Nout Wellink: European competitiveness – where do we stand and where do we 
go? 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the Conference “Towards sustainable European competitiveness: the role 
of  business”  organized  in  commemoration  of  INSEAD´s  upcoming  50th  anniversary  by  its  Dutch 
alumni association, Amsterdam, 8 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
Let me start with some personal remarks. In the past few weeks, I visited successively Dublin, Tblisi, 
Athens  and  Buenos  Aires.  And  as  you  probably  know,  I  meet  twice  a  month  with  my  European 
colleagues at the ECB in Frankfurt. And as you probably don’t know, I will become 65 next year and 
thus entitled to public pension benefits (AOW), although my term as president expires only in 2011. 
This  is  how  my  professional  life  looks  like  nowadays  in  a  world  marked  by  globalization,  European 
integration and aging. However, these three trends are not only relevant for central bankers, they are 
relevant for everyone. Today, I will speak about the impact of globalisation, European integration and 
aging on European competitiveness. 
Globalisation 
Globalisation strengthens the interrelationships between national economies. Let me illustrate this by 
China’s  economic  development.  The  rise  of  China  gives  an  enormous  supply  shock  to  the  world 
economy.  Currently,  16%  of  total  world  production  is  made  in  China,  which  was  only  4%  in  the 
beginning of the 80s. After the European Union and the US, China is now the third largest economy in 
the world. 
China’s economic development is noticeable for every European citizen. For example, electronics and 
textiles have become much cheaper due to cheap Chinese production. Inflated prices of raw materials 
and oil are a flip side of China’s explosive growth. Everyone who regularly refuels his car, can agree 
on  this.  On balance,  Chinese  economic  development  has  been beneficial  for  Europe.  For  instance, 
Dutch families have saved on average 300 euros per year due to cheap Chinese imports, according to 
a recent estimate by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB)1. 
China’s economic development certainly has an impact on European economies, but there are large 
differences  across  Europe.  China  has  a  comparative  advantage  in  producing  and  exporting  cloths, 
shoes, toys and consumer electronics. A country like the Netherlands has a comparative advantage in 
producing and exporting flowers, dairy products and food. Hence, the Netherlands currently has only 
limited competition from China in its export markets. However, a country like Italy, which is specialized 
in shoes and clothing, is confronted with severe competition from China. Consequently, Italy will have 
to restructure its shoes and clothing industries, something the Netherlands already did by the end of 
the 60s. 
A  key  question  for  the  future  is  whether  Europe  can  sustain  global  competition  with  countries  like 
China. The development of labour productivity is an important determinant of the competitive position. 
In this respect, it is worrisome that the growth of European labour productivity has been lagging behind 
its  main  competitors  in  the  past  years2,  although  recently  there  seems  to  be  a  pick-up  in  trend 
productivity  growth.  Possible  explanations  for  the  low  productivity  growth  in  Europe  are  the  lack  of 
technological progress and an unfavourable business environment3. Let me take a closer look at both. 
Concerning technological progress, there is evidence that Europe’s relative weak productivity growth 
can at least partly be explained by its low research-and-development efforts. In the US and Japan, 
                                                      
1   CPB (2006), China and the Dutch Economy; Stylised facts and prospects, CPB Document 127. 
2   While  annual  productivity  growth  recently  decelerated  from  2.4%  (1970-1995)  to  1.3%  (1995-2004)  in  the  euro  area,  it 
accelerated from 1.3% to 2.4% in the US. Source: European Commission (2007), Annual report on the euro area. 
3   Source: ECB (2005), Competitiveness and the export performance of the euro area, Occasional Paper no. 30. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
R&D-expenditures4 in total manufacturing are about 50% higher than in the euro area. A second factor 
which might explain our weak productivity growth, is the education of the European population. Over 
the  last  decades  we  have  seen  an  increase  in  the  level  of  educational  attainment.  But  to  create  a 
knowledge-based European powerhouse, we need to unlock universities’ potential. In a global context 
European  universities  are  currently  no  match  for  American  universities5. More  competition  between 
academic institutions, selective entrance exams and allowing more freedom in funding could spark a 
move to high-quality academic research. This is one of the things Europe needs to become “the most 
competitive and dynamic knowledge-driven economy” as laid down in the Lisbon agenda. 
Concerning  the  overall  business  environment,  there  is  evidence that  Europe  is  in a  less  favourable 
position than its main competitors. Surveys among European businessmen suggest that this holds in 
particular for the tax system, labour regulations and the administrative burden. The average marginal 
tax rate on labour in the euro area is high and hovers around 15 percent points above the rate in the 
US6.  Labour  regulations  such  as  employment  protection  legislation  hinder  job-to-job  mobility  in 
Europe.  As  a  result,  workers  in  the  EU  stay  in  the  same  job  for  more  than  10  years  on  average, 
compared to less than 7 years in the US7. Concerning the administrative burden, the average cost of 
starting a business with up to 50 employees in the euro area is estimated to be 10 times higher than in 
the US, according to the World Bank. That is, if entrepreneurs have not given up starting a business in 
the meantime, as it takes on average 27 days to set up a new business in the euro area, compared to 
just 5 in the US8. I always had respect for entrepreneurs, but it’s getting larger in view of the red tape 
they have to cut through.  
Some  reforms  have  recently  been  undertaken,  both  at  the  national  and  the  European  level.  For 
example, personal tax wedges have been reduced and employment protection legislation has been 
relaxed  in  some  European  countries.  And  I  fully  support  the  current  EU  Commission  initiative  for 
measuring the cost of existing legislation and reducing the administrative burden on companies with 
25 percent by 2012. Furthermore, the adoption of the European Services Directive by the European 
Parliament  in  2006  will  contribute  to  a  level  playing  field  in  the  services  sector.  This  will  foster 
competition  in  the  services  sector,  which  is  needed  given  the  lacking  productivity  performance. 
However, although these reforms are a step in the right direction, more reforms are needed to improve 
productivity growth in Europe. 
Aging 
Europe is aging more than for instance the US and China. Let me give you some figures to illustrate 
this. Currently there are on average 23 retirees for every 100 workers in Europe, in 2050 this will be 
48. In the same period, this so-called old-age dependency ratio will increase to 34 in the US, and to 39 
in China9. Thus, the relative share of workers in the population of Europe will be smaller than in the 
US and China in the coming decades. This will threaten Europe’s competitive position. 
Although all European countries are aging, there are large differences across Europe. For instance, 
Italy is aging more rapidly than the Netherlands. Concerning aging in the Netherlands, let me have a 
closer look at the two underlying demographic trends. First of all, we have fewer children. Until the mid 
60s, Dutch women gave birth to approximately three children during their lives. After having fallen to 
1.5 children in the mid 80s, this figure is now projected to be only 1.75 children in the coming decades. 
Secondly, we live longer. At the time the public pension scheme (AOW) was introduced (1957), the 
average  remaining  life  expectancy  at  age  65  was  less  than  15  years.  Nowadays,  new  AOW-
beneficiaries expect to receive AOW-benefits for more than 18 years on average. 
                                                      
4   R&D-expenditures divided by value added. 
5   P.  Kalaitzidakis,  T.  P.  Mamuneas  and  T.  Stengos  (2001),  Ranking  of  Academic  Journals  and  Institutions  in  Economics, 
October 2001. 
6   Source: OECD. Marginal tax on labour consists of income tax, employee and employer social contributions as a percentage 
of total labour costs of average worker. 
7   Turmann, A. (2004), A new European agenda for labour mobility, CEPS Task Force Report. 
8   World Bank (2006), World Development Indicators, Business Environment database. 
9   Source: UN (2006), World Population Prospects: the 2006 Revision. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
From  an  economic  point  of  view,  both  demographic  trends  are  basically  good  news.  Having  fewer 
children  reduces  the  scarcity  of  finite  natural  resources,  which  has  a  positive  effect  on  individual 
welfare. Living longer partly mitigates this effect as individuals use more finite natural resources the 
longer they live. However, living longer also increases an individual’s potential earning capacity over 
their  lifetime.  Reaping  the  potential  economic  gains  from  living  longer  requires  adjustments,  in 
particular with respect to education and retirement. Let me take a closer look at both. 
Living  and  working  longer  requires  more  attention  for  education  both  when  young  and  old.  Young 
people should be properly educated and the number of school drop outs should be reduced. Older 
people need to get additional education during their careers to keep pace with the latest technological 
developments.  In  this respect,  it  is  good  to  note  that  this  concept  of  life-long  learning  is  one  of  the 
leading principles of education at INSEAD. 
Living and working longer also requires an increase in retirement ages. Until recently, most European 
countries  never  increased  their  statutory  retirement  ages  despite  the  increased  longevity  of  their 
population. This threatens the sustainability of the pay-as-you-go financed European public pension 
schemes. Germany and the UK have recently announced a gradual increase in the statutory pension 
age  to  67  and  68  respectively.  Other  European  countries  should  also  increase  retirement  ages  in 
response to longevity developments if they want to keep a sound public pension scheme. 
Given the prospect of dramatically increasing old-age dependency ratios, it is now definitely time to 
act.  Moreover,  gradual  adjustments  in  the  pension  ages  are  much  easier  to  deal  with  than  large 
increases at once. Doing nothing implies either a dramatic future fall in public pension benefits such as 
AOW  to  avoid  tax  increases  or  a  dramatic  future  increase  in  the  tax  burden  to  preserve  pension 
benefits. The latter would have severe consequences for Europe’s competitive position. 
European integration 
In a globalizing world economy, European integration can help to preserve Europe’s competitiveness. 
Being  the  largest  economic  block  in  the  world,  a  united  Europe  is  more  capable  in  defending  its 
economic interests than a divided Europe. This applies for instance to the trade negotiations in the 
World Trade Organisation. More importantly, European integration has fostered the competitiveness of 
European  companies,  in  particular  by  the  creation  of  the  internal  market.  This  has  made European 
companies  better  prepared  for  global  competition.  The  euro  is  another  important  example  of  how 
European  integration  can  foster  Europe’s  competitiveness.  Being  a  strong  and  stable  currency,  the 
euro is not as subject to exchange rate fluctuations as the individual European currencies used to be 
in the past. This reduces the economic uncertainty for European exporters. 
A  precondition  for  successful  European  integration  is  a  proper  governance  structure  to  facilitate 
smooth  decision  making.  This  holds  especially  after  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  to  27 
Member  States.  Besides  fostering  democracy  and  transparency,  the  recently  rejected  European 
Constitution  was  aimed  at  improving  decision  making  in  the  European  Union.  Surveys  among  the 
European public suggest that the resistance against the Constitution does not stem from the proposed 
changes itself, but from the process followed, which was considered as proceeding too fast and too 
unknown for the public. In this respect, the term “Constitution” might be misleading as it suggests the 
creation of a single European State. In my view, the rejection of the draft Constitution in France and 
the  Netherlands  demonstrated  the  need  for  a  deeper  dialogue  with  the  public  about  European 
integration. In this respect, I fully support the recent attempts to draft a shorter and simpler version of 
the draft Constitution, maintaining its main components. 
Despite the rejection of the draft Constitution, there is no need for pessimism concerning European 
integration. In the past, European integration has also halted from time to time before proceeding to 
the next landmark. Let me remind you of the crises with the European Monetary System in the early 
90s. These crises did not prevent Europe from completing the process of monetary unification by the 
creation of the euro. It is as Willy Brandt once said: “The history of the EU is the history of its crises”. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. Globalisation, European integration and aging do not stop after this conference. The 
question  is  whether  Europe  is  able  to  deal  with  it  in  such  a  way  that  its  competitiveness  is 
safeguarded. Although there is certainly a need to adjust as I have just sketched, we shouldn’t be too 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 3
pessimistic about the ability of Europe to accomplish this. In the past, Europeans proved themselves 
to be more than capable of adjusting to new circumstances. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2007
