Ewart S Williams: National Financial Literacy Programme in Trinidad 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the 
“Signing Ceremony for Primary Schools Financial Literacy Intervention”, Port-of-Spain, 4 May 2007. 
 I am delighted to participate in this ceremony launching our financial education programme in primary 
schools. I am very pleased to welcome to the Bank, you bright young ladies and gentlemen as well 
as you principals and teachers. 
But kids, this phase of the programme is about you and about helping you understand and learn more 
about money and about managing money wisely. 
Let me use this illustration. 
If you save $2.00 a week out of your allowance, consider how much you will have in say, three years – 
yes, over $300! You can use this money to buy something that you really want. Even if you cannot pay 
for the entire thing, you can show Mummy or Daddy that you are responsible and that you have made 
the sacrifice by saving for what you want. Apart from the pride that you should feel for the achievement 
of saving and contributing towards something important to you, I can guarantee you that this kind of 
attitude will result in parents being more willing to meet you halfway when you really want something. 
The  context  of  the  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme  is  that  individuals  at  all  levels  are  being 
called upon to make complex financial decisions about money and finance, and in too many cases, 
they  lack  the  knowledge  to  make  informed  decisions.  The  problem  is  particularly  acute  with  young 
people  who  are  being  targeted  by  advertisements  to  spend  and  borrow  at  the  time  when  they  can 
least afford to. 
The Financial Literacy Programme targets people at all levels. We feel though that it is critical to start 
in the schools so that our youth could emerge into the workplace more financially-literate and more 
confident about making financial decisions. 
You kids learn and pick up good (and sometimes bad) habits much faster than older people do. The 
most glaring example is in technology where you master computer games and computer know-how 
considerably faster than your parents. 
We believe, therefore, that introducing financial literacy in schools will not only help you to make better 
financial decisions for yourselves now and as you grow older. We also believe that as you become 
more financially aware, your parents would need to become more financially adept in order to keep in 
step. 
If  I  can  focus  on  the  kids  a  bit  …  you  young  ladies  and  gentlemen  need  to  start  from  now  to 
understand about: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
saving some of your allowance rather than spending it all; 
making a budget and planning ahead for something you want to buy; 
getting your parents to open bank and credit union accounts for you; 
understanding that interest accumulates and the money grows; 
life is about choices – (very often it is about the video game or the pair of sneakers but not 
both); and 
you need to understand clearly that borrowing has a cost and that too much borrowing could 
lead to problems. 
 For you, teachers and principals, I have seen the programme and I promise you that it is designed to 
teach the kids good habits about spending, saving and other money matters in an exciting, creative 
and interactive way. 
The sessions will be facilitated by the Junior Achievement Body of Trinidad & Tobago (JA) and The 
Consulting Interface Limited (TCIL), organizations with very good track records in both the primary and 
secondary schools in Trinidad and Tobago. 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
In the first phase of implementation, JA and TCIL will present their material to a total of 96 primary 
schools with an estimated 5,000 Standard 2 students from the eight educational districts of Trinidad 
and Tobago. This phase is considered a pilot and will run for the current school term. At the end of this 
phase,  the  programme  will  be  evaluated  and  changes  made  as  necessary  to  enhance  its 
effectiveness.  It  will  then  be  rolled  out  to  other  primary  schools.  It  is  our  hope  that  over  time,  the 
programme  will  form  part  of  the  school  curriculum  of  all  primary  schools  in  the  country.  Similar 
programmes are being planned for secondary and tertiary level students as well in the medium term. 
The financing for the programme will come primarily from the Central Bank and subventions from the 
Government. However, because of its national dimension and to make the programme all-inclusive, 
we  plan  to  ask  the  financial  firms  and  other  private  corporations  to  collaborate  with  us  in  this 
worthwhile initiative. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  you  the  principals,  teachers,  students  present  today  for  your 
implicit support of the programme. You are pioneers in an exciting journey directed towards improving 
the financial capability of the nation. 
Let  me  also  thank  Senator  the  Honourable  Hazel  Manning  and  the  Ministry  of  Education  for 
enthusiastically approving this initiative. 
I would also like to recognize the commitment and hard work of the Management Committee of the 
Financial  Literacy  Programme  whose  unstinting  volunteer  efforts  are  contributing  to  make  all  this 
possible. 
Kids, as I said earlier, we in the Bank are excited about this programme. We hope that we can get you 
even more excited and that you can spread this excitement to your friends and parents. 
If this happens, we are confident that these efforts will redound to the benefit of the population as a 
whole. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
