Y V Reddy: Regulators’ eyes on financial institutions 
Comments by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, published in January 2007 issue 
of The Banker, London. It can also be accessed at www.thebanker.com. 
 As we move from a world based on relationships to one based on transactions, can our banks be far 
behind?  Indeed,  banking  has  been  transformed,  perhaps  unrecognisably,  and  regulators  and 
customers are taking notice. 
In the 1970s, a visit to the bank meant face-to-face time, assistance with problems, financial advice, 
and often just a friendly chat with your banker who you knew and trusted. Today, many customers and 
banks prefer point-and-click transactions, and face time can sometimes mean fees. And whether you 
are in Chennai or Chicago, the person answering your bank query is probably in Bangalore. 
What  does  this  mean  for  the  banks,  their  customers  and  regulators?  Banks  rely  less  on  customer 
loyalty  and  more  on  efficiency.  Reputational  concerns  that  were  once  paramount  are  less  critical  – 
witness the million-dollar penalties routinely imposed on some of the global banking giants; yet, they 
continue to grow. 
Efficiency rules 
Fee-based income has overtaken net interest margin income. Customers enjoy efficient transactions, 
but  find  themselves  unequipped  to  make  the  best  possible  financial  decisions  with  regard  to  their 
banking needs. It is perhaps significant that bank regulators, who were until recently content with bank 
licensing  and  applying  prudential  regulations  while  encouraging  competition,  are  now  focusing  on 
preparing customers to deal with the banks. 
Today, some banks levy a penalty or an interest charge for not maintaining a minimum balance, for 
not operating a bank account for a certain period, and for other negligent behaviour – although the 
interest  charges  paid  by  the  bank  for  similar  negligent  behaviour  are  less  than  those  paid  by  the 
depositor.  These  treatments  are  often  sanctified  by  the  terms  and  conditions  imposed  when  an 
account holder opens an account. But in signing the contract, customers are not as empowered or as 
cautious as they should be. This could be due to several reasons, among them the prevalence of non-
standard  contracts  that  make  comparison  of  competing  products  difficult  and  tend  to  dampen 
competition. 
Educating consumers 
In response to overcharging on credit cards and other issues, bank regulators are taking initiatives to 
prepare  customers  for  the  market  by  educating  them  (through  financial  education  initiatives), 
counselling  them  (through  credit  counselling),  and  assuring  them  (of  "fair  trade  practices"  and 
"reasonable charges"). Regulators seem to be aware of the need to consciously connect the common 
person with bank services and equip him to manage the new reality of transaction-based but multi-
faceted banking. 
Regulators all over the world have recognised some market failures in savings and credit markets and 
that  banks’  sophisticated  customer-segmentation  strategy  has  unintended  consequences.  Thus, 
globally, financial inclusion is now a priority. Initiatives range from the Financial Inclusion Task Force in 
the UK, which has noted that better customer-segmentation technology has led to certain sections of 
the  population  being  financially  excluded,  to  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  in  the  US,  which 
imposes an affirmative and continuing obligation on banks to serve the credit and banking needs of all 
the  communities  in  which  they  are  chartered,  to  the  initiatives  of  the  Indian  government  and  the 
Reserve Bank.  
Regulatory sea change 
Banks  are  special.  They  have  special  privileges  and  unique  obligations.  They  are  licensed  to  take 
uncollateralised  deposits  from  the  public  but  have  a  high  degree  of  leverage.  Their  services  are 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 1
necessary. However, recent developments indicate a rebalancing of the focus of regulators and the 
awareness  of  bank  customers.  The  regulators’  thrust,  of  late,  on  financial  inclusion,  financial 
education,  credit  counselling,  fair  trade  practices,  reasonable  charges  and  avoidance  of  unequal 
contracts is the right way forward to ensure an efficient, inclusive and equitable banking system. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2007
