Charles C Soludo: The safety and soundness of the Nigerian banking system  
Press  statement  by  Professor  Charles  C  Soludo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  on  the 
safety and soundness of the banking system, Abuja, 12 June 2007. 
 This briefing is to clarify some pertinent issues regarding the state of Springbank, and to reassure the 
Nigerian public that the banking system is the safest and soundest it has ever been in its history, and 
that  the  CBN  and  NDIC  will  take  all  necessary  measures  to  protect  all  depositors  of  the  banking 
system. 
Banking sector consolidation: progress so far 
I:  
As you are all aware, the banking sector consolidation programme was necessitated by the pervasive 
weaknesses  and  uncertainty  of  the  banking  system,  and  the  need  to  re-engineer  and  fast-track  a 
system that will engender confidence and power a new economy. So far, the grand objectives of that 
policy  are  being  achieved,  and  our  consolidation  programme  has  been  adjudged  about  the  most 
successful  in  the  world.  The  world  is  celebrating  Nigeria’s  success,  and  over  $1  billion  of  foreign 
investment has gone into the sector within the last 12 months, and several hundred millions of dollars 
are still pouring in. The non-performing loans as percentage of total loans have gone down from about 
23% before consolidation to less than 8% currently; total deposits have almost doubled, and credit to 
the  private  sector  growing  astronomically  (annualized  at  72%  within  the  first  four  months  in  2007). 
Today,  individual  banks  can  finance  big  projects  valued  at  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars  and  also 
operate in the oil and gas sector – a feat they never could do before now. Interest rates are gradually 
coming down. As at today, there are over 3,866 branches of commercial banks, up from 3,200 prior to 
consolidation  and  the  total  employment  in  the  sector  far  higher  than  prior  to  consolidation.  By  end 
2007, there will be about 7 or more banks with shareholders fund in excess of $1 billion, and over 10 
banks with market capitalization of over $2 billion each (there was none in 2004). Today, Nigeria has 
the  fastest  growing  banking  system  in  Africa,  and  one  of  the  fastest  in  the  world.  As  seasoned 
commentators have observed, it has taken Nigeria less than three years to achieve what it took South 
Africa  20  years  to  achieve  in  the  area  of  banking.  To  put  it  succinctly,  a  new  banking  system  has 
emerged, and will only get stronger for the benefit of the Nigerian economy. We firmly believe that with 
the sustenance of the reforms as the CBN is determined to, the best is yet to come. 
Springbank and challenge of re-capitalization. 
II:  
At  the  conclusion  of  the  recapitalization  exercise  in  early  2006,  I  announced  that  the  CBN  would 
undertake post-consolidation re-verification of capital. This was in a clear understanding that there was 
a  possibility  that  some  people  may  have  manipulated  their  capital  during  the  last  days  of  the 
recapitalization exercise. Fortunately, the re-verification exercise did not throw up major surprises. 
In the case of Springbank, it must be recalled that its merger was consummated some few days to the 
end of the consolidation programme, after each of the six legacy institutions had experienced repeated 
failed attempts to merge with other banks. Even the legacy banks themselves agreed in their Merger 
Document  to  carry  out  post-merger  adjustment  based  upon  post-merger  capital  recertification.  The 
CBN’s  maiden  examination  of  the  bank  as  at  June  2006  queried  the  bank’s reported  shareholders’ 
funds and directed the bank to beef up its capital within six months. The inability of the bank’s Board to 
resolve the issue of the contributions of each legacy institution to its capital led to a special CBN/NDIC 
Examiners  to  re-certify  the  bank’s  capital.  A  bank  by  bank  contribution  to  the  shareholders’  fund 
revealed that only the former Guardian Express bank and ACB International brought positive capital to 
the merger. 
However, despite its weak capital base, the other indicators show that the bank has a strong promise: 
its deposit base and liquidity situation are strong. 
It  was  in  the  light  of  the  new  capital  structure  of  the  bank  (and  relative  contributions  of  the  legacy 
institutions)  as  well  as  the  deeply  divided  and  acrimonious  Board,  that  the  CBN  decided  earlier  to 
dissolve the Board, and call for a reconstitution by the legacy institutions. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
We  have  however  monitored  the  developments  closely  since  our  last  decision,  and  hereby  wish  to 
update the public on the developments regarding our current stance as follows: 
Decisions: 
1. 
Initially, we decided to give the legacy groups of shareholders a chance to nominate some 
members of the Board, and the legacy bank with the highest shareholders’ fund – Guardian 
Express – to produce the MD. From the acrimonious public pronouncements of the various 
camps, it is evident that we can’t rely upon the reconstituted Board drawn from the legacy 
groups to move forward. Consequently, the CBN and NDIC have decided to reconstitute a 
totally neutral Board, made up as follows: 
Mr. Vincent Omoike, Chairman 
i) 
Dr. S. A. Ndanusa, Managing Director 
ii) 
iii) 
Abdulraman Umar 
Bature Mohammed Abubakar 
iv) 
Bulus Dareg 
v) 
vi) 
H.I Muhammed 
vii) 
Emmanuel Onucheyo 
The CBN and NDIC stand ready to provide every necessary support to the new Board to re-
capitalize the bank, and ensure that it meets the aspirations of the shareholders, depositors 
and the Nigerian public. This will be completed within the shortest possible time. 
We assure all depositors of Springbank that their money is safe. The public should go about 
their normal banking business with Springbank. 
We  are  compiling  the  infractions  of  the  various  Directors  and  Management  of  the  legacy 
groups,  and  will  ensure  that  appropriate  sanctions  are  applied  and/or  report  same  to  the 
EFCC and the police for any criminal investigations and prosecution. 
Furthermore,  we  are  also  compiling  the  list  of  non-performing  loans  of  the  bank  and  the 
culprits will be handed over to the EFCC and the Police for necessary action. 
We appeal to the general public to ignore the vexatious, albeit libelous publications of those 
who  either  want  to  divert  attention  or  destroy  the  bank.  Some  want  to  hide  under  the 
umbrella to reopen their lost debate on banking sector consolidation. In due course, we shall 
respond appropriately. 
Finally,  We  assure  Nigerians  and  the  world  that  the  CBN  and  NDIC  are  committed  to 
ensuring that the Nigerian banking system remains the safest and fastest growing among the 
emerging markets. You can count on us to deliver on this! 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
