T T Mboweni: Making Johannesburg a world-class African city 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Country  Club 
Johannesburg Breakfast Meeting, Johannesburg, 8 June 2007.  
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1. 
Thank you for the invitation to address one of your series of breakfast meetings, coming as it does 
only a couple of weeks after the last of a number of memorable and spectacular events marking the 
Centenary Celebrations of the Country Club Johannesburg. Being only 20 years younger than the city 
of Johannesburg, the Country Club Johannesburg is indeed an inseparable part of the heritage and 
history of this magnificent city.  
History of the city 
2.  
It  appears  that  there  is  no  consensus  among  the  historians  about  who  gave  this  city  the  name 
Johannesburg. There is no dispute, however, that it was named after a man called Johann. Johann 
was  a  common  Dutch  name  and  remains  so  to  this  day.  I  would  not  be  surprised  if  it  is  the  most 
common name in the South African Reserve Bank at the moment. I guess that there could be many 
Johanns who can lay claim to having given the name.  
Apparently  Johannesburg  was  proclaimed  in  a  hurry  as  gold  prospectors  had  begun  flooding  the 
place. In fact ten years had passed before anyone sought to enquire about the origin of the name. 
Many versions have been recorded by historians, including one claiming that the original name was 
Johannesburg, which was reportedly changed to Johannesburg as it was difficult to pronounce. 
The history of Johannesburg is very fascinating indeed. Just over 100 years ago, what is today the 
economic  and  financial  centre  of  South  Africa  was  an  endless  untouched  savannah.  This  changed 
very fast when gold was discovered. This history is littered with many pioneers who suspected that 
there  was  gold  in  the  area.  After  all  gold  had  been  found  a  few  hundred  kilometres  to  the  east  in 
Barberton. Some prospectors spent years buying up land, digging, trying to find the yellow ore, but 
nothing substantial  was  found.  George Harrison has  to  his credit  the  discovery  of  gold  on the  farm 
Langlaagte in 1886. This marked the beginning of Johannesburg, which was declared a city in 1928. 
Gold diggers and fortune hunters arrived in droves and soon a tent town sprung up, later to become 
the  city  that  is  now  South  Africa’s  main  commercial  hub.  Gold  was  the  catalyst  which  brought 
Johannesburg into being and the city’s identity continues to be closely linked with the yellow ore. The 
mine dumps that surround the city are a lasting reminder of the city’s origins. This city is appropriately 
called eGoli, Nguni for gold.  
The  gold  rush  shantytowns  that  sprang  up  were  transformed  into  a  modern  concrete  city, 
Johannesburg, and the economic boom engulfed the entire country. The revenue generated from gold 
has enabled the country to develop its impressive industrial, commercial and financial strength. Today 
Johannesburg is a modern city in every sense – tall skyscrapers, a complex network of freeways, a 
bustling metropolis of industry and commerce and a hub to which people are drawn. According to the 
Human Sciences Research Council, the city of Johannesburg has a population which is conservatively 
estimated to be over three million. 
A world-class financial centre 
3.  
The discovery of gold led to the establishment of many mining and financial companies, leading to the 
development  of  a  stock  exchange.  On  November  8,  1887,  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  was 
established  and  trading  was  moved  around  the  city  several  times  as  the  trading  halls  became  too 
small  to  accommodate  the  amount  of  trading  and  number  of  traders.  In  1978  the  Stock  exchange 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 1
moved to the historic Diagonal Street, before leaving the city centre for its current location in Sandton 
in 2000.  
The JSE Limited is the largest stock exchange in Africa and is ranked among the top 20 major equity 
exchanges in the world. At the end of 2006, the JSE had a market capitalisation of R5,7 trillion, with 
388 companies listed on the exchange. Turnover on the JSE has shown strong growth over recent 
years, increasing from an annual turnover of R1 279 billion in 2005 to R2 100 billion in 2006. 
One is encouraged to learn of plans by the JSE Limited to construct a Pan-African exchange which will 
initially allow investors to trade in shares from Ghana, Namibia and Zambia, and later develop to cover 
the  rest  of  Africa.  These  are  bold  steps  towards  making  Johannesburg  a  financial  centre  for  the 
continent. 
The Bond Exchange of South Africa (Besa) also resides in this great city. As at 31 December 2006, 
Besa had granted a listing to 725 debt securities, issued by 91 borrowers, with a total nominal value of 
R725  billion  –  equal  to  just  over  47  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).  Government  bonds 
comprise around 60 per cent of the bonds listed on Besa, with the rest consisting of bonds issued by 
parastatals and corporates. Corporate bond issuances are currently increasing at a much faster rate 
than government bond issuances. In fact, on a net basis so far in 2007, government is redeemer of 
bonds. The annual turnover on Besa has increased from R8,1 trillion in 2005 to R11,6 trillion in 2006. 
The  annual  turnover  is  currently  about  38  times  the  market  capitalisation,  indicating  a  very  liquid 
market. In the current year to date, the turnover on Besa is R5,4 trillion. 
The City of Johannesburg has contributed to the development of the bond market, being the first and 
only  municipality  in  South  Africa  to  issue  a  bond.  The  City  of  Johannesburg  launched  several 
municipal  bonds  since  2004,  the  first  being  a  R1-billion  bond,  which  was  neither  guaranteed  by 
government  nor  secured  by  city  assets.  However,  this  bond  issue  had  an  overwhelmingly  positive 
response from the market, clearing at a spread of 230 basis points above the R153 government bond. 
This bond is currently trading at a spread of 90. The second bond issued was also a R1-billion bond, 
partially guaranteed, issued at a spread of 164 basis points above the R157 government bond, was 
last trading at 120 basis points. Two further bonds were later issued and were also well received by 
the market as they were issued at spreads of 154 and 120 basis points above the R157 respectively, 
and are now trading at compressed spreads of 105 and 104 basis points respectively. 
The city of Johannesburg is at a mature stage to issue paper without any guarantee as the city now 
has a long-term debt rating of A+. With this improved credit rating and the narrowing of spreads, it is 
very clear that the city of Johannesburg has a good standing as a borrower in its own right. It is not 
surprising then that they have undertaken a medium term note programme under which they can issue 
paper to a total tune of R6-billion. Actually the last bond was issued under this programme. 
Non-residents are active participants in the South African capital markets, accounting for around 20 
per cent of daily turnover on both the JSE and Besa. The participation of non-residents in the domestic 
financial  markets  is  facilitated  by  a  liquid  market  for  foreign  exchange.  The  average  daily  turnover 
against rand in the South African foreign exchange market is around USD10 billion, and non-residents 
account for around 65 per cent of these transactions. 
While gold was the initial magnet that attracted and spawned entrepreneurship, today only a few of the 
mining operations in Johannesburg are still active. Not only have the mining dumps formed a lasting 
landscape, Johannesburg has developed into a modern financial city. One of the five-year strategic 
objectives  identified  in  the  City’s  Integrated  Development  Programme  is  improving  the  profile  of 
Johannesburg,  both  on  the  continent  and  internationally,  as  a  core  centre  of  finance,  business  and 
trade. This is to be attained by, among other things, improved liaison with key partners in the business 
community  to  define  what  the  City  can  do  over  the  longer  term  to  help  consolidate,  protect  and 
enhance Johannesburg’s position in this regard. 
A globally competitive city-region 
4.  
Although the smallest in size compared to the other provinces, Gauteng is the economic and financial 
powerhouse  of  South  Africa  and  the  centre  of  the  country’s  commerce  and  industry.  The  Gauteng 
province contributes 34,2 per cent of the country’s GDP, 47,2 per cent of all employee remuneration 
and 51,4 per cent of all institutions’ turnover. 
Johannesburg  accounts  for  40  per  cent  of  the  economy  of  Gauteng  and  enjoys  the  unchallenged 
status  of  being  the  economic  capital  of  the  country  and  the  subcontinent.  Johannesburg  is  the 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2007
continent’s only world city and a regional motor in the global economy. The city’s share of the national 
economy constitutes about 16 per cent. It is, therefore, obvious that the economic performance of a 
city like Johannesburg becomes critical not only to the province in which it resides but to the country 
as whole.  
To a very large extent, it is the economic logic stemming out of this reality that informs the growth and 
development  strategies  of  both  the  city  and  the  province.  Central  to  both  strategies  is  the 
strengthening of Gauteng’s position as a global city-region, in recognition of the pivotal role played by 
cities in modern economies, political, social and environmental trends. City regions are not based on 
administrative boundaries but rather lay emphasis more on social and economic functional geography. 
Also, some recent research suggests that strong city-regions are a necessary – even though they may 
not be a sufficient – condition for ensuring optimal economic growth. Final report of a study entitled: A 
framework  for  City-Regions,  commissioned  in  December  2004  by  the  Office  of  the  Deputy  Prime 
Minister in the United Kingdom. 
The Gauteng Growth and Development Strategy recognises the advantages of co-operating internally 
to compete externally. To this end, it advocates the development of a strategy to build Gauteng as an 
integrated  globally  competitive  region  where  the  economic  activities  of  the  different  parts  of  the 
province complement each other in consolidating Gauteng as an economic hub and an internationally 
recognised global city region. The City has identified key focus areas for engagement in respect of this 
vision. 
Challenges 
5.  
The City’s vision statement visualises Johannesburg in 25-30 years thus: “… a more equitable and 
spatially integrated city, very different from the divided city of the past. In this world class African city 
for all, everyone will be able to enjoy decent accommodation, excellent services, the highest standards 
of  health  and  safety,  access  to  participatory  governance,  and  quality  community  life  in  sustainable 
neighbourhoods and vibrant urban spaces.”  
On the way towards that vision, however, the City’s 2006-2011 Integrated Development Programme 
recognises  the  enormous challenges  faced by  the city  and  spells  out  clear  five-year  objectives  and 
programmes of action. It identifies Six Mayoral Priorities as: economic growth and job creation; health 
and  community  development;  housing  and  services;  safe,  clean  and  green  city;  well-governed  and 
managed city; and the fight HIV/AIDS. 
Except for economic growth and job creation, I do not think the list is in order of priority. Of course 
safety  is  a  big  issue  as  far  as  Johannesburg  is  concerned  and,  in  particular,  the  central  business 
district (CBD). This concern has led to many shops and offices moving to the northern suburbs. It is 
gratifying that measures have been taken by both the business community and the local government 
to reverse this trend. The installation of the CCTV cameras has led to crime levels in the inner city 
dropping considerably. The City’s Crime Prevention Programme seeks to focus on crimes that affect 
business  and  impact  on  perceptions  of  Johannesburg  to  reduce  real  and  perceived  risks  to 
investment. 
Sporting achievements 
6.  
This city boasts a broad range of sporting achievements. In 1995 it played host to the final of Rugby 
World Cup final that was won by South Africa. The following year the city hosted the final of the African 
Cup of Nations which South Africa won. This city also hosted the All-Africa games in athletics in 1999. 
In  2003  the  city  also  hosted  the  final  of  the  Cricket  World  Cup.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that 
Johannesburg looks forward to hosting the FIFA World Cup final in 2010!  
Conclusion 
7.  
All these lofty plans, programmes and strategies recognise the centrality of economic growth towards 
the attainment of other policy objectives, particularly the reduction of unemployment and poverty. The 
primary mandate of the South African Reserve Bank remains the achievement and maintenance of 
price  stability.  Maintaining  low  inflation  contributes  enormously  towards  the  attainment  of  high  and 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 3
sustainable  rates  of  economic  growth  and  employment  and  maintenance  of  overall  macroeconomic 
stability. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2007
