Krzysztof Rybiński: SEPA and the payment system in Poland 
Speech by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, at the 13th Bank 
Forum “Regulatory changes in European banking – outcomes for banks and the economy in Poland”, 
Warsaw, 14 March 2007. 
 Welcome to the session devoted to the SEPA project – Single Euro Payments Area – in the context of 
the Polish payment system.  
When  you  google  SEPA,  the  first  website  on  the  results  list  is  the  site  of  the  Scottish  Environment 
Protection  Agency,  but  what  closely  follows  is  the  ECB’s  website  on  SEPA  (Single  Euro  Payments 
Area). The pagerank of both these sites is 6, which means that they are important in the Internet.  
Since the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins in 2002, consumers have been able to make 
cash  payments  throughout  the  euro  area  from  a  single  purse  using  a  single  currency.  The  SEPA 
project represents the next major step towards closer European integration; it will allow consumers to 
make  cashless  payments  throughout  the  euro  area  from  a  single  account  under  the  same  basic 
conditions, regardless of their location. 
In  2002,  the  banking  industry  took  up  this  challenging  project  by  creating  the  European  Payments 
Council (EPC). The EPC is defining the new rules and procedures for euro payments. To do that, it 
has  involved  not  only  the  stakeholders  in  the  euro  area,  but  also  those  in  other  countries  of  the 
European  Union,  Poland  obviously  included,  as  well  as  Iceland,  Liechtenstein,  Norway  and 
Switzerland. Communities outside the euro area will thus have the opportunity to participate in euro 
payment systems, and will be able to adopt SEPA standards and practices, thereby contributing to the 
establishment of a single market for payment services.  
The  EPC  plans  first  SEPA  products  to  come  on  the  market  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  year. 
Therefore, today’s Bank Forum is an excellent opportunity for an in-depth discussion on the role and 
place of the Polish payment infrastructure in the SEPA world. Ladies and Gentlemen, I am pleased to 
present you the discussants of our panel, in alphabetical order: 
Mr. Ryszard Drużyński, Vice President of Raiffeisen Bank Polska,  
Mr. Krzysztof Kalicki, President of the Management Board of Deutsche Bank Polska,  
Mr. Ronnie Richardson, President of the Management Board of Kredyt Bank,  
Mr. Witold Zieliński, Vice President of the Management Board of Citibank Handlowy. 
I would like this discussion to be broad and dynamic, that's why feel free to join it.  
First,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  changes  ahead  of  us  are  needed  to  move 
towards  a  more  integrated  payments  market,  which  will  bring  substantial  economic  benefits.  The 
SEPA  will  not  only  introduce  more  comparable  services,  but  will  also  foster  competition  and  drive 
innovation. Institutions that are able to embrace new technological developments and offer customers 
additional  services  will  benefit  from  this  new  integrated  market.  In  a  competitive  and  integrated 
economy,  a  forward-looking  view  is  required  so  that  retail  payments  have  a  level  of  safety  and 
efficiency that is comparable with the best national systems in place today. 
Undoubtedly, this approach will considerably influence the balance of power on the European market 
of  payment  services,  as  well  as  on  our  local  market.  The  proposed  mechanisms  will  favour 
consolidation  processes  in  the  sector  of  payment  infrastructure  providers,  and  possibly  also  in  the 
banking sector itself. 
SEPA stands for (S)Speed, (E)Efficiency, (P)Positiveness and (A)Automatisation. It is important 
that the SEPA project is not viewed just as a “one-shot operation”, but rather as a continually evolving 
project  that  fosters  European  integration,  seeking  to  improve  all  aspects  of  the  euro  area  retail 
payments  market  on  an  ongoing  basis.  The  SEPA  will  also  make  a  notable  contribution  to  the  so-
called  Lisbon  Agenda,  which  aims  at  fostering  competitiveness  and  ensuring  the  continuous 
development of the European economy. The National Bank of Poland, as a forward-looking and acting 
institution, which supports development of the Polish banking sector, has been participating, for two 
years now, in the TARGET system, and is now proceeding with intensive preparation for the transition 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 1
to the new platform – TARGET2. It is worth reminding that this initiative has led to a considerable drop 
in charges for cross-border transfers in the euro under correspondent banking, although for the time 
being the drop is of benefit mainly to banks, and hardly at all to clients. 
SEPA consists of the following elements: the single currency, a single set of euro payment instruments 
–  credit  transfers,  direct  debits  and  card  payments,  efficient  processing  infrastructures  for  euro 
payments, common technical standards, common business practices, a harmonised legal basis, and 
ongoing development of new customer-oriented services. 
I am sure than many of you are wondering "Why SEPA?". To answer this question we have to think 
like Europeans. 
Currently,  the  euro  area  economy  is  unable  to  fully  exploit  all  the  benefits  of  the  Monetary  Union. 
Customers face difficulties when making euro retail payments to other euro area countries, as these 
payments often turn out to be more time-consuming. As long as this is the case, the euro cannot be 
viewed as a fully implemented single currency. 
Despite  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999  and  the  development  of  TARGET,  the  common  large-
value  payment  system  for  euro,  low-value  electronic  payments  (i.e.  retail  payments)  continue  to  be 
processed  differently  throughout  the  euro  area.  Overall,  the  number  and  variety  of  payment 
instruments, standards and processing infrastructures for retail payments has not really changed since 
the introduction of the euro. In such an environment, to facilitate the flow of payments, companies with 
a substantial number of cross-border payments have to maintain bank accounts in all the countries in 
which they do business.  
Imagine  enterprises  in  Poland  had  to  keep  bank  accounts  in  each  voivodship  in  order  to 
operate efficiently, and each voivodship had a different settlement system and different legal 
regulations. Would enterprises in such a situation be able to operate as efficiently as they do 
now?  What  would  it  mean  for  the  costs  and  competitiveness  of  Polish  banks  and  prices  of 
payment services?  
This  fragmentation  not  only  affects  cross-border  payments  but  also  national  euro  payments,  as  it 
prevents innovation and competition on the euro area level. Payers and payees may also be subject to 
different  rules  and  requirements  depending  on  their  country  of  origin.  The  creation  of  a  common 
framework  will  create  the  opportunity  for  innovative  payment  solutions  to  be  offered  irrespective  of 
national borders.  
The goal of SEPA is thus to create an integrated, competitive and innovative retail payments market 
for  all  non-cash  euro  payments,  which,  in  time,  will  be  conducted  entirely  electronically.  As  such, 
SEPA will benefit all customers. 
New  payment  instruments  will  be  available  throughout  the  euro  area,  making  life  easier  for  both 
consumers and business. Consumers will need only one bank account. From this account, they will be 
able to make euro credit transfers and direct debit payments anywhere in the euro area as easily as 
they make national payments. They could, for instance, pay rent for children studying abroad, pay for 
a holiday home, or pay for services provided by European companies, e.g. mobile telephone services, 
insurance companies, utilities, etc. People who live, work or study outside their home country will no 
longer need one bank account at home and another one abroad. 
The use of payment cards will be more efficient, as consumers will be able to use the same card for all 
euro  payments.  This  will  reduce  the  necessity  for  people  to  carry  cash.  Innovative  services  can  be 
offered to consumers irrespective of national borders. The long-term goal of the banking industry is 
that the SEPA payment instruments will only be used in electronic form. Payments can then be easily 
combined  with  other  e-services  in  the  case  of  both  individual  and  corporate  clients.  These  include 
e-invoicing, mobile or internet payment initiation, airline e-tickets, credit advice or e-reconciliation. As a 
consequence, consumers will spend less time handling payments. Everything will be easier, faster and 
cheaper ... in the long term. 
Payment  cards are  becoming  a  favourite  payment instrument with  consumers,  and  are  increasingly 
replacing  cheques  and  cash  payments.  The  use  of  cards  is  thus  expected  to  grow  in  the  future. 
Thanks to the creation of a single euro payments area, acquirers will be able to process all SEPA-
compliant card payments, even across borders. In the SEPA environment, merchants will be able to 
choose  any  card  payment  processing  entity  in  the  euro;  this  will  increase  competition  and  reduce 
costs.  
2 
 BIS Review 29/2007
Point-of-sale  terminals  in  the  euro  area  will  become  increasingly  standardised.  As  a  consequence, 
there will be a wider choice of terminal providers, and merchants will be able to accept a wider range 
of cards with a single terminal. The increased competition between payment card systems should also 
drive down fees. 
This is a vision of anticipated benefits for an integrated Europe, but the questions I would like to ask 
the panelists and all of you today are as follows: Will SEPA reinforce the competitiveness of Polish 
entrepreneurs?;  How  fast  should  we  act?;  What  roles  are  there  to  be  played  and  who  should  play 
them so as to ensure the success of the Polish economy, enterprises and consumers in the SEPA 
era? 
It  seems  to me  that  these  are  the  key  questions  to  be  answered  now so  that  Forum  SEPA  Polska 
could develop, in the months to come, an optimal strategy for launching new payment products in the 
Polish market. 
Let’s  also  have  a  look  at  our  own  local  situation.  By  providing  new  payment  instruments  and  euro 
area-wide infrastructures, SEPA will ensure that banks expand their business and compete on a euro 
area level, as any bank can offer its services more easily to any individual in the euro area. Banks can 
also  expand  their  business  by  offering  their  customers  value-added  services  on  top  of  the  SEPA 
products.  
It is worth referring here to Regulation No 2560/2001 of the European Commission, which established 
the principle of equal charges for cross-border payments and comparable domestic payments within 
the  EU,  which  in  turn  has  created  an  imbalance  between  bank  fees  and  costs  of  cross-border 
payments.  This  imbalance  can  only  be  overcome  if  the  handling  of  cross-border  payments  is 
reorganised to become as efficient and inexpensive as the handling of national payments, which is the 
primary goal of SEPA. 
An aspect which deserves particular attention in the discussion on SEPA is the harmonisation of the 
law  within  the  payment  area.  The  proposed  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD)  establishes  the 
necessary  legal  framework  for  SEPA  payments  and  will  also  apply  to  existing  national  payment 
products. 
The  aim  of  the  Directive  is  to  harmonise  the  market  access  requirements  for  non-bank  payment 
service providers. This will create a level playing field with enhanced competition in national markets.  
The Directive will provide clarity and certainty with regard to the core rights and obligations of users 
and providers of payment services. It will also provide the necessary legal framework for SEPA, as it 
will harmonise existing, and differing, national legal requirements. 
Please note that the Eurosystem sees SEPA as “an integrated market for payment services which is 
subject to effective competition and where there is no distinction between cross-border and national 
payments  within  the  euro area.”  Over  the  long  term,  all  euro  area  payments will  become domestic, 
reaching  a  level  of  safety  and  efficiency  that  is  at  least  on  par  with  the  best  performing  national 
payment systems today. 
Let  us  consider  together  the  potential  benefits  of  SEPA  for  the  Polish  market  participants.  The 
following questions seem to be of particular importance here: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
What’s the role and place of Polish payment infrastructure in the SEPA world? 
Will SEPA increase the consolidation of the Polish banking sector?  
Will SEPA reinforce the competitiveness of Polish entrepreneurs?  
What  roles  are  there  to  be  played  and  who  should  play  them  so  as  to  ensure  that  SEPA 
contributes to the success of the Polish economy and increased consumer satisfaction?  
What benefits may the Polish payment market participants gain before Poland joins the euro 
area? 
 Now, let me ask the Presidents to take the floor. 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 3
