Durmuş Yilmaz: Turkey’s monetary and exchange rate policy for 2007  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the Central 
Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Istanbul, 13 December 2006. 
General framework of the monetary policy 
 A brief evaluation of the first year of the inflation targeting regime  
The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  (Central  Bank)  adopted  the  formal  inflation-targeting 
regime at the turn of 2006, and since that time has implemented a policy consistent with the principles 
laid  out  in  the  policy  statement  entitled  “General  Framework  of  Inflation  Targeting  Regime  And 
Monetary And Exchange Rate Policy for 2006” and released on 5th of December, 2006.  
Four Inflation Reports have been published in 2006, in January, April, July and October. These reports 
have explicated the Central Bank’s inflation forecasts and policy perspectives. The main messages of 
the reports have been shared with the public each time in by means of press conferences.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) held regular meetings throughout 2006, in addition to the 
interim  meetings  held  in  June,  in  line  with  the  pre-announced  annual  timetable  to  determine  policy 
rates.  Press  releases  explaining  the  rationale  of  decisions  and  the  Committee’s  policy  stance  have 
been published along with interest rate decisions. Moreover, the summary reports of the Committee’s 
discussions have been released within five working days following the meetings. 
In the first year of the inflation-targeting regime, some supply-side shocks were experienced, which 
caused inflation to materialize above the path consistent with the target. The Central Bank explained 
the  reasons  of  this  deviation  through  open  letters  written  to  the  Government,  took  the  necessary 
measures to put inflation back on track consistent with the target and shared its evaluations pertaining 
to the timing of convergence to the target with the public in a transparent manner.  
These implementations not only strengthened the communication framework of monetary policy, but 
also played an important role in shaping the expectations. Although the inflation rate has stabilized at 
around 10 percent-level for a long time due to the supply-side shocks experienced in 2006, the fact 
that  the  inflation  expectations  for  the  next  24  months  is  around  5.5  percent  as  of  today  is  a  clear 
evidence of the success achieved in the inflation-targeting. However, being ultimately focused on price 
stability,  the  Central  Bank  cannot  be  content  with  what  has  been  achieved  until  medium-term 
expectations are consistent with the target. 
As  a  result,  important  steps  were  taken  in  2006  on  the  way  to  transparency,  accountability  and 
predictability, which are the main principles of the inflation-targeting regime. This press release aims to 
review the strategic as well as the operational framework of monetary policy in light of the first year’s 
experience and to lay down the principles for 2007. In the first part of the text, the general framework 
of  monetary  policy  will  be  presented,  and  in  the  second  part  exchange  rate  policy  and  liquidity 
management issues will be considered.  
Inflation targets 
Inflation targets will continue to be defined as the end-year rate of inflation calculated by the annual 
percentage change of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in the upcoming period. In the press release 
regarding the monetary and exchange rate policy for 2006, the target horizon was set as three years 
and this time frame will be preserved for 2007. Taking into account the structural transformation of the 
economy, the transition from chronic high inflation to low inflation, and the process of convergence to 
the developed countries, a target of around 4 percent is considered appropriate for the medium-term. 
Therefore,  inflation  targets  for  2007  and  2008,  which  were  previously  announced  as  4  percent,  are 
maintained and the inflation target for 2009, which was scheduled to be announced at the end of this 
year,  has  also  been  determined  as  4  percent.  As  the  structural  transformation  and  convergence 
process is completed in time, it will be possible to target lower inflation rates. 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
Uncertainty band 
In  Article  42  of  the  CBRT  Law  it  is  stipulated  that  “The  Bank  shall  submit  information  to  the 
Government in writing and inform the public disclosing the reasons for the incapability to achieve the 
determined targets in due time published or the occurrence of the possibility of not achieving and the 
measures to be taken thereof”. However, it does not specify the size of the deviation from the target 
that  will  require  such  an  explanation.  Therefore,  in  order  to  clarify  this  mechanism  and  facilitate  its 
operation,  the  Central  Bank  has  set  a  symmetrical  uncertainty  band  of  2  percentage  points  in  both 
directions around the point target.  
It has been decided to keep the uncertainty band around the target at 2 percent for 2007 as well. The 
path consistent with the end-year target and the uncertainty bands defined for the end of each quarter 
of 2007 are shown in Table 1. In case the figures go outside the band, the Central Bank shall submit a 
separate report to the Government disclosing the reasons for the deviation and the measures to be 
taken for convergence to the target and share this report with the public. The path shown in Table 1 
will also be used as performance criterion for the IMF reviews within the framework of the Stand-by 
program. 
Table 1: Inflation path consistent with the end-year target and the uncertainty band  
  
Uncertainty Band (upper
limit) 
  Path Consistent with
the Target 
Uncertainty 
(Lower Limit) 
Band
March  June  SeptemberDecember 
11,2
9,2
7,2
8,7
6,7
4,7
7,3
5,3
3,3
6,0
4,0
2,0
The difference between the targets and forecasts 
In last year’s policy statement regarding the general framework of the inflation-targeting regime, it was 
stated that the inflation target would only be changed in the event that sharp and long-term deviations 
from the target are expected or the medium-term targets no longer make sense due to factors beyond 
the control of monetary policy. It was also stated that temporary shocks would only change inflation 
forecasts  rather  than  inflation  targets  and  the  points  of  reference  to  be  used  by  economic  agents 
would be inflation forecasts for the short-term and the inflation target for the medium-term. This policy 
approach  was  put  into  practice  after  the  supply-side  shocks  of  2006.  The  inflation  forecasts  were 
updated  in  July  and  it  was  announced  that  inflation  would  stand  well  above  the  end-year  inflation 
target;  however,  the  target  for  end-2006  was  not  changed.  Accordingly,  the  economic  agents  have 
taken  the  inflation  forecasts  announced  by  the  Central  Bank  for  end-2006  as  a  point  of  reference 
instead of the end-year inflation target for 2006. In fact, inflation expectations for end-2006 are in line 
with the Central Bank’s forecasts.  
It is not something exceptional for the countries implementing inflation-targeting regime to experience 
significant  deviations  from  the  inflation  target.  What  matters  most  here  is  to  be  able  to  explain  the 
reasons  for  the  deviation,  to  take  necessary  measures  to  ensure  that  the  target  could  be  attained 
again and to inform the public of the convergence period. If the Central Bank had changed its inflation 
target  for  end-2006 as 10  percent,  it  would  have  achieved  the  end-year  target  and would not  have 
been liable to be called to account to the public. However, instead of changing the target, the Central 
Bank preferred to render account to foster its communication policy. Within this framework, the Central 
Bank will inform the Government through a new open letter in January 2007 and explain the reasons 
for  overshooting  the  end-year  inflation  target,  in  addition  to  sharing  its  projections  pertaining  to  the 
convergence process with the public.  
In conclusion, the Central Bank considers that frequent changes in targets are likely to have adverse 
effects on inflation expectations and pricing behaviors, which could damage the credibility of the future 
commitments. For this reason, it is important in the upcoming period that targets should be left intact 
as long as inflation is expected to converge to targets within a reasonable period of time.  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2007
Transmission mechanism and control horizon 
Central banks in both developed and developing countries experience serious uncertainties regarding 
the lagged effects of monetary policy on inflation. Considering the fact that the relationship between 
macroeconomic variables changed remarkably along with the structural transformation in the economy 
after  the  2001  crisis,  it  is  assessed  that  the  mentioned  uncertainty  in  Turkey  is  at  least  as  high  as 
those in other countries.  
However, in light of the recent normalization experience, it is possible to produce forecasts about the 
period  required  for  monetary  policy  to  influence  inflation.  The  latest  observations  indicate  that  the 
period  needed  for  monetary  policy  measures  to  affect  domestic  demand  varies  between  3  to  9 
months, while the change in demand influences inflation in a period between 3 months and 1 year. 
This leads us to the conclusion that the impacts of monetary policy on inflation spread over a period of 
one and a half years on average.  
In this context, taking into account the lagged impacts of monetary policy, the Central Bank defined the 
policy horizon as approximately one and a half years in the main policy statement published last year. 
Although it is forecasted that the impact of monetary policy on inflation will show itself in a more lagged 
manner and that the control horizon may be extended as the normalization process of the economy 
continues, the control horizon is maintained as one and a half years at this stage. There is no doubt 
that  this  period  may  be  extended  or  shortened  depending  on  the  extent  of  shocks  and  the  period 
needed for their influence to reflect on prices. The impacts of various shocks on inflation may differ 
according to time and period. As a consequence, the period required for inflation to converge to the 
target again will be announced after the occurrence of shocks and the determination of their sources, if 
there is a significant deviation from the target.  
Forecast horizon 
The forecasts presented in the Inflation Reports published throughout 2006, covered a period of one 
and a half years. From 2007 onwards, forecasts will refer to a two-years period. This change aims to 
help economic agents to predict the future better. Furthermore, forming a comparable forecast period 
with the results of the Expectations Survey will provide us with the opportunity to analyze and assess 
inflation forecasts more easily.1
Inflation forecasts and interest rate path 
While  producing  inflation  forecasts,  one  of  the  most  critical  questions  to  be  answered  is  how  the 
monetary policy is shaped over the forecast horizon. Country experiences reveal that there are many 
different  approaches  related  to  the  presentation  of  forecasts  and  the  method  of  signaling  future 
monetary policy. Accordingly, central banks can be classified into three groups: 
(i) 
Countries  in  which  central  banks  produce  inflation  forecasts  by  considering  their  own 
potential  policy  responses:  New  Zealand,  Norway,  Canada,  Sweden,  Czech  Republic, 
Turkey, Columbia, Peru, Rumania. In addition, these countries announce their forecasts on 
the interest rate path in verbal or numerical terms.  
Countries where central banks employ the market expectations: European Union (European 
Central Bank), Chile, Brazil, Czech Republic, Sweden, and England. In this framework, the 
expected short-term interest rate path is calculated via the yield curve, expectations survey 
and other sources and inflation forecasts are published under the assumption that this path 
will materialize.  
Countries in which central banks assume that interest rate will remain fixed over the forecast 
horizon: England, Brazil, Peru, and Australia.2 
(ii) 
(iii) 
In  recent  years,  both  academic  literature  and  current  central  banking  implementations  increasingly 
support the approach adopted by the first group, including Turkey for sharing the own expectations of 
the central banks about future monetary policy with the public corresponds to the transparency and 
                                                      
1  
2   Some  central  banks  follow  more  than  one  method  while  producing  forecasts  about  interest  rates.  For  instance,  Bank  of 
In the survey, the farthest period of time given for inflation expectations is 2 years.   
England is in both the second group (expectations for market interest rates) and third group (fixed interest rate).  
BIS Review 1/2007 
 3
predictability  principles  of  inflation  targeting.  In  this  context,  it  is  observed  that  more  countries  from 
second and third groups join the first group each year.  
Monetary policy and interest rate risk 
As mentioned above, the Central Bank shares its forecasts about monetary policy verbally with the 
public.  When  evaluating  the  inflation  and  monetary  policy  outlook,  a  particular  question  to  be 
answered is raised: How should the policy perspective that will keep inflation close to the target in the 
medium-term (in a period of one and a half years to two years) be? The answers to this question as 
provided in the Inflation Reports published in 2006 were as follows:  
• 
JANUARY 2006: “... a short-term interest rate path remaining constant for the first couple of 
months in 2006 and displaying a gradual decline thereafter...” 
APRIL 2006: “...where the Central Bank continues to cut policy rates gradually...” 
JULY  2006:  “...  in  addition  to  the  measures  of  June,  the  Central  Bank  will  implement 
measured monetary tightening in the rest of 2006 and cut policy rates gradually in 2007...” 
OCTOBER 2006: “under the scenario that the Central Bank maintains its tight stance until 
the last quarter of 2007 and cuts policy interest rates afterwards...” 
  As it is clearly seen above, as long as there was not a significant shock in the economy, the Central 
Bank acted in parallel to its earlier statements. However it had to revise its monetary policy stance 
after important shocks such as the market volatilities of May and June. It is more evident in light of 
these this example that, as it is frequently emphasized in our announcements, the interest rate path, 
which is used by the Central Bank in producing forecasts, should not be perceived as a commitment to 
be followed in every case. Hence, the interest rate risk should be assessed by considering the fact that 
the  outlook  presented  in  the  Inflation  Report  is  subject  to  change  depending  on  the  data  flow,  and 
thus, the policy perspective can be updated whenever necessary. Since the end of 2005, the Central 
Bank has repeatedly drawn attention to this matter via the Inflation Report and other policy documents.  
Special CPI aggregates and core inflation 
Instead of considering a single so-called core indicator, the Central Bank uses more than one indicator 
in the differentiation of various exogenous shocks. Thus, depending on the source of shocks, different 
indicators may stand out from time to time. For instance, the index that excludes the energy item in a 
period where oil prices display high increases or the index that excludes the unprocessed food group 
in  a  period  where  agricultural  prices  fluctuate  excessively  may  contain  more  comprehensive 
information in order to achieve a better understanding of the main inflation trend. 
Special CPI aggregates produced will continue to be a part of the forward-looking inflation analysis 
and the communication policy of the Central Bank. As of 2005, TURKSTAT started to publish 7 special 
CPI  aggregates  and  beginning  from  September  2006  the  H  index  composed  by  excluding  energy, 
alcoholic beverages-tobacco, unprocessed food, and gold has started to be published. Currently, even 
though the H index seems to be relatively in the forefront, it should be kept in mind that this index is 
sensitive to developments in FX rates and it could provide incomplete information in periods when FX 
rates are highly volatile. In such periods it would be appropriate to support the data from the H index 
with  other  indexes  that  have  low  FX  rate  pass-through  (for  example;  evaluating  them  with  service 
prices inflation). 
Hence, the Central Bank will not use only one indicator to assess the main trend in inflation and will 
openly  inform  the  public  of  the  type  of  the  relevant  indicator  and  the  degree  of  its  importance. 
Moreover, after reaching a satisfactory number of observations, new indices can be compiled based 
on different techniques and the SCA can be updated. 
Public sector’s role in the inflation targeting regime 
In the inflation-targeting regime, developments in the public sector are a matter of concern from the 
monetary  policy  perspective.  The  CBRT  certainly  cannot  control  polices  implemented  by  the  public 
sector. However, the fact that the size of the public sector relative to the economy is still large makes it 
necessary to closely monitor the developments in this area. In accordance with its law, a central bank, 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2007
which focuses on price stability, has to monitor developments in budget and fiscal policy and has to 
react to the possible repercussions of these policies on inflation. 
Policies of the public sector have the potential to affect the inflation outlook through various channels. 
The  first  channel  comprises  expectations.  Further  enhancement  of  fiscal  discipline  through  its 
continuity  will  increase  the  effectiveness  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy  by  extending  the 
borrowing maturities and reducing risk premiums and the volatilities in risk premiums and facilitate the 
management of inflation expectations.  
Pricing behavior of goods and services produced or controlled by the public sector itself or the indirect 
taxation  channel  has  a  direct  effect  on  inflation.  In  this  framework,  pricing  goods  and  services 
produced by the public sector rationally and enhancing the quality of fiscal discipline is crucial in terms 
of the predictability of inflation. 
Another channel, which affects inflation and inflation expectations, is the incomes policy of the public 
sector.  One  of  the  main  determinants  of  expectations  for  price  and  wage  inflation  in  Turkey  is  the 
increase  in  wages  made  by  the  public  sector  to  its  own  employees.  Wage  increases  in  the  public 
sector may set a precedent for the private sector. In this context, the consistent trend of the incomes 
policy with the inflation target is significant in terms of achieving the inflation-targets more easily and 
quickly. 
One  of  the  main  components  of  total  demand  is  the  public  sector’s  direct  purchase  of  goods  and 
services. Therefore, while evaluating developments regarding the inflation outlook, the Central Bank 
carefully monitors public expenditures as well. 
The Central Bank takes into consideration the budget projections while setting the inflation targets and 
the  monetary  policy  perspective  and  hence,  makes  various  assumptions  regarding  the  channels 
mentioned above. In case of an unpredicted development in one of the channels, the policy stance 
needs to be updated. 
Monetary Policy Committee meetings and the decision-making process  
The Monetary Policy Committee will continue to meet once a month in the upcoming period as it has 
done since 2001 and as stipulated by Central Bank Law. The meeting will continue to be held in two 
sessions.  The  first  session  will  start  at  1:00  pm  and  will  host  the  Central  Bank  authorities  and 
specialists  as  well  as  authorities  from  the  Undersecretariat  of  Treasury.  In  this  session,  the  related 
bodies of the Central Bank will present their reports on evaluations about economic developments and 
inflation  outlook  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  At  the  same  time,  the  authorities  from  the 
Undersecretariat of Treasury will present their evaluations on the developments in debt management 
and fiscal policy to the Committee. In the second session, the Committee members will make the final 
evaluations about the outlook and the decision will be put to a vote. After making a decision, members 
of the Committee will prepare a brief report explaining the rationale of the decision. The decision and 
its rationale will be announced by the Central Bank in a press release before 7:00 pm on the same 
day, and it will also be posted on the website of the Bank. A significant change in the upcoming period 
is that the Turkish version and the English translation of the decision will be published on the same 
day. 
Other policy statements and important dates  
The Central Bank will continue to publish main policy statements regularly in 2007 as well. Within this 
framework: 
• 
• 
• 
The Inflation Report will continue to be published quarterly. 
The Financial Stability Report will be published twice a year on previously announced dates.  
The  statement  entitled  Summary  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Discussions  will  be 
published within 8 working days following the meeting with the title Summary of the Monetary 
Policy Committee Meeting, alongside its English translation. 
As  of  July  2006  the  “Price  Developments”  report  started  to  be  published  to  provide  an 
accurate understanding of inflation data. This report will be published within 2 working days 
following the announcement of inflation data. 
 BIS Review 1/2007 
 5
  Besides all these statements, presentations and speeches made by the Governor and the 
Committee members will be shared with the public from time to time. 
Moreover, the research papers, booklets, and technical notes published by the Central Bank 
and organized conferences will continue to be a part of the communication policy. 
The  publication  calendar  for  the  Inflation  Report  and  the  Financial  Stability  Report  along  with  the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting dates are presented in the Appendix. Meeting dates have been 
determined by taking into account such factors as official holidays, national and religious festivals, and 
the data flow calendar. 
Exchange rate policy and foreign exchange buying auctions 
Along  with  inflation  targeting,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  implement  a  floating  exchange  rate 
regime in the upcoming period. In the floating exchange rate regime the FX rate is neither a target, nor 
a policy tool. The only variable that the Central Bank sets as target is inflation and the main policy tool 
to achieve this target is short-term interest rates. Therefore, the Central Bank targeting a variable such 
as FX rate, growth or current account deficit is out of the question. 
The Central Bank shares with the public the general framework of the current exchange rate policy 
and FX buying auctions in the press releases it has issued each year since the start of 2002. As also 
stated in these press releases; 
(i) 
In the current floating exchange rate regime, exchange rates are determined by supply and 
demand  conditions  in  the  market  and the  Central  Bank does  not  have  any  exchange rate 
target.  
Since  there  is  no  exchange  rate  level  to  maintain  in  countries  with  floating  exchange  rate 
regimes,  the  level  of  foreign  currency  reserves  is  much  less  significant  compared  to 
countries  with  fixed  or  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes.  However,  especially  in  emerging 
economies  such  as  Turkey,  a  strong  FX  reserves  position  is  significant  in  removing  the 
unfavorable effects of potential internal and external shocks and boosting confidence in the 
country’s  economy.  In  addition,  taking  into  account  the  foreign  debt  payments  of  the 
Treasury and the need to gradually reduce the number of high-cost remittance accounts in 
the long-term, which are peculiar to Turkey and make up a significant part of the liabilities 
side of the Central Bank’s balance sheet, the Central Bank holds foreign exchange buying 
auctions to build up reserves at times where foreign exchange supply constantly increases 
compared to foreign exchange demand.  
The  economic  transformation  process  experienced  after  the  2001  crisis  has  enabled 
significant  achievements 
the 
“dollarization”  effect  created  by  unstable  macroeconomic  policies  and  high  inflation  in  the 
past.  Despite  some  deviations  from  this  main  tendency  due  to  exogenous  shocks  and 
changes  in  risk  perceptions,  decisive  implementation  of  economic  program  has  always 
enabled a return to the main tendency. This process, combined with favorable developments 
in the balance of payments, has supported the increase in foreign exchange supply in the 
economy.      
In this framework, in order to minimize the impact on supply and demand conditions in the 
foreign exchange market, the Central Bank, which follows a moderate reserve-raising policy, 
has conducted its FX buying via auctions, whose terms and conditions are announced with 
due notice, since 1 April 2002. Moreover, the Bank has announced annual auction programs 
since  2005  and  does  not  make any  amendments  to  these  programs,  unless  extraordinary 
differences are observed in foreign exchange liquidity.  
Meanwhile, as also emphasized in all its press releases, the Central Bank will continue to 
closely monitor the volatility in exchange rates and may directly intervene in the markets in 
the  event  of  excessive  volatility  that  might  occur  in  either  direction.  These  volatility 
interventions are not only carried out by considering past data with a mechanical rule, but by 
evaluating all aspects of realized and potential volatilities.        
in  macroeconomic  stabilization  and  helped 
reduce 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
In  the  press  release  referred  to  as  “The  General  Framework  of  Inflation  Targeting  Regime  and 
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2006” dated 5 December 2005, the annual auction program 
for 2006 was announced in consistence with the aforementioned general framework. The maximum 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2007
daily amount that can be bought was determined as USD 60 million, with USD 20 million of auction 
amount and USD 40 million of optional selling amount (200 % of the total amount sold), to be effective 
as of the 2nd of January 2006.  
However,  in  line  with  the  decline  in  foreign  exchange  supply  due  to  global  liquidity  conditions,  the 
depth  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  lost  and  volatilities  were  observed  in  exchange  rates. 
Therefore, the Bank decided to suspend daily FX buying auctions for a certain period of time, starting 
from the 16th of May 2006.  
Moreover, as a response to the excessive volatility in exchange rates observed in 2006, the Central 
Bank  directly  intervened  in  the  market  via  one  FX  buying  intervention  and  three  FX  selling 
interventions. These interventions were as follows:  
(i) 
Following  the  increase  in  foreign  exchange  sales  due  to  developments  in  international 
markets,  the  Central  Bank  decided  to  directly  intervene  in  the  market  by  buying  a  total 
amount of USD 5.4 billion foreign currency on 15 February 2006, in order to prevent actual 
and expected excessive volatilities.  
On 13 June 2006 and 23 June 2006, the Central Bank decided to directly intervene in the 
market by selling foreign currency in order to prevent the excessive volatility observed in line 
with the liquidity shortage in the foreign currency market due to global liquidity conditions. 
Total amounts sold were USD 0.5 billion and USD 0.8 billion, respectively.  
In  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting  held  on  the  25th  of  June  2006  following  the 
aforementioned interventions, it was stated that the liquidity shortage in the foreign currency 
market continued and once again underlined that an effective foreign currency market was a 
prerequisite for the price stability target. Thus, in order to provide foreign currency supply via 
its  instruments  and  mechanisms,  the  Central  Bank  directly  intervened  in  the  market  by 
selling an amount of USD 0.9 billion foreign currency on the 26th of June 2006. In addition to 
this intervention, two more FX selling auctions were held on the 26th and 27th of June 2006, 
in which a total amount of USD 1 billion foreign currency was sold.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
Following the measures taken by the Central Bank against the volatility in financial markets in May and 
June  2006  and  improved  global  liquidity  conditions,  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  become 
relatively stable. For this reason, the Central Bank has decided to resume the foreign exchange buying 
auctions,  which  were  suspended  on  the  16th  of  May  2006,  as  of  the  10th  of  November  2006. 
Accordingly,  the  maximum  daily  amount  to  be  purchased  in  the  auctions  has  been  set  at  USD  45 
million, with USD 15 million for auction amount, and USD 30 million for optional selling amount (200 % 
of the total amount sold).    
As  of  12  December  2006,  the  total  amount  of  foreign  currency  purchased  via  auctions  and 
interventions is USD 9.4 billion, while the total amount sold is USD 3.1 billion for the whole of 2006. 
The total amounts of foreign currency purchased and sold by the Central Bank are shown year by year 
in the table below:  
Table 2: The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases and sales (2002-2006; million 
USD) 
Year 
FX Buying 
Auctions 
FX Selling 
Auctions 
FX Buying 
Interventions 
FX Selling 
Interventions 
Total Net FX 
Buying 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006* 
Total 
795 
5.652 
4.104 
7.442 
3.961 
21.954 
 1.000 
1.000 
16 
4.229 
1.283 
14.565 
5.441 
25.534 
12 
- 
9 
- 
2.105 
2.126 
799 
9.881 
5.378 
22.007 
6.297 
44.362 
       * As of 12 December 2006   
BIS Review 1/2007 
 7
Unless  extraordinary  differences  are  observed  in  foreign  exchange  liquidity  conditions,  FX  buying 
auctions will continue in 2007 in the framework of the aforementioned program. However, as was the 
case  before, the  Central  Bank  may,  with  prior  notice,  suspend  the  auctions  temporarily  for short  or 
longer  periods  when  the  depth  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  is  lost  due  to  exogenous shocks  or 
unforeseen  extraordinary  developments,  and  when  the  resulting  excessive  volatility  and  unhealthy 
price  formation  are  observed  in  foreign  exchange  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Central  Bank  will 
continue to closely monitor the volatility in exchange rates also in 2007 and will directly intervene in the 
market in the event of actual and potential excessive volatilities. 
Banks will be able to borrow foreign exchange in terms of USD and euro from the Central Bank within 
the predetermined limits with a one-week maturity in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Market-
Foreign  Exchange  Deposit  Market  in  the  upcoming  period  too.  Moreover,  the  purchase/sale 
transactions  of  “foreign  exchange  against  foreign  exchange”,  “foreign  exchange  against  foreign 
banknotes” and “foreign banknotes against foreign banknotes” conducted between the Central Bank 
and institutions authorized to operate in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets will continue. 
In  conclusion,  as  can  be  understood  from  the  general  framework  and  our  exchange  rate  policy 
implementations described above, exchange rates are established by supply and demand conditions 
in the foreign exchange markets under the implementation of the  floating foreign exchange regime. 
The key determinants of foreign exchange supply and demand are the monetary and fiscal policies 
and  the  economic  fundamentals  determined  by  the  structural  reform  process  and  expectations.  It 
should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  economic  agents  operate  in  an 
environment  of  exchange  rate  risk.  Nevertheless,  as  repeatedly  emphasized  by  the  Central  Bank, 
exchange rate risk is a manageable risk and economic agents should establish the mechanisms that 
will ensure the efficient management of this risk. 
Liquidity management 
Excess liquidity, which was created by the Central Bank’s purchases of government securities worth of 
YTL 14 billion from state-owned banks and banks transferred to the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund 
(SDIF) in order to meet their liquidity needs following the February 2001 crisis, as well as the intensive 
foreign exchange purchases during the 2003-2005 period, persisted in 2006.  
The  Central  Bank,  withdrew  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  market  mainly  via  New  Turkish  Lira  deposit 
operations in the Interbank Money Market within the CBRT and Repo transactions in the Repo and 
Reverse Repo Market of the Istanbul Stock Exchange, on an overnight basis. Accordingly, overnight 
interest  rates  were  constantly  realized  around  the  borrowing  rate  of  the  Central  Bank.  Hence,  the 
borrowing rate of the Central Bank has continued to be an indicator for money markets.  
Based on the information currently available, the level of the liquidity in the market in 2007 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
will have a lowering effect, while 
(i) 
(ii) 
The increase in base money,  
Coupon and principal redemption by the Treasury to the Central Bank, 
Treasury’s foreign exchange debt payments financed by its domestic currency borrowing 
The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases, 
Interest payments to be made by the Central Bank for reserve requirements and for excess 
liquidity absorbing transactions,  
The decline in Treasury cash accounts with the Central Bank will have an increasing effect 
on liquidity.  
(iii) 
Based  on  the  assumption  that  the  foreign  exchange  payments  of  the  Treasury  would  exceed  the 
foreign  exchange  inflow,  and  by  taking  the  Central  Bank  FX  buying  auction  program  into 
consideration,  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  market  is  expected  to  continue  within  reasonable  limits  in 
2007, even though temporary liquidity shortages may occur. However, as in previous years, it is not 
possible to make a precise forecast regarding the net foreign exchange payments of the Treasury, the 
amount of the Central Bank’s foreign currency purchases and the balance of Treasury cash accounts 
with the Central Bank. Depending on the variations of these variables, the market liquidity may change 
significantly. 
8 
 BIS Review 1/2007
As long as the excess liquidity in the market remains at reasonable levels, as foreseen in the main 
scenario, the Central Bank will continue to withdraw the excess liquidity in the market, on an overnight 
basis, via New Turkish Lira deposit operations in the Interbank Money Market within the CBRT and 
Repo transactions in the Repo and Reverse Repo Market of Istanbul Stock Exchange. Accordingly, 
overnight interest rates will continue to realize at the level of the borrowing rate of the Central Bank. 
Thus, the overnight borrowing rate of the Central Bank will continue to be the benchmark interest rate 
with respect to monetary policy.   
In case of a permanent liquidity shortage in the market, the benchmark short-term interest rate will be 
the average interest rate of the repo auction, not the daily borrowing interest rate of the Central Bank. 
Therefore, in case of liquidity shortage, the interest rate taken as a benchmark by the market would 
have become higher merely due to the decline in liquidity. In order to avoid any negative impacts, the 
Central Bank could revise its interest rates – provided that the inflation outlook is stable – so as to 
encounter  the  pressure  created  by  the  liquidity  shortage.  However,  such  an  interest  rate  cut  would 
only mean a technical arrangement stemming from the change in liquidity conditions. Therefore, such 
a move should not be perceived as a loosening or tightening of monetary policy. 
Under the assumptions regarding liquidity stated above, the Central Bank’s 2007 liquidity management 
strategy will be as follows: 
(i) 
The Central Bank will continue to announce overnight borrowing and lending interest rates 
between 10:00-12:00 and 13:00-16:00 in the Interbank Money Market within the CBRT. In 
case of a liquidity shortage during the day, banks will be able to borrow at the Central Bank’s 
lending rate against collateral within their limits. In the event of a fall in interest rates due to 
increasing liquidity, banks will be able to lend New Turkish Lira to the Central Bank at the 
Central Bank’s borrowing rate. 
The Central Bank will continue to provide the Late Liquidity Window Facility in the Interbank 
Money Market within the CBRT between 16:00-16:30 such that banks may borrow from or 
lend to the Central Bank against collateral without any limit.  
In  case  of  a  temporary  or  permanent  liquidity  shortage,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to 
carry  out  liquidity  management  through  one-week  repo  auctions.  When  there  is  liquidity 
shortage in the market, the Central Bank will announce the amount of repo auction for that 
day  on  Reuters’  CBTF  page  at  10.00.  While  determining  the  amounts  of  the  auction,  the 
Central  Bank  -  as  long  as  no  extraordinary  fluctuations  are  observed  in  the  market  -  will 
endeavor to maintain the average auction interest rate;  
a. 
At  maximum  of  1  percentage  point  above  the  O/N  borrowing  rate  of  the  Central 
Bank  announced  for  the  intra-day  transactions  and  to  reduce  fluctuations  in  O/N 
interest  rates,  in  cases  where  the  liquidity  shortage  in  the  market  is  envisaged 
temporary and when the technical interest rate cut explained in paragraph 48 is not 
applied,  
At  approximately  the  mid  point  of  the  O/N  borrowing  and  lending  rates  of  the 
Central  Bank,  in  cases  where  the  liquidity  shortage  in  the  market  is  envisaged 
permanent and the technical interest rate cut explained in paragraph 48 is applied.  
The weekly repo auctions will be executed at 11:00 and the results will be announced on 
Reuters’  CBTG  page  no  later  than  11:30.  The  traditional  auction  method  will  be  used  in 
auctions;  in  other  words,  the  successful  bidders  will  be  evaluated  with  their  own  interest 
rates. 
In  case  of  unforeseen  excessive  liquidity  shortage  during  the  day,  which  would  exert 
excessive  pressure  on  money  market  interest  rates,  the  CBRT  may  announce  “Intra-day 
Repo Auctions” in addition to the regular ones. 
The primary dealer banks will be able to conduct repo transactions within the framework of 
open market operations, between 10.00–12.00 and 13.00–16.00 hours.  
In  case  of  an  excessive  increase  in  the  liquidity  surplus  or  the  emerge  of  extraordinary 
fluctuations  in  the  market  even  at  reasonable  levels  of  excess  liquidity,  to  enhance  the 
effectiveness and flexibility of monetary policy and liquidity management strategy, in addition 
to YTL deposit buying auctions with standard maturities, reverse repo auctions and Central 
Bank liquidity bills with maturity up to 91 days may also be used actively. As a matter of fact, 
technical  procedures  regarding  the  issue  of  the  said  bills  were  completed  by  the  Central 
b. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 9
(viii) 
Bank,  by  “the  Communiqué  on  Liquidity  Bills”  published  in  the  Official  Gazette,  number 
26310, dated 5th of October 2006.  
Currently, depending on liquidity conditions, whether there will be standard one week or two 
weeks  YTL  deposit  buying  auctions  will  be  held  or  not,  if  there  will  be  an  auction,  the 
maximum amount to be drained through the auction is announced at 10.00 at Reuter’s CBTY 
page.  In  2007,  the  Central  Bank  may  hold  New  Turkish  Lira  deposit  buying  auctions  with 
standard  maturities  of  1,  2  and  4  weeks  and  continue  to  announce  the  maturity  and  the 
maximum amount to be bought in the auction(s) on Reuters’ CBTY page. Starting from 2007 
onwards,  no  announcement  will  be  made  on  the  said  page  on  days  when  no  auction  is 
deemed  necessary  according  to  liquidity  conditions.  In  case  the  issue  of  liquidity  bills  is 
deemed necessary, the method of issue of the said bills and other related information will be 
announced to the public in advance by a press release.  
As always pointed out, the Central Bank deems the stability and development of financial markets as a 
supporting objective for the effective implementation of policies pertaining to price stability. As a matter 
of  fact,  compatible  with  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  the  Central  Bank  has  taken  measures 
towards  maintaining  financial  stability  several  times  in  the  last  four  years.  Within  this  context,  the 
Central  Bank,  the  primary  goal  of  which,  entrusted  to  it  by  law,  is  to  establish  price  stability,  will 
continue its practices to enhance the effectiveness of the monetary policy and liquidity management, 
also in 2007. Accordingly, the Central Bank may change not only its liquidity management strategy, 
but also the borrowing and lending interest rate margins in cases of unpredictable changes in market 
conditions and according to the new needs.  
Obviously, under the floating exchange rate regime, the Central Bank is able to implement the YTL 
liquidity policy in a more flexible manner than it can under a fixed currency peg regime and can act 
more promptly and flexibly to meet the YTL liquidity needs of the banking system. The Central Bank 
can prevent excessive fluctuations in money market interest rates as long as they are consistent with 
the  inflation  target.  However,  it  is  worth  mentioning  once  more  that  the  banking  system  should  not 
slacken  risk  management  principles  by  simply  relying  on  the  more  flexible  and  effective  liquidity 
management of the Central Bank; to the contrary, it should use risk management principles effectively. 
10 
 BIS Review 1/2007
ANNEX: Calendar for 2007 
MPC Meeting Dates 
16 January, Tuesday 
15 February, Thursday 
15 March, Thursday 
18 April, Wednesday 
14 May, Monday 
14 June, Thursday 
12 July, Thursday 
14 August, Tuesday 
13 September, Thursday 
16 October, Tuesday  
14 November, Wednesday 
13 December, Thursday 
 Inflation Report 
29 January, Monday 
 
 
27 April, Friday 
 
 
27 July, Friday 
 
 
26 October, Friday 
 
 
Financial Stability Report 
 
 
 
 
31 May, Thursday 
 
 
 
 
 
30 November, Friday 
 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 11
