Martín Redrado: Overview of monetary and financial policy in Argentina 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, President of the Central Bank of Argentina, before the Committee on 
Treasury and Budget of the National Senate, Buenos Aires, 20 December 2006. 
 Monetary and financial policy guidelines 
1. 
In  our  third  year  in  office,  we  are  laying  the  foundations  and  starting  points  for  the  monetary  and 
financial  system  of  the  coming  decades.  This  strategy  is  based  on  four  main  pillars  -  a  consistent, 
articulate and gradual monetary policy; a foreign reserve accumulation and management policy that 
provides  a  long-term  horizon;  a  system  that  is  independent  from  public  sector  needs;  and  a  policy 
framework that boosts corporate and household credit. 
The economic literature has shown that there is no optimal one-size-fits-all scheme. Worldwide, there 
are success stories both of fixed and floating exchange rate regimes, with or without explicit inflation 
targets, that use the money supply or the interest rate as an instrumental variable. The important thing 
here is not the label of the regime, but the monetary policy internal consistency, designed to ensure a 
balanced  money  market.  At  this  stage  in  national  history,  there  are  no  adequate  substitutes  for  a 
monetary policy that allows the system to develop while keeping the growth of monetary aggregates in 
check and fosters savings without affecting investment. In fact,  we carry out a sterilization program 
that is unprecedented for Argentina - because of its depth as well as its quality - on the basis of a 
public sector that saves, a sound financial system, and a Central Bank with a strengthened balance 
sheet. 
While we are enjoying a favorable international scenario, believing that this scenario will last forever 
would be misleading. In fact, the world today is highly volatile and, as we all know, the challenges we 
face are magnified in emerging countries such as Argentina, where transmission mechanisms are still 
vague  and  instruments  have  a  limited  power.  As  a  consequence,  our  risk  management  approach 
entails that monetary and financial policy should help prevent crises and weather uncertain scenarios. 
This  leads  to  the  development  of  countercyclical  mechanisms  to  cushion  the  effects  of  external 
disruptions on the economy. One of them is the prudential policy of international reserve accumulation, 
which enables us to hold a stock of over USD 31 billion, an unforeseen level not long ago. 
Besides, after decades of financing public spending through various monetary arrangements, we are 
designing an independent monetary and financial system. This structural change sets out a substantial 
difference from the past: neither the Central Bank nor the financial system are used to finance fiscal 
imbalances. 
In this sense, the Central Bank has developed market instruments to encourage the revival of private 
credit.  A  series  of  specific  measures  from  the  asset  as  well  as  the  liability  side  has  led  to  a  new 
regulatory  framework  that  widens  the  base  of  potential  borrowers,  eases  reporting  requirements, 
extends the use of collateral and encourages the extension of maturities. 
These  policies  lay  the  foundations  for  the  Argentine  monetary  and  financial  system  of  the  coming 
decades  as  true  State  policies  -  independently  from  any  predetermined  ideological  scheme  and 
assimilating  the  opportunities  and  challenges  of  today’s  world  -  thus  contributing  to  sustained 
economic growth. 
The international scenario 
2.  
The international scenario still shows sound economic growth, with commodity prices at a record high 
and  substantial  liquidity.  Expansion  is  nowadays  more  balanced  due  to  lower  US  growth,  that  was 
offset by a more favorable trend in the euro area, Japan and the emerging countries. In fact, the world 
is expected to grow nearly 5 percent by 2007 in a context of subdued inflation. Latin America benefits 
from a favorable global framework and is expected to increase 4 percent by next year. 
The region shows a sounder expansion than in previous recovery episodes since, in the past years, 
macroeconomic  discipline  has  been  strengthened.  The  region  is  therefore  better  prepared  to  face 
adverse  shocks.  Latin  American  countries  are  implementing  prudent  monetary  policies,  showing 
sounder fiscal positions, reducing currency mismatches, holding positive external balances, applying 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 1
more flexible exchange regimes, building up reserves as a preventive mechanism, and paying back 
debt with international organizations in an effort to improve their liability management. 
An example of this enhanced soundness is that the higher financial volatility evidenced worldwide in 
May  and  June  had  a  relatively  mild  impact  on  the  region’s  economies  as  compared  with  other 
emerging economies with a more vulnerable macroeconomic situation. This was mainly reflected in 
stocks and foreign exchange rates and, to a lesser extent, in fixed income instruments. 
However,  the  global  scenario  is  not  risk-free  for  Latin  America  and  Argentina.  Both  the  trend  of 
(financial and real) asset prices and the way in which global imbalances (and, in particular, the effects 
of an eventual significant deceleration in the US economy) are gradually corrected, are two factors that 
may trigger sudden disruptions in the international economic scenario. 
As to the former, today much is debated over the permanent or temporary nature of current commodity 
prices. 
In my opinion, here the analysis can be split in three: 
For metals, the long-term price has risen and current prices seem to exceed such long-term values. 
These new long-term prices are due to higher energy costs, while the relatively high current price is 
due to rather long production cycles, with significant fixed costs and low marginal costs. 
In turn, the prices of agricultural products are relatively high, but long-term prices have not increased. 
That is to say, the average is stable and so a reversal to the mean kind of process is expected. 
Finally, the price of oil depends on extra-economic factors that are difficult to grasp through a model. 
In addition, the oil market is not very competitive, leading the price dynamics to be mainly perceived as 
a random walk. In this sense, the recent drop in crude oil prices allowed inflation to decrease and core 
inflation indices to relatively stabilize worldwide. Second-round effects seem to be limited, as was the 
case when the oil price exceeded USD 75 per barrel. 
The  end  of  the  housing  boom  in  the  US  is  having  a  limited  impact  despite  lower  prices  and  sales. 
Indicators such as employment growth, high corporate profits and liquidity, and the growth of activity in 
the  residential  segment  are  quite  strong  to  support  consumption.  However,  the  correction  of  real 
estate  inflation  continues  to  be  a  source  of  uncertainty  for  the  global  economy,  given  the  size  and 
scope of its effects on aggregate spending. 
As to the second risk factor - i.e. the correction of global imbalances - the trend in the US external 
sector seems to signal a certain degree of stabilization. Anyway, these data do not seem to indicate 
that the exchange adjustment has come to an end. Both the current account deficit - around 7 percent 
of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) -  and US financial assets held by the rest of the world are high. 
This has already resulted in a readjustment of the main currencies that, in my view, is not over yet. 
While  the  euro  has  significantly  appreciated  against  the  dollar,  the  adjustment  has  been  less 
pronounced for the currencies in different Asian countries with a surplus current account. 
The pattern of global growth in recent years led to a significantly reduced share of the US in global 
output and trade, which may limit the impact of a deceleration in the US economy. Also, the economic 
growth  of  Japan  and  the  euro  area  is  mainly  supported  by  domestic  demand,  reducing  contagion 
through trade flows. 
Nevertheless, the possibility of the adjustment resulting in financial turbulences, such as the ones in 
May and June, should not be ruled out. In those months, there was a strong belief that interest rates 
would  soar,  and  this  led  to  a  sell-off  of  emerging  market  assets  with  the  resulting  effects  on  asset 
prices  and  on  most  currencies  in  the  world.  The  Federal  Reserve  monetary  policy  -  which  is  today 
explicitly data-dependent - has shifted part of the uncertainty within its own monetary policy committee 
to the markets, and we, emerging countries, must be alert to any sudden change in global investors’ 
expectations. 
3.  
Monetary and financial policy in 2006 
Compliance with the Monetary Program 
3.1.  
By the end of 2006, the Central Bank has strictly complied with the Monetary Program self-imposed 
targets for 14 consecutive quarters, which is a signal of certainty and predictability. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2007
The  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  begun  in  2005  through  a  strict  control  over  monetary 
aggregates  deepened  in  2006,  and  was  reflected  in  a  sustained  deceleration  of  year-over-year  M2 
growth  (currency  in  circulation,  private  and  public  sector's  current  accounts  in  pesos  and  savings 
accounts in pesos), which fell around 6 percentage points. 
An indicator used by central banks to measure the monetary policy prudential bias is the comparison 
between  monetary  aggregate  growth  and  nominal  GDP.  Monetary  aggregates  in  Argentina  are 
decelerating  nowadays,  converging  to  the  GDP  nominal  change,  which  represents  a  significant 
reduction from the excessive monetization in 2003 and 2004, whose effects are still felt today, given 
the lags with which monetary policy works. 
The  effect  of  the  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  was  not  limited  to  the  M2:  the  change  in 
currency in circulation also slowed down markedly, falling nearly 8 percentage points in 2006. 
In turn, we continue pursuing our prudential international reserve accumulation policy, which enabled 
us to hold a stock of over USD 31 billion in the past few days. This entailed that in only nine months 
we  have  managed  to  recover  the  levels  reached  before  the  full  payment  of  the  debt  owed  to  the 
International Monetary Fund. As many emerging market central banks, we are generating an effective 
insurance mechanism against crises, which acts as a collateral for the macroeconomic program. This 
policy  reduces  external  vulnerability  and  exchange  volatility,  fosters  the  development  of  domestic 
financial markets in local currency and the reduction of the economy’s financial cost, and improves our 
relative position when competing for investment in the global economy. 
The  impact  of  the  reserve  accumulation  strategy  on  the  money  supply  has  been  offset  by  a  deep 
sterilization policy that allowed us to absorb the excess money supply in the economy. The joint action 
of the various absorption factors has led to a monetary contraction of around ARS 27 billion in 2006. 
Both the financial system and the public sector have contributed to the absorption of surplus pesos. 
Due  to  the  scheme  set  forth  by  the  BCRA,  the  early  repayment  of  rediscounts  led  to  a  monetary 
contraction of around ARS 6.6 billion in 2006, and the number of institutions that are still indebted to 
the BCRA was reduced to two. The minimum requirement policy contributed with ARS 4.4 billion, while 
the  main  tool  used  was  the  placement  of  Central  Bank  securities,  which  contributed  with  ARS  10 
billion. 
Consequently,  in  early  December  the stock  of Central  Bank  bills and  notes  amounted  to ARS  41.2 
billion (29 percent of LEBACs and 71 percent of NOBACs). Throughout the year, the NOBACs’ share 
at  a  floating  interest  rate  has  increased  (64  percent  of  the  stock  in  early  December),  vis-à-vis 
CER-indexed instruments (5 percent in that period) and LEBACs in pesos (31 percent). As a result of 
this strategy, the Central Bank’s debt average term was extended from 260 (at the beginning of the 
year) to 360 days (in early December). 
Throughout the year, the Central Bank introduced changes to the minimum requirement policy, raising 
minimum cash requirements for demand deposits. In particular, in April we eliminated interest paid on 
demand deposits and raised the minimum cash requirements from 15 to 17 percent. We also reduced 
the maximum interest rate paid on funds held at the Central Bank without full minimum requirements 
from 75 to 50 percent of the BADLAR rate for private banks; and reduced the interest rate paid on the 
liquidity requirements on money market funds from a nominal year-over-year 2.55 percent rate to a 
nominal  year-over-year  0.5  percent  rate.  In  August,  additional  measures  were  adopted,  raising  the 
minimum requirements for demand deposits in pesos to 19 percent, eliminating the requirements for 
time deposits of over 180-day residual maturity, and establishing that only 67 percent of cash held by 
banks  could  be  used  for  minimum  requirements  purposes.  These  measures  aimed  at  recovering 
prudential liquidity, acting, in turn, indirectly on the means of payment, promoting the extension of the 
funding structure, and thus facilitating an increase in credit. 
Our aggressive sterilization policy is feasible due to the Central Bank’s strengthened balance sheet 
and  positive  quasifiscal  result.  At  present,  income  from  the  high  level  of  reserves  and  from  the 
payment of illiquidity assistance more than offsets outlays, which are mainly related to payments of 
interest on securities issued by the Central Bank and the premia paid on its repo transactions. 
In addition, the behavior of the reference interest rate (interest rate on reverse repurchase operations) 
in 2006 also reflected the change in the stance of monetary policy, with a 125 bp hike. Market interest 
rates followed the reference rate dynamics. Hence, in early December, the BADLAR rate for private 
banks  rose  240  bp  up  to  a  9.5  percent  year-over-year,  and  the  interest  rates  for  30-to-59-day  time 
deposits grew 210 bp up to a 7.2 percent year-over-year, thus leading real interest rates to neutral 
levels. 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 3
In turn, there was a sustained decrease in the inflation rate throughout the year. During the first eleven 
months  of  the  year,  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  rose  8.8  percent,  2.3  percentage  points  below 
year-over-year. This trend is explained by stabilization of core inflation since May (around 0.7 percent 
per month, equivalent to 8.7 percent per annum), which was also accompanied by smaller increases 
(the median price rise for the products making up the core inflation index went from 0.9 percent in the 
second  quarter  to  0.5  percent  in  the  last  few  months),  a  lesser  spreading  of  rises  (from  around  85 
percent in the first half of the year down to 76 percent), and a lesser persistence of price adjustments 
within  the  various  time  horizons.  The  trend  was  reflected  in  inflation  expectations:  according  to  the 
latest  measurement,  the  retail  inflation  forecast  for  the  next  12  months  resulting  from  the  BCRA´s 
Market  Expectation  Survey  (REM)  was  nearly  3  percentage  points  down  from  the  beginning  of  the 
year. 
Despite these advances, lower inflation for 2006 is concentrated in certain specific sectors, and the 
magnitude as well as the spreading and persistence of price rises remain high, reflecting the need to 
keep on following this path. 
To sum up, in 2006 we have complied with the Monetary Program targets strictly controlling the means 
of  payment  growth,  without  affecting  the  Central  Bank’s  balance  sheet  and  actively  pursuing  our 
prudential policy of international reserve accumulation. 
Credit growth 
3.2.  
In  2006,  the  process  of  rebuilding  financial  intermediation,  which  was  begun  last  year,  was 
consolidated. This year we are able to show not only a deepening of this process, but also an incipient 
improvement in terms of its quality as well as of general access conditions. 
Our  proactive  policy,  together  with  the  favorable  macroeconomic  scenario,  boosted  private  credit, 
which is growing at rates of over 40 percent year-over-year. All lines have grown, with credit to small 
and medium enterprises reaching above-average levels. 
Mortgage  credit  lines  began  to  grow  significantly  together  with  their  average  maturity,  boosting 
medium- and long-term financing. This positive behavior is being driven by public as well as private 
banks, with  prudent  risk  management evidenced  by the  improved  quality  of  both  public  and  private 
sector portfolio. Today, nonperforming loans are hitting record lows and are below the Latin American 
average. 
The  Central Bank  went  on  building  a plan  of  adequate  incentives  to  generate  the  revival  of  private 
credit in its three basic dimensions: quantity, quality, and access. A set of specific measures on the 
asset  as  well  as  the  liability  side  has  led  to  a  new  regulatory  framework  that  widens  the  base  of 
potential borrowers. According to the underlying philosophy, adequate conditions need to be created 
for financial institutions to assess projects requiring financing with a forward-looking perspective - that 
is, favoring prospects over past experience. 
On the liabilities’ side, we have broadened the range of instruments included in financial institutions’ 
equity  that  make  it  easier  to  attract  resources  in  the  long  run.  The  so-called  “hybrid  bonds”  or 
“perpetuities”  have  become  eligible  as  basic  capital.  What  distinguishes  these  instruments  is  their 
extended maturity, which we have determined to be no less than 30 years. The possibility of accessing 
this  type  of  funding,  particularly  considering  the  current  context  of  marked  liquidity  in  the  financial 
markets,  favors  long-term  financing  and  fosters  productive  investment  and  housing  financing  and, 
simultaneously, the development of the domestic capital market. 
One of the features that has historically characterized our system is the low use of banking services. 
Although the most economically productive regions in the country enjoy relatively adequate levels of 
banking coverage,  the  distribution nationwide  should  be  improved.  That  is  why  in  the  past year  we 
authorized  the  opening  of  137  new  branches.  Opening  new  branches  in  geographical  areas  where 
banking services are not so widespread enables these areas. Also, we are working to improve access 
of lower socio-economic segments of the population to such services. Our measures include a more 
regular payment schedule for credit to microenterprises (on a weekly, bimonthly, or monthly basis), 
enabling  banks  to  grant  an  initial  grace  period  for  the  payment  of  capital  services.  In  addition,  we 
raised the maximum payment amount from ARS 200 to ARS 300 in order to cover a larger population 
segment,  and  extended  the  maximum  financing  term  from  24  to  36  months,  thus  increasing  the 
financing amount available for infrastructure works from ARS 3,000 to ARS 6,000. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2007
In  addition,  we  offer  the  possibility  of  setting  up  a  new  type  of  operating  house  in  towns  with  no 
branches already opened to perform various transactions. This enables a more efficient management 
of variable costs to reach areas that are farthest away from the major cities and beyond the financial 
system’s coverage. 
During 2006, several changes were introduced to deepen the reversal of the crowding-out of private 
credit (the maximum amount allowed for public sector asset holdings will be reduced from 40 to 35 
percent of assets as from July 2007). Consequently, in the past two years the share of credit to the 
government in total assets decreased 17 percentage points. In fact, financing to households and firms 
is today the main component of financial institutions’ assets and the focus of their action. 
When  assessing  central  bank  practical  independence  both  in  Argentina  and  in  other  emerging 
countries,  strict  compliance  with  the  rules  regarding  assistance  to  the  Treasury  and  regulatory 
incentives for banks to absorb the public debt are crucial. This contrasts with mistakes made in our 
recent  history  when,  under  a  supposedly  independent  scheme,  the  financial  system  ended  up 
financing public spending in the framework of banking regulations that not only failed to prevent it but 
also fostered it, discouraging private sector financing. 
In  this  context,  earnings  amounted  to  1.7  percent  of  assets  year-over-year.  Improved  profitability 
together with capitalizations (the financial system received capital contributions worth approximately 
ARS 2.4 billion throughout 2006) fostered the consolidation of financial system solvency. 
the 
immediate  availability  of 
the  monetary  system  prioritized 
International reserve management 
3.3  
Uncertainty  factors  worldwide  trigger  the  need  to  protect  ourselves  against  volatility  and  to  create 
mechanisms to ensure liquidity and the value of our financial assets. In this sense, the international 
reserve  management  policy  aims  at  optimizing  returns  on  reserves,  seeking  the  best  possible 
combination of risk and return through investment in financial assets with high liquidity and with the 
lowest credit exposure. 
The  specific  restrictions  to  Central  Bank  international  reserve  management,  our  country’s  structural 
changes and the current international economic cycle have led to flexibility in the objectives pursued 
for reserve management, as well as the maximization of opportunities available. 
Today’s international reserve management is significantly different from that of the past decade’s: in 
the  past, 
investment  and  a 
comprehensive program of external managers was used (supplemented by the in-house management 
of a part of the reserves). 
The  current  floating  exchange  rate  system  and  the  policy  of  foreign  reserve  accumulation  make  it 
possible to lay less emphasis on very short-term placements. 
In  the  past  two  years,  apart  from  the  “traditional”  task  of  monitoring  the  international  markets  and 
economies  on  a  daily  basis  as  the  starting  point  for  decision-making  in  international  reserve 
investment, quantitative analytic models have been developed that have succeeded in improving the 
strategic and tactical decision-making processes. Some of these models focus on the fundamentals; 
others, on technical indicators of market behavior; yet others combine both elements - but all of them 
use advanced financial tools to assist and supplement the traditional qualitative analysis of investment 
opportunities. 
In turn, the floating system implies that there are no technical reasons to concentrate reserves in a 
single  currency,  which  allows  for  portfolio  diversification.  Diversification  gradually  moved  from  an 
“opportunistic”  approach  (fully  based  on  the  expectations  regarding  exchange  rate  evolution)  to  an 
approach based on the economy’s structure, particularly, on the currency composition of the current 
account and the external debt, which allows for tactical deviations to increase returns. 
The debt with the IMF was paid with practically all foreign currencies in the portfolio other than the US 
dollar. Since then, euros and pounds were gradually purchased, until investment in currencies other 
than  the  US  dollar  (including  gold)  reached  around  18  percent  of  reserves.  As  part  of  this 
diversification policy, the euro and pound positions were set above the neutral levels (resulting from 
the current account and public debt currency structure), while the yen position was set below those 
levels. 
Despite the redefinition of the currency composition after the payment to the IMF, the share of euros is 
at its highest (except for the considerable euro purchases in late 2005 to make the payment), while the 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 5
share of pounds and yens has been reduced. As to the gold position, derivative instruments started to 
be used in order to reduce the impact of market rate volatility, as necessary. 
In particular, the great increase in the price of gold during the past two years entailed an additional 
source of return for international reserves. 
While the rise in the price of gold was mainly due to the strong demand from India and China, this year 
in particular there was a very significant increase in speculative positions. In consequence, and in line 
with  the  higher  price,  there  was  a  significant  increase  in  price  volatility.  Against  that  backdrop,  we 
decided to use a partial hedge strategy, made up of financial derivatives. This has protected us from 
an eventual decrease in prices and, in turn, considerably reduced the volatility of reserves resulting 
from fluctuating gold prices. 
Investment in callable bonds involved the need to resort to “effective duration” (instead of the usual 
duration)  to  measure  the  average  term  of  placements  and  the  portfolio’s  exposure  to  interest  rate 
changes. 
As from this year, a policy of gradual increase in portfolio duration was adopted. This policy is not only 
the result of expectations on the US rate cycle, but also a gradual process towards the reintegration of 
benchmarks for reserve management. In fact, as has been empirically proven, the discipline derived 
from  the  use  of  benchmarks,  with  specific  restrictions  to  deviation,  offers  tangible  results  in  the 
medium-long term and is the policy regularly adopted by most central banks. 
As  the  element  agglutinating  all  of  the  innovations  mentioned  above,  a  full  change  in  investment 
policies is being introduced so as to include the basis for investment policies and update the range of 
instruments available. At the same time, updating investment policies entails, besides the traditional 
restrictions  in  terms  of  liquidity  and  credit  risk,  precise  limits  to  market  risks,  such  as  value  at  risk 
measures, among others. 
Despite context-imposed limitations, the outcome has been very positive. It is estimated that, without 
taking into account fluctuations in the peso exchange rate, the investment of international reserves in 
2006 would yield over USD 1.2 billion (5.6 percent yield per year over the average stock during that 
period). This means that there was a 2 percentage point increase during our term in office. 
Regardless of the very important benefits for the economy in general (less country risk, less crisis risk) 
as a tangible result of a prudential reserve accumulation policy, as our stock grows, its management 
becomes increasingly relevant. Therefore, maximizing investment efficiency and effectiveness through 
the  optimization  of  the  decision-making  process  impacts  on  financial  performance  and  is  a 
fundamental basis for monetary policy. 
4.  
The 2007 Monetary Program 
The macroeconomic scenario 
4.1.  
The optimistic scenario for the global and regional economy, together with the pillars of the domestic 
economic policy, anticipate a good performance of the Argentine economy for the coming year, with 
significant  output  growth,  continuing  fiscal  and  external  surplus,  favorable  financial  conditions,  and 
improved social conditions. 
Nevertheless, when designing the Monetary Program, some domestic economic determinants should 
be taken into account which in the transition towards the steady state path, influence the behavior of 
some variables and restrict the use of certain traditional economic policy tools, available in contexts of 
sufficient financial depth. 
Firstly, the adjustment of relative prices after the devaluation is not yet over and, therefore, preventing 
some  goods  and  factor  prices  from  adjusting,  far  from  being  a  healthy  practice,  may  threaten  the 
economic path towards long-term stable equilibrium. 
Secondly, although post-crisis financial recovery has been extraordinary, monetary policy transmission 
channels are not yet adequately consolidated. In fact, credit barely exceeds 10 percent of GDP, so its 
channel is still inadequate to influence the aggregate demand level through monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2007
Thirdly,  even  though  uncertainty  is  external,  domestic  economic  policy  and,  in  particular,  domestic 
monetary policy should be ready to face unexpected changes in the international scenario. It would be 
a mistake to think that the favorable conjuncture for emerging countries will last forever. 
In that case, the lack of definition of the new global financial architecture and the absence of a lender 
of  last  resort  force  us  to  enhance  prudential  policies  which,  for  the  monetary  authority,  result  in 
international reserve accumulation to face external contingencies. 
Apart  from  that,  expected  8.5  percent  GDP  growth  for  2006  brings  to  the  coming  year  a  statistical 
carry-over of over 3 percent. Thus, output is projected to grow to over 7.4 percent next year, bearing in 
mind  a  quarterly  increase  that  will  remain  high,  though  somewhat  lower  than  this  year's,  leaning 
toward levels that are more consistent with long-term sustained growth. Domestic absorption would 
continue  to  lead  this  process,  mainly  due  to  a  new  expansion  of  consumption  and  investment. 
Investment is expected to grow again above average, expanding its share in terms of output. 
Trade with the rest of the world will continue on the upswing, anticipating additional exports growth 
(exports would hit record levels of around USD 50 billion). Exports levels would practically double the 
ones recorded before the devaluation and allow the trade surplus to hit high levels again - of around 
USD  10  billion,  in  FOB-CIF  terms  -  in  spite  of  a  slight  correction.  In  addition,  based  on  the 
aforementioned goods trade balance, which would still be the major foreign exchange earner for the 
country, the positive current account balance in 2006 is projected to remain so in 2007, allowing for 
the external gap to be slowly bridged. By the end 2007, international reserves are expected to hit a 
new record high in the institution’s 71 years. 
In turn, following budgetary guidelines, fiscal discipline would continue as in recent years, which would 
contribute to stabilizing inflationary expectations. More specifically, and according to expectations, the 
3.1  percent  of  GDP  primary  surplus  will  be  accomplished.  It  is  worth  highlighting  that  in  building  a 
financial  system  permanently  independent  from  public  sector  needs,  the  2007  Monetary  Program 
allows for a reduction in public sector assets in the financial system during 2007. 
Finally, core inflation forecasts point at a deceleration of end-to-end measurements as compared to 
this years’ to fall within an 7-11 percent range. 
Monetary guidelines 
4.2.  
In 2007, the Central Bank will follow monetary policy guidelines based on the prudential accumulation 
of foreign reserves and a strict control of monetary aggregate expansion, through the sterilization of 
money supply in excess of demand. 
As in 2006, M2 will continue to be targeted because it is the monetary aggregate that better reflects 
the demand for means of payment, given its closer long-term relationship with price dynamics. 
Thus,  we  consolidated  monetary  policy  conduct  based  on  the  control  of  M2  growth,  while  the 
institutional and financial infrastructure is being developed, to enable the transition towards an inflation 
targeting regime but without completely departing from the quantitative analysis, via the adoption of a 
two-pillar approach that draws on the European Central Bank’s successful experience. 
Among the prerequisites to implement this regime, we have already complied with the following: 
(1) 
institutional  commitment  with  long-term  price  stability,  regardless  of  the  natural  and 
necessary relative price adjustments related to the transition phase; 
fiscal,  financial  and  external  stability,  evidenced  by  the  consolidation  of  a  positive  public 
sector balance, a recovered banking sector, and a stable external surplus; 
a comprehensive and transparent communication strategy, including a clear explanation by 
the monetary authority of its plans, intermediate objectives, and decisions; 
autonomy for the monetary authority to manage its instruments and meet the targets set; 
the monetary authority’s accountability for compliance with disclosed plans. 
(4) 
(5) 
As  I  have  already  mentioned  in  several  opportunities,  the  main  obstacle  to  implementing  inflation 
targeting is the small size of the financial system: this does not ensure the adequate functioning of 
monetary policy transmission mechanisms and results from the deep shrinkage experienced by our 
banking  system  after  the  crisis.  Based  on  the  current  scenario,  in  an  economy  that  still  makes 
intensive use of relatively liquid means of payment, with reduced credit and financial depth, it makes 
(2) 
(3) 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 7
sense to directly control the money supply vis-à-vis the control of aggregate demand through interest 
rates.  However,  the  remarkable  financial  system’s  recovery  points  at  the  prospects  for  advancing 
towards a more sophisticated monetary system in the future. 
Consistently with expected macroeconomic and fiscal performance for 2007, means of payment were 
estimated  on  a  quarterly  basis,  both  for  M2  and  for  the  other  monetary  aggregates.  The  need  for 
monetizing the economy in keeping with the expected trend in output, interest rate and inflation was 
calculated  with  the  best  econometric  techniques  available.  In  addition,  intervals  were  determined 
around  specific  estimates,  so  as  to  define  a  M2  floor  and  ceiling  and  consider  the  probability  of 
occurrence of alternative scenarios. 
The  2007  Monetary  Program  anticipates  a  deceleration  in  monetary  aggregate  growth.  It  thus 
establishes an year-over-year growth for M2 within the 18.7-11.7 percent range for December 2007. 
Moreover, M2 is projected to grow below the expansion of nominal GDP. A deceleration in the growth 
of other monetary variables, such as private sector M2 and currency in circulation, is also expected. 
Together with the deceleration of transactional money, an expansion savings in the financial system is 
projected. 
The Monetary Program seeks to mitigate fluctuations of the most liquid forms of money in terms of 
output,  while  the  broader  monetary  aggregates  grow.  Thus  conceived,  the  Monetary  Program  is, 
according to the Central Bank's best information available, fully consistent both with the aim of serving 
the economy’s liquidity needs and that of providing an environment of price stability. It is also flexible 
enough so as to include various scenarios other than the most likely. This methodology is an improved 
way  of  contributing  to  normalizing  economic  and  financial  variables  and  thus  aiming  at  sustained 
economic growth that includes all the Argentine people. 
8 
 BIS Review 7/2007
