John Gieve: The City’s growth – the crest of a wave or swimming with the 
stream? 
Speech  by  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  London  Society  of 
Chartered Accountants, Bank of England, London, 26 March 2007. 
 Introduction 
Over the past few months there has been renewed talk of London overtaking New York as the world’s 
leading  financial  centre.  And  it  has  reflected  fears  in  the  US  as  much  as  self  congratulation  in  this 
country. 
We should take some of this with a pinch of salt. Talk of an external threat may be helpful to those 
building a case for change in the US financial system. The US market remains the biggest in the world 
by many measures. More fundamentally this is not a zero sum game. Even if London establishes a 
comparative advantage and gains market share, New York (and Paris and Edinburgh for that matter) 
can prosper too. 
Yet something interesting is going on. The report by McKinseys commissioned by Mayor Bloomberg 
concluded that “London is transforming itself into an increasingly sizeable and attractive talent hub for 
people with … skills that used to be available only in New York …” and “… superior conditions for 
innovation, capital formation, risk management and investment in these markets [derivatives and debt 
financing] are beginning to emerge (or have already done so) in London, which is building momentum 
relative to New York”.1  
On this side of the pond too, the growth of financial markets in the City is attracting more attention. 
While much of that is favourable, we have seen renewed worries that London’s prominence and the 
wealth  it  attracts  and  generates  may  be  distorting  the  broader  economy  possibly  adding  to  social 
tensions – that it may be more a cuckoo in the nest than a golden goose. 
So the future of the City is a significant issue not just for Londoners but for the development of the 
wider British economy. And the development of the financial sector is of particular interest to the Bank 
not just because it is an important part of the economy itself but because it shapes the way that our 
monetary policy impacts on the wider economy and because of our responsibility with the FSA and 
Treasury for maintaining the stability of the financial system. 
I  will  be  speaking  about  the  impact  of  the  City’s  rapid  growth  on  the  broader  economy  in  coming 
months but today I want to focus on what underlies that growth and, therefore, to address the question 
whether we should expect it to be a passing phase or to continue. Is London just on the crest of a 
wave or is it swimming with a persistent stream? 
Putting it into perspective 
To  start  with,  how  important  is  the  City?  Is  its  press  profile  greater  than  its  real  contribution  to  the 
economy? 
The City’s output is hard to measure.2 We know that financial intermediation as a whole accounted for 
about 8.5% of UK Gross Value Added in 2005. And a recent estimate3 of the professional services 
supporting financial services accounted for a further 3.6% of economic activity in 2005, giving a total of 
some 12%. That compares with around 14% of GDP for the UK manufacturing sector and the jobs in 
financial and business services taken together have increasingly outnumbered those in manufacturing. 
                                                      
1  
“Sustaining  New  York’s  and  the  US’  Global  Financial  Services  Leadership”.  Report  by  McKinsey  &  Company  to  Mayor 
Michael Bloomberg of New York and Senator Charles Schumer (pages 14 and 54). 
Indeed  the  ONS  has  announced  that  it  will  be  revising its  estimates  of  the  level  and  composition of  GDP  to  incorporate 
changes  to  the  measurement  and  treatment  of  value  added  for  banks  and  to  take  better  account  of  in-house  software 
development. 
International Financial Services, London. “International Financial Services in the UK”, November 2006. 
2  
3  
BIS Review 29/2007 
 1
And since 1999 financial services and insurance taken together have accounted for over 20% of the 
UK’s exports of services. So it is clear that the financial sector is an important industry for the UK. 
But financial intermediation covers a great deal more than the City. Retail banking and insurance, like 
other  retail  services  from  restaurants  to  hairdressing,  is  widely  dispersed  across  the  country.  In 
general one would expect this part of the industry to reflect the size of the population and their wealth. 
To the extent that the UK’s industry may be relatively efficient and competitive, we may even have 
fewer people engaged at this end of the business than some other countries. While in 2003 the share 
of  Gross  Value  Added  from  financial  intermediation  was  a  little  higher  for  the  UK  than  for  France, 
Japan or Germany (5%, 7% and 4% respectively) there was not that big a gap and the figures for the 
US were about the same as the UK (8.5%). 
It is London’s position in the wholesale and international markets that is special and it is harder to get 
a handle on that. A recent estimate put the total number employed in “City” jobs at around 320,000.4 
There are other significant European centres in Paris and Frankfurt and, within the UK, in Edinburgh 
for  instance.  But  London  is  estimated  to  have  75%  of  UK's  wholesale  financial  jobs  and  to  be  the 
largest European centre for wholesale finance with 35% of the jobs (up from 30% in 2000). So by this 
measure  those  working  in  “City”  represent  a  little  more  than  1%  of  the  UK  workforce.  While  this  is 
estimated to be twice the equivalent proportion for Germany and three times that of France, we should 
not get it out of perspective. 
The economic geography of financial centres 
Geographical concentrations, clusters, are common in many industries. In some cases they reflect the 
availability of raw materials or power sources. Elsewhere the underlying reasons are not so obvious. 
Watch making in Switzerland, films in Hollywood, the high-tech sector of Silicon Valley are all classic 
examples. But the pattern of geographical hubs is particularly prominent in the financial industry. In 
most  countries,  one  city  has  tended  to  become  predominant  even  if  cities  such  as  Chicago  and 
Edinburgh have developed important niches in particular financial services. Over time some of these 
have become hubs for international finance like New York in the US, Zurich in Switzerland, Hong Kong 
and Singapore in Asia and, of course, London in the UK. 
The history of each centre has been shaped by a myriad of factors from empire, the role of guilds, and 
the proximity of kings and governments. But a number of economic forces have also been at work and 
are still reinforcing the pattern.5
First, there are great advantages for both firms and workers from operating in a market with a deep 
pool of labour with the right skills. Workers know that if their firms fail or shrink they can easily find 
another job; firms can easily acquire new workers to start up or expand. Second, firms which have 
expertise in supplying the main industry become established close to the cluster so new front-line firms 
find  the  inputs  they  need  on  the  spot.  The  37,000  strong  membership  of  the  London  Society  of 
Accountants  is  a  good  example  of  this.  Third,  where  specialist  firms  and  highly  skilled  workers  are 
grouped  together  the  transfer  of  skills  and  information  can  be  quicker.  Knowledge  and  information 
pass  between  workers  in  different  firms,  formally  and  informally,  as  they  trade  with  each  other,  so 
innovation  is  encouraged  and  productivity  improves.  Fourth,  clustering  tends  to  promote  both 
competition  and  cooperation.  Clusters  tend  therefore  to  increase  productivity,  drive  innovation  and 
stimulate the formation of new business. In these ways the clustering helps to create and reinforce the 
comparative advantage which drives trade. 
In the case of the financial industry some additional factors promote clustering. In the past of course 
there was the physical need to be close to the market places but it appears that the centripetal forces 
remain  strong  even  in  a  world  of  electronic  trading  and  video  conferencing.  There  is  a  reputational 
advantage  of  locating  in  an  established  financial  centre,  which  signals  you  are  part  of  the  Premier 
League.  And  in  wholesale  finance  where  the  firms  can  be  both  sellers  and  buyers,  business  is 
                                                      
4  
“City  type”  jobs  in  London  include  securities  dealing,  international  banking,  corporate  finance,  derivatives  and  foreign 
exchange  activity,  fund  management  (including  hedge  funds),  specialist  insurance  (such  as  Lloyds)  and  professional 
services such as legal, accountancy and consultancy directly supporting other City jobs. They include jobs in Canary Wharf 
and in the West End as well as those in the Square Mile. 
5   See, for example, Fujita, M, Krugman, P and Venables A.J, “The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and International Trade” 
MIT 2001. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2007
attracted to liquid markets, in cash and securities. Each firm benefits from a pool of competitors taking 
different positions. 
There are also some centrifugal forces that tend to limit the size of clusters and ultimately drive firms 
away.  The  more  concentrated  the  activity,  the  more  vulnerable  trade  can  be  to  external  shocks, 
whether  from  earthquakes,  wars  or  taxes.  If  there  are  restrictions  on  the  supply  of  labour, 
concentration can lead to shortages. And of course clustering can drive up prices of other factors of 
production. In a successful urban centre, land in particular can become expensive. 
The history of the City of London 
But  on  balance  the  history  of  London’s  financial  sector  illustrates  how  powerful  the  factors  leading 
towards concentration and clustering have been. 
During  the  18th  and  19th  centuries,  it  was  not  hard  to  see  why  international  finance  developed  in 
London  alongside  Britain’s  pre-eminence  as  an  economic  and  trading  power.  The  need  to  provide 
finance for trade stimulated the development of the money markets here, based around commercial 
bills, and that in turn provided essential liquidity for longer-maturity securities markets.6
By 1914, while Britain had been overtaken as the world’s leading economy, it remained the hub of the 
international  monetary  system  –  the  Gold  Standard.  UK  had  42%  of  the  world  stock  of  overseas 
investments and around one third of all the negotiable instruments in the world were traded on the 
London  Stock  Exchange.  And  if  London  was  important  to  the  world,  the  world  was  also  crucial  to 
London; more than half the value of securities quoted on the London Stock Exchange was accounted 
for by loans for foreign companies and governments.7
As an editor of the Economist during the period put it: “It [the City] is the greatest shop, the greatest 
store,  the  freest  market  for  commoditites,  gold  and  securities,  the  greatest  disposer  of  capital,  the 
greatest dispenser of credit, but above and beyond, as well as by reason of all these marks of financial 
and commercial supremacy, it is the world’s clearing house.”8
The benign international environment disappeared with the outbreak of the Great War, and the UK’s 
political and economic standing in the world fell away steadily through the following 60 years. By 1950, 
average incomes in the UK were below those in the United States, and they fell below Germany and 
France  by  1970.  The  economic  dominance  of  the  United  States  ensured  New  York’s  place  as  the 
leading financial centre and the American commercial banks became the world’s largest. In the 70s 
and  80s  the  growth  of  Japan  propelled  Tokyo  up  the  rankings.  And  in  Britain,  the  share  of  foreign 
securities issuance fell to only 6% in 1961, as against more than half before 1914. 
So by the 1970s London was benefiting from few of the factors which had produced its golden period 
before the first War. It had suffered from the destruction of the wars and the Depression, and from the 
loss of Empire and protectionist policies at home and abroad, including capital and exchange controls. 
In a faltering economy trade in government debt had supplanted much of its international business, 
sterling had declined as an international currency, and the major British merchant banks and brokers 
had been overtaken by the investment banks in the US and the universal banks in Europe and Japan. 
Nonetheless,  through all  this London  remained  a  leading  international  financial  and  banking centre. 
On some measures, indeed, it retained its position as the leading centre for international finance for all 
but a few years after the second war.9 It had the critical mass to keep the skillbase and networks to 
retain  the  professional  trade  in  many  markets.  So,  even  in  the  1960s  the  Euro  markets  developed 
here. 
                                                      
6   Michie, RC “The City of London: Continuity and Change, 1850-1990” Macmillan, Basingstoke and London, 1992. 
7   Cassis, Y. “Capitals of Capital. A History of International Financial Centres 1780-2005” Pictet and Cie, Geneva, 2005. 
8   Kynaston, D. “The City of London”, Volume II Golden Years 1890-1914. 
9   Reed, H. “The pre-eminence of international financial centres”, 1981. 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 3
The recent growth of the City of London 
Over the last twenty years, a number of reforms have improved the environment and helped the City 
to build on its position. Exchange controls were removed in 1979, facilitating capital flows into and out 
of  the  UK;  and  Big  Bang,  in  1986,  opened  up  the  Stock  Exchange  and  paved  the  way  for  the 
participation of the leading foreign investment banks in London’s market. At the same time the growth 
of international trade and thus capital flows has brought in more business. 
In some of the activities that London has long dominated, its growth in the last 10 years has largely 
reflected the growth of global capital market activity. 
In the foreign exchange market, for example, where the London market is and remains the largest in 
the world, turnover was a bit over 30% of the global total in April 2004, broadly unchanged from 1998. 
But turnover in London had increased by nearly 20% over the same period – a big increase despite 
the creation of the euro, which removed the necessity for trading between so many currency pairs. On 
an even larger scale the UK’s share of cross border bank leading – which has long been a strength of 
London’s – remained unchanged at around 20% between 1998 and 2006. But over that same period, 
the market grew by about 150%. 
But there are several areas where London’s share of business is rising, particularly in new, innovative 
and technically demanding areas of finance. 
London’s  share  of  world  over-the-counter  derivatives  business,  for  example,  has  risen  from  around 
35%  in  2001  to  nearly  40%  in  April  2004.  And  within  that  the  notional  amount  of  credit  derivatives 
traded  in  London  multiplied  by  more  than  100  between  1997  and  2006.  While  the  US  remains  the 
main centre of the hedge fund sector, at the latest count twelve of the world’s largest 50 hedge funds 
were  based  in  London,  as  against  only  three  in  2002.  London  has  a  share  of  nearly  80%  of  the 
European based hedge fund market, up from around 70% in 2002. The UK private equity market has 
been another prominent area of growth recently. UK private equity funds raised in 2005 were over £25 
billion,  around  twice  the  size  of  the  previous  peak  in  2001,  with  the  UK  private  equity  industry 
accounting for over 50% of the total European market. 
The drivers of the City’s recent growth 
In part the City’s recent growth reflects – as it did a century ago – a rapid growth in international trade 
and financial liberalisation. Globalisation has brought an expansion of world imports by 180% since 
1990 compared with an 80% increase in world GDP. Progressive upgradings of a number of emerging 
economies have broadened and deepened international links. Higher savings in the emerging Asian 
economies, in particular, have combined with demographic change in the West to increase demand for 
long-term savings instruments and a fall in their yields.10 All these trends taken together have led to a 
period  since  2002  of  unusually  high  returns  for  holders  of  many  financial  assets  and  the  explosive 
growth in new products and markets. 
But  what  is  driving  the  growth  of  London  in  particular?  One  approach  to  this  question  is  to  ask 
executives  in  major  financial  companies,  both  in  the  UK  and  abroad,  why  they  choose  to  locate 
business  here.  A  number  of  these  surveys  have  been  conducted  recently  and  they  show  several 
common factors.11
London benefits from English as an international language of commerce, and from its time zone, which 
means the working day overlaps with Asia in the morning and America in the afternoon. London also 
has well established financial infrastructure and telecommunication networks. 
Many of those surveyed point to the regulatory and legal environment. This is partly a matter of the 
regulatory  style  –  the  “risk  based  and  proportionate”  approach  that  the  Financial  Services  Authority 
has adopted based on general principles where possible. It is partly the simplicity of dealing with a 
single regulator. 
                                                      
10   Caballero, R. “On the macroeconomics of asset shortages” NBER WP 12753, December 2006. 
11   For example, Cook, G. A. S., Pandit, N. R., Beaverstock, J. V., Taylor, P. J. and Pain, K. (forthcoming in 2007). “The role of 
location in knowledge creation and diffusion: Evidence of centripetal and centrifugal forces in the City of London financial 
services agglomeration”. Environment and Planning A. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2007
English law, which is also the basis for financial services law in the United States, prevails here, with 
the added advantage that practitioners are less likely actually to invoke the legal system. And what 
has been called the Wimbledonisation of the UK financial markets – the sale of nearly all the British 
merchant  banks  and  stockbrokers  and  the  dominance  of  foreign  players  –  gives  confidence  to 
prospective  market  participants  that  the  competitive  environment  is  genuinely  open  to  all  comers. 
London is also a growing centre for Islamic banking. Finally, London may be benefiting from measures 
elsewhere;  certainly  in  the  years  since  the  Enron  and  WorldCom  scandals,  commentators  have 
suggested that the application of the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation to foreign firms listing in New York 
may have encouraged some firms to list here instead. 
But the single most important factor is the first one suggested by economists: London’s comparative 
advantage  lies  in  its  skilled  labour  and  financial  know-how  both  in  the  financial  firms  and  in  the 
professions which support them. 
The  free  movement  of  labour  within  the  European  Union,  and  relative  openness  to  immigration  by 
those with specific expertise from outside it, has also meant that employers in the financial sector can 
access  the  world  labour  market.  And  the  relative  flexibility  of  the  labour  market  here  in  the  UK 
compared to others in Europe may also be a factor. 
That  concentration  of  skilled  labour  has  spurred  competition  and  innovation.  We  have  seen  a  very 
striking illustration of this in the last few years with the rapid growth of hedge fund management and 
private equity firms in London. Many have been established and are staffed by people who acquired 
their skills and earned their capital at the more established investment banks and fund management 
firms of the City. Being at the heart of world markets helped them spot the opportunities and assess 
the competition. Once they struck out on their own, they could draw on a network of former colleagues 
and contacts for staff, information and expertise. 
Future prospects of the City of London 
So what are the prospects of the City of London? 
One of the clear lessons from history is that any position can be lost. It is always possible to throw 
away  an  advantage  by  ill  judged  decisions.  Any  widespread  operational  disruption  or  fear  about 
security could also be very damaging, which is one reason why we and the other tripartite authorities 
are spending so much time on improving crisis response and management. 
But  in  the  absence  of  disaster  the  structural  factors  I  have  discussed  seem  likely  to  favour  further 
concentration of financial business in the City. 
First, the entry of China and India international market has been associated with a massive expansion 
of international trade and finance in relation to overall world GDP. That seems likely to continue and 
has been a major factor in the growth of London in the past. 
Fifteen  years  ago  people  worried  that  developments  in  information  technology  would  undermine 
centres like the City of London. When anyone could log on to receive market information and trade in 
real time, wouldn’t traders flee the hurley burley and relocate to other, quieter and cheaper financial 
centres or even out of cities altogether? What seems to have happened is the opposite. The reducing 
costs of collating information and trading at a distance have led to operations relocating to London and 
the City becoming an even more important cluster for financial activity. The technology which could 
have allowed the dispersion of business has instead allowed greater concentration.12  
So  whereas  in  1997  the  largest  share  of  market  turnover  of  Frankfurt’s  Eurex  market  came  from 
traders based in Germany (over 80%), the largest share in 2005 came from the UK (with over 45%). 
As more assets can be traded remotely, this may further drive the growth of centres like London with 
large pools of skilled financial workers. 
The  growth  of  European  capital  markets  relative  to  traditional  commercial  banking  should  reinforce 
that process. Historically, European and equity markets have been smaller relative to their economies 
than  in  the  US.  With  around  some  $30  trillion  in  assets,  euro-zone  financial  markets  are  still 
significantly  smaller  than  the  $50  trillion  in  the  US.  But  Europe  is  closing  the  gap.  In  2005  the 
                                                      
12   HM Treasury, “The location of financial activity and the euro”, 2003. 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 5
eurozone’s  financial  stock  grew  by  over  20%,  compared  with  around  6%  in  the  US.  And  the  euro-
zone’s financial depth has increased at twice the pace of the US over the past 10 years.13 If this gap 
continues  to  narrow,  I  expect  this  to  favour  the  growth  of  London  as  the  main  centre  for  Europe’s 
capital markets. The development of capital markets in Asia is further behind still and I would expect to 
see continued rapid growth in these markets in the next decade. 
The rationalisation brought by the single financial market in Europe should push in the same direction. 
The number of central counterparty (CCPs) clearing houses by ownership has halved in Europe since 
1999. And there were over 650 mergers and acquisitions in the EU banking sector between 2001 and 
2005, a quarter of which were cross-border within Europe. But the process has some way to go and as 
the  European  financial  sector  becomes  more  consolidated,  and  financial  institutions  become  larger 
and more complex, they tend to become more intensive users of capital markets. The major UK banks’ 
trading book assets, for example, now account for over 30% of their balance sheet assets compared 
with little over 15% back in 2000. 
What of the countervailing – centrifugal pressures? The creation of Canary Wharf, the expansion of 
office space in the Square Mile and the West End has helped to allow the rapid expansion of recent 
years. But of course London is an expensive city with high land and labour costs. So we have seen 
financial firms outsourcing functions like IT support, systems development and HR both within the UK 
and  Europe  and  to  India.  That  too  seems  likely  to  continue  so  further  growth  of  trading  and 
management in London may well not lead to proportionate growth in jobs. On current trends we might 
expect a greater concentration of high value, high skill jobs in London. 
Conclusion 
So back to my question: wave or persistent stream? The answer is, as you will have spotted, both. 
Readers of the Bank’s Financial Stability Report (next edition due next month) – or those that have 
read the financial news – will know that the financial markets have been buoyant recently; in particular 
the  premia  for  risks  in  the  credit  market  are  very  low  and  profit  growth  and  bonuses  have  been 
spectacular. Some of this may well be the crest of a wave. However, for the reasons I have set out this 
afternoon, London is also benefiting from a longer lasting and a strong current. We may expect that 
cycle to turn at some stage – and London will be affected because of its international position. But 
there are good reasons to expect London to further enhance its position as a global financial centre in 
the long term. And that will have implications for the rest of the economy and the risks it faces. It will 
continue to affect the labour market, the housing market, and the distribution of wealth and income. 
And it will further sharpen the dependence of the British economy on wider international movements in 
financial markets. I plan to return to these implications in coming months. 
                                                      
13   McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company's economics research institute. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2007
