Vittorio Corbo: The Fund’s medium-term strategy – a view from Latin America 
and a dialogue with high-level officials 
Keynote speech by Mr Vittorio Corbo, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the High-level Seminar 
“The  Fund’s  Medium-Term  Strategy:  Considerations  for  a  New  Liquidity  Instrument  for  Crisis 
Prevention  and  Effective  Surveillance.  Dialogue  with  High-Level  Officials”,  organized  by  the 
International Monetary Fund and the Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, 11 December 2006. 
 Latin  America  has  benefited  substantially  from  the  fast  growth  experienced  by  the  global  economy 
during  the  last  four  years  and  from  domestic  policies  that  have  contributed  to  enhanced 
macroeconomic  stability.  External  current  accounts  and  primary  fiscal  balances  are  in  surplus, 
exchange rates are more flexible, and inflation is no longer a major issue as it was for several years 
and after surpassing the average of 400 percent per year during the 1990s. Likewise, the structure of 
public  debt  has  become  less  vulnerable,  characterized  by  lower  shares  of  short-term  and  foreign-
currency debt in most countries as compared with the early 2000s. At the same time, there is renewed 
appreciation  in  the  region  that  a  solid  commitment  to  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  is  a 
necessary condition to achieve high and sustainable growth rates in the medium term. 
A distinguished feature of the region is that fiscal revenues are highly dependent on natural resources. 
In  the  current  favorable  context  for  commodity  prices,  primary  fiscal  surpluses  have  clearly  shown 
positive  numbers,  averaging  around  4  percent  of  GDP  of  the  region.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that 
policymakers  in  the  region  consider  the  risks  of  a  possible  turnaround  of  this  positive  cycle,  and 
carefully monitor fiscal spending. Expenditures should be established in coherence with the permanent 
levels of fiscal revenues so as to ensure that, once the current boom is over, public finances are not 
depleted, and public spending is shielded from commodity price fluctuations. 
Although the region’s economies have made significant progress regarding integration to the global 
markets, they are still vulnerable to international financial volatilities. A yellow light was turned on by 
the  episodes  of  May-June  of  this  year,  when  the  market  correction  hit  hard  on  some  currency  and 
stock exchanges of emerging economies. 
The main challenge for our region at this point is to take advantage of the opportunities provided by 
the actual international situation by making progress in the design of policy framework and institutions 
so as to consolidate macroeconomic stability, and strengthen the conditions necessary to achieve high 
and sustainable growth rates. This is the best strategy to prevent future crises.  
Main opportunities are in continuing advancing in: 
• 
in 
In 
fiscal  policies. 
this  direction,  progress 
Macroeconomic  policies  oriented  toward  making  the  economy  more  resilient  to  external 
shocks. This requires a credible and flexible policy framework, with prudent and consistent 
monetary,  exchange  rate,  and 
fiscal 
accountability, and the adoption of inflation-targeting monetary frameworks alongside more 
exchange rate flexibility have left the economies of the region better equipped to participate 
in the global economy. 
Modern regulation and supervision of the financial sector, so as to ensure efficient financial 
intermediation and manageable risk levels. 
Openness to foreign trade in goods and services and to financial flows, in order to improve 
domestic efficiency and to reap the benefits of globalization. 
Quality  and  transparency  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  information  by  adopting 
international  standards  and  codes  of  best  practices.  This  improves  the  effectiveness  of 
policies by allowing markets to internalize changes in a more orderly and gradual way. At the 
same time, it establishes a framework for a greater responsibility and creates incentives for a 
better design of policies.  
   Achieving  macroeconomic  stability  together  with  trade  and  financial  integration  pose  important 
challenges for the countries’ institutional and policy frameworks, at both the domestic and the global 
level.  Therefore,  progress  in  these  fronts  must  be  simultaneous,  and  at  a  pace  that  countries  feel 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 1
comfortable with, because otherwise, economic integration may increase exposure to external shocks 
and local vulnerabilities, while macroeconomic instability, in turn, could hinder integration. 
The  long-lasting  weakness  and  volatility  of  growth  rates  of  the  region  have  made  it  difficult  for 
governments to reduce poverty significantly and the endemic inequality in income distribution. In the 
current positive cycle of booming commodity prices, governments face the difficult tradeoff between 
continuing to bring down public debt vis-à-vis facing social pressures for increased spending. All this 
maintaining macroeconomic stability. Balancing these objectives requires having in place very flexible 
budget  processes,  and  tax  and  spending  structures.  In  addition,  governments  of  the  region  should 
also  take  a  careful  look  at  existing  social  policies  so  that  they  are  aimed  at  reducing  poverty  and 
improving the access of the poorest groups of the population to quality education and health services. 
In his concise and well-focused document, launched before the 2005 Annual Meetings, Mr de Rato 
addressed the fundamental strategic question for the Fund: Given the purpose of the Fund, as set out 
in Article I of Articles of Agreement, what is the relevance of the Fund in today’s global economy and 
financial  markets?  In  our opinion,  the Fund  has a privileged  position  to contribute  to  more  effective 
management  of  global  macroeconomic  and  financial  risks  around  the  world.  This  process  involves 
taking several steps simultaneously: 
• 
• 
Identify threats to global macroeconomic and financial stability and to member countries; 
Quantify  its  effects  on  key  variables  such  as  exchange  rates,  relative  prices,  and  real 
outputs, etc.; 
Identify economic and financial vulnerabilities at global, regional and country level; 
Manage implied risks by  making  better analyses and developing  better understanding of 
institutional and market mechanisms so as to absorb, cushion, transfer, hedge, strengthen 
the resilience to such risks, and ultimately, minimize their potential impact; 
Continue surveillance of risks and vulnerabilities. 
In our opinion, continued surveillance of macroeconomic and financial stability is a shared 
responsibility  of  the  Fund,  member  countries,  and  private  sector  institutions  of  the 
international  financial  system,  especially  those  participants  of  systemic  relevance.  In  this 
vein, the Fund’s work should focus mainly on economies, developed or emerging, that have 
played an increasing role in the global economy developments. 
  On multilateral surveillance, the Fund should deepen its analysis, while improving its communication 
capability and persuading the countries involved to adopt its recommendations. In this context, we are 
particularly interested, and strongly support the high priority given by the Fund’s management to the 
first multilateral consultations involving several systemically important members or groups of members 
such as China, the Euro Area, Japan, Saudi Arabia and the United States. This exercise constitutes 
an  important  collaborative  effort  among  major  countries  that  could  provide  an  important  forum  for 
debate on issues of systemic or regional importance with a special focus on how to address global 
imbalances while maintaining robust global growth. The success of this exercise in making an effective 
contribution to orderly adjustment, thus reducing the burden of disorderly adjustments on the global 
economy, will depend crucially on the commitment of countries participating in the consultation. 
On  the  bilateral  surveillance  front,  it  is  essential  that  the  Fund’s  staff  make  a  clear  contribution  to 
strengthening macroeconomic and financial resilience of member countries. This could be achieved by 
promptly recognizing, and taking into account, cross-country differences, and also by upgrading the 
Fund’s capacity to perform stress-testing analysis. In particular, we are of the view that the Article IV 
consultations  should  focus  more  on  core  macroeconomic  issues  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
challenges posed by globalization. Also, although we believe that the Fund should be more explicit 
about the reasons why its recommendations may not deliver the expected outcomes, we note that this 
should not be interpreted as, nor convey the message that, the Fund’s recommendations are always 
correct or that member countries’ authorities always take a defensive attitude. We believe deeply in a 
policy dialogue process that could be beneficial to both parts. At the end, successful policies are those 
implemented by economic authorities that feel them their own and are capable to create the political 
framework for their execution.  
We  also  support  a  more  systematic  focus  of  the  Fund’s  surveillance  on  regional  developments  by 
detecting regional trends and fostering dialogue with region-wide institutions such as ECLAC. Along 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2007
these  lines, we  appreciate  the  Fund’s  regional  outlook report,  whose  last  issue  was simultaneously 
launched in Mexico City and Santiago in early November. 
As a Central Bank fully committed to an inflation-targeting framework, we place substantial weight on 
making  continuous  efforts  in  strengthening  transparency.  In  this  direction,  we  think  that  the  Fund’s 
communication  strategy  would  be  more  effective  if  analysis  goes  beyond  the  mere  publication  of 
reports, making it an integral part of the public debate on policies and economic reforms. Considering 
the importance of communications, we believe that enhancing the Fund’s outreach activities both at 
global and regional level will strengthen the effectiveness of the Fund’s monitoring and surveillance. 
The risks the world economy faces in the medium term - associated to an abrupt resolution of global 
imbalances,  a  commodity  price  downturn,  a  slowdown  of  global  growth,  or  an  abrupt  shift  in  risk 
perception  and  valuation  by  global  investors  -  require  that  the  agenda  on  international  financial 
architecture  be  focused  more  on  preventing,  rather  than  resolving  crises  ex  post.  As  countries  are 
progressively  more  integrated  into  a  more  global  financial  system,  new  challenges  emerge  for 
economic  authorities.  The  increased  mobility  of  international  capital  flows  -  beyond  their  potential 
benefits -  entails  the risks  of  sudden  and  unexpected reversal  of  capital  flows  that  could  be  further 
worsened  by  the  contagion  associated  to  the  financial  market  reaction.  Also,  in  the  current 
market-driven international environment, characterized by increasing access of emerging economies 
to private funding, and by a more complex international financial system, externalities, market failures 
and  perverse  incentive  effects  are  still  in  place  and  impede  private  financial  flows  to  become  a 
permanent and stable source of financing. 
Therefore, strengthening countries’ resilience is not only about developing and improving appropriate 
and consistent policies and institutions, but also about providing countries with access to emergency 
liquidity  and  the  possibility  to  obtain  short-term  liquidity  by  private  financial  instruments.  The  Fund 
should therefore play a leading role in facilitating the development of more complete global financial 
markets,  which  will  ultimately  help  emerging  economies  to  protect  themselves  against  external 
reversals while complementing authorities’ efforts in building up a sound policy framework. 
It is our view that there is a need for further improvement of the current precautionary facilities to make 
them more suitable in providing countries with preventive financial assistance to face capital account 
crises. In this context, the discussion of this morning gave the Fund’s staff useful elements to consider 
on  the  design  of  more  effective  financial  instruments  to  limit  contagion  from  shocks  in  the  global 
financial market. 
But not only the Fund’s financing instruments should be explored. The Fund should have a dialogue 
and  a  permanent  association  with  private  financial  markets  around  the  world  to  promote  and 
eventually participate in the creation of new financial instruments that provide liquidity support at times 
of stress. This is an integral part of the process of managing systemic risks to macroeconomic and 
financial stability, which we referred to previously. From this standpoint, the Fund could contribute to 
alleviating the impact of existing externalities in global financial markets by creating new knowledge 
relating to the design of new market instruments, valuation methodologies, benchmarks and indices, 
for instance. This is especially important for countries that have made lots of progress in addressing 
their main weaknesses both on policies and the development of their intuitional framework. 
After  almost  twenty  years  since  the  debt  crisis  of  the  eighties,  a  good  part  of  the  Latin-American 
countries  have  repaid  their  obligations  with  the  Fund.  Also,  the  global  financial  system  currently 
provides ample liquidity, and since global markets have increasing access to more information on the 
productive and financial structure and the functioning of the economies of the region, they are more 
willing to provide tailored financing at good rates of return. Against this backdrop, we believe that the 
economies of the region have a good opportunity for building a new relationship with the Fund, which 
should  be  based  rather  on  a  collaborative  dialogue  about  how  global  financial  development  could 
contribute to the final objective of achieving high and sustainable growth rates in the medium-term, 
than on meeting a certain set of stringent conditions associated to the lending programs as has been 
so far. 
Should the weight of emerging economies in the decision-making process of the Fund be increased, 
all these necessary efforts to which I have referred to above would produce better outcomes. Chile, as 
the rest of South America, did not support the proposed resolution on the quota reform in September, 
although it did fully support the search for an integral solution. The reasons for our vote are well known 
and it is not is my intention to reiterate our arguments in this occasion. We still believe that an increase 
in  emerging  country  quotas  would  lead  to  more  active  and  committed  involvement  of  emerging 
economies in the Fund’s decisions that definitely would increase the Fund’s legitimacy in the region. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 3
Our commitment for the future is to continue working constructively in the improvement of the quota 
system, the strengthening of the governability, credibility and effectiveness of the Fund. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2007
