Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Protecting financial systems from money laundering and  
terrorist financing activities 
Keynote address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the World 
Bank Workshop on Capacity Enhancement for Anti Money Laundering and Combating the Financing 
of Terrorism, Colombo, 7-11 May 2007. 
 Ladies & Gentlemen,  
Let me welcome you to the inaugural ceremony of this Capacity Enhancement workshop and extend 
to all overseas participants and representatives a very warm welcome to our country.  
I  am  also  happy  to  be  able  today  to  share  a  few  thoughts  with  you  about  the  need  to  ensure  the 
integrity  of  worldwide  financial  systems  by  protecting  such  systems  from  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing activities. 
This is a challenging task as advancements in technology, especially in the financial services industry, 
have made it easier for criminals including terrorists to take advantage of liberalized financial markets, 
innovative technologies and the ease with which cross-border flows of financial transactions can take 
place.  
One of the most recent incidents in this regard is the sophistication with which, internationally active 
Tamil Tiger Terrorists have successfully perpetrated a massive credit card fraud in London costing the 
British  public,  according  to  reports,  about  100  million  Sterling  Pounds  by  skimming  credit  cards 
belonging  to  the  British  public.  Skimming  has  been  a  common  technique  used  to  raise  funds  for 
terrorists in Algeria, Kashmir and Chechnya, and now it is clear that it is being extensively practiced in 
the Western world too. 
The modus operandi in this case was said to be the “cloning” of credit cards skimmed at petrol sheds 
in various parts of England by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) to fund its terrorist activities 
in Sri Lanka. It has been reported that about 200 independently owned petrol stations are said to be 
currently investigated where LTTE terrorists operating under the guise of petrol shed staff have been 
involved. The investigations have also apparently revealed that the Credit Cards cloned in Britain have 
been used to obtain funds in Thailand, and some other far off parts of the world. In that context, what 
is  important  to  note  here  is  that  such  criminal  activities  could  very  well  be  happening  in  our  own 
countries too, and we may be inadvertently funding terrorism ourselves.  
It is therefore clear that we have all got to be vigilant to ensure that these as well as other fund raising 
and laundering modalities are not adopted in our respective countries and to institute immediate and 
effective safeguards to combat them.  
My  dear  friends,  this  massive  fraud  in  England  also  demonstrates  very  strongly  that  Terrorists  and 
Terrorism are not a threat only to the country where the actual terror is unleashed but, indeed, to every 
other peoples, countries and economies as well. So, it is imperative that we treat terrorists, their allies, 
sympathizers,  and  associates,  with  the  same  yard  stick,  and  not  get  fooled  by  some  of  the  sugar 
coated pills in which blatant and horrendous acts of terrorism are sometimes cleverly packaged and 
presented.  
What are the other manifestation of these organized funding schemes? 
We, in the South Asian Region, are conscious of the unofficial banking systems that operate, like the 
Hawala and Hundi, which pose a serious threat to our efforts to close the avenues available to money 
launderers and terrorists. These underground banking services provide the ideal framework and the 
means  for  laundering  of  money  and  financing  terrorism.  It  has  just  been  reported  that  the  Indian 
Income  Tax  Department  early  this  year,  busted  a  money-laundering  racket  during  a  routine 
investigation into Hawala transactions. From the information unearthed so far, they have discovered 
that Transworld ICT was only a front for a huge money laundering scam. In this scam, a certain Delhi-
based businessman, is said to have, by himself, remitted US $ 1.4 billion between January and July 
2006 "as proceeds of software business" through Transworld ICT Solutions, which essentially worked 
as an illegal clearing house.  
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
We are of course, mindful of the efforts of the international standardsetters and watchdogs, to deal 
with these situations. They work tirelessly to review and recommend the preventive measures needed 
to  be  taken  in  this  regard.  They  attempt  to  harmonize  legislation  and  the  regulatory  tools  which 
become imperatives, worldwide, against financial crime and terrorist financing. 
At the same time, let us not forget that terrorists too, learn from each other. Sometimes the learning 
and co-operation may be direct. At other times, it could be indirect. Perhaps they too, have workshops 
like what we are having today. On 31st January 1996, Tamil terrorist suicide cadres drove a 500 kg. 
explosive laden commercial truck into the Central Bank of Sri Lanka building. About 5 ½ years later, 
on 11th September 2001, Al Quaeda terrorist suicide cadres piloted 2 jet fuel laden commercial air 
crafts into the WTC Twin Towers in New York. The scale and the means employed may have been 
different,  in  the  two  instances.  But  the  method  was  similar.  So,  let  us  remember  that  terrorists  and 
terrorist financiers will also surely learn from each other and wreck havoc in our respective societies, 
and they too, must be, obviously trying their best to be ahead of us.  
Regulators need, therefore, to be constantly abreast of these methods, if not be ahead of them. We 
need to equip ourselves for this purpose by enhancing our capacity and processes to effectively meet 
the challenges of terrorism and terrorism financing. 
I am happy to say that Sri Lanka has made considerable headway in this regard. In the years 2005 
and  2006  three  key  laws  were  enacted,  namely,  The  Convention  on  the  Suppression  of  Terrorist 
Financing  Act,  The  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Act,  and  the  Financial  Transactions  Reporting 
Act.  The  FTR  Act  created  the  institutional  body  of  the  FIU  within  the  Central  Bank,  with  regulatory 
powers  and  a  mandate,  inter  alia,  to  formulate  policies  and guidelines  to  meet  the  Financial  Action 
Task Force (FATF) 40 + 9 recommendations.  
The  enactment  of  the  necessary  AML/CFT  legislation  in  Sri  Lanka,  early  last  year  and  the 
establishment  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  soon  after,  demonstrates  Sri  Lanka’s  strong 
commitment  to  the  global  efforts  to  fight  financial  crime  and  terrorism.  Naturally,  therefore,  in  this 
effort, the areas of vulnerability have been identified and adequate measures taken to deal effectively 
with  the  weaknesses.  The  stakeholders  also  need  to  be  adequately  equipped  to  discharge  their 
responsibilities effectively. We therefore, see today’s effort at building capacity and processes, as one 
of the most important pre-requisites for the implementation of an effective AML/CFT regime, and we 
commend the World Bank and all others who are involved in this endeavour.  
My  dear  friends,  Sri  Lanka  has  been  ever  mindful  of  its  obligations  in  this  regard  and  has  been  a 
pioneer  in  this  field.  Long  before  the  advent  of  the  AML  and  CFT  legislation,  certain  safeguards  to 
insulate our financial system from money launderers and terrorists were in fact put in place by us. This 
was done through legislation such as the Exchange Control Act, the Banking Act and the Customs 
Ordinance. Adequate reporting requirements were also imposed to monitor large cross-border flows of 
currency. “Know-your-customer” guidelines were issued to the banks as far back as 2001. 
However, the ever increasing sophistication with which criminals and terrorists operate globally have 
made our task to fight financial crime and terrorist financing even more daunting. In the final analysis, 
it  is  clear  that,  the  financing  of  crime  and  terrorism  is  one  of  the  most  important  dimensions  of  the 
physical  violent  acts  unleashed  by  terrorists  in  the  form  of  suicide  bomb  attacks,  killing  of  innocent 
civilians,  etc.  This  realization  should  confirm  to  us  that  very  often  we  may  be  able  to,  through  our 
collaborative efforts, prevent acts of terrorism by preventing the financing of crime and terrorism. If we 
can do that effectively, perhaps more than three fourths of the battle may be won. Without finances to 
equip themselves with sophisticated arms, intelligence, equipment, skills, machinery and techniques, 
terrorism will surely be on the wane. This then, is a fact that we must always be mindful of. 
9/11 shocked the world. At the same time, it also united the world in its quest to defeat terrorism and 
eradicate financing of terrorism. Post 9/11, the whole world has renewed its battle against, this ever 
growing threat of terrorism. Until then, in a sad sort of a way, we in Sri Lanka, used to think that we 
were  fighting  this  battle  alone.  But  today,  the  many  international  conventions  and  the  resultant 
resolutions that have taken place, post 9/11 to which we have all become signatories, consolidates our 
international obligations in the fight against terrorism. That indicates to us, that we are not alone in this 
struggle. In fact, today, we witness a closing of ranks amongst all the countries of the world to fight 
terrorism.  
While  these  efforts  are  commendable,  all  of  us  would  also  have  to  grudgingly  admit  that, 
notwithstanding the enhanced global counter-measures, terrorism worldwide is still on the increase. 
According  to  a  US  report  released  recently,  an  increase  of  29%  has  been  recorded  last  year  in 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
worldwide terror attacks, which have become even deadlier. As a result, global terrorism deaths have 
recorded a 40% increase last year. In Afghanistan alone which is represented here at this Forum, the 
number of terror attacks have almost doubled. The self destruction in the form of suicide bombers that 
Sri Lanka’s Tamil terrorists launched in recent times, have now become commonplace in many parts 
of the world. Such incidents are almost a daily occurrence, making human life a cheap commodity as a 
means to an end in the armoury of terrorists.  
In the meantime, the economic effects of terrorism in almost all our countries, is also becoming very 
challenging. In this regard, the recent air attacks by Tiger Terrorists may have opened a new chapter 
in  the  book  of  international  terrorism.  If  unchecked,  it  may  only  be  a  matter  of  time,  before  terror 
groups  in other  parts  of  the  world  also emulate  these  dastardly  attacks.  It  is  therefore,  vital  that  all 
countries quickly assist Sri Lanka to eradicate this threat, as otherwise, it may only be a matter of time, 
before this too becomes a new tool in the armoury of terrorists.  
Today, combating terrorism cannot be considered the sole responsibility of single governments or of 
single sets of soldiers who fight at the front at the risk of their lives. We must all get involved in an 
international effort if we are to defeat this menace. In these efforts, financial institutions and all other 
corporate entities, especially, NGO’s must also actively help prevent the funding and the flow of goods 
and services to terrorist organizations. We must all be wise to the type of trade we are engaged in, 
and be mindful of the impact it can have in facilitating terrorist activity. It therefore becomes imperative 
that any loopholes in banking which can be identified as facilitating the financing of terrorism and strict 
adherence to regulations to prevent such financing, receive the immediate attention of the regulatory 
institutions.  
The aftermath of natural disasters also often provide happy hunting grounds for money launderers and 
terrorists.  Sri  Lanka’s  experience  post-tsunami  is  ample  testimony  to  this  reality.  Organisations  and 
individuals emerged from nowhere after the Tsunami, with absolutely no track record of humanitarian 
work,  to  descend  on  us  in  the  guise  of  humanitarian  relief.  In  the  critical  circumstances  of  the 
aftermath of the tsunami, it was perhaps not possible for us to closely verify their bona fides. However, 
we  are  now  much  wiser  about  the  humanitarian  face  of  money  launderers  and  terrorists.  We  now 
know that several terrorist front organizations have used the official banking channels to solicit and 
remit  funding,  on  the  grounds of  humanitarian  relief.  A  large  inflow  of  funds also came  through  the 
official banking channels post-tsunami, which may not, in normal circumstances, have penetrated our 
banking  system.  I  would  therefore,  urge  all  participants  to  endeavour  to  learn  from  these  types  of 
experiences,  and,  through  an  exchange  of  views  in  these  experiences,  enrich  themselves  with  the 
necessary  expertise  to  be  able  to  impart  to  their  counterparts,  the  techniques  and  the  knowledge 
necessary to achieve our collective goals.  
Finally,  let  me  express  my  grateful  thanks  to  the  World  Bank  and  to  all  of  you,  for  your  efforts  to 
organize  and  equip  each  other  to  be  a  cohesive  force  in  eradicating  money  laundering  and  the 
financing of terrorism in your respective countries.  
I wish all of you a very fruitful learning experience and stimulating exchanges, and a very successful 
workshop.  
BIS Review 48/2007 
 3
