Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Dnevik, Expansión, Irish Independent and  
La Repubblica 
Interview with Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted on 27 March 
2007 by Ms Elena Polidori (La Repubblica), Mr Javier Blas (Expansión), Mr Bojan Glavic (Dnevik) and 
Mr Brendan Keenan (Irish Independent), Frankfurt am Main, published on 2 April 2007.  
 One  recent  survey  over  the  first  5  years  since  the  euro  introduction  finds  a  deep 
disappointment  among  European  citizens,  especially  over  price  rises  since  the  euro  launch. 
How do you evaluate those five years?
People of Europe are telling us to ensure price stability and saying: We support you in ensuring price 
stability. And they add: We are not sure that we have perfect price stability. That is true, but it cannot 
be interpreted in a negative way. It means: We back your mandate.  
To give you one striking survey result – 73% of citizens in the euro area back ECB independence in 
order to ensure price stability.  
The  enthusiasm  of some  new  EU  members  for  membership  of  the  euro  also  seems  to  be 
fading,  and  their  target  dates  are  less  and  less  ambitious. Is  the  ECB considering some 
exhortations to bring those dates forward?
We  have  always  said  that  entering  the  euro  area  is  an  important  decision  which  is  based  on  the 
criteria as laid down by the Maastricht Treaty. So I really think the way things are being done is the 
right and proper one. We are not a closed shop. We already have one former communist country – 
Slovenia – in the euro area. That is a remarkable demonstration of the fact that we are not a closed 
shop. I am confident that the new EU members, to the extent that they are converging according to the 
criteria of the Treaty, on a sustainable basis, will progressively join the euro area. 
You have signalled  your concerns that wage increases are the main risk to price stability  in 
2007. But so far wages are increasing at a slow rate. Why are you still concerned? 
We think that wage increases must be worked out by the social partners, taking into account three 
main  parameters.  First  –  the  level  of  unemployment.  With  some  countries  still  having  mass 
unemployment, it’s important that they have moderate increases in wages in order to permit as active 
as  possible  job  creation.  Second,  the  level  of  unit  labour  costs  is  very  important.  If  it  points  to 
competitiveness problems in a country – for instance a loss of market share inside the euro area – 
then it calls for wage moderation to re-establish competitiveness. Third, the level of labour productivity 
must be taken into consideration in order to preserve competitiveness. 
So there is no single recipe, as the situation of the individual countries differs. But taking all this into 
account, we believe wage moderation is of the essence at the level of the euro area as a whole. 
Would  you  say  that  inflation  risks for  the  medium  term,  i.e.  2008,  have  increased  in  the  last 
three months or decreased? 
In the opinion of the ECB Governing Council the outlook for price developments in the medium term 
remains characterised by upside risks.  
Is  the  ECB  happy  with  its  current  target  for  inflation,  or  is  still  there  room  to  revise  the 
definition of price stability?
It  is  extraordinarily  important  to  anchor inflation  expectations,  not  just  on  a  medium  term  basis,  but 
also in the long-term, and even the very long-term. The remarkable success of the ECB Governing 
Council is that it has anchored expectations from the very beginning in line with our definition of price 
stability:  less  than  2%,  close  to  2%  inflation.  This  created  the  financial  environment  favourable  for 
growth and jobs creation. There is absolutely no case for changing our definition of price stability.  
BIS Review 32/2007 
 1
According to the OECD both the ECB and the Fed should avoid a rise of interest rates because 
the inflation situation does not justify an increase. In particular, the OECD chief economist said 
recently that eurozone inflation is “well under control”. Is this expert right or wrong?
Each institution does its own analysis. Let me tell you that the OECD is today fully supporting all the 
monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB  since  December  2005  –  when  we  started  increasing  interest 
rates.  I  don’t  think  you  can  interpret  the  recent  OECD  analysis  as  in  any  way  contradicting  our 
decisions. 
Financial markets are not fully pricing in a further rate increase, in particular for June. In that 
context,  would  you  say  that  market  expectations  are  different  from  the  ones  of  the  ECB 
Governing Council? How far in advance does the Council have to decide on giving guidance to 
the markets about a change?
I certainly do not comment on a day to day basis on market probabilities that go up and down. I fully 
confirm on behalf of the Governing Council, as I did before the European Parliament, that our analysis 
shows  that  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  on  the  accommodative  side,  with  ECB  interest  rates 
moderate, money and credit growth vigorous. Therefore acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure 
price stability in the medium term is warranted. 
We are totally transparent in our definition of price stability. Not all central banks are as transparent as 
we are. We have a very clear mandate and a very clear monetary policy concept. So every observer, 
investor, every saver, in Europe and the rest of the world, knows that we will do what is necessary to 
ensure price stability. By the way, they trust us. Otherwise, their inflation expectations would not be in 
line with our definition of price stability.  
They also know that our policy is not to pre-commit in any respect to future action. We will do what is 
necessary, but we never unconditionally pre-commit. 
The markets interpreted your last press conference and the ECB monetary policy statement, in 
particular  the  change  from  “low”  to  “moderate”  as  the  description  for  the  interest  rates,  as 
meaning  that  a  peak  on  the  current  tightening  cycle  is  very  near.  Would  you  say  they  are 
reflecting the thinking of the ECB Council?
A number of observers have taken notice of a change in the wording, from “low ” to “moderate ” and 
also from “accommodative ” to “continues to be on the accommodative side ”. It was the intention of 
the Governing Council to make these slight changes. On future decisions let me repeat: we will do 
what is necessary to ensure price stability. 
How much weight does the ECB give to measures of the output gap? Does the ECB it have a 
target for trend growth in the eurozone?
Our  monetary  policy  concept  calls  on  us  to  counter  inflationary  risks  in  the  medium  term,  and  be 
credible in delivering price stability over time. Our policy is neither commanded by calculations of an 
output gap, nor of a NAIRU [Non-Accelerating-Inflation-Rate-of-Unemployment], or of the computation 
of a theoretical neutral rate. We are guided by our own judgement of the risks to price stability based 
on our two-pillar strategy: our economic analysis and our monetary analysis. In doing so we are not 
the prisoner of any kind of model, but rather we are keen on having as comprehensive as possible 
analysis in order to take the best decision in situations that are always very complex.  
At this stage the Council does not think that it is the time to consider increasing the previous estimate 
for potential growth of around 2-2.25%. That being said, we are looking very carefully at the evolution 
of productivity, which is one of the most important parameters.  
What is behind the current strong growth in Europe? Are structural reforms beginning to pay 
off? Do ECB demands that governments do more to cut budget deficits not put the renewed 
growth at risk? 
I  have  to  say  that  the  currently  encouraging  growth  in  Europe  is  certainly  largely  cyclical  and  it  is 
important  to  see  that  we  are  currently  in  an  environment  of  strong  global  growth,  which  is  very 
encouraging. But it is also true that some structural reforms are paying off, in particular those which 
have been made in order to stimulate labour participation and job creation, especially in the unskilled 
labour market.  
Since the setting up of the euro on the 1st January 1999, we have created more than 12 million new 
jobs. This compares with less than 3 million in the eight years before the euro. It is worth noting that 
these 12 million new jobs are more than the number of new jobs created in the United States during 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2007
the  same  eight  years  period.  This  is  an  undeniable  success  in  job  creation.  But  it  is  not  time  for 
complacency because we still have mass unemployment. We think that all the structural reforms that 
are necessary would allow us not only to create jobs but also to have a jump in labour productivity that 
would permit a significant increase in our medium- and long-term growth potential. 
We do not see yet this phenomenon, but we are analysing very carefully the recent evolution in labour 
productivity.  
Let me add that one of the main lessons we can draw from the past is that in a encouraging period of 
growth  –  last  year  was  one  and  we  expect  that  this  year  and  next  year  will  also  be  years  of 
encouraging growth – it is very important to pave the way for the best possible future by practising 
fiscal  soundness.  That  is  our  permanent  message  to  governments  and  on  this  point  we  are  in  full 
agreement with the Commission. 
What  lessons  do  you  draw  from  recent  sharp  corrections on  stock  exchanges all  over  the 
world. Is it a sign of dangers on financial markets? If so, where do the main dangers lie?
We should not forget that: First, these corrections took place within the framework of very encouraging 
global growth. Second, the recent correction on the financial markets is a useful reminder of the fact 
that an appropriate pricing of risks in the global economy is very important. All investors certainly have 
this in mind. Third, it is not surprising that we have seen the most significant corrections in markets 
which had registered substantial capital gains in recent months and weeks. Fourth, the ECB, with all 
other central banks, will continue to monitor the situation very closely: smooth and orderly changes are 
always preferable to sharp and abrupt corrections, which are never welcome. 
There  is  a  strong  sense  that  political  pressure  to  limit  ECB  independence  is  rising  in  some 
countries (especially France). Does this worry you or is it just an empty threat?
A majority of the people of Europe says that it is good that the central bank is independent to ensure 
price stability. The percentage in France is exactly the same as in the euro area as a whole, at 73% - 
three  citizens  out  of  four!  We  have  been  made  independent  by  the  will  of  the  people.  All  our 
democracies had multi-national and multi-party consensus to give the ECB independence. We are the 
child  of  a  multi-party  consensus  for  independence,  which  is  again  fully  vindicated  by  the  people  of 
Europe. So I am not worried. 
Are you disappointed that most of the attacks are coming from your home country, France?
In France, the decision to make the Banque de France independent was particularly solemn because 
it required a change of the constitution of the Fifth Republic – the constitution of General de Gaulle – 
by a majority of three-fifths in both Chambers of the Parliament. After this, the people of France voted 
in favour of central bank independence as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty.  
These critics often point to the fact that the Federal Reserve has a mandate partly for growth, 
and  the  ECB  does  not.  Is  there  any  room  for  some  element  of  this  to  be  placed  in  the  ECB 
mandate?
The  fact  that  our  primary  mandate  is  to  ensure  price  stability  has  been  approved  by  all  the 
democracies of Europe and everybody expects us to respect the will expressed solemnly by all our 
democracies. But I will add that it is the view of all central banks in the world that price stability is a 
necessary condition for sustainable growth and job creation. That is the reason why so many countries 
in  the  industrial  world  and  in  the  emerging  economies  have  adopted  a  concept  of  direct  inflation 
targeting.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  central  banks  in  the  world  are  given  a  single  mandate  to 
ensure price stability. It is the case in London, in Stockholm, in Ottawa, in Mexico City, in Brasilia as 
well as in Frankfurt. 
My US counterparts, Ben Bernanke today and Alan Greenspan yesterday, always say themselves in 
their speeches that “price stability is a pre-condition for sustainable growth and job creation”.  
What  is  your secret in  being  able  to  keep  smiling  and  never  lose  your  good  humour  when 
journalists  keep  asking  for  clear,  but  forbidden  answers  about  further  ECB  rate  increases. 
When can we expect the next one?
I don’t know whether I keep smiling permanently! What is true is that I never lose my nerve. I’ll let you 
judge my good humour. But we are so clear in our mandate and in our strong will to live up to our 
mandate, that everybody knows we will do what is necessary. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 3
What is your advice to the authorities in countries like Ireland or Spain, where the eurozone 
interest rate is likely to be most different from a suitable “Taylor rule” national rate, as these 
countries face higher inflation and stronger growth than average?
First of all, let me say that in a single currency area the decisions are taken by the central bank on the 
basis of the overall situation of the area itself – the 317 million people. It cannot be otherwise. Equally 
the Federal Reserve takes decisions on the basis of the 300 million US citizens, and not on the basis 
of California, South Carolina or Alaska, even though there is the same dispersion of growth rates as in 
Europe. That calls of course for national policies in the euro area that are as appropriate as possible 
for the domestic situation. That explains why we are calling for highly sound fiscal policies, which is 
particularly  valid  for  Spain  and  Ireland  and  they  are  following  that  way.  As  responsible  as  possible 
wages  and  salaries  increases  are  also  crucial  in  order  not  to  lose  competitiveness  in  very  buoyant 
episodes of the cycle. Finally we call for as active as possible structural reforms to have as flexible 
economies as possible to increases growth and keep down unit labour cost.  
How big a risk to eurozone price stability are housing price booms, like the ones in Spain or 
Ireland? Are you concerned about housing valuations on those countries?
As you know, we look at the entire real estate market of the euro area, not particularly here or there, 
Spain  or  Ireland.  At  the  level  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  we  have  a  dynamic  growth  of  loans  to 
finance housing, namely 9.4% over the last twelve months. This dynamism was one of the elements 
the Governing Council took into consideration in our decision making process. On top of that, all that 
can be done at the national level to counter adverse developments is certainly to be encouraged. Let 
me  note  that  we  are  beginning  to  see  some  slowing  down  in  the  national  real  estate  markets,  in 
particular in Ireland and Spain. 
Spain has the second largest current account deficit (in dollar terms) after the US. Is the ECB 
worried that this is signalling a growth path that is not sustainable?
This calls for very cautious and attentive examination. You have to look at the level of savings as a 
percentage of GDP, which is not abnormal, and at the level of investment. It is clear that Spain has a 
very  high  level  of  investment,  which  is  not  necessarily  sustainable  in  the  long  run,  because  of  the 
extremely large volumes of domestic and external financing, coming in particular into the real estate 
market. One has to place the figures for the current account deficit in that context, and in the context of 
the very dynamic episode of the cycle. That being said, we call on all countries in the similar situation, 
not  only  Spain,  to  have  the  soundest  possible  fiscal  policies  with  large  surpluses,  and  the  utmost 
responsibility of the social partners in setting wages and salaries, in order to counter what would be a 
tendency to imbalanced growth. 
What would be your recommendation to the Spanish government?
Continue  with  the  best  possible  fiscal  policy.  This part  of  national  policy  is  a  very  important  way  to 
moderate  imbalances.  Continue  to  look  very  carefully  at  the  evolution  of  the  unit  labour  costs  and 
labour productivity. Fostering labour productivity through structural reforms is of the essence.  
The Italian public deficit is going down towards 2.3% this  year, according to the last official 
projections.  But  the  ECB,  in  its  latest  report,  is  still  suggesting  the  extra  fiscal  revenues  be 
used  to  balance  the  budget  and  not  to  cut  taxes.  As  you  know,  the  Italian  government  has 
already  decided  to  use  part  of  this  extra  money  to  reduce  taxes.  How  do  you  judge  the 
government’s choice?
As a general rule, we recommend to all countries, not just Italy, that in the most encouraging part of 
the cycle, the windfall revenues should be used to balance the budget. It’s a general rule that the ECB, 
as well as the Commission, are recommending to all governments and parliaments in Europe.  
In case of countries with a very high level of public debt as a percentage of GDP, which is the case of 
Italy, our constant recommendation is to do everything necessary to reduce as rapidly as possible the 
level  of  outstanding  debt.  This  is  in  the  interests  of  the  country  itself,  because  it  will  diminish  the 
burden of the future budget on the economy as a whole, fully in line – of course – with the Stability and 
Growth Pact.  
In the same documents, the ECB fears that the measures of the Italian budget for 2007, the so 
called Finanziaria, will not be realized. What in particular does not convince you?
I  would  say  that  we  call  for  the  full  implementation  of  the  measures  that  were  decided  by  the 
government  on  the  proposal  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa.  The  ECB  also  shares  the  latest 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2007
that  we 
independent 
take  decisions 
institution.  Everybody  understands 
conclusions of the European Council on the update of the stability programme, which encourages Italy 
to use the additional revenues for a more rapid reduction of public debt. 
It  is  one  and  a  half  year  since  Antonio  Fazio  left  the  Italian central  bank.  What  are the  main 
differences between the former and the current Bank of Italy?
The  Banca  d’Italia  has  always  been  a  very  active  and  important  member  of  the  monetary  team  of 
Europe, a remarkable player on the field. I have to say that Mario Draghi, whom I have known for 20 
years,  has  an  outstanding  and  wide  experience,  has  done  and  is  still  doing  a  lot  to  continue 
modernising his institution and to permit it to be up-to-date in all respects. 
The Governing Council meeting scheduled for Dublin in May could be days before the general 
election.  Could  this  create  political  difficulties,  especially  if  the  ECB  were  announcing  or 
signalling a change in interest rates?
totally 
We  are  an 
independently  of  such  national  political  considerations.  We  wouldn't  be  credible  and  we  would  not 
solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations  if  anybody  could  think  that  we  were  could  modify  our  policy 
because of political events in any of the thirteen member countries of the euro area. I am really looking 
forward to be in Dublin in May – when I'm in Dublin, I always think of James Joyce and Dubliners. 
Ireland is a remarkable economic success story.  
What is your opinion about Slovenia’s difficulties in naming a new central bank governor and 
what  consequences  could  this  have  for the  country  and  Slovenia’s  seat  on  the  governing 
council? Do the ECB rules allow for a stand-in to take the seat in such circumstances?
I regret very much the difficulties which have happened in Slovenia in this decision-making process, 
just after the remarkable success of introducing the euro. Governor Gaspari has informed me who will 
represent  the  Banka  Slovenije  on  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  Yes,  the  ECB  rules  allow  for  a 
substitute to participate in such circumstances. 
Slovenia is the only member of the eurozone with limits on the free movement of labour. When 
might it change and what effects does it have on the economy and labour market?
As you know, we called for the full implementation of the single market as a major improvement of the 
EU economy as a whole – for all the 490 million people in the EU and 317 million in the euro area. We 
call also for as flexible and integrated as possible markets in Europe and the euro area. I said very, 
very  clearly  that  it  was  abnormal  that  labour  movement  for  Slovenia  inside  the  euro area  would  be 
limited. It doesn't fit the integration of Slovenia into the euro. Slovenia's labour force should be free of 
any restriction inside the euro area. This is one example that I would give very strongly – to say that 
the economic underpinning of full freedom of movement in a single currency area is very strong. 
Has  the  ECB  any  estimate  of  its  own  on  the  impact  of  the  euro  introduction  on  inflation  in 
Slovenia?  Is  such  an  estimate  more  difficult  in  a  country  with  a  very  long  period  of  double 
pricing (16 months)? 
All  the  information  I  have  at  the  moment  is  that  the  euro  introduction  has  been  a  great  success  in 
Slovenia and the preparation which has been done by the central bank and the government as well as 
the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission,  has  been  very  careful.  To  my  knowledge,  the  success 
includes efficiently limiting and avoiding abnormal price increases.  
I don't think the long period of double pricing should make the estimate more difficult. I think it was a 
good idea to have a long period. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 5
