Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The constellation of monetary challenges and 
responses 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at 
the  Philippine  Economic  Briefing,  Makati  City, 
12 September 2007.  
 The current economic constellation 
I.  
Both the domestic and international business communities affirm that the Philippines is now 
experiencing the most stable macroeconomic environment in a decade.  
The  inflation  rate  has  been  low  and  stable,  with  the  outlook  for  inflation  benign.  This  has 
allowed monetary authorities to maintain interest rates at low and stable levels also.  
Our balance of payments remains in surplus, bolstered by the current account, which is also 
in  surplus,  in  fact  for  four  (4)  consecutive  years  now.  We  have  built  up  our  international 
reserves  to  a  record-high  of  $30.3  billion,  adequate  to  more  than  cover  our  short-term 
liquidity requirements. Our strong external position enabled the BSP and the NG to prepay 
foreign debts amounting to US$ 2.1 billion in 2006 and another $0.9 billion in the first half of 
2007. These have markedly improved our external debt ratios. Included in these payments 
was the prepayment in full of the country’s outstanding obligations to the IMF in December 
2006, a milestone in the Philippines’ relationship with the IMF since it effectively ended the 
country’s use of IMF resources after nearly four and a half decades.  
Our  banking  system  is  growing  at  double  digit  rates  in  both  asset  size  and  deposit  base, 
improving in profitability and continues to be capitalized well-above international standards.  
Investor  attention  and  responses  to  the  current  constellation  of  economic  data  have  been 
significantly positive as evidenced by the following developments, particularly during the first 
half of the year:  
• 
• 
The stock market reached seven-year highs  
The peso appreciated on account of strong export earnings and sustained overseas 
remittances.  
Our sovereign credit spreads compressed.  
Yields on domestic securities fell to record lows.  
• 
• 
The questions, however, that may be in your minds now are: Can these gains be sustained? 
Will  the  economic  momentum  be  able  to  weather  the  recent  domestic  and  global  market 
adjustments and volatilities?  
My quick answer is yes.  
Our macroeconomic fundamentals are sound. Because our underlying fundamentals are the 
result  of  the  fiscal,  macroeconomic,  banking  and  financial  sector  reforms  that  have  been 
undertaken vigorously and continue to be pursued, I believe we are resilient and therefore 
less vulnerable to domestic and external uncertainties.  
The challenges to monetary policy formulation 
II.  
On the part of the BSP, we formulate monetary policy against an assessment of global and 
domestic economic issues and developments.  
BIS Review 100/2007 
 1
We  are  mindful  of  the  range  of  circumstances  in  recent  times  which  draws  important 
challenges  for  Philippine  monetary  policy.  Plentiful  global  liquidity.  The  strong  foreign 
exchange inflows into Asia. The build-up of international reserves. The marked appreciation 
of regional currencies against the US dollar. Financial innovations. Yield-seeking activities of 
agents,  and  now  more  recently,  a  reassessment  of  risk  appetite  and  repricing  of  risks.  A 
possible further tightening of global credit conditions. The fragility of US growth. Volatile oil 
and commodity prices.  
All  these  challenge  us  as  we  endeavor  to  provide  a  sound  monetary  policy  environment, 
while  advancing  reforms  that  promote  growth  and  respond  to  changes  in  global  financial 
conditions.  Our  resolve  to  follow  good  governance  and  international  best  practices  in  our 
reform agenda has provided us the discipline necessary to craft appropriate responses and 
avoid steps that could distort rational market behavior. 
The courses of action 
III.  
Let me put forward three essentials in response to these challenges. 
One,  we  will  remain  focused  on  achieving  our  inflation  target.  Our  monetary  policy  will 
continue to be responsive and forward-looking. Our inflation targeting approach has proven 
to be effective as a monetary anchor and provides us with an array of policy tools against 
turbulent economic and financial conditions.  
Two, we will maintain our market-determined exchange rate policy, while complementing this 
with  a  liberalization  of  our  foreign  exchange  regulations  to  allow  greater  access  to  foreign 
exchange  for  outward  investments.  We  have  already  put  out  the  “first  wave”  of  FX 
liberalization measures, a “second wave” will be implemented before the end of the year.  
Third, we will continue to undertake steps to strengthen the domestic financial system and 
help manage risks attendant to financial market developments.  
In the banking sector, we are focused on good governance, asset-clean up, capital build-up 
and industry consolidation. We want to see stronger, well-governed, better-capitalized banks 
that  would  be  effective  channels  of  monetary  policy.  In  other  words,  stable  financial 
institutions that perform the intermediation function between the sources and users of funds, 
fully cognizant of the risks attendant to this role.  
As  driven  by  the  changing  profit  dynamics  brought  about  by  our  adoption  of  international 
accounting and the Basel II capital adequacy standards, we are encouraging banks to look 
for ways to capture economies of scale. This would make them more capable of investing in 
the  required  technologies  (i.e.,  risk-based  technologies)  thereby  making  them  more 
competitive in an increasingly challenging local and global environment.  
These and other long-term structural reforms will continue to support a favorable investment 
climate and enhance productivity through investments in our growth sectors. 
The clever response from you 
IV.  
We are aware that the core investor is always in search, not just of higher and higher returns, 
but  rather  of  “quality”  returns.  We  are  also  aware  that  countries  with  good  governance 
frameworks,  wide-ranging  structural  reforms  and  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  are 
always on such investors’ shortlist in their search for high effective returns.  
I  believe,  the  Philippines’  macroeconomic  fundamentals  as  well  as  the  reforms  that  have 
been instituted in the banking sector make us a clear choice for the core investor.  
The recent volatilities related to the US subprime mortgage market are not likely to have a 
direct  significant  impact  on  our  banking  system.  Philippine  banks’  exposure  to  the  CDO 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2007
market is a minuscule 0.2 percent of the total banking system’s assets, none of which have 
subprime mortgages as underlying assets. 
Apart from this, sufficient liquidity in the domestic financial system, as well as the increased 
tapping  by  corporates  of  long-term  domestic  funding  for  their  expansion  needs,  will  help 
reduce the influence or effects of external developments on our markets. As always, should 
there be need for more liquidity in the system, the BSP will act to maintain order and stability 
in the markets. 
As the country pursues further reforms that support growth and reduce our vulnerabilities to 
external shocks, I ask investors to focus on our fundamentals. I am confident that this pattern 
of strong macroeconomic fundamentals will be sustained and favor a constellation of bullish 
opportunities and expectations for the Philippine economy. 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 3
