Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia’s part in the growing global Islamic finance industry 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the INCEIF 
Inaugural  Intellectual  Discourse  "Islamic  Finance:  Issues  and  Challenges  of  Co-existence  in  an 
Entrenched Conventional System", Central Bank of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 23 February 2007. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to INCEIF Inaugural Intellectual Discourse Series. INCEIF has 
made  remarkable  progress  within  a  period  of  less  than  a  year.  In  2006,  INCEIF  has  gained  the 
university  status,  it  has  currently  enrolled  756  students  from  39  countries,  and  it  has  entered  into 
strategic alliances with a number of industry training and education providers from the Middle East, 
South  East  Asia  and  the  West.  Indeed,  INCEIF  has  received  an  overwhelming  response.  As  an 
institution  of  higher  learning  dedicated  to  the  development  of  human  capital  for  the  growing  global 
Islamic finance industry, INCEIF will have an important role in meeting the increased demand for talent 
and expertise for the industry.  
The topic for today's deliberation, "Issues and Challenges of the Co-existence of Islamic Finance in an 
Entrenched  Conventional  System",  is  most  relevant  in  the  currently  highly  competitive  financial 
services  industry  where  new  challenges  and  opportunities  are  continuously  emerging  in  this  era  of 
globalisation and of rapid change that is also driven by advances in technology.  
Today's  initiative  brings  together  Islamic  finance  experts  and  scholars  to  deliberate  the  issues 
confronting Islamic finance in an environment where the conventional finance is dominant and highly 
entrenched.  The  primary  objective  of  today's  Inaugural  Intellectual  Discourse  is  to  explore  the 
prospects for Islamic finance which has now reached a stage of development in which it is now no 
longer regarded as a niche product serving a specialised market. Today, it is a robust industry that 
operates in more than 60 countries, and it is a viable form of financial intermediation that is competitive 
and resilient. Islamic finance, nevertheless faces many challenges with respect to its product offering, 
its distinctive ethical and moral dimension, and its relevance to all customers.  
The  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  has  evolved  as  a  competitive  component  of  the  overall 
financial system, complementing the conventional financial system as a driver of economic growth and 
development. Malaysia will continue to foster the expansion of the dual banking system where both, 
the Islamic and conventional systems operate in parallel to deliver innovative and competitive financial 
products and services. The global experience has however shown that institutional and development 
financial infrastructure, the broadening and deepening of the financial markets, and a rigorous legal 
and  regulatory  framework  is  vital  for  the  soundness,  stability  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system. 
Developments in both domestic and international economic and financial conditions have from time to 
time  tested  the  resilience  of  financial  systems.  Thus,  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  not  only  be 
assessed  by  their  Shariah  aspects,  but  also  by  other  factors  including  their  effectiveness  and 
efficiency,  their  resilience  and  their  ability  to  evolve  and  reinvent  to  meet  the  challenges  of  the 
continuously changing demands as we advance forward.  
After more than two decades of experience in the development of Islamic finance, we are now seeing 
the  international  dimension  of  our  Islamic  financial  system  gain  significance.  This  has  followed  the 
increased foreign presence and participation in our domestic Islamic financial system. Malaysia has 
also  ventured  to  participate  in  international  financial  markets  and  in  term  of  presence  beyond  our 
domestic  borders.  More  specifically,  three  new  foreign  Islamic  banks  are  now  participating  in  our 
domestic  financial  system.  Following  further  liberalisation  measures,  there  is  also  increased  foreign 
participation in our domestic Islamic financial institutions. Our takaful industry has also become one of 
the success stories in Islamic finance. In the four new licences issued recently, it has comprised of 
joint  ventures  with  foreign  participation.  The  Malaysian  bond  market  has  also  been  liberalised  to 
enable  foreign  entities  to  raise  funds  in  our  domestic  market.  Our  experience  in  launching  the  first 
Sukuk  has  drawn  significant  interest  by  corporates  and  sovereigns  for  raising  long-term  financing 
based on Islamic structure instruments.  
Following  these  developments  we  are  now  entering  a  new  phase  in  the  development  of  Islamic 
financial system in Malaysia with the new initiatives to promote Malaysia as an International Islamic 
Financial  Centre.  This  aims  at  strengthening  our  economic  and  financial  inter-linkages  and  thus 
promoting  greater  trade  and  investment  across  borders.  This  is  therefore  the  beginning  of  a  new 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
phase  of  development  for  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  as  it  becomes  more  integrated  with  the 
international financial system.  
We have set high standards in market coverage and broadening of Islamic financial products being 
offered to the market. The challenge is for the financial institutions to have a more extensive outreach. 
Islamic  finance  must  promote  greater  financial  inclusion  involving  all  levels  of  the  community. 
Opportunities also need to be created for Islamic financial products to have an outreach to the small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises.  Moreover,  financial  instruments  structured  under  the  Salam,  Istisna' 
and  Musyarakah  contracts  need  to  be  designed  to  stimulate  activities  in  those  sectors  such  as 
agriculture and manufacturing where there is limited participation by conventional finance. We need to 
reach those segments of society and economic activities that have not fully benefited from the success 
of Islamic finance.  
As  part  of  the  global  development  of  Islamic  finance,  of  equal  importance  is  the  supporting 
international architecture that is evolving. Both AAOIFI and IFSB have contributed significantly to the 
development  and  the  harmonisation  of  accounting  and  prudential  standards.  This  will  allow  for  the 
potential of strengthening the inter-linkages across borders to take place.  
The  conventional  banking  as  a  more  matured  market  has  also  continued  to  grow  and  prosper  in 
Malaysia.  Since  the  beginning,  it  has  attracted  dominant  global  players.  There  are  fourteen  100% 
owned banks  in  our  financial  system  that  accounts  for  almost  one  third  of  the  market share.  In  the 
insurance  sector  the  foreign  participation  is  even  greater.  In  conventional  finance,  Malaysia  is 
therefore already highly integrated with the international financial system. This has been reinforced by 
the progressive liberalisation of our capital account which now allows for the free inflow and outflow of 
funds.  Our  financial  system  has  therefore  facilitated  Malaysia  's  strong  international  economic  and 
financial  linkages  which  have  for  several  decades  contributed  to  our  economic  growth  and 
development.  
In  this  competitive  global  environment,  new  challenges  and  risks  can  be  expected  to  continuously 
emerge. The growing world wide participation in Islamic finance as a form of financial intermediation in 
this highly challenging environment has demonstrated its viability and competitiveness. This dynamic 
environment in which we operate will thus require continued developments to be pursued on all fronts.  
The discourse among the expertise in the field will not only provide us with further insights into the 
issues and challenges of coexistence not only in our domestic systems but also in the international 
financial  system.  This  will  contribute  to  the  awareness  and  understanding  of  the  journey  for  the 
sustainable development of Islamic finance.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On this note, I wish you a successful and productive discourse. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2007
