Nout Wellink: Microfinance – small loans, big differences 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the Roosevelt Academy, Middelburg, 1 June 2007. 
 Today  is  special.  You  represent  the  very  first  graduation  year  of  the  Roosevelt  Academy,  and 
undoubtedly there awaits a bright future for you all wherein chances of success will abound. Clearly 
your  accomplishment  also  signals  the  big  achievement  by  the  Academy  and  its  faculty  members. 
Today, I wish to talk to you about another success story, namely that of microcredit. 
The  UN  designated  2005  the  International  Year  of  Microcredit.  The  aim  was  “building  inclusive 
financial sectors and strengthening the powerful, but often untapped, entrepreneurial spirit existing in 
communities around the world.” The Year of Microcredit has proved highly successful. It has raised 
awareness around the globe about the importance of microfinance in fighting poverty and empowering 
the  poor  by  enhancing  higher  incomes  and  more  jobs.  In  other  words,  microfinance  can  promote 
economic and social inclusion. 
Permit me to address the issue of microfinance in greater depth. “Microfinance” generally stands for 
financial services for the poor. Microfinance is important because well over three billion people do not 
have access to basic financial services such as credit, savings accounts and insurance. Microfinance 
can offer such basic financial services, which is of prime importance to these people. These financial 
services  are  provided  by  so-called  "microfinance  institutions"  (MFIs)  or  "microlenders",  which  are 
simply  generic  terms  for  the  estimated  10,000  diverse  entities  such  as  commercial  banks,  NGOs, 
credit unions, finance companies etc. While from now on I will have microcredit in mind when referring 
to microfinance in general, please keep in mind that microfinance services are much broader and also 
include  insurance,  deposit  taking  and  sometimes  even  pensions.  However,  the  most  important 
element of microfinance today is still micro credit. 
Let  me  therefore  begin  by  explaining  what  microcredit  is,  how  it  works  and  whether  it  helps  poor 
people  to  improve  their  living  standards.  Thereafter  I  will  discuss  the  market  for  microcredit.  In 
particular, I will focus on initiatives that have been taken in the Netherlands. With pride I can say that 
the  Netherlands  is  amongst  the  frontrunners  when  it  comes  to  developing  and  supporting  new 
initiatives  in  the  field  of  microfinance.  The  fact  that  Her  Royal  Highness  princess  Maxima  was  a 
member  of  the  Advisors  Group  to  the  United  Nations  International  Year  of  Microcredit  2005  has 
undoubtedly contributed to the growing involvement of the Dutch in microfinance. And, she continues 
her work as a member of the UN Advisory Group on Inclusive Financial Sectors. Finally, by way of a 
conclusion I will identify some challenges for the future. 
Microcredit – what is it? 
Microcredit  is  the  extension  of  very  small  loans  (micro  loans)  to  the  unemployed,  to  poor 
entrepreneurs  and  to  others  living  in  poverty  who  are  not  considered  bankable.  These  individuals 
typically lack collateral, steady employment and a verifiable credit history. Therefore they cannot meet 
even  minimal  qualifications  to  gain  access  to  traditional  credit.  Microcredit  is  a  financial  innovation 
which  originated  in  developing  countries  where  it  has  successfully  enabled  extremely  impoverished 
people (mostly women) to engage in self-employment projects that allow them to generate income and 
to begin to build wealth and ultimately to exit poverty. Thanks to the success of micro credit, many 
people in the traditional banking industry have begun to realize that these microcredit borrowers can 
be seen as pre-bankable. Microcredit is gaining credibility in the mainstream finance industry. Many 
traditional  large  finance  organizations  are  now  considering  microcredit  projects  as  a  new  source  of 
future growth. 
How does microcredit work? 
As  you  all  know,  microfinance  has  been  invented  by  Nobel  Prize  laureate  Muhammad  Yunus,  who 
was here last year when he received the Four Freedoms Award by the Roosevelt Foundation. In the 
1970’s  Professor  Yunus  was  working  at  the  Chitttagong  University  in  Bangladesh.  At  that  time,  he 
started  experimenting  with  providing  small  loans  to  the  people  in  the  villages  surrounding  the 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
university. In 1976 he started the now famous Grameen Bank with help from the government. The goal 
was  simple:  providing  small  loans  to  the  very  poor.  Regular  banks  would  not  provide  such  loans 
because they considered them too risky – poor people typically lack collateral – and too costly. The 
small  scale  of  the  loans  and  high  monitoring  costs  for  each  individual  loan  typically  increase 
operational costs.  
An interesting feature of Grameen bank’s initial lending methodology is that loans were provided to 
groups rather than to individuals. Let me briefly illustrate how some of those first schemes worked in 
practice. Two members of a five-person group receive their loans first. If all instalments are paid on 
time, the initial loans are followed four to six weeks later by loans to two other members. After another 
four to six weeks, the remaining member, known as the group chairperson, receives his or her loan – 
of  course  provided  all  goes  well.  In  the  beginning  the  group  was  typically  seen  as  a  source  of 
solidarity. For example, when one member could not repay the loan, the group chairman could help 
out. In this way the credit record of the defaulted borrower would remain clean, and thereby also that 
of the group as a whole. Over time, formal sanctions by the bank became more common. If one or 
more  group  members  failed  to  repay,  all  group  members  would  be  cut  off  from  future  loans.  The 
incentive to help each other out in times of need, but also to check on each others repayment record, 
became stronger through this joint liability system. 
In practice the group lending methodology functioned well, as repayment rates were generally high. 
Group  lending  is  not  only  beneficial  for  the  poor  people  as  they  gain  access  to  credit,  it  is  also  an 
advantage for the microfinance institution that is providing the loans. Part of the responsibilities of the 
microfinance institution, such as monitoring loans and enforcing repayments, are taken care of through 
the group’s own checks and balances. In this way the operational costs of microfinance have reduced 
and it becomes possible to give poor people loans that would otherwise not be available or at least 
would  not  be  available  at  such  low  interest  rates.  The  group  lending  methodology  thus  increases 
social capital and efficiency.  
Effect on poverty and economic development 
With innovative concepts such as group lending it is possible to give poor people access to credit. An 
obvious next question is: what does this credit do for them? Can people actually improve their living 
standards with the help of micro credit? There are basically two ways to answer this question. The first 
way is to look at the data and the available scientific studies and carefully assess the results. This is 
how central bankers typically approach economic questions. The second way is to pack your bags, 
hop  on  an  airplane,  and  see  for  your  self  how  microcredit  affects  the  lives  of  people  in  developing 
countries.  Let’s  start  with  the  second  approach,  which  is  not  so  common  for  central  bankers,  but 
undoubtedly no less illuminating. 
My personal experience with microfinance in Ghana has been very positive. And this holds for many 
observers  who  have  witnessed  the  activities  of  microfinance  institutions  on  the  ground.  But  is 
microcredit really an effective means to alleviate poverty? Are the high expectations justified and can 
we establish a clear causality between microfinance and higher socio-economic welfare? To answer 
this question, we have to go beyond personal experience and also look at the data and results of the 
available  scientific  studies.  However,  there  has  been  surprisingly  little  scientific  work  on  the 
effectiveness of microfinance programs. According to some experts this may be explained by the fact 
that  many  donors  who  finance  microfinance  institutions  are  focussed  on  reaching  as  many  poor 
people as possible. Evaluating programmes is often seen as a waste of time and money – and let me 
say that from a practical point of view such a perception is understandable. 
But, from a broader policy point of view, it is important to know which concepts work best and which 
concepts  are  less  effective.  Careful  experimentation  with  sound  control  groups  may  provide  such 
insights. Another explanation for the limited degree of scientific evaluation is lack of data. Often there 
are  simply  not  enough  data  available  to  study  the  effectiveness  of  microfinance.  Moreover,  the 
available  data  may  be  of  limited  use  because,  for  example,  accounting  definitions  differ  between 
institutions  in  the  microfinance  industry.  I  therefore  welcome  recent  initiatives,  for  example  by  the 
World  Bank,  to  improve  the  quality  of  reliable  data  to  increase  our  current  knowledge.  With  these 
shortcomings  in  mind,  the  available  studies  provide  a  rather  positive  picture  of  microfinance  and 
confirm my personal observations. It turns out that microcredit helps people to increase their income 
through entrepreneurial activities. The effects are often larger for women than for men and seem to 
diminish  if  the  size  of  the  loan  increases.  This  latter  result  suggests  that  the  smallest  loans  can 
actually make the biggest difference! And that women remain an important target group. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
The market for microcredit and initiatives in the Netherlands 
The prospect for the microcredit industry in general is strong. The market is growing rapidly and supply 
can hardly keep up with demand. It is estimated that only 4 percent of global demand for microfinance 
services is being met. Note that the potential global microfinance market is worth roughly $300 billion, 
although  estimates  vary  widely.  Also,  with  the  growing  development  of  the  microfinance  sector, 
sources of funding for MFIs have diversified. Official donors are no longer the primary source, as tens 
of microfinance funds and more and more private sector investors are also offering capital to MFIs and 
are rapidly commercialising microfinance. These investors are typically private-sector funding arms of 
donors  and  socially  motivated,  privately-managed  investment  funds  financed  by  public  and  private 
capital.  Although  both  types  of  investors  generally  take  a  commercial  approach  in  the  rigor  of  their 
investment  analysis  and  monitoring,  they  are  not  always  fully  commercial  in  the  sense  of  trying  to 
maximise profit. 
The Dutch involvement in microfinance has not been left to chance. On the contrary, already in 1997 
the  first  effort  was  made  to  co-ordinate  microfinance  activities  by  several  co-financing  agencies 
(Cordaid,  Hivos,  Interchurch  Organisation  for  Development  Co-operation  and  Novib)  and  their  main 
funder the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. With the growing involvement of other private and commercial 
organisations in microfinance there was a need to include a larger and more diverse group of actors in 
this initiative. So, in January 2003 thirteen organisations agreed to formalise their efforts to co-ordinate 
and  work  together.  They  jointly  established  the  Netherlands  Platform  for  Microfinance.  Dutch 
organisations  that  support  the  microfinance  sectors  in  developing  countries  through  investments  or 
subsidies can join. Since its establishment the Platform has grown to comprise fifteen organisations. 
To give you some idea of what the Platform does: in 2005 the Platform invested over Eur 360 million in 
the form of loans, equity investments, guarantees, seed capital and subsidies; this is up more than 
50% from the Eur 225 million in 2004! These investments reached more than 550 organisations in 78 
countries that offer financial services to poor people, ranging from community-based organisations, co-
operatives,  non-governmental  organisations,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  A  large  share  of 
this  money  has  been  invested  in  Latin  America,  followed  by  Asia,  Central  and  Eastern  Europe. 
Surprisingly, Africa has the lowest share (around 12%). The West still seems to lack the commitment 
to truly help this continent forward. The distribution over the four regions has by and large remained 
steady  over  the  last  three  years.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  in  general  microfinance  markets  have 
matured,  especially  in  Latin  America,  compared  to  the  development  of  the  sector  on  the  African 
continent. But, although the market for microfinance is growing and more and more organisations are 
supporting this development, there remain important challenges for the future.  
Challenges for the future – by way of conclusion 
If  we  truly  wish  to  succeed  in  providing  microfinance  services  to  the  poor  on  a  large  scale,  further 
contributions  are  desperately  needed.  This  is  not  only  an  issue  of  financing.  Regulators  and 
governments,  in  particular,  need  to  develop  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  for  microfinance, 
consumer  protection,  and  financial  infrastructure.  Also  prudential  supervisors  –  and  as  a  prudential 
supervisor myself I find this very important – can contribute to the growth of microfinance by defining 
clear  criteria  for  microfinance  institutions.  This  pertains  in  particular  to  institutions  that  wish  to  take 
deposits from the public or expand their services cross sectorally. And, last but not least, perhaps you 
yourselves as successful graduates of the Roosevelt Academy can also make a contribution to the 
success  of  microfinance,  as  future  investors,  entrepreneurs,  or  simply  by  telling  others  in  your 
environment about the potential of microfinance. The latter can actually prove to be very effective, as 
you undoubtedly have a bright future as the next generation of influential professionals in our society. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
