Alan Bollard: Easy money – global liquidity and its impact on New Zealand 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Wellington 
Chamber of Commerce, Wellington, 15 March 2007. 
 What has been happening to global liquidity? 
1.  
Globalisation  has  had  major  effects  on  the  New  Zealand  economy  over  the  last  decade  or  two. 
Monetary policy has certainly not been immune. Some of the impact has been very helpful to us in our 
primary task of achieving price stability. We have enjoyed a useful disinflationary impact from the flood 
of  cheap  manufactures  available  from  China  and  other  newly  industrialising  countries.  We  have 
enjoyed the benefits of trading with a buoyant world that has been enjoying good stable growth rates 
with stable prices. More recently however, we have had to focus on a related phenomenon which has 
had some unanticipated effects: the growth of global liquidity. 
Global liquidity has increased dramatically over recent years. In our part of the world, this reflects:  
a surplus of savings relative to investment in the East Asian and oil-exporting countries;  
• 
new players, new products, new transactions and markets; and in particular  
• 
• 
the impact of the “carry trade” fuelling investment flows into a range of markets. 
A feature of the period of relatively strong growth in the world economy over the past several years 
has been large and growing financial imbalances among the world’s major economies. The US current 
account deficit has increased significantly over this period, although it has stabilised over the past year 
relative to the size of the US economy. Meanwhile, most East Asian countries have consistently run 
current account surpluses since recovering from the 1997/98 financial crisis, when many experienced 
deficits. More recently, the rise in oil prices has underpinned a substantial increase in the surpluses of 
the oil exporting nations. 
Figure 1: Current account balances 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, September 2006; RBNZ 
BIS Review 25/2007 
  1
These relative current account positions broadly reflect the contrasting balances between saving and 
investment in these countries. In the case of the deficit countries – such as the US, Australia and New 
Zealand – investment has exceeded saving, with the excess savings of surplus countries financing the 
shortfall.  Excess  savings  relative  to  investment  amongst  the  surplus  countries  has  increased 
substantially since the late 1990s, led by Asia, a range of developing countries and more recently the 
oil exporters. This has given rise to a phenomenon that US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke 
has referred to as a “global savings glut”.1  
Figure 2: Gross saving and investment 
 Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, September 2006; Economics@ANZ 
For many of these countries – particularly the developing economies – this represents a considerably 
different  set  of  circumstances  to  that  existing  prior  to  the  late  1990s,  when  developing  economies 
(including  many  of  those  in  Asia)  were  net  recipients  of  capital.  In  the  case  of  the  developing 
economies  in  Asia,  the  response  to  the  1997/98  financial  crisis has  been  to focus  on  export-driven 
growth  and  the  associated  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  –  a  strategy  that  most  are 
continuing  to  pursue  almost  a  decade  after  the  crisis.  The  strength  of  exports  relative  to  domestic 
demand has seen saving outstrip investment in most of these economies – even in the case of China, 
where investment growth has been very strong. Accordingly, we have the ironic situation whereby a 
range of developing countries are (in net terms) the providers of capital to some of the world’s most 
developed  economies.  This  rapidly  rising  “savings  glut”  has  been  a  principal  source  of  increased 
global liquidity. 
                                                      
1  
“The Global Saving Glut and the US Current Account Deficit”, March 2005 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2007
Figure 3: Capital flows to developing economies 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, September 2006; Economics@ANZ 
  How is this being recycled? 
2.  
Along  with  financial  deregulation  and  the  general  opening  up  of  economies,  the  flow  of  increased 
global  liquidity  through  markets  has  provided  the  impetus  for  many  changes.  In  a  recent  speech2, 
Malcolm Knight, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, highlighted a number of 
important new features:  
• 
the  unbundling  and  re-pricing  of  risk  through  major  advances  in  financial  engineering, 
resulting  in  improved  ability  to  lever  lending  via  new  markets  such  as  for  credit  transfer 
products;  
the emergence of new financial players such as hedge funds and private equity firms that 
have not been traditional intermediaries;  
more reliance of financial firms on markets to handle growing complexity;  
a reliance on market liquidity even in stress situations; and  
a surge in volume and value of transactions. 
• 
• 
• 
The  search  for  means  to  generate  a  return  on  this  liquidity  has  spurred  massive  growth  in 
securitisation  of  debt  and  the  development  of  a  vast  array  of  derivatives.  The  propagation  of  these 
instruments can itself be seen as a source of liquidity growth and, by some estimates, a substantial 
one at that. From a monetary policy perspective, this implies a very big increase in the liquidity that is 
not directly controlled by central banks. 
                                                      
2  
“Now you see it, now you don’t: risk in the small and in the large”, February 2007 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 3
Figure 4: Estimates of global liquidity 
Source: Independent Strategy 
A particular development of interest to us has been the increasing integration of housing finance into 
these liquid international markets. A recent article in the Financial Times3 reports on a significant slice 
of new mortgages in Hungary being issued in Swiss francs while households in Latvia and Romania 
are borrowing in yen. The article then goes on to focus on what they see as one of the biggest flows, 
the bonds denominated in NZ dollars by European and Asian issuers. 
 What are the global effects of this liquidity? 
3.  
The  flows  associated  with  the  growth  of  global  liquidity  has  played  a  role  in  helping  to  prolong  the 
period of strong global growth seen in recent years. The associated search for yield has pushed down 
interest rates, bid up equity prices and generally put downward pressure on returns across a range of 
asset classes.  
Many of these effects have been clearly welfare-enhancing. But in contrast to how markets might have 
reacted a decade ago, it has also allowed less disciplined economic behaviour by some households 
and firms. It has allowed global imbalances, particularly those associated with the contrasting current 
account positions of the major economies, to build up and persist beyond what might have previously 
been considered sustainable. It has meant that when large economies operate with distortions in their 
own markets, those distortions can be felt halfway around the world. 
Risk  appetites  in  global  financial  markets  have  generally  been  very  strong  in  recent  years.  This 
perhaps reflects the extended period of relatively strong growth in the world economy underpinning 
investor confidence. This confidence has been bolstered by generally low market volatility, which has 
also lowered perceptions of risk.  
                                                      
3  
“Why the yen borrowing game could end in players taking a tumble”, 14 February 2007 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2007
Figure 5: Risk aversion and market volatility 
Source: Bloomberg; DataStream 
Perceptions of a relatively benign risk environment have provided the basis for investors to engage in 
a vast range of so-called “carry trades”. These involve borrowing to invest in an asset that is either 
yielding  –  or  is  expected  to  yield  –  a  higher  rate  of  return  than  the  borrowing  cost.  In  this  regard, 
relatively  low  risk  aversion  and  market  volatility  are  important  conditions  for  carry  trades,  so  that 
traders  are  less  fearful  that  sharp  market  moves  could  eliminate  the  expected  yield  differential. 
Currency  carry  trades,  whereby  investors  borrow  in  low  interest  rate  currencies  to  invest  in  higher 
interest rate currencies, have been some of the most popular. Relatively low interest rates in some 
economies, particularly Japan and Switzerland, have been used as the basis for a raft of leveraged 
investments and in so doing have further fuelled global liquidity. 
 Figure 6: Global policy rates 
Source: DataStream 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 5
The  events  of  the  past  few  weeks  have  provided  a  timely  reminder  of  the  importance  of  low  risk 
aversion  and  market  volatility  for  the  carry  trade.  Fears  sparked  by  a  sharp  retracement  in  China’s 
share  market  and  growing  concerns  regarding  the  ramifications  of  problems  in  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage market saw investors rush to reduce positions in a range of markets. Notably, this episode 
saw currency carry trades scaled back, with funding currencies strengthening and recipient currencies 
weakening – although the sell-off proved highly correlated across a wide range of asset classes. This 
period  of  turbulence  has  proved  relatively  contained  to  date,  with  risk  appetites  and  markets 
recovering. But it does demonstrate the potential widespread impact of an increase in risk aversion 
and market volatility. 
Figure 7: Market developments since the beginning of the year 
Source: Bloomberg 
 How does it impact on the NZ economy? 
4. 
Given our relatively high interest rates, New Zealand has attracted a disproportionate share of global 
liquidity  in  recent  years,  putting  upward  pressure  on  the  NZ  dollar  despite  a relatively  large  current 
account deficit. These flows have come in many forms. One particular avenue has been the issuance 
of  NZ  dollar  denominated  bonds  in  offshore  markets:  Eurokiwi  and  Uridashi  bonds.  The  derivative 
transactions associated with Eurokiwi and Uridashi issuance have provided a mechanism for the New 
Zealand banks to hedge the interest rate and currency risks associated with their offshore borrowings 
at cheaper rates than would otherwise have been the case. The upward pressure this has put on the 
New Zealand dollar and downward pressure on interest rates has exacerbated the current problematic 
imbalance between traded and non-traded sectors in New Zealand. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2007
Figure 8: Offshore NZ dollar denominated bond issuance (Eurokiwi & Uridashi bonds) 
Source: Reuters; Bloomberg; RBNZ 
But it is important to recognise that the attractiveness of the NZ dollar for offshore investors is not just 
a reflection of the current level of interest rate differentials, but also investors’ views regarding their 
sustainability.  In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  relatively  close  correlation  between  house 
prices and the NZ dollar over the last 15 years. Without claiming a direct relationship between the two, 
this  goes  some  way  to  illustrate  the  extent  to  which  persist  domestic  inflation  pressures  have 
underpinned the outlook for interest rates, which in turn has maintained upward pressure on the NZ 
dollar. Accordingly, a sustained retracement in the NZ dollar from the highs seen in recent years could 
be contingent on our efforts to rein in domestic inflation pressures. 
 Figure 9: House prices and the NZ dollar Trade Weighted Index (TWI) 
Source: Quotable Value; RBNZ 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 7
Of course the inward capital flows that have kept pressure on the NZ dollar would not have happened 
without a strong domestic demand for borrowing. In this case it is New Zealand households’ desire to 
keep  investing  in  housing,  while  at  the  same  time  consuming  strongly,  that  fuels  their  demand  for 
funds, and represents the other leg to these international transactions. 
How does it affect monetary policy? 
5.  
No central banker today can ignore these effects on domestic monetary policy. A recent speech by 
Ben Bernanke4 observed that financial market globalisation has made the Fed’s analysis much more 
complex. He notes that even for the US there is no such thing as total monetary independence. For 
example, correlations between long term interest rates in the US and other industrial countries have 
risen significantly. Having said that, he concludes that, despite Alan Greenspan’s term of “conundrum”, 
this has not significantly constrained their ability to influence domestic financial conditions. 
This is more problematic for a number of small open economies with higher interest rates – not only 
New Zealand, but also Iceland, Hungary, Australia and South Africa. The downward pressure created 
by abundant global liquidity on market interest rates has had implications for the operation of monetary 
policy. In general terms, the Reserve Bank has most impact on the shorter end of the yield curve, both 
by setting the OCR itself and influencing market expectations about the outlook for monetary policy. 
But further out the yield curve, other factors – including global interest rate developments and country 
risk premia – also influence interest rate levels. 
Figure 10: A stylised representation of the relative influences on the yield curve 
Source: RBNZ 
Low global interest rates have restrained the rise in longer-term interest rates relative to the upward 
pressure monetary policy has been able to exert on shorter-term interest rates during this tightening 
cycle.  This  has  seen  the  yield  curve  progressively  flatten  and  become  negatively-sloped  during  the 
past few years. 
                                                       
4  
“Globalisation and Monetary Policy”, March 2007 
8 
 BIS Review 25/2007
Figure 11: The change in the yield curve since the beginning of the tightening cycle 
Source: Bloomberg 
Figure 12: New Zealand and US long term interest rates 
  Source: Bloomberg 
A negatively-sloped yield curve has encouraged borrowers to take out term loans at relatively lower 
rates. Households in particular have favoured fixed rate mortgages, which now account for more than 
80 percent of mortgage borrowing, and increasingly for longer terms. This has muted and delayed the 
impact of policy tightening in this cycle, although we have now seen the effective mortgage rate rise by 
around 110 basis points since its lows in late 2003. 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 9
Figure 13: The OCR and the effective mortgage rate 
Source: RBNZ 
A further practical constraint for us has been that, although the TWI is influenced by a wide range of 
global events, in recent years we have not wished to add to upward pressure on the NZ dollar. We 
have  also  remained  conscious  of  our  obligation  to  avoid  unnecessary  instability  in  output,  the 
exchange rate and interest rates, as required under section 4b of the Policy Targets Agreement. This 
has meant we have been more cautious in our OCR tightening path than might otherwise have been 
the case. 
 New Zealand policy in a global context 
6. 
The circumstances we face at present do not necessarily represent an enduring structural change in 
the  environment  in  which  policy  operates.  At  some  stage  in  the  future  when  the  large  East  Asian 
trading blocs are able to trade currencies and products with the world at more sustainable prices, a 
significant distortion to our own rate setting process will be removed. However, for that we must wait 
for G-7, Doha and other international forces to do their work. 
As for New Zealand, we need to see realisation amongst borrowing households and lending banks 
that this recent period of cheap international money has been unusual, and at some point will revert to 
more normal financial conditions. That means thinking about other eventualities ahead, and in some 
cases showing less exuberance. 
Monetary policy always impacts with long and variable lags. Those lags have been longer in this cycle, 
but as household debt grows the OCR becomes a more potent policy instrument. We are continuing to 
assess  alternative  measures  that  might  support  the  OCR,  working  with  the  relevant  government 
agencies. These include a tightening of tax rules applying to housing investment and changes to bank 
capital requirements to help moderate the amplifying effect of credit on the housing cycle. However, 
we will continue to rely on the OCR as the primary instrument of monetary policy. 
10 
 BIS Review 25/2007
