Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Sri Lanka and its battle against money laundering and 
terrorist financing activities 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
Commonwealth  Secretariat  Programme  on  Financial 
Investigations  Training,  Colombo, 
22-26 January 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure that I welcome you to the inaugural ceremony of this conference and extend to all 
overseas participants and representatives a very warm welcome to our country. I am also very happy 
to be able to share a few thoughts with you at this Forum about the progress Sri Lanka has made in its 
battle against Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing activities. 
Sri Lanka has given serious recognition to the need for preventing money laundering and combating 
the financing of terrorism in view of their adverse consequences both economic and social. In fact, Sri 
Lanka has been a victim of terrorist financing and suffered immensely by its consequences. As we all 
know,  money  laundering  and  financing  of  terrorism  promote  criminal  activities,  endanger  financial 
system stability and misallocate resources into non-productive investments. The Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka  has  a  special  concern  about  these  adverse  consequences,  as  it  has  a  mandate  to  maintain 
financial system stability together with economic and price stability. It is in this context that the Central 
Bank  has  pledged,  in  its  policy  statement,  “Road  Map:  Monetary  and  Financial  Sector  Policies  for 
2007 and Beyond” that it would expand the work of Financial Intelligence and actively investigate and 
take actions to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. 
In the years 2005 and 2006 Sri Lanka made considerable headway in this regard. The main actions in 
this  context  were  the  enactment  of  three  laws,  namely,  The  Convention  on  the  Suppression  of 
Terrorist  Financing  Act,  The  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Act,  and  the  Financial  Transactions 
Reporting  Act.  The  FTR  Act  created  the  institutional  body  of  the  FIU  with  regulatory  powers  and  a 
mandate to formulate policies and guidelines to meet the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 40 + 9 
recommendations. This legislative package was the outcome of an in-depth consultation initiated by 
an  inter-ministerial  committee  which  engaged  the  stakeholders  such  as  the  banks  and  professional 
bodies. In the preparation of the legislation, the inter-ministerial committee closely liaised with the IMF 
in  order  to  ensure  that  legislation  complied  with  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  40+  9 
recommendations. 
Even prior to the enactment of this legislation in Sri Lanka, there have been certain punitive measures 
in place, to discourage individuals from using the country’s financial institutions for Money Laundering 
and Financing of Terrorism activities. These measures were taken under the Exchange Control Act; 
the  Customs  Ordinance  and  the  Banking  Act.  Pending  the  enactment  of  the  new  legislation,  the 
Central Bank too issued as far back as 2001, ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC) guidelines to all banks and 
urged adherence when dealing with clients and counterparties. We cannot however be satisfied with 
the  results  because  it  is  unlikely  that  terrorism  activity  in  particular,  on  the  scale  that  has  been 
unleashed in Sri Lanka, could have taken place if these measures to combat terrorism financing and 
money  laundering  had  in  fact  been  effective.  We  believe,  the  measures  introduced  have  only 
marginally deterred terrorism financing from delivering such ill-gotten funds to destabilize our country, 
particularly before 9/11/2001. As many know, Sri Lanka has been crying foul for many years about 
fund raising for terrorism, taking place in many countries, where the funds were used to procure and 
supply weapons to wage terrorist activity in our country. Sadly, our pleas were not taken too seriously. 
But the world took greater note of this scourge after 9/11/2001.  
Fortunately for us, post 9/11, anti money laundering and terrorism financing measures were pursued 
with vigour at international level and these processes have been evolving rapidly in recent years. The 
international  community  has  witnessed  the  use  of  increasingly  sophisticated  methods  to  curtail  the 
move of illicit funds through the financial systems across the globe. Sri Lanka, naturally, was keen to 
support this global effort and soon established a comprehensive legal and institutional framework for 
anti-money  laundering  and  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism.  Hence,  the  enactment  of  the 
legislation  by  our  country’s  legislature  is  welcomed  by  all  of  us  who  value  stable  economies  and 
peaceful  societies.  Due  to  the  scale  and  magnitude  of  the  heightened  global  interest  in  Money 
Laundering and Terrorist Financing, international obligations too, required many countries to introduce 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 1
legislation. In fact, in terms of their international obligations the legislative approach pursued by many 
countries, including Sri Lanka, has been in the context of Security Council Resolution 1373 dealing, 
inter alia, with financing of terrorism and the International Convention on the suppression of financing 
of  terrorism.  These  agreements  have,  to  a  great  extent,  unified  the  world  in  its  fight  to  meet  this 
challenge and, I dare say, the closing of ranks among the countries of the world, would have certainly 
helped  to  curtail  terrorism  which  may  otherwise  have  reached  unimaginable  levels,  thereby 
threatening world peace in general and the world economy in particular.  
Let me now say a few words about our own efforts in this sphere of activity. 
The initial phase of establishing a comprehensive framework for anti money laundering and combating 
financial  terrorism  in  Sri  Lanka  was  focused  on  the  preparation  of  the  draft  legislation.  With  the 
passage of legislation, our efforts were then directed towards setting up of the infrastructure for the 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). We now have a fully operational FIU established in the Central Bank, 
the  apex  institution  in  the  financial  system  in  Sri  Lanka,  to  meet  both  its  local  and  international 
obligations. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  Sri  Lanka  is  presently  engaged  in  a  valiant  effort  to  control  many  terrorist 
activities  waged  by  the  LTTE,  a  Group  acknowledged  worldwide  as  a  Terrorist  movement.  USA, 
Canada, the EU and many other countries have banned this movement due to flagrant human rights 
violations  and  inhuman  acts  of  terror.  They  have  been  designated  as  a  terrorist  group  by  most 
countries in the western hemisphere. As has been recognized worldwide, the most effective manner to 
undermine  and  defeat  terrorist  activities  is  to  stop  or  curb  its  funding  sources.  Notwithstanding  the 
bans,  the  LTTE  has extended  its  tentacles  in North America,  the  European  Union and Australia.  In 
response, those countries and nations are today taking meaningful steps to stop these fund raising 
activities and taking the perpetrators of such crimes to justice and we deeply appreciate such moves. 
The Government of Sri Lanka is dedicated to winning the support of all countries in this regard through 
the exchange of information on a bi-lateral basis which would enhance bi-lateral co-operation through 
a  structured  exchange  of  information.  Only  last  week,  one  such  initiative  with  Switzerland  was 
commenced  where  fruitful  discussions  were  held  to  establish  a  framework  and  modalities  for 
structured co-operation. It has also been recognized that efforts to combat the financing of terrorism 
require jurisdictions to expand the scope of the anti money laundering framework to include non profit 
organizations and, in particular, some dubious charities. This is to ensure that such organizations are 
not used, directly or indirectly, to finance and support terrorism. We are in possession of information of 
how  certain  so-called  charities  have  been  able  to  even  hoodwink  international  agencies  to  donate 
funds  to  them  for,  seemingly,  charitable  or  humanitarian  causes,  but  which  have,  instead,  been 
channeled for the upkeep of terrorist cadres and the provision of supplies to assist the terrorist effort. 
Natural disasters such as the Tsunami have also unwittingly lent a humanitarian face and ample cover 
to such activities. We, therefore, urge the co-operation of global and regional countries to trace and 
eliminate  such  funding  programmes  and  to  be  extremely  vigilant  when  dealing  with  organizations 
which  may  well  be  front  organizations  to  finance  terrorism.  In  this  respect  it  need  hardly  be 
emphasized that financial intelligence sharing is fundamental to this strategy. The FTRA enables the 
FIUs to enter into agreements with other FIUs to exchange information. Obviously therefore, as our 
FIU moves forward, we will give this matter our highest priority. 
The International Monetary Fund has estimated that the aggregate amounts of funds laundered in the 
world  could  range  between  2  to  5  per  cent  of  the  global  GDP.  Given  the  estimated  global  GDP  of 
approximately  USD  48  Trillion,  this  could  range  between  USD  1  -  2.4  Trillion.  Accordingly,  by  any 
estimate  the  size  of  the  problem  is  gigantic  and  merits  the  focus  of  all  jurisdictions.  Missions  from 
agencies  such  as  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  have  identical  goals  in  terms  of  money  laundering  and 
combating the financing of terrorism. We are indeed  very pleased to note that there are also many 
other agencies outside the IMF and WB taking an active role, and often working jointly in an effort to 
achieve these common goals. We commend these efforts.  
Together with the establishment of a legal and institutional framework for anti money laundering and 
combating terrorist financing, it is equally important to raise public awareness on issues pertaining to 
money laundering and financing of terrorism, and introduce more effective ways of preventing such 
actions by sharing experiences of other countries. It is not for nothing that the phrase “prevention is 
better than cure” has been coined. It is therefore our fervent hope that this workshop will, in the next 5 
days achieve this objective and also establish a framework for a regional dialogue to: 
• 
Share the lessons of success and failure; 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2007
  Identify specific problems common to countries of the region; 
Discuss  future  challenges  common  to  participating  countries  particularly  in  the  context  of 
effective programmes already implemented to fight money laundering and terrorist financing,  
Identify  practical  means  of  sustaining  economic  development  and  maintaining  financial 
system stability in the face of such terrorist threats.  
While thanking the Commonwealth Secretariat and all those who have made this Conference possible, 
we also commend our new FIU for the initiatives it has taken to organize this international event, so 
early in its existence. We urge you to discuss the many issues confronting our respective countries 
and  attempt  to  learn  from  each  other  as  well  as  from  the  broader  experiences  from  international 
experts and develop our skills and expertise. We also look forward to your report at the conclusion of 
your deliberations.  
Let us also offer all of you our continued co-operation in your collective endeavors to combat money 
laundering and terrorist financing activities.  
Finally,  we  wish  you  a  successful  learning  experience  and  hope  that  your  efforts  will  effectively 
contribute to the prevention and suppression of money laundering and financing of terrorism. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 3
