Ardian Fullani: Financial stability in Albania 
Address  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Workshop  “Catching-up  in 
South-Eastern Europe: The Role of the Financial Sector”, Tirana, 3 May 2007. 
 Honourable participants! 
Today’s workshop on “Catching-up in South-eastern Europe: The Role of the Financial Sector” is of 
special importance, because it is aimed at providing a panorama of the financial sector development 
trends in the countries of the region. Actually this seminar follows the VI Annual Conference of the 
Bank of Albania, held in October of the past year, which focussed on financial stability issues from the 
viewpoint of regional financial sector.  
We have the pleasure to have today the presence of Mr. Max Watson, an Economic Adviser to the 
Director  General  on  Economic  and  Financial  issues  at  the  European  Commission.  He  will  hold  a 
presentation about economic developments and financial systems of our region. Taking advantage of 
the opportunity of Mr. Watson’s presence in this workshop, I would like to inform you that the Bank of 
Albania has established a constant communication with the European Commission, as concerns to the 
country’s  economic  and  financial  developments  through  its  participation  in  some  periodic  meetings 
taking place annually between the Republic of Albania and the European Union.  
The  organisational,  legal,  operational  approximation  with  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks, 
stated also in the Bank of Albania’s Mid-term Development Strategy, remains one of its main strategic 
targets.  In  view  of  this,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  paid  special  attention  to  establishing  specific 
structures and creating human resources capable of being faced with various approximation phases 
and eventual membership to the European System of Central Banks. Also, approximation of laws and 
by-laws with the Acquis legislation remains of special importance. The Law “On the Banking System in 
the  Republic of  Albania”, passed  by  the  Parliament  on  December,  provides a  good example  in  this 
regard. 
Simultaneously,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  actively  contributed  to  the  maintaining  of  the  country’s 
macroeconomic  stability,  by  keeping  low  and  steady  inflation  rates  and  by  supervising  the  banking 
system prudentially.  It  is  aware  of  its role  as a  promoter  of  the country’s  economic  development,  a 
process that will naturally facilitate our integration into the European Union.  
Over  the  previous  year  our  economy  was  characterised  mainly  by  rapid  credit  growth.  The  loans 
portfolio reached lek 191.2 billion, or 21.3 percent of GDP at end of 2006. In absolute terms, credit to 
the economy grew by lek 69.3 billion, compared to the growth by lek 52 billion over the previous year. 
In 2006 the annual credit growth was 56.7 percent, providing good support for economic needs. The 
relatively high pace of banking system lending to the economy has also continued over the first quarter 
of  the  current  year,  drawing  our  attention,  as  the  regulatory  authority  of  the  banking  activity,  to  the 
need to monitor any risks this expansion may comprise.  
More  concretely,  this  growth  has  led  to  decrease  of  capital  adequacy  rate  and  liquidity;  however, 
banks have continued to be well-capitalised, liquid and profitable. Quarterly stress-tests carried out by 
us have indicated that the country’s banking system is flexible against any probable shocks relating to 
exchange rate, interest rates or credit quality. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  to  prudentially  monitor  the  rapid  credit  growth,  enhancing  its 
banking  supervision.  In  this  framework,  the  establishment  of  the  Credit  Registry,  expected  to  be 
carried out within December 2007 is of special importance. Currently, we are working for completing 
the legal framework that will enable the Registry establishment and functioning. At the same time, the 
decision is already made on selecting the company that will provide technical solutions to the Registry.  
We are confident that all these measures will contribute to the maintaining of credit quality and the 
financial stability of our country.  
Wishing you a fruitful workshop, I give the floor to Mr. Watson. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 42/2007 
 1
