X P Guma: The challenges facing the bond market in South Africa 
Remarks  by  Dr  X  P  Guma,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  High-level 
workshop on “Developing Bond Markets in Emerging Economies”, Frankfurt am Main, 9-10 May 2007. 
1.  
2.  
  Introduction 
Honourable Ministers, distinguished guests, fellow participants, ladies and gentlemen, let me 
begin by thanking the organisers of this workshop for having invited me to participate. It is 
always beneficial to interact with persons of the calibre present at this  
The initial invitation was subsequently upgraded to that of “speaking for about 15 minutes to 
shed some light on the challenge faced in South Africa”; a task to which I will devote the next 
14 minutes. Upgrades are not always without some pain! 
A brief review of the South African experience 
There exists at present a relatively sophisticated bond market in South Africa, which market 
has shown significant growth and development since the 1980s when the government issued 
bonds  only  on  demand:  that  is,  on  an  open-ended  tap  basis.  At  that  time,  there  were  no 
government  (or  other)  benchmark  bonds;  nor  could  any  refined  yield  curve  be  discerned 
because it did not exist. 
Issuance  and  secondary-market  trading  were  dominated  by  government  and  quasi-
government issued debt, the major issuers being the National Treasury, the Landbank and 
public  utilities  such  as  Eskom,  Telkom  and  Transnet.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
(SARB) served as the principal underwriter. 
Following an investigation by a Commission of Inquiry chaired by Dr J. Jacobs1, the market 
opted for self-regulation in the form of the Bond Market Association (BMA), comprising bond 
issuers, intermediaries, banks, brokers and investors. The SARB was a founding member of 
(and active participant in) this Association which attempted to formalise the market, achieve 
greater depth and increase transparency. 
In  1996,  the  BMA  was  granted  an  exchange  license  and  was  transformed  into  the  Bond 
Exchange of South Africa (BESA), a development that was facilitated, in part, by the decision 
taken  by  the  government  in  1989,  to  consolidate  smaller  issuances  in  order  to  create 
benchmark  bonds  and,  thereby,  enhance  the  liquidity  and  efficiency  of  this  market.  In 
addition, trading on the gilts floors of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange came to an end in 
November 1995, shifting to the BMA which then operated an informal screen and telephone 
trading  system  with  the  Universal  Exchange  Corporation  Ltd  (Unexcor)  serving  as  the 
clearing  house.  The  Rule  Book  and  the  principles  underlying  the  operation  of  the  market 
were  approved  in  March  1996  and  BESA  was  licensed  (and  started)  to  trade  on  15  May 
1996. 
Some  major  developments  subsequent  to  this  time  include  the  introduction  of  electronic 
trading,  matching  and  settlement;  the  immobilisation  and  later,  dematerialisation  of  bonds 
listed  on  BESA,  the  development  of  a  series  of  total-return  indices  for  government  and 
corporate bonds and the development of a more refined yield curve. 
Since  the  late  1990s,  the  South  African  bond  market  has  increased  in  depth  and 
sophistication. Developments include the introduction of inflation-linked bonds, floating rate 
notes,  a  strip  programme  (an  acronym  for  Separate  Trading  of  Registered  Interest  and 
Principal),  retail  bonds  and  municipal  bonds.  The  corporate  bond  market  has  also  grown 
substantially from net issuance of more than R10 billion in 2001 to net issuance of almost 
R70 billion in 2006. 
                                                      
1   See Jacobs, AJ (1988). The South African Bond  Market. Report  by the Committee appointed to examine the Market for 
Public Sector Securities. May. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 1
3.  
The development of the corporate bond market has been assisted by the decline in issuance 
of government bonds, a low interest rate environment – at least in relative terms-, mergers 
and acquisitions, the narrowing of spreads and improved liquidity. Significant also has been 
the  expansion  of  the  regional  dimension  of  this  market  with  the  raising,  by  the  Mauritius 
Commercial  Bank,  of  R350  million  –  the  first  inward-listed  bond  to  be  raised  by  a  non-
resident in South Africa. 
Regarding sophistication, it is the case that the role of the SARB has changed. In the past, 
the SARB served as an underwriter and then as a market-maker, quoting two-way prices in 
the secondary bond market. These activities ended in 1998 when the government adopted a 
system of regular, weekly, pre-announced auctions. A panel of 12 primary dealers – all being 
banks – was appointed to participate in the auctions which were, and still are, conducted by 
the SARB.2
The current conjuncture 
The  introduction  of  the  Global  Bond  Index  Emerging  Markets  (GBIEM+)  by  JP  Morgan, 
which tracks changes in emerging-market local-currency bond prices, has been particularly 
helpful  to  South  Africa,  given  that  most  of  the  country’s  debt  is  denominated  in  local 
currency, contrary to the practice in most other emerging markets. In addition, it also implies 
more dedicated bond inflows into our market, possibly of a more lasting nature. Another area 
of  the  bond  market,  which  has  seen  significant  issuance  over  the  years,  is  that  of  the 
Eurorand bond market. The demand for randdenominated bonds issued by highly rated non-
resident institutions contributes positively to the value of both the rand and domestic bonds. 
The  government  debt  consolidation  process  has  allowed  the  cost  of  borrowing  to  decline 
markedly. Sound debt management has been such that new issuance is spread across the 
maturity  spectrum  of  the  yield  curve.  The  bond  market  has  become  a  more  appealing 
corporate finance tool and, as such, corporate listings have become more popular. Since the 
very first listing of a corporate bond (South African Breweries) in 1994, the corporate bond 
market has increased considerably in size. Innovation in this sector has been impressive – 
from issuance of vanilla bonds to securitisations and commercial paper. Not only do these 
innovations  offer  debt  at  lower  interest  rates  than  vanilla  bonds,  but  also  provide  lower 
income groups with access to home mortgage finance. 
The  introduction  of  inflation-linked  government  bonds  in  2000  was  a  further  significant 
innovation  and  is  quite  helpful  in  providing  monetary  policymakers  and  analysts  with 
important information on inflation expectations through readings of the so-called breakeven 
inflation  rate.  Whilst  much  has  been  achieved,  there  are  still  many  opportunities  and 
challenges ahead. Non-government bond issuance has increased sharply; however, banks 
continue to account for the bulk of this issuance. In addition, the buy-and-hold approach to 
corporate  bonds  and  inflation-linked  bonds,  in  particular,  renders  these  segments  of  the 
bond market relatively illiquid. The municipal bond market is still in a developing stage but 
can certainly contribute to enhancing the breadth and depth of the domestic bond market. 
Finally, the significant amount of infrastructure spending planned for the next few years is 
likely to boost the supply of corporate bonds and therefore increase liquidity in this market. 
The corporate bond market has increased in size from accounting for 5 per cent of the total 
bond  market  at  the  end  of  2001  to  almost  30  per  cent  today.  This  increase  in  corporate 
sector issuance was mainly due to the reduction in the supply of government bonds, lower 
financing  costs  and  an  upbeat  corporate  sector.  In  2006,  net  issuance  in  the  non-
government sector amounted to R41,0 billion (excluding securitised assets). 
Net issuance emanated mainly from the corporate sector, with only R7,2 billion emanating 
from  parastatals  and  municipalities.  Issuance  in  the  corporate  market  has  increased,  with 
both new and old issuers active in the domestic market. For the bond market as a whole the 
number of issuers has increased, by 38 to 99 while the number of listings increased by 348 
                                                      
2  The number of primary dealers is currently 9, following some consolidation in the banking sector during the early part of this 
century. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2007
4.  
5.  
to  725  from  2004  to  2006.  Of  this,  corporate  bonds  in  terms  of  issuers  increased  almost 
twofold and listings threefold to respectively 83 and 563 over the same period. 
Legal and regulatory framework that supports the development of capital markets 
According  to  the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa  the  purpose  of  a  legal  and  regulatory 
framework is to strengthen and develop the debt capital market, to monitor the debt capital 
market,  and  to  provide  investor  protection.  The  framework  is  also  important  for  the 
development of the debt capital market since it provides for an institutional organisation to 
enforce  the  rules.  Many  exchanges  across  the  world  have  developed  as  self-regulatory 
organisations under the supervision of a national regulator. 
Debt capital market regulation should provide: 
1. 
rules,  processes  and  procedures  to  deal  with  listings  of  bonds,  trading,  trade 
capture,  matching  of  trades,  clearing  and  settlement,  surveillance,  dispute 
resolution, failed trades, default procedures, appeal processes; 
sanctions regarding market manipulation and providing misleading information; 
licensing, monitoring, sanctions and penalties of inter-dealer brokers; 
licensing  powers,  duties  and  responsibilities  of  self-regulatory  organisation  and 
supervisory bodies; 
ownership, transfer, pledge of securities and security depositories; 
internationally  accepted  accounting  standards,  practices  and  corporate 
governance; 
capital adequacy requirements; 
legislation to prevent money-laundering, fraud and other white collar crime; 
legislation to permit institutional investment into debt capital markets. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
To encourage local and foreign investment into debt capital markets, governments have to 
ensure that the legislation and regulations that govern the debt capital markets comply with 
international  standards.  BESA  has  ensured  that  the  rules  of  the  exchange  are  G30-
compliant.  It  continuously  strives  to  benchmark  its  rules  according  to  international  best 
practice. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
General debt capital market infrastructure 
Moreover, according to BESA, it is essential to develop an appropriate infrastructure for a 
debt capital market which inter alia consists of: 
1. 
financial  intermediaries  or  an  inter-dealer  broker  network  to  support  the  bond 
market and promote liquidity; 
a platform for electronic trade capture and matching; 
an  efficient  settlement  system  that  meets  the  BIS  recommendations,  e.g.  DvP, 
T+3; 
a central securities depository to facilitate transfer of ownership of scrip; 
centralised distribution of market information; 
a centralised pool of liquidity, e.g. central and transparent price dissemination from 
a central platform. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Whether  or  not 
permutation of these and other determinants remains moot. 
these  requirements  are  supply-leading,  demandfollowing  or  some 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 3
Conclusion 
The challenges to which the bond market will have to respond appear, to me, to be principally two. 
First, the market will have to adopt to the fiscal stance of central government. This stance will reduce 
the need for government to fund itself through this market, in the near- and medium terms. 
Second, I suggest, the market will need to address the problem of “original sin” on the sub-continent: 
that  is,  the  inability  of  adjacent  emerging  and  developing  economies  to  raise  financing  in  their  own 
currencies  beyond  their  own  borders.  Resolving  this  dilemma  on  a  regional  basis  constitutes  a 
formidable challenge – as does the resolution of most sins! 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2007
