Donald L Kohn: The aging workforce 
Testimony by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Special Committee on Aging, US Senate, Washington DC, 28 February 2007. 
 Chairman  Kohl,  Senator  Smith,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to 
discuss some recent research at the Federal Reserve on the effect that population aging may have on 
the growth of the labor force.1 The research is careful and important, but I would like to emphasize 
that it is a staff product and so does not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Board. 
As  we  all  know,  the  United  States  is  at  the  front  edge  of  a  massive  and  important  shift  in  the 
demographic composition of the population. The onset of the traditional retirement years for the oldest 
members  of  the  baby-boom  generation,2  coupled  with  a  trend  toward  greater  life  expectancy  and 
relatively low fertility rates, will cause the share of older individuals in the population to rise markedly in 
the years ahead. How our society responds to the challenges associated with demographic change 
will  have  important  consequences  for  the  longer-run  prospects  for  economic  growth,  average  living 
standards, and the distribution of income and consumption across generations. 
The main demographic story is in exhibit 1, which shows that around 2003, the population of those 
aged 62 and older began growing as a share of the population aged 16 and older. Age 62 is important 
as the time at which individuals become eligible for Social Security retirement benefits under current 
law. According to projections from the Bureau of the Census, shown in the shaded area of exhibit 1, 
the  upward  trend  in  aging  will  steepen  noticeably  in  the  next  few  years.  The  share  of  the  adult 
population that is aged 62 and older, now at about 19 percent, is projected to rise to more than 22 
percent by 2015.3
A subset of the adult population is the labor force – that is, those who are either actively looking for 
work or have a job. Because the participation of men and women in the labor force declines sharply 
after age 55, as shown in exhibit 2, the rising share of older individuals has important implications for 
the  nation’s  labor  supply.  In  particular,  the  aging  of  the  population  will  put  significant  downward 
pressure  on  the  total  labor  force  participation  rate  in  coming  years,  provided  the  basic  pattern  of 
participation over the lifecycle is maintained. 
Changes in labor force behavior within age groups also have the potential to add to the downward 
trend in labor force participation. Exhibit 3 shows that by the time men born in 1935 reached age 30, 
about 97 percent of them were in the labor force. In contrast, only about 92 percent of 30-year-old men 
born in 1976 were in the labor force. Although not shown in the exhibit, a roughly similar pattern exists 
for men older than 30, and, all else equal, the gradual reduction in labor force participation of men has 
put downward pressure on the overall participation rate. 
Exhibit 3 also shows that, until recently, the decline in the labor force participation rate of successive 
generations of men had been more than offset by a steady increase in the participation rates for each 
new generation of women. Women born in the 1920s and 1930s had low participation rates at age 30, 
but three-fourths of 30-year-olds born in 1960 were in the labor force. However, participation rates for 
more recent generations of 30-year-old women have not risen any further. 
Economists at the Federal Reserve have developed a model that combines information on the decline 
in labor force participation at older ages, shown in exhibit 2, with information on the changes in labor 
                                                      
1   Stephanie Aaronson, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher (2006), “The Recent Decline in 
the Labor Force Participation Rate and Its Implications for Potential Labor Supply,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
2006:1, pp. 69-154. 
2   The baby boom is generally taken to be children born from 1946 through 1964. The Census Bureau estimates that roughly 
78 million American baby boomers were alive as of July 1, 2005, and that approximately 2.9 million Americans turned 60 in 
2006.  U.S.  Census  Bureau  (2006),  “Facts  for  Features:  Special  Edition,  Oldest  Baby  Boomers  Turn  60,”  press  release 
CB06-FFSE.01-2, January 3, www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/releases/. 
from 
for  2006 
(http://www.census.gov/popest/estimates.php)  with  the  Census  Bureau’s  projections  of  population  growth  by  age  through 
2015 (http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj). 
latest  estimates  of  population 
3  This  projection  combines 
the  Bureau  of 
the  Census 
the 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
force participation across generations, shown in exhibit 3. Exhibit 4 shows the actual participation rate, 
the model’s estimate of the underlying trend in the total participation rate between 1995 and 2006, and 
– under a specific set of assumptions – a projection of the trend out to 2015. The fluctuations in the 
actual  participation  rate  around  the  trend  largely  reflect  cyclical  influences.  For  example,  the  strong 
demand for labor in the late 1990s caused participation to rise above its longer-run trend, whereas the 
2001  recession  and  subsequent  weak  labor  market  caused  participation  to  fall  below  the  trend. 
Currently,  actual  participation  is  again  above  the  estimate  of  the  long-run  trend,  according  to  this 
model, largely because of the current strength of the labor market. 
A point more relevant to today’s hearing is that the estimated trend has been declining since about 
2002  and  is  projected  by  the  model  to  fall  substantially  further,  from  about  65-1/2  percent  today  to 
about 62-1/2 percent by 2015. That decline in the overall participation rate, coupled with the slowing in 
the growth of the working-age population projected by the Census Bureau, would be consistent with a 
slowing in the annual growth of the labor force from the roughly 1-1/4 percent average pace seen in 
recent years to only 1/4 percent by 2015. 
By  its  very  nature,  the  model  can  only  illustrate  what  will  happen  if  workers,  employers,  and 
policymakers  behave  in  the  future  in  line  with  the  assumptions  embodied  in  the  projections. 
Specifically, the forecast proceeds under the assumption that (1) participation rates among the elderly 
will rise gradually, (2) the average participation rate for men aged 25-61 will continue to edge down, 
and (3) participation rates for women in the same age group will not increase further. Of course, these 
assumptions may not be borne out. As outlined in exhibit 5, several factors may work toward raising 
the labor force participation rate. 
In particular, increasing longevity and improvements in health may induce many more individuals to 
remain in the workforce well past age 65. For their part, employers, upon facing slower growth in the 
labor force, may look for ways to attract workers into the labor market. Paying higher wages is one 
obvious approach. But they could also create flexible work schedules, increase the availability of part-
time work, encourage telecommuting, increase training for older workers, and provide additional health 
care coverage as a way to retain and attract older workers. Such changes might also boost the labor 
force participation of other age groups. 
Government policies can also influence the attractiveness of remaining in the workforce. For example, 
to  raise  participation  rates  among  older  individuals,  policymakers  could  seek  ways  to  preserve  or 
enhance the incentives to work beyond traditional retirement ages. Government policies could also be 
designed to make work more attractive to other demographic groups. 
Finally, to a limited extent, immigration has the potential to alter the future pace of labor force growth. 
Most directly, if future immigration rates exceed those assumed by the Census Bureau, the population, 
and hence the labor force, would grow faster than the Census Bureau currently projects. In addition, 
because new immigrants tend to be younger and are more likely to participate in the labor force than 
are native-born individuals, higher immigration would also lead to a higher overall participation rate. 
Some of the influences described above may already be boosting the participation rate relative to the 
model’s prediction. As shown in exhibit 6, the labor force participation rate of individuals aged 62 and 
older had been trending down since the late 1970s but has been rising markedly since 1995. To some 
extent, this increase simply reflects the aging of a generation of women who were more likely to be in 
the  labor  force  throughout  their  lifetimes  than  were  earlier  generations  of  women.  However,  the 
magnitude of the rise is greater than can be explained by this factor alone. 
Because the factors just discussed have the potential to offset some of the effects of population aging, 
and given the considerable uncertainty that surrounds any long-term economic projection, economists 
hold a range of views about the pace of future labor force growth. A projection from the Congressional 
Budget Office is shown in exhibit 7. The CBO foresees the pace of trend labor force growth slowing to 
1/2 percent per year by 2015, a smaller deceleration than projected by the model developed by Board 
staff but still a significant slowing. 
As  I  indicated  at  the  outset,  the  aging  of  the  population  has  important  implications  for  the  living 
standards of current and future generations. Because total output is equal to output per worker times 
the number of workers, a slowdown in the rate of labor force growth will, all else equal, tend to slow 
the growth of output – as shown in the right-most column of exhibit 7. Moreover, if the growth in the 
labor  force  is  lower  than  population  growth,  output  per  person  will,  all  else  equal,  rise  even  more 
slowly  than  output  per  worker.  Indeed,  as  indicated  in  the  exhibit,  both  the  Federal  Reserve  staff 
projection and the CBO projection for the growth of the labor force through 2015 are lower than the 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2007
growth  of  the  population  expected  in  that  period  by  the  Census  Bureau.  Consequently,  on  these 
projections, the level of output per person will be lower than it would have been without population 
aging. 
Increasing labor force participation would help reduce these effects, but is unlikely to completely offset 
them.  Thus,  without  an  offsetting  increase  in  productivity  growth,  the  aging  of  the  population  likely 
means  that  output  per  person  will  have  to  be  lower  than  it  would  have  been  in  the  absence  of 
population  aging.  Accordingly,  a  critical  question  is  how  that  burden  will  be  distributed  across 
generations.  If  we  do  nothing,  it  will,  by  default,  fall  entirely  on  future  generations.  However,  by 
forgoing some consumption to increase national saving, we can take on some of that burden today 
and thereby raise the living standards of future generations.4 A rise in saving can achieve that shift 
because the extra savings would be used to increase the nation’s stock of capital and increase our net 
holdings of foreign assets. Increasing the amount of productive assets owned by Americans increases 
the amount of consumption that future generations will be able to enjoy. Determining the best way to 
distribute  the  burden associated with  the  aging  of  the  population should  be  high  on  society’s  list  of 
priorities. 
 
 
                                                        
4   The relationship between population aging and living standards is explored in more detail in Louise Sheiner, Daniel Sichel, 
and Lawrence Slifman (2007), “A Primer of the Macroeconomics of Population Aging,” Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2007-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).  
BIS Review 19/2007 
 3
  4 
   BIS Review 19/2007
     BIS Review 19/2007 
 5
 6 
   BIS Review 19/2007
