Bandid Nijathaworn: Quantitative models and tools for good risk 
management 
Opening address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
2nd  SEACEN-OCC  Advanced  Seminar  on  Quantitative  Techniques  for Macro  Surveillance 
and Determining Resilience of the Banking Sector, Bangkok, 3 September 2007. 
 Let  me  begin  by  extending  a  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  to  Bangkok,  and  to  the  second 
SEACEN-OCC  Advanced  Seminar  on  Quantitative  Techniques  for  Macro  Surveillance  and 
Determining Resilience of the Banking Sector. The Bank of Thailand is pleased to be hosting 
this seminar, jointly with the US Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the SEACEN 
Centre. 
Today’s seminar reflects another important effort in forging a closer cooperation and network 
between US regulators and the central banks and regulators of the Southeast Asian region. 
Such  a  close  tie  is  most  valuable  for  it  is  a  platform  that  helps  facilitate  supervisory 
coordination  that  is  necessary  for  an  efficient  home-host  relationship,  as  well  as  for 
exchanging  views  on  important  market  developments  and  supervisory  issues  such  as  on 
financial innovation, on the implementation of Basel II, and on accounting standards. Going 
forward, such a close tie will be even more valuable, because an important component of a 
good  macro-surveillance  process  is  an  open  and  timely  dialogue,  and  exchange  of  views 
among regulators from different jurisdictions. 
With a deepening process of financial globalisation that we are now seeing, supervisors and 
central banks are faced with increased challenges to analyse and manage risks, especially in 
the context of more complex interlinks between financial institutions and financial markets, as 
well  as  between  domestic  and  the  global  economies.  In  such  an  environment,  the  risk 
management ability of financial firms and supervisors is important and rests crucially on the 
ability to assess quantitatively and in a forward-looking manner, the possible impact of each 
risk scenario on the economy and its financial sector. 
In  this  light,  a  sound  and  practical  approach  to  integrate  the  quantitative  assessment  into 
financial stability and into risk-based supervision is most crucial, as it will allow the potential 
key risk affecting the financial sector to be identified, to be assessed, and to be ranked in 
order of importance. Through this, the approach will help focus policy dialogue and facilitate 
communication  between  all  the  key  stakeholders,  namely  –  the  supervised  financial 
institutions, the home and host supervisors, other related supervisory agencies especially in 
the case of complex financial conglomerates, and between the monetary authority and the 
Finance Ministry. 
In moving forward, it is important to recognize that, while these quantitative techniques are 
valuable tools, they are no substitute for a thorough understanding of the overall risk dynamic 
of  financial  institutions,  the  related  systemic  implications,  as  well  as  the  behaviour  of 
institutions and markets. 
The  emphasis  here  is  that  a  good  macro-surveillance  framework  must  balance  technical 
excellence and  technical  complexity  with  sound  rationale and  good  qualitative  judgment  in 
order  to  make  real  contribution  to  policy  decision.  The  robust  framework  of  risk-based 
supervision such as Basel II places a strong technical demand on supervisors not only on 
Pillar  I  but  also  for  the  Supervisory  Review  work  in  Pillar  II,  which  requires  dynamically 
assessing on-going risk and changing risk profile of financial institutions. Therefore, macro-
surveillance, stress-testing, as well as model validation, will fast become the norm for good 
risk management. 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 1
Macro-surveillance  and  its  parallel  policy  framework  –  especially  macro-prudential  policy  – 
are  now  exciting  fields  for  central  banks  and  supervisory  agencies.  But  in  my  view,  the 
needed pioneered framework is yet to be developed. The quantitative models and tools so 
far are at its early stage of development compared to those more established in monetary 
policy, such as the inflation targeting framework. 
The  frontier  work  currently  undertaken  by  central  banks  of  advanced  economies  are,  for 
example,  developing  macro-stress  testing  model  which  incorporates  interlinkages  between 
financial  and  real  sectors.  Such  work  is  quite  demanding  due  to  the  complexity  of  the 
evolving  linkages  and  behaviour  linked  to  rapid  developments  in  economic  and  financial 
sector,  and  all  the  more  so  with  globalisation.  In  response,  community  of  experts  are 
emerging,  and  many  such  experts  are  now  using  virtual  network  such  as  stress-testing 
internet platform to share knowledge and experience. 
For emerging economies such as most SEACEN  members, it is even more challenging in 
light of data limitations and continued structural changes that are taking place in our markets, 
particularly the proliferation of new financial products that consumers are less familiar with, 
and are less able to manage risk because of market limitations in terms of the availability of 
hedging  instruments.  This  type  of  situation,  if  not  properly  monitored  and  supervised,  can 
lead to a build-up of financial vulnerability and risks, for example in consumer finance, real 
estate,  and  the  housing  market.  Therefore,  supervisors  need  to  work  closely  with  their 
counterparts in the monetary policy wing to monitor and assess possible risks. 
The timeliness of this seminar is all the more important in light of the on-going developments 
in  the  global  financial  markets.  Global  imbalance  between  economies  continues  to  be  an 
important underlying risk upon which more financial market volatility can emerge. Linked to 
this, the geopolitical risk and oil price uncertainty, as well as the volatility emanating from the 
sub-prime  mortgage  markets  in  the  US,  could  also  bear  down  on  the  prospect  of  global 
growth. 
Against this backdrop, emerging markets in Asia have experienced large and volatile capital 
flows  with  important  implications  for  currency  and  for  domestic  financial  conditions.  Going 
forward, the combination of volatile financial markets and downside risk to global trade and 
growth  could  have  implications  for the  region’s  growth  and  inflation  outlook,  as  well  as  for 
credit and market risk for our financial institutions. 
Thus,  now  more-than-ever,  macro-surveillance  process,  early  warning  models,  stress-
testing,  ever  more  vigilant  risk-based  supervision,  and  strong  internal  risk  management  by 
financial institutions will be instruments crucial for safeguarding our financial stability. 
In closing this introduction, I am certain that this seminar will be extremely useful and provide 
an important opportunity for building a close network amongst supervisors in SEACEN, as 
well as for fostering a closer cooperation between regulators in our region and the US-OCC. 
So,  without  further  ado,  let  me  declare  the  second  SEACEN-OCC  Advanced  Seminar  on 
Quantitative Techniques for Macro Surveillance and Determining Resilience of the Banking 
Sector open, and wish you all every success in this seminar, as well as in your career, and 
have a pleasant stay in Thailand. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2007
