Jean-Claude Trichet: Towards the review of the Lamfalussy approach – market 
developments, supervisory challenges and institutional arrangements 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  First 
CEBS Conference, London, 9 May 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at the first conference of the Committee of European 
Banking Supervisors (CEBS) and to share with you some thoughts at this particular time when market 
developments  are  underscoring  the  importance  of  making  rapid  progress  towards  a  convergent 
supervisory framework. Not least, this time is also appropriate for such an exchange of views given the 
upcoming assessment of the functioning of the Lamfalussy approach.  
Let me begin by recalling that the ECB has been a strong supporter of the Lamfalussy approach from 
the  outset,  i.e.  since  2001,  when  this  new  institutional  framework  for  financial  regulation  and 
supervision  was  first  introduced.  We  also  welcomed  the  extension  of  the  approach  to  all  financial 
sectors  with  a  view  to  reaping  the  expected  benefits,  across  the  entire  financial  system,  of  more 
flexible  and  transparent  legislative  procedures  and  greater  regulatory  and  supervisory  convergence 
and  cooperation.  Since  then,  the  ECB  has  been  closely  monitoring  the  efforts  to  enhance  the  EU 
framework for banking supervision. It is now time, as the CEBS completes more than three years of 
successful operation, to take a step back to evaluate the progress that has been made and to identify 
the key issues on the way forward.  
I  will  organise  my  remarks  in  three  parts.  In  the  first,  I  will  analyse  some  developments  in  the  EU 
banking  sector  with  a  particular  focus  on  integration  and  cross-border  banking  activities.  I  will  then 
review the main objectives and related challenges for the supervisory framework in relation to these 
market developments. Finally, I will assess the progress achieved with the supervisory responses so 
far and point to some elements of the way forward. 
Developments in the EU banking sector  
Among  the  many  developments  in  the  EU  banking  sector  over  the  past  few  years,  I  would  like  to 
highlight two, given their relevance for the supervisory framework.  
First, the process of financial integration has advanced more slowly in the banking sector than in 
other  segments  of  the  financial  system,  namely  the  money,  bond  and  equity  markets.  This  is  also 
supported by the findings of the ECB’s report on “Financial integration in Europe”, which we published 
for the first time at the end of March. The evidence presented in the report shows in particular that the 
retail  component  of  banking  business  is  the  least  integrated.  Looking  at  price-based  indicators,  the 
cross-country dispersion of bank interest rates has remained relatively high, in particular for consumer 
loans (160 basis points). As to quantity-based indicators, while the cross-border component in banks’ 
capital-market  related  and  interbank  holdings  has  increased  over  time  –  reaching  51%  and  33%  in 
2006  –  the  respective  share  in  loans  to  corporations  and  households  has  more  or  less  stagnated, 
accounting for only 4% in 2006.  
As we know, the pursuit of further integration in retail banking, and retail finance more generally, is one 
of the main objectives – fully shared by the ECB – of the European Commission’s financial services 
policy in the coming years, as evidenced also by the recently issued Commission’s Green Paper on 
retail financial services. While the achievement of the financial integration objective is fundamentally a 
market  driven-process,  public  action  is  also  required  to  establish  and  preserve  a  favourable 
framework. In this context, the supervisory setting in the EU is one factor – although not the only one – 
which is necessary to permit and facilitate further banking integration.  
Second,  the internationalisation of EU banking groups has increased  in recent  years.  This  has 
resulted, to a large extent, from cross-border mergers and acquisitions within the EU. The share of 
such transactions in the total value of M&A transactions performed by EU banks has risen to 36% in 
the  years  2005-2006,  from  an  average  of  19%  in  the  four  preceding  years.  This  intensified  cross-
border M&A activity was largely driven by some key, large-scale transactions. One can easily recall, to 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
mention  just  a  few,  the  acquisition  of  HypoVereinsbank  by  Unicredit  in  2005  and  the  take-over  of 
Banca Nazionale del Lavoro by BNP Paribas in 2006.  
In this context, it is interesting to consider also the findings from a mapping exercise of EU banking 
groups  with  significant  cross-border  activity  which  has  been  carried  out  by  the  Banking 
Supervision Committee of the European System of Central Banks for the years 2001, 2003 and 2005. 
While  the  number  of  the  groups  included  in  the  analysis  increased  only  slightly  –  from  41  to  46 
between the years 2001 and 2005 – the consolidated assets of the sample as a whole grew by 54% 
during this period, and its share in overall consolidated EU banking assets increased from around 54% 
to 68%. This indicates that EU banks with significant cross-border activity hold a sizable – and rising – 
share of total EU banking assets.  
As one looks at the data in more detail, it emerges that the intensity and geographical scope of foreign 
activity varies considerably among banks. A simple measure of this, referring to the banking activity 
performed within the EU and based on 2005 data, shows that only 16 banking groups out of 46 hold 
at least 25% of their EU assets outside their home country and are present in at least 25% (i.e. six) of 
the other 24 EU countries. These 16 groups – which could be labelled “key cross-border players” – 
account  for  around  one-third  of  total  EU  banking  assets,  hold  on  average  38%  of  their  EU  assets 
abroad  and are  present  in  almost  half  (44%)  of  the  other  EU countries.  This indicates  that  there  is 
ample room for further intensification of cross-border banking activities in the EU. The EU supervisory 
framework has an important role to play in this regard. Let me elaborate on this aspect.  
Supervision of cross-border banking groups 
A  first  consideration  is  that  the  supervisory  framework  in  the  EU  should  be  supportive  of  a 
market-led process of cross-border banking as a driver of further banking integration. Cross-
border  banks  may  act,  via  their  expansion  across  jurisdictions,  as  important  drivers  in  the  financial 
integration process and thus contribute to enhancing the overall efficiency of the banking sector. The 
supervision of cross-border banks is performed mainly on a national, stand-alone basis, which results 
in a large number of partially overlapping and also potentially diverging requirements, thereby raising 
the costs for banks. Moreover, cross-border banking expansion has taken place predominantly via the 
establishment  of  foreign  subsidiaries  rather  than  branches.  For  the  key  cross-border  players,  for 
instance, foreign subsidiaries account for 60% of total assets held abroad. This increases the overall 
cost  of  supervision,  given  the  evidently  more  far-reaching  responsibilities  and  the  correspondingly 
closer involvement of supervisors. Therefore, efficient supervision at group level should be pursued, 
through  consistent  supervisory  requirements  and  approaches  and  closely  coordinated  measures  to 
fully exploit synergies.  
A  second  consideration  is  that  the  supervisory  framework  in  the  EU  should  maintain  its 
effectiveness in safeguarding financial stability in a more integrated banking and financial sector. 
When  the  EU  arrangements  for  financial  supervision  were  established,  the  underlying  premise  was 
that potential disturbances at a bank would remain largely confined to the national level. We all agree 
that  this  assumption  no  longer  holds.  Indeed,  given  the  rising  intensity  and  scope  of  the  foreign 
activities of EU banks, their growing degree of functional integration and the importance of intra-group 
exposures,  financial  difficulties  affecting  individual  group  entities  may  spread  beyond  national 
boundaries,  and  not  only  within  the  respective  banking  group  but  also  across  banking  groups  and 
financial systems.  
While it is recognised that measuring these potential financial stability implications is a very complex 
issue,  a  simple  way  to  gauge  the  importance  of  cross-border  banking  groups’  operations  for  their 
home  and  host  countries  is  to  look  at  their  respective  local  market  shares.  In  their  eight  home 
countries,  the  16  key  cross-border  players  have  on  average  an  aggregate  market  share  of  35%, 
ranging from 16% to 64% of total domestic banking assets. In the host countries a more mixed picture 
emerges. In eight host countries the key cross-border players hold on average an aggregate market 
share  between  37%  and  63%  of  domestic  banking  assets.  In  nine  host  countries,  the  average 
aggregate  market  share  is  still  important,  accounting  for  10%  to  29%  of  domestic  banking  assets. 
Finally, in eight host countries, the average aggregate market share is at a lower level, ranging from 
1% to 9%. Overall, in 60% of all EU countries at least one of the key cross-border players accounts 
alone for more than 15% of domestic banking assets, and the average market share of the group with 
the greatest activity in these countries is 26%.  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
These  elements  support  the  need  for  enhanced  cross-border  supervision  at  the  group  level.  In 
particular, intense cooperation and information-sharing is required, as both home and host supervisors 
increasingly depend on input from their peers on developments in other group entities to adequately 
assess  potential  risks  that  may  affect  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  group  as  a  whole  or  of  its 
individual  components.  Furthermore,  supervisory  measures  should  be  more  closely  coordinated  to 
ensure the overall effectiveness of supervisory action. 
A third consideration is that the pursuit of the two supervisory objectives I have just mentioned is a 
challenging and complex endeavour. I would like to highlight four issues in this respect.  
First,  the  increasing  intensity  and  scope  of  the  foreign  activities  of  EU  banks  inevitably  leads  to 
additional practical challenges for supervision at cross-border level, which in turn increases the need 
to ensure convergence of day-to-day supervisory practices.  
Second, it may at times be difficult to resolve differences of opinion stemming from different attitudes 
of  supervisors.  For  instance,  progress  in  supervisory  cooperation  and  convergence  may  require 
different degrees of adjustment in the supervisory frameworks of the concerned countries, given their 
varying starting points. Moreover, the time and resources devoted by supervisors to improving cross-
border  supervision  may  vary,  depending  on  the  particular  structure  of  a  banking  group  and  the 
geographical distribution of its activities.  
Referring again to the key cross-border players, there are host countries with large domestic banking 
systems, where a foreign establishment is very important for the group as a whole – accounting for 
20% to 40% of total group assets – while it is much less significant for the host country concerned. 
Conversely,  there  are  cases  where  a  foreign  establishment  holds  more  than  20%  of  the  respective 
host  country’s  banking  assets,  but  accounts  for  less  than  5%  of  group  assets.  This  phenomenon 
presents  itself  especially  in  smaller  host  countries.  But  it  could  become  more  widespread  if  the 
recently observed trend towards large scale cross-border M&A operations with major domestic players 
in the host countries continues in the coming years.  
Third, there is an increasing need for co-operation between EU and third country banking supervisors. 
This stems from the fact that the more internationally active EU banking groups perform a significant 
part  of  their  foreign  activities  not  only  within  the  EU,  but  also  in  other  countries.  For  instance,  the 
foreign assets held by the key cross-border players in non-EU countries account on average for 29% 
of the total foreign assets of these groups, reaching up to 53% in one case. 
Finally, there is a need also for enhanced co-operation between supervisors on a cross-sector basis, 
given  that  many  EU  banking  groups  are  active  in  other  segments  of  the  financial  system,  namely 
insurance and securities. For instance, seven out of the 16 key cross-border players have also been 
identified by the European Commission as “financial conglomerates” in accordance with the Financial 
Conglomerates Directive. 
Progress to date and the way forward 
I would like now to move on to the question of how the work of the CEBS has contributed to pursuing 
the objectives I mentioned earlier for the supervisory framework in the EU, namely to support further 
cross-border  banking  activity  and  to  maintain  its  effectiveness  in  safeguarding  financial  stability. 
Overall, we can all agree that the CEBS has carried out in a relatively short time a remarkable amount 
of work to foster greater convergence of supervisory requirements and approaches.  
In the first instance, we can say that the CEBS has contributed significantly to the preparation of an 
impressive  set  of  supervisory  guidelines  which  are  relevant  in  general  but  in  particular  for  the 
activity  of  cross-border  banks.  This  contribution  is  related  primarily,  but  not  exclusively,  to  the 
supervisory implementation of the Capital Requirements Directive, covering the main elements of the 
first and second pillar of the new capital adequacy framework. The CEBS guidelines on the validation 
of  internal-ratings  based  approaches  and  home-host  cooperation  are  important  pieces  of  this  work 
aimed at fostering a more coherent approach to cross-border supervision at the group level.  
I am aware that there are different views on the extent to which the CEBS has made progress in some 
areas  in  the  pursuit  of  common  supervisory  frameworks.  The  common  supervisory  reporting 
developed  by  the  CEBS  for  banks'  consolidated  financial  statements  and  solvency  requirements  is 
frequently mentioned as an example of an area where it could have achieved more. In this respect, I 
would highlight two aspects to place things in the right perspective. First, it is difficult to express an 
objective judgement about success or failure in the field of supervisory convergence in the absence of 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 3
an agreed and shared notion of convergence. Second, the process of convergence is challenging also 
because of the large variety of supervisory approaches at the outset.  
In  the  second  instance,  the  CEBS  has  undertaken  initiatives  to  ensure  that the  application  of the 
supervisory guidelines is consistent in practice. This is a challenging objective but also one which 
is  crucial  to  determining  the  effects  of  the  work  on  supervisory  convergence.  The  CEBS  has  been 
working  effectively  on  many  aspects  which  are  important  for  the  implementation  phase,  such  as 
supervisory disclosure, supervisory culture and the networks of competent supervisors. I regard the 
establishment of operational networks as a major initiative in this respect, but we should also be aware 
that it will take time to deliver results, given the complexity of supervising cross-border banks.  
Overall, the work conducted so far by the CEBS to establish a common set of supervisory guidelines 
and  the  tools  to  promote  their  consistent  application  across  countries  is  to  be  assessed  in  positive 
terms. However, we should remind ourselves that the pursuit of supervisory convergence in practice is 
unavoidably  a  long-term  project  and  thus  it  will  be  of  great  importance  to  keep  momentum  in  the 
process. To that end, I believe that all relevant stakeholders will have an important role to play along 
the following lines.  
First,  I  would  underline  that  the  ability  of  the  current  arrangements  to  deliver  results  in  terms  of 
improved cross-border supervision ultimately depends on the institutional setting. As we know, the 
CEBS is not an institutional body in its own right, but a network of national authorities. While the CEBS 
– as well as the other Level 3 committees – is accountable for its achievements towards supervisory 
convergence  at  EU  level,  through  periodic  reporting  to  the  Financial  Services  Committee  and  the 
European  Parliament,  its  members  are  ultimately  accountable  to  their  national  constituencies. 
Although  so  far  the  CEBS  members  have  demonstrated  a  strong  commitment  to  supervisory 
convergence and cooperation, a gap could emerge between aspirations towards further progress in 
this area and the national mandates of the supervisory authorities.  
Ultimately  it  will  be  the  continuous  commitment  of  Member  States  to  the  objective  of  creating  a 
sufficiently  coherent  EU  framework  for banking supervision which  will  determine  the  success  of  the 
overall efforts of the CEBS. Against this background, Member States may wish to consider whether 
the  present  entirely  non-binding  approach  to  supervisory  cooperation  will  be  sufficiently  strong  to 
respond to the growing challenges of effective and efficient group supervision, or whether more solid 
foundations may be warranted to support the work of the CEBS and the other Level 3 committees. 
Ideas  for  strengthening  cross-border  cooperation  among  supervisors,  for  example  by  including  a 
specific  EU-related  reference  in  the  mission  statements  of  national  supervisors  and/or  by  allowing 
qualified majority voting for decision-taking in the Level 3 committees, are already on the table. It is 
certainly useful to analyse such proposals in more detail, with a view to identifying potential benefits 
and other implications.  
Second, I would argue in general that the outcome of the efforts towards supervisory convergence will 
also  be  influenced  by  the  degree  of  involvement  of  supervisors  in  the  design  of  financial 
regulation at the EU level. Experience with the Lamfalussy approach in the field of securities tells us 
that, if the Level 3 committee – in that specific case the Committee of European Securities Regulators 
(CESR) – is strongly involved in providing advice on the draft Level 2 legislation, the subsequent work 
on supervisory convergence and co-operation by the committee concerned is made easier since it is 
based on a common understanding among the competent supervisors of the scope and content of the 
relevant provisions. As we know, in banking CEBS’ involvement in providing advice on draft Level 2 
legislation  is  limited,  due  to  the  structure  of  the  Level  1  legislation  which  combines  both  general 
principles and technical provisions. Therefore consideration could be given to extending the role of the 
CEBS  in  this  respect,  also  to  give  additional  impetus  to  the  pursuit  of  supervisory  convergence. 
Enhanced  involvement  of  the  CEBS  in  an  advisory  role  in  draft  Level  2  legislation  could  also  be 
combined with an intensified role in removing the so-called “goldplating”, namely the layers of national 
legislation extending beyond the EU rules, as well as the numerous options for supervisors provided 
by the current framework. In this way, a more homogeneous regulatory framework across countries 
would be promoted. 
Third,  the  success  of  current  efforts  to  enhance  cross-border  supervision  will  also  depend  on 
supervisors making the best possible efforts to ensure consistency and reduce complexity in practice. 
To that end, an effective application of the principle of proportionality in supervisory cooperation 
could be an important factor. While it is clear that effective and efficient supervision at group-wide level 
will  eventually  require  that  all  competent  supervisors  move  in  step,  a  more  prominent  role  for  the 
supervisors of the most significant group entities, in line with the well-established supervisory principle 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2007
of  proportionality,  could  facilitate  the  development  of  common  supervisory  approaches  and 
cooperation  procedures.  An  effective  application  of  the  proportionality  principle  could  also  help  to 
reduce potential incentive problems already at an early stage by structuring supervisory relationships 
in line with the relative importance of individual group entities for the group as a whole and the host 
countries concerned, before entering into substantive discussions regarding best supervisory practices 
and cooperation procedures.  
To  illustrate  this  point,  and  looking  only  at  the  distribution  of  assets,  let  us  assume  that  a  possible 
threshold of at least 5% of either group assets or domestic banking assets represents a rough criterion 
for  identifying  significant  group  entities.  If  we  were  to  apply  this  criterion  to  the  key  cross-border 
players, there would be on average three countries in which significant group entities were located. 
This would be a significant reduction from the current average of 12 countries in which the banking 
groups operate. This example is purely indicative of the possible positive effects of applying in full the 
principle  of  proportionality  in  the  pursuit  of  supervisory  convergence  while  respecting  the  current 
institutional framework. In practice, we all know that the identification of significant group entities is not 
always straightforward, but requires a comprehensive, case-by-case, assessment of various factors, 
relating  especially  to  the  internal  structure  of  the  group  and  the  distribution  of  group  assets  across 
countries, as highlighted also in the CEBS home-host guidelines.  
Another important factor in further streamlining the supervisory interface for cross-border entities and 
economising on supervisory resources could be a greater recourse to the cross-border delegation of 
tasks, and where appropriate, responsibilities. I look forward to the results of the work that the CEBS 
is conducting in this area, in line with the recommendations of the FSC report on financial supervision 
which was endorsed by the ECOFIN Council on 5 May 2006.  
Finally, the success of the efforts to develop a consistent supervisory framework will depend also on 
an active and effective role of market participants. While supervisors should stand ready to deploy 
adequate  resources  and  make  adjustments  to  national  approaches  to  enhance  supervisory 
convergence and cooperation, initiative and commitment on the part of the banking groups themselves 
is indispensable for making progress in the future. I would just recall in this context as an example that 
adequate  group-wide  tools  and  procedures  for  risk  management  and  the  effective  dissemination  of 
relevant  information  within  a  group  are  basic  prerequisites  for  streamlined  supervisory  action.  The 
experience  of  the  CEBS  Consultative  Panel  and  public  consultations  characterised  by  an  active 
involvement of market participants indicates that there is a strong will on the part of the industry to 
contribute to the success of the supervisory efforts.  
Conclusions 
Let  me  briefly  conclude.  The  CEBS  has  made  significant  progress  so  far  and  this  has  been 
acknowledged and appreciated by all interested parties, including the ECB and the Eurosystem.  
The work of the CEBS has laid the foundation for a supervisory framework in the EU which should be 
able  to  promote  on  the  one  hand  further  banking  and  financial  integration  and  at  the  same  time 
maintain its effectiveness in pursuing financial stability in a more integrated financial system. 
The full success of the framework established by the CEBS should not be taken for granted. It will 
depend on the continuous improvement of several factors including further possible progress in the 
decision-making  process  of  the  CEBS,  a  sustained  high  degree  of  commitment  on  the  part  its 
members and the necessary constructive role of market participants. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 45/2007 
 5
