Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Ouest France 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Ouest 
France conducted by Mr Hervé Babonneau, published on 11 August 2007. 
 Do the current shocks being felt by the world’s stock exchanges, arising notably from 
property difficulties in the US, worry you? 
I  said  on  Thursday  2  August,  reporting  on  the  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council,  that  we 
would “continue to pay great attention to the developments in the markets over the period to 
come”. This is what we have been doing since then and what we are doing by granting the 
markets the appropriate liquidity.  
How is the euro area economy performing? 
The robust growth we diagnosed several months ago has been confirmed. The International 
Monetary Fund has recently revised upwards its growth expectations for the euro area this 
year, i.e. for 13 countries, one of which is France, and 319 million inhabitants. 
Does that translate into jobs? 
There are factors you have to bear in mind. We have created in the euro area as a whole 
more  than  12  million  jobs  in  the  eight  years  since  the  creation  of  the  euro  in  1999.  In  the 
eight years before that, less than three million jobs were created in the same countries. More 
than 12 million jobs in eight years. That’s more than the United States over the same period. 
In France, it’s the same thing: two million jobs after the euro, 500,000 before, in the same 
preceding eight-year period. 
That’s also evident in the unemployment rate … 
The unemployment rate in the euro area is now at 6.9%. It’s the lowest we have had for 26 
years. The euro has fortunately been accompanied by the creation of more jobs than was the 
case previously. 
So the euro doesn’t act against employment? 
Those who say that the euro acts against employment don’t have the figures to back up what 
they are saying. I’m not saying that it is the euro by itself which has created all these jobs – 
it’s of course the efforts of all our fellow-citizens, the bold, creative spirit of our businesses, 
the  economic  reforms  which  have  been  carried  out,  but  it’s  also,  clearly,  the  monetary 
stability that we have brought to a whole continent, to over 300 million people. What’s more, 
there  is  a  significant  consensus  worldwide  which  regards  price  stability  as  a  necessary 
condition  for  sustainable  growth  and  sustainable  job  creation,  because  it  maintains 
purchasing power and boosts the confidence of savers and investors. Price stability in itself 
isn’t enough, but it is necessary. 
Some  people  in  France  criticise  you  for  favouring  the  fight  against  inflation,  to  the 
detriment of growth… 
Ask the French people what they think! 63 million French, along with everyone else in the 
euro area – 319 million altogether – ask us to ensure price stability. It’s what the opinion polls 
say.  Our  fellow-citizens  have  entrusted  us  with  this  task  by  approving  the  Treaty  of 
Maastricht. They pay close attention to the European Central Bank ensuring price stability, 
which  permits  the  preservation  of  purchasing  power  and  fosters  sustainable  growth  and 
employment. The French themselves have been historically very attached to price stability, to 
monetary stability. It is true of all the great national sensitivities. It’s not by chance that the 
major symbolic figures of right and left – in particular, General de Gaulle and Pierre Mendès-
France – were very attached to monetary stability. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
So all is well? 
Much progress has been made, but we still have a lot to do in Europe, and also in France, as 
the Governor of the Banque de France said in his most recent letter. Unemployment is still 
far too high, even if we have the lowest level for 26 years. It’s why we are supporting the 
efforts being made by all the European governments to embark on structural reforms. 
Structural reforms…what does that mean? 
To put this quite simply, it means making the economy more flexible and more competitive. A 
flexible  economy  is  an  economy  which  constantly  adapts,  one  which  is  capable  of  taking 
advantage of technological progress, of the opportunities offered by the changes taking place 
in the global economy. The economies which are more flexible have more growth and more 
jobs  for  themselves  and  their  children.  In  Europe  today,  it’s  the  more  flexible  economies 
which have achieved full employment. 
You must be pleased to see new EU countries wanting to join the euro? 
It’s true, being numerous in the euro area allows us to have a large continental economy that 
is  stable  and  prosperous.  Our  responsibility,  i.e.  that  of  the  Executive  Board  and  the 
Governing Council of the ECB, is to give the best possible monetary policy to our vast single 
economy  with  a  single  currency,  which  is  comparable  with  the  United  States.  Cyprus  and 
Malta  will  join  us  as  from  1  January  2008.  The  euro  area  will  have  then  320  million 
inhabitants and 15 countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
