Lucas Papademos: The outlook for the European economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Spring 
Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Athens, 1 June 2007. 
 Introduction  
I.  
Being in Athens, it seems appropriate to start with a reference to a great thinker who had established his 
Lyceum  not  far  from  this auditorium:  Aristotle once said  “We are  what  we  repeatedly  do.  Excellence, 
then,  is  not  an  act,  but  a  habit.”  To  me,  the  connection  to  the  regular  membership  meetings  of  the 
Institute  of  International  Finance  is  obvious:  the  regular  semi-annual  gatherings  of  this  broad  and 
distinguished group have established a forum that is well-known for its excellence of debate and high 
quality analysis. It is indeed a great pleasure and privilege to have been invited by the Institute to be part 
of this session on key issues facing the global economy, and specifically to share some thoughts with 
you on the outlook for the European economy and its financial system. I will first discuss the prospects 
for  growth  and  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  provide  an  assessment  of  the  ongoing  structural 
changes in its economy which may be establishing a new basis for higher sustainable growth. Then, I 
will briefly address some issues pertaining to the stability of the European financial system, focusing in 
particular on one of its features, the abundant liquidity which characterises both the European and global 
financial markets.  
The outlook for the euro area economy 
II.  
The world economy has been experiencing a fairly long period of economic good times and the medium-
term outlook for the global economy remains positive. Annual world real GDP growth averaged 5% over 
the past three years (2004-2006), and it is expected to remain robust, moderating only slightly to just 
below 5% in both 2007 and 2008.1  
Global financial market conditions have remained, for the most part, very favourable. Except for a few 
episodes of market turbulence, notably in May and June 2006 and in late February and early March this 
year, financial markets have been characterised by unusually low (implied) volatility, very low risk premia 
and  credit  spreads,  and  rising  equity  prices.  Indeed,  for  much  of  the  time  over  the  past  three  years, 
financial market volatility and risk premia have been falling, reaching historically low levels, while asset 
prices  have  been  following  a  rising  trend.  Robust  economic  growth,  macroeconomic  stability  and 
favourable  financial  market  conditions  have  been  mutually  reinforcing.  In  particular,  the  low  levels  of 
short  and  long-term  interest  rates  and  the  cost  of  capital  have  supported  economic  activity,  while 
expectations of strong economic growth and price stability have contributed to the decline in financial 
market volatility and risk premia. 
The pace of global economic activity is becoming more balanced across the main economic regions. 
Despite a slowdown in the US economy this year, economic growth in Europe, Japan and, especially, in 
emerging market economies is forecast to remain robust.  
In  the  euro  area,  economic  growth  has  progressively  strengthened  significantly.  In  2006,  real  GDP 
expanded by 2.7% in the euro area, almost twice the growth rate of 1.4% recorded in the previous year, 
reflecting a strong increase in investment (by 4.7%) but also a pick-up in private consumption growth. 
Gross exports of goods and services rose by an impressive 8.3% and stimulated aggregate demand and 
domestic investment. The contribution of net exports to GDP growth in 2006 was relatively moderate 
(0.3 percentage point) because imports also rose significantly, but it was nevertheless greater than in 
the previous year (by 0.5 percentage point). Thus, overall for the euro area as a whole, GDP growth last 
year was mainly driven by the faster increase in domestic demand. 
Looking forward, incoming data as well as survey indicators confirm the view that the outlook for euro 
area growth remains positive. Eurostat’s recent flash estimate of real GDP growth of 0.6% in the first 
quarter was slightly higher than expected, underlining the continuing strength of the euro area economy. 
                                                      
1   According to the Spring 2007 forecast of the European Commission, world real GDP growth is expected to be 4.8% in both 
2007 and 2008; in the latest IMF World Economic Outlook, annual global growth is forecast at 4.9% in both 2007 and 2008. 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 1
Increases  in  industrial  production  and  retail  sales  as  well  as  a  further  upsurge  in  various  business 
confidence indicators point to an expansion of euro area economic activity at solid rates in the coming 
quarters.  Although  indicators  of  private  consumption  have  recently  provided  mixed  signals, consumer 
confidence  has  remained  unchanged  but  at  the  highest  level  since  2001.  At  the  same  time,  the 
sustained strength of the global economy will continue to support euro area exports. All in all, however, 
the  positive growth  prospects  for  the euro  area will  continue  to be  primarily driven by  the  strength of 
domestic  demand,  and  notably  investment  which  has  risen  significantly  in  recent  quarters,  benefiting 
from  still  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  strong  corporate  earnings  and  gains  in  business 
efficiency.  According  to  the  Spring  forecast  of  the  European  Commission  (released  on  7  May  2007), 
euro  area  real  GDP  growth  is  forecast  at  2.6%  in  2007  and  2.5%  in  2008.  The  ECB  survey  of 
professional forecasters, recently published (in the May edition of the ECB Monthly Bulletin), points to 
similar, though slightly lower growth rates in 2007 and 2008.2 These growth forecasts and expectations 
are within the ranges of the ECB staff macroeconomic projections released in March 2007. 
The current upswing in economic activity has been accompanied by a steady improvement in the euro 
area  labour  markets.  This  has  been  a  job-creating  economic  recovery.  In  2006,  employment  rose  by 
1.4%,  almost  double  the  rate  recorded  in  the  previous  year,  and  the  number  of  employed  persons 
increased by around 2 million in the euro area. The unemployment rate has steadily declined in recent 
quarters and dropped to 7.2% in March 2007, the lowest level observed since the introduction of the 
euro – and, indeed, since the official series began in 1993 – and it is expected to further decline in the 
coming quarters. Such positive labour market dynamics provide the basis for solid growth in personal 
disposable income and help improve consumer confidence; they thus underpin the outlook for private 
consumption and sustained economic growth in the euro area. 
While  recent  conjunctural  developments  have  been  very  encouraging  and  the  medium-term  growth 
prospects  remain  favourable,  ultimately  the  prosperity  of  the  euro  area  economy  will  depend  on  its 
capacity to sustain a higher long-term rate of economic growth. The forecast growth rates for 2007 and 
2008 (by the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund and private sector institutions) are 
above  the  range  of  available  estimates  of  the  euro  area’s  potential  growth.  Therefore,  a  key  issue  is 
whether structural changes underlying the ongoing expansion of the euro area economy imply a gradual 
improvement in its potential growth rate. Two fundamental determinants of potential growth, the rates of 
change in productivity and labour utilisation, have risen significantly over the past two years. Are these 
increases mainly cyclical, reflecting the upswing in activity, or partly a consequence of structural factors 
with a permanent positive impact? 
Starting with labour utilisation, we have seen a significant improvement in the year 2006. This was not 
only the result of the decline in the unemployment rate that I mentioned earlier, but was also due to the 
continued  increase  in  the  labour  force  participation  rate.  In  addition,  though  to  a  lesser  extent,  this 
improvement stems from a relatively stable number of hours worked per employed person, in contrast 
with the decline in hours worked observed in the past. What are the factors or forces that account for the 
recent  increase  in  labour  utilisation?  It  is  partly  related  to  the  important  labour  market  reforms 
implemented in many euro area countries, which, among other things, have increased the incentives to 
work. In addition, moderate wage developments have also contributed to stronger employment growth. 
In this context, I would like to recall that since the launch of the euro, employment in the euro area has 
risen by more than 12 million people. Looking ahead, we expect the labour market to continue to benefit 
from  past  reforms  and  others  being  implemented.  That  said,  we  cannot  rest  on  laurels:  certain 
inefficiencies  and  rigidities  in  labour  markets  remain  and  should  be  tackled  through  further  structural 
reforms, not least in view of the still unacceptably high level of unemployment – especially among the 
young – in comparison with other advanced economies.  
With regard to productivity, the second fundamental determinant of potential growth, developments in 
the euro area since the mid-1990s have been, on the whole, unsatisfactory, both compared to previous 
decades and relative to the productivity gains achieved in other major economies, notably the United 
States.  More  recently,  however,  the  productivity  performance  of  the  euro  area  has  improved.  Annual 
labour productivity growth (output per person employed) increased from a 0.2% per annum in the first 
quarter of 2005 to 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2006. The crucial question is again whether this recent 
improvement  is  of  a  temporary  or  permanent  nature.  In  real  time,  it  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  a 
potential  change  of  the  longer-term  trend  from  cyclical  and  temporary  fluctuations  in  the  productivity 
                                                      
2   The  participants  in  the  ECB  survey  expect  real  GDP  growth  of  2.5%  in  2007  and  2.3%  in  2008.  The  longer-tem  growth 
expectations (i.e. for the year 2011) of the survey participants remained unchanged at 2.1%. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2007
data. There is some evidence that, in certain sectors, and in a number of euro area countries, structural 
reforms  and  corporate  restructuring  have  been  raising  productivity  and  are  contributing  to  higher 
potential  output  growth.  However,  sectoral  analysis  –  notably  the  fact  that  the  recorded  productivity 
gains were concentrated in the industrial sector and that there were limited improvements in the services 
sector – and survey evidence suggest caution and support the view that recent improvements in labour 
productivity have been mainly cyclical.  
It is, thus, too early to reach a verdict on the extent to which the observed acceleration in productivity 
growth  since  early  2005  represents  a  structural  improvement  beyond  that  resulting  from  cyclical 
dynamics. More information and analysis are certainly needed to reach any definite conclusions. Two 
pertinent conclusions emerge from this assessment: First, further reforms are undoubtedly necessary in 
order to foster permanently higher productivity growth; second, there is an encouraging message for all 
to see: reforms do pay off. 
Improvements in productivity and labour utilisation growth which help increase the euro area’s potential 
growth have also implications for the conduct of monetary policy: for they can help raise the “speed limit” 
of the euro area economy, meaning that the economy can attain a faster rate of sustainable growth that 
is compatible with price stability. This leads me to a discussion of price developments. 
In  recent  months,  annual  HICP  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  fluctuated  at  levels  slightly  below  2%, 
mainly reflecting developments in energy prices. In the short term, as a result of significant base effects 
deriving from last year’s energy price volatility, and barring further increases in oil prices, annual inflation 
rates are likely to remain below 2% and may fall somewhat in the coming months, before rising again 
towards the end of the year to levels around 2%. What is relevant, however, for monetary policy is the 
outlook for price stability over the medium term. Over this policy-relevant horizon, the outlook for price 
developments  remains  subject  to  a  number  of  upside  risks.  These  relate  notably  to  the  increasing 
capacity  utilisation  in  the  euro  area  economy,  the  possibility  of  further  oil  price  rises  and  additional 
increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced and decided thus far. More 
fundamentally, stronger than currently expected wage developments could pose significant upward risks 
to price stability, not least in view of the favourable momentum in labour markets.  
Moreover, monetary and credit developments and liquidity conditions also point to upside risks to price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer-term.  Recent  monetary  data  confirm  that  the  underlying  rate  of 
monetary  expansion  remains  robust,  in  an  environment  of  already  ample  monetary  liquidity.  The 
strength  of  monetary  expansion  is  reflected  in  the  continued  rapid  growth  of  M3,  which  reached  an 
annual  rate  of  10.4%  in  April  2007.  What  is  behind  these  developments?  The  ongoing  strength  of 
monetary and credit expansion is due partly to the moderate level of interest rates and solid economic 
growth. However, the evolution of monetary aggregates can be volatile in the short run, and it has been 
affected by a number of factors. First, the flattening of the euro area yield curve in recent months has 
encouraged  substitution  into  shorter-term  monetary  assets  from  longer-term  instruments  outside  M3. 
Second, the growth of the “other financial intermediaries” (OFI) sector may accentuate this development, 
since institutional investors such as OFIs, which have become increasingly important over recent years, 
may  be  more  sensitive  to  such  yield  differentials  than  households.  Third,  the  shift  in  international 
investor sentiment in favour of the euro area economy has led to capital inflows, which – as foreigners 
purchase  euro-denominated  securities  from  domestic  residents  –  have  also  contributed  to  the 
acceleration  of  M3  growth.  Such  phenomena  suggest  some  caution  in  interpreting  the  latest  annual 
growth rates. Nevertheless, they should not lead to the conclusion that the strong recent dynamism of 
M3 can be discounted. The fact remains that the underlying rate of monetary expansion continues to be 
strong. 
Higher policy rates and short-term interest rates are starting to influence monetary and credit dynamics, 
although, as yet, they have not significantly dampened their overall strength. The growth of credit to the 
private  sector  has  moderated  somewhat,  though  it  seems  to  have  stabilised  at  double-digit  rates. 
Borrowing  for  financial  transactions  –  notably  in  the  context  of  securitisation  activities,  private  equity 
transactions  and  leveraged  buyouts  (LBOs)  –  has  supported  strong  rates  of  credit  expansion.  Credit 
extended for such purposes may not have the same immediate implications for aggregate demand as 
lending to finance investment or consumption spending. Nonetheless, such borrowing contributes to the 
accumulation of monetary liquidity in the euro area, as bank balance sheets expand.  
Given the vigorous monetary and credit growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-
check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  supports  the 
assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium to longer term. Accordingly, as 
stressed  by  the  Governing  Council  already  last  month,  strong  vigilance  is  of  the  essence  in  order  to 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 3
ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will support the solid 
anchoring of medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area at levels consistent with price 
stability. 
The euro area financial system 
III.  
Let me now conclude with a brief assessment of the prospects for financial stability in the euro area. As I 
mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  presentation,  the  external  macro-financial  environment  of  the  euro 
area financial system has been favourable. Credit quality in the euro area remains high, and it should be 
further underpinned by the positive economic outlook. Although there are some pockets of vulnerability 
in the euro area household and corporate sectors that have most likely increased, on average financial 
positions  continue  to  be  sound.  Moreover,  financial  institutions,  including  banks  and  insurance 
companies, have shown improving financial results and market participants expect profitability to remain 
strong in the foreseeable future.  
In late February and early March this year, the shock-absorbing capacity of the global and euro area 
financial system was tested by the third significant burst of market volatility in the past two years. This 
had  been  weathered  comfortably.  Improvements  in  the  risk  management  practices  of  financial  firms 
have  contributed  to  ensuring  that  higher  financial  market  volatility  did  not  prevent  the  capital  markets 
from facilitating the intermediation of capital.  
Nevertheless, the fact that the global and euro area financial systems have so far proven resilient to a 
series of  adverse  disturbances,  while  comforting,  does  not  provide  any  ground  for  complacency.  The 
few episodes of sharply rising market volatility endured in the past two years were triggered by relatively 
small  and  transitory  disturbances  in  an  environment  of  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and 
abundant  financial  market  liquidity.  Therefore,  it  is  unlikely  that  these  episodes  can  provide  sufficient 
guidance on how the financial system would perform in the event of larger shocks that could trigger a 
more material reappraisal of risks, or a change in risk appetite, at a less favourable stage of the credit 
cycle.  Moreover,  previously  identified  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability  to  financial  system  stability 
remain. And some of these vulnerabilities could be quickly exposed if financial market liquidity were to 
abruptly and sharply decline, for example as a result of a sudden decrease in investors’ risk appetite.  
There are several interesting and policy-relevant issues pertaining to the existing abundance of financial 
market  liquidity.  They  relate  to  its  nature,  causes,  symptoms  and  consequences.  It  is  essential  to 
emphasise that financial market liquidity is a concept distinct from monetary liquidity, although there can 
be links between the two. 
Financial  market  liquidity  can  be  defined  as  the  ability  of  market  participants  to  undertake  securities 
transactions  without  triggering  large  changes  in  asset  prices.  The  measurement  of  financial  market 
liquidity is not straightforward, but the symptoms of abundant market liquidity are visible and include high 
leverage, low bond yields, low volatility, narrow credit spreads, and high market turnover.  
We have constructed a composite indicator of financial market liquidity for the euro area which is based 
on a methodology developed by the Bank of England. The indicator relates to equity, bond and foreign 
exchange  markets  and  aims  to  gauge  three  different  dimensions  of  market  liquidity:  tightness,  depth, 
and resiliency. This particular indicator confirms that financial market liquidity in the euro area increased 
gradually since the late 1990s, rose significantly during 2003, and since then markets have remained 
very  liquid.  This  indicator  will  be  presented  in  the  forthcoming  edition  of  the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability 
review, which will be published by mid-June. 
This increase in market liquidity in recent years seems to reflect partly, if not mostly, structural changes, 
for example, the liberalisation of international flows of funds, the securitisation of loans, the development 
of  new  financial  instruments,  and  the  rapidly  growing  presence  of  highly  active  financial  market 
participants  in  markets,  such  as  hedge  funds.  However,  ample  market  liquidity  could  also  reflect  the 
“search for yield” and excessive risk appetite, indicating that liquidity risk could be underpriced. If this is 
soothe case, the current favourable market liquidity conditions could suddenly fade away if there were 
an abrupt and lasting increase in risk aversion. This could expose several underlying vulnerabilities and 
result  in  funding  liquidity  challenges  for  highly  leveraged  institutions,  unwinding  of  carry  trades  and 
increasing credit spreads across the credit quality spectrum. 
The  triggers  that  could  expose  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  cannot  be  predicted  with  any 
degree of certainty. However, financial institutions can prepare to mitigate potential disturbances before 
they occur through appropriate risk management arrangements and by stress-testing. This is especially 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2007
relevant today because the modern – developed and efficient – financial markets are – if I may employ a 
fitting image used before – like a highway; they get you where you want to go faster and more efficiently. 
But  accidents,  if  they  occur,  may  be  worse  than  before.  For  this  reason,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency  and  we  must  be  alert  so  as  to  look  forward  to  a  safe  journey  for  the  global  financial 
markets and, more generally, the world economy. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 5
