Usha Thorat: Financial inclusion – the Indian experience 
Speech  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  HMT-DFID 
Financial Inclusion Conference 2007, London, 19 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I thank Her Majesty’s Treasury and DFID for organising this conference and inviting the Reserve Bank 
of India to share India’s experiences in achieving greater financial inclusion (FI).  
We, in India, have been greatly impressed by the focused attention being paid by the UK Government 
to  the  subject  of  FI.  I  had  read  a  very  detailed  report  by  the  British  Banker’s  Association  in  2000 
dwelling upon the issues involved in providing greater access to financial services and the concept of 
a basic banking account. The setting up the Financial Inclusion Task Force and the Financial Inclusion 
Fund  reflect  the  priority  attached  by  the  Government  to  the  subject.  DFID  has  been  involved  in  a 
number of livelihood diversification projects in India and other countries especially for the marginalised 
and  DFID’s  stake  in  the  subject  obviously  derives  from  the  development  aspect  of  FI.  The  interest 
shown  by  authorities  in  different  countries  in  FI  clearly  show  that  there  are  concerns  that  large 
segments of the world’s population are excluded from formal payments system and financial markets 
while financial markets are developing and globalising rapidly. There is an obvious market failure and 
thus governments and financial sector regulators are seeking to create enabling conditions such that 
markets become more open, more competitive, affordable and inclusive.  
Focus of financial inclusion in India 
The Indian economy is growing at a steady rate of 8.5 % to 9% in the last five years or so. Most of the 
growth is from industry and services sector. Agriculture is growing at a little over 2 %. The potential for 
growth  in  the  primary  and  SME  sector  is  enormous.  Limited  access  to  affordable  financial  services 
such as savings, loan, remittance and insurance services by the vast majority of the population in the 
rural areas and unorganised sector is believed to be acting as a constraint to the growth impetus in 
these  sectors.  Access  to  affordable  financial  services  –  especially  credit  and  insurance  –  enlarges 
livelihood opportunities and empowers the poor to take charge of their lives. Such empowerment aids 
social and political stability. Apart from these benefits, FI imparts formal identity, provides access to 
the payments system and to savings safety net like deposit insurance. Hence FI is considered to be 
critical for achieving inclusive growth; which itself is required for ensuring overall sustainable overall 
growth in the country.  
The  approach  to  FI  in  developing  countries  such  as  India  is  thus  somewhat  different  from  the 
developed countries. In the latter, the focus is on the relatively small share of population not having 
access to banks or the formal payments system whereas in India, we are looking at the majority who 
are excluded.  
FI can be thought of in two ways. One is exclusion from the payments system –i.e. not having access 
to a bank account. The second type of exclusion is from formal credit markets, requiring the excluded 
to approach informal and exploitative markets. After nationalisation of major banks in India in 1969, 
there was a significant expansion of branch network to unbanked areas and stepping up of lending to 
agriculture, small industry and business. More recently, the focus is on establishing the basic right of 
every person to have access to affordable basic banking services.  
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
Measures of financial exclusion 
 
  One  common  measure  of  FI  is  the  percentage  of  adult  population  having  bank  accounts  (Chart-1). 
Going by the available data on the number of savings bank accounts and assuming that one person 
has only one account, (which assumption may not be correct as many persons could have more than 
one bank account) we find that on an all India basis 59 per cent of adult population in the country have 
bank accounts – in other words 41 per cent of the population is unbanked. In rural areas the coverage 
is  39  per  cent  against  60  per  cent  in  urban  areas.  The  unbanked  population  is  higher  in  the  North 
Eastern and Eastern regions.  
 
  The extent  of  exclusion  from credit  markets  is  much  more,  as number  of  loan  accounts constituted 
only 14 per cent of adult population (Chart-2). In rural areas, the coverage is 9.5 per cent against 14 
per cent in urban areas. Regional differences are significant with the credit coverage at 25 per cent for 
the Southern Region and as low as 7, 8 and 9 per cent respectively in North Eastern, Eastern and 
Central Regions.  
The extent of exclusion from credit markets can be observed from a different view point. Out of 203 
million households in the country, 147 million are in rural areas – 89 million are farmer households. 
51.4 per cent of farm households have no access to formal or informal sources of credit while 73 per 
cent have no access to formal sources of credit. Similar data are not available for non farm and urban 
households.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
Looking  at  the  different  sources  of  credit,  it  is  observed  that  the  share  of  non  institutional  sources 
reduced  from  70.8%  in  1971  to  42.9%  in  2002.  However  after  1991,  the  share  of  non  institutional 
sources  has  increased;  specifically,  the  share  of  moneylenders  in  the  debt  of  rural  households 
increased from 17.5 % in 1991 to 29.6% in 2002. In urban areas the share of non institutional sources 
has come down significantly from 40% in 1981 to around 25 % in 2002.  
Who are the excluded? 
The financially excluded sections largely comprise marginal farmers, landless labourers, oral lessees, 
self  employed  and  unorganised  sector  enterprises,  urban  slum  dwellers,  migrants,  ethnic  minorities 
and socially excluded groups, senior citizens and women. While there are pockets of large excluded 
population in all parts of the country, the North East, Eastern and Central regions contain most of the 
financially excluded population.  
Reasons for financial exclusion 
There  are  a  variety  of  reasons  for  FI.  In  remote,  hilly  and  sparsely  populated  areas  with  poor 
infrastructure, physical access itself acts as a deterrent. From the demand side, lack of awareness, 
low  incomes/assets,  social  exclusion,  illiteracy  act  as  barriers.  From  the  supply  side,  distance  from 
branch, branch timings, cumbersome documentation and procedures, unsuitable products, language, 
staff attitudes are common reasons for exclusion. All these result in higher transaction cost apart from 
procedural hassles. On the other hand, the ease of availability of informal credit sources makes these 
popular even if costlier. The requirements of independent documentary proof of identity and address 
can be a very important barrier in having a bank account especially for migrants and slum dwellers.  
Recent initiatives by Reserve Bank of India 
The  period  1969  to  1991  saw  a  huge  increase  in  the  branch  outreach  in  India  as  the  average 
population  covered  by  a  bank  branch  fell  from  64,000  to  13,711.  In  1991  along  with  reforms  for 
liberalising  and  opening  the  economy,  financial  sector  reform  aimed  at  deregulation,  increased 
competition and strengthening the banking sector through recapitalisation and adoption of prudential 
measures.  The  Indian  banking  industry  today  is  quite  robust  and  strong  to  be  able  to  take  on  the 
challenges of achieving greater financial inclusion.  
In the Annual Policy of the Reserve Bank for 2004-05, the Governor, Dr. Reddy observed and I quote 
– “There has been expansion, greater competition and diversification of ownership of banks leading to 
both enhanced efficiency and systemic resilience in the banking sector. However, there are legitimate 
concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract vast sections of 
population, in particular pensioners, self-employed and those employed in unorganised sector. While 
commercial  considerations  are  no  doubt  important,  the  banks  have  been  bestowed  with  several 
privileges, especially of seeking public deposits on a highly leveraged basis, and consequently they 
should be obliged to provide banking services to all segments of the population, on equitable basis.” 
Pursuant  to  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  undertaken  a  number  of  measures  with  the  objective  of 
attracting the financially excluded population into the structured financial system. In November 2005, 
banks  were  advised  to  make  available  a  basic  banking  “no-frills”  account  with  low  or  nil  minimum 
balances  as  well  as  charges  to  expand  the  outreach  of  such  accounts  to  vast  sections  of  the 
population. Banks are required to make available all printed material used by retail customers in the 
concerned regional language. 
In order to ensure that persons belonging to low income group, both in urban and rural areas do not 
encounter  difficulties  in  opening  bank  accounts,  the  know  your  customer  (KYC)  procedures  for 
opening  accounts  has  been  simplified  for  those  persons  with  balances  not  exceeding  Rs  50000/- 
(about GBP 600) and credits in the accounts not exceeding Rs.100000/- (about GBP 1200) in a year. 
The simplified procedure allows introduction by a customer on whom full KYC drill has been followed.  
Banks have been asked to consider introduction of a General purpose Credit Card (GCC) facility up to 
Rs. 25000/- at their rural and semi urban braches. The credit facility is in the nature of revolving credit 
entitling  the  holder  to  withdraw  upto  the  limit  sanctioned.  Based  on  assessment  of  household  cash 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 3
flows, the limits are sanctioned without insistence on security or purpose. Interest rate on the facility is 
completely deregulated.  
A  simplified  mechanism  for  one-time  settlement  of  overdue  loans  up  to  Rs.25,000/-  has  been 
suggested for adoption. Banks have been specifically advised that borrowers with loans settled under 
the  one  time  settlement  scheme  will  be  eligible  to  re-access  the  formal  financial  system  for  fresh 
credit.  
In  January  2006,  banks  were  permitted  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-governmental  organisations 
(NGOs/SHGs),  micro-finance  institutions  and  other  civil  society  organisations  as  intermediaries  in 
providing  financial  and  banking  services  through  the  use  of  business  facilitator  and  business 
correspondent (BC) models. The BC model allows banks to do “cash in – cash out” transactions at the 
location of the BC and allows branchless banking.  
Other measures include setting up pilots for credit counselling and financial education. A multilingual 
website in 13 Indian languages on all matters concerning banking and the common person has been 
launched by the Reserve Bank on 18 June 2007. 
Strategies and approach 
At the regional level, a forum called the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) has been in operation 
since nationalisation. SLBC is a group of bankers and government officials and is convened by a bank 
having major presence in the State called the SLBC convenor bank. It meets quarterly and reviews the 
banking  developments  in  the  State.  At  the  district  level,  the  district  level  committee  functions;  it  is 
headed by the District Commissioner and is convened by a designated lead bank for the district. In 
early 2006, one district in each State was identified by the SLBC for 100 per cent financial inclusion. 
So far, SLBCs have reported having achieved 100 per cent financial inclusion in the Union Territory of 
Puducherry  and  in  some  districts  in  Haryana,  Himachal  Pradesh,  Karnataka,  Kerala  and  Punjab. 
Reserve  Bank  proposes  to  undertake  an  evaluation  of  the  progress  made  in  these  districts  by  an 
independent external agency to draw lessons for further action in this regard. 
In the districts taken up for 100% financial inclusion, surveys were conducted using various data base 
such  as  electoral  rolls,  public  distribution  system,  or  other  household  data,  to  identify  households 
without bank account and responsibility given to the banks in the area for ensuring that all those who 
wanted  to  have  a  bank  account  were  provided  with  one  by  allocating  the  villages  to  the  different 
banks.  Mass  media  was  deployed  for  creating  awareness  and  publicity.  The  banks  used  different 
approaches to communicate the advantages of having a bank account. Bank staff or their agents who 
are usually local NGOs or village volunteers would contact the people at their households. Ration card 
/ Electoral ID cards of the families were taken for fulfilling the simplified KYC norms. Photographs of all 
the persons who opened bank accounts were taken on the spot by a photographer accompanying the 
bank team. In most States, the product used for launching the program for financial inclusion is the 
“No frills” accounts. In one State the farmer’s credit card or KCC is being used ensuring first to credit 
rather  than  savings.  In  other  States  no  frills  account  was  followed  by  small  overdraft  facility  or  a 
general  purpose  revolving  credit  upto  pre-specified  limit.  Recognizing  the  need  for  providing  social 
security  to  vulnerable  groups,  in  some  cases  in  association  with  insurance  companies,  banks  have 
provided innovative insurance policies at affordable cost covering life, disability and health cover.  
Cooperative banks and regional rural banks being local level institutions are well suited for achieving 
financial  inclusion.  These  banks  are  being  revived  and  strengthened  with  incentives  for  better 
governance. Being local institutions they are ideally suited for achieving FI.  
The role of an efficient payments system for FI cannot be overstressed and we efforts are being made 
to bring about Improvements in the payments system especially in the relatively less developed parts 
of the country. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2007
Huge increase in no frills accounts 
 
  The outcome of the efforts made is reflected in the increase of 6 million new “no frills” bank accounts 
opened between March 2006 and 2007. In view of their vast branch network (45000 rural and semi 
urban branches) public sector banks and the regional rural banks have been able to scale up their 
efforts by merely leveraging on the existing capacity. FI is being viewed by these banks as a huge 
business opportunity in an overall environment that facilitates enterprise and growth. It provides them 
a competitive advantage and defines a clear niche for their growth.  
Use of intermediaries 
One of the ways in which access to formal banking services has been provided very successfully since 
the  early  90s  is  through  the  linkage  of  Self  Help  Groups  (SHGs)  with  banks.  SHGs  are  groups  of 
usually women who get together and pool their savings and give loans to members. Usually there is a 
NGO that promotes and nurture these groups. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
has  played  a  very  significant  role  in  supporting  group  formation,  linking  them  with  banks  as  also 
promoting best practices. The SHG is given loan against guarantee of group members. The recovery 
experience  has  been  very  good  and  there  are  currently  2.6  million  SHGs  linked  to  banks  touching 
nearly 40 million households through its members. Banks provide credit to such groups at reasonable 
rates  of  interest.  However  the  size  of  loans  is  quite  small  and  used  mostly  for  consumption 
smoothening or very small businesses. In some SHGs, credit is provided for agricultural activities and 
other livelihoods and could be several times the deposits made by the SHG. Most of the SHGs have 
been linked to public sector banks in view of the latter’s dominant presence in the rural areas.  
The foreign banks and private sector banks have approached the access issue through either setting 
up relatively lower cost non bank companies for providing small value retail loans or have partnered 
with micro finance institutions that provide financial services to the relatively higher risk segments of 
the  population.  Microfinance  has  drawn  attention  to  an  entire  sector  of  borrowers  who  had  been 
previously  poorly  served  by  the  formal  financial  sector  –  and  MF  has  demonstrated  how  to  make 
lending  to  this  sector  a  viable  proposition.  However  the  rates  of  interest  charged  are  quite  high, 
typically 24 to 30 per cent, mainly on account of the high transaction cost for the average loan size that 
can  be  quite  small.  Compared  to  the  informal  sector,  perhaps  the  rates  are  lower,  but  issues  are 
raised whether these rates are affordable – in the sense whether they would leave any surplus in the 
hands of the borrowers and lead to higher levels of living.  
For commercial banks, the lower cost of funding, advantages of size and scale gives scope for cross 
subsidization and their interest rates are more competitive compared to the MFIs, but they have not 
been  as  successful  in  dealing  with  the  last  mile  issue.  The  partnering  with  SHGs  and  MFIs  with 
reasonable cost of funding by the banks has been seen as a more optimal approach till now.  
BIS Review 71/2007 
 5
As indicated earlier, a recent important regulatory measure is the permission given to banks to use 
post  offices,  cooperative  societies,  non  government  organisations  set  up  as  trusts  or  societies,  as 
business  correspondents  (agents)  for  doing  branchless  banking  after  conducting  due  diligence  on 
such intermediaries. Agency risk is sought to be minimised by using well respected local organisations 
and use of IT solutions for tracking transactions in the bank accounts. Many banks are exploring the 
use of this model to increase their outreach and deliver doorstep banking services at lower cost. The 
viability  and  scalability  of  the  model  would  require  some  flexibility  in  charging  of  interest  rates  or 
services charges to cover costs.  
IT solutions for financial inclusion 
The use of IT solutions for providing banking facilities at doorstep holds the potential for scalability of 
the FI initiatives. Pilot projects have been initiated using smart cards for opening bank accounts with 
bio metric identification. Link to mobile or hand held connectivity devices ensure that the transactions 
are  recorded  in  the  bank’s  books  on  real  time  basis.  Some  State  Governments  are  routing  social 
security  payments  as  also  payments  under  the  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme 
through such smart cards (see pictures below). The same delivery channel can be used to provide 
other financial services like low cost remittances and insurance. The use of IT also enables banks to 
handle the enormous increase in the volume of transactions for millions of households for processing, 
credit scoring, credit record and follow up.  
Initiative of a State Government – pictures of technology at work 
Pensioners with Bio-metric cards line-up to receive payments 
 
 6 
 BIS Review 71/2007
Biometric validation of smart card 
 
 Transaction confirmation receipt 
 
   Role of Government 
State Governments can play a pro-active role in facilitating FI. Issuing official identity documents for 
opening accounts , creating awareness and involving district and block level functionaries in the entire 
process, meeting cost of cards and other devices for pilots, undertaking financial literacy drives are 
some of the ways in which the State and district administration have involved themselves.  
India Post is also looking to diversify its activities and leverage on its huge network of post offices, the 
postman’s intimate knowledge of the local population and the enormous trust reposed in him. Banks 
are entering into agreements with India Post for using post offices as agents for branchless banking. 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 7
Work in progress 
The Finance Minister in his budget for 2007-08 has announced the setting up of two funds for FI; the 
first  called  Financial  Inclusion  Fund  for  developmental  and  promotional  interventions  and  the  other 
called Financial Inclusion Technology Fund to meet cost of technology adoption of about $ 125 million 
each. The scope of these funds is being worked out. Setting up of financial literacy centres and credit 
counseling  on  a  pilot  basis,  launching  a  national  financial  literacy  campaign,  forging  linkages  with 
informal  sources  with  suitable  safeguards  through  appropriate  legislation,  evolving  industry  wide 
standards for IT solutions, facilitating low cost remittance products are some of the initiatives currently 
under way for furthering FI.  
Thank you.  
8 
 BIS Review 71/2007
