Nout Wellink: Risk management & financial stability – Basel II & beyond 
Remarks  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the GARP 2007 8th Annual Risk Management Convention & 
Exhibition, New York, 27 February 2007. 
 Introduction  
I am very pleased to be here in New York this morning to talk about risk management in the context of 
a  rapidly  changing  financial  environment.  Many  would  argue  that  the  greatest  challenges  for  risk 
managers and supervisors arise during economic downturns and periods of financial stress. However, 
current  benign  and  favourable  conditions  can  present  other  challenges.  We  are  facing  a  period  of 
rapid innovation in financial markets, growing competition, and fading history that is relevant to how 
stress could play out in the future.  
In my remarks today, I would like to present a framework to think about the changing risk landscape 
for  banks,  as  well  as  some  practical  steps  for  risk  managers  and  supervisors  that  flow  from  this 
analysis.  Specifically,  I  will  first  talk  about  the  changing  business  model  under  which  banks  are 
operating. I will then discuss the new types of risk that this business model presents for banks and 
how traditional measures of risk and capital are becoming less relevant in this context. Finally, I will 
present some thoughts on what banks and supervisors can do to improve core financial institutions’ 
resilience to stressed market conditions. 
I should note that my remarks today benefit from the excellent exchanges of information that occur 
among banking supervisors at the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, as well as other bodies 
like the Joint Forum of banking, insurance and securities supervisors. They are also informed by the 
insights that supervisors are deriving from the development and implementation of the Basel II capital 
framework. In an environment where banks and securities firms have a growing share of their activities 
outside of their home countries, exchanging information on emerging risks and possible supervisory 
responses is increasingly important. 
Changing business model of banking 
As a result of significant financial product innovation and advances in technology, the role of banks as 
the ultimate holders of credit assets has become less important. At the same time, however, the global 
banking  institutions,  together  with  a  handful  of  securities  firms,  are  now  at  the  centre  of  the  credit 
intermediation process. These institutions originate and underwrite the majority of credit assets. They 
tend to distribute them to various classes of investors through syndication, securitisation, and credit 
derivative  technologies.  Using  similar  technologies,  they  also  actively  manage  their  residual 
exposures.  In  many  cases,  financial  institutions  may  retain  and  manage  the  more  complex  and 
potentially less liquid risks, for which they are ultimately rewarded. 
We  are  therefore  witnessing  a  fundamental  change  in  the  business  of  banking  from  buy-and-hold 
strategies  to  so-called  ‘originate-to-distribute’  models.  While  this  change  presents  opportunities  and 
challenges for risk managers and supervisors, it also serves as a useful framework for thinking about 
the changing risks at banks and other financial institutions. 
This shift in business models has been propelled by the rapid innovation in financial instruments, in 
particular  the  interaction  of  the  credit  derivatives  markets  with  the  rapid  growth  of  securitisation 
technology. It has also been influenced by the rapid growth of the institutional investor base. There are 
many new players to whom risk can be distributed, such as hedge funds, loan funds, funds-of-funds, 
in-house  hedge  funds  and  mutual  funds.  In  particular,  we  are witnessing  a rapid  growth  in  investor 
appetite to take on new forms of credit risk.  
These  developments  have  created  many  opportunities  to  improve  the  way  financial  institutions 
manage  their  risk  exposures  and  reduce  their  vulnerabilities  to  traditional  types  of  credit  stresses. 
Risks are now more widely distributed outside the banking system. There are more tools to manage 
risk  concentrations.  Risks,  and  how  they  are  priced,  have  become  more  transparent.  As  a  result, 
deteriorating credit exposures can be managed more actively at an earlier stage. 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
New risks and risk management challenges 
The transformation of banks’ business models has yielded substantial benefits. However, the move to 
originate-to-distribute models also provides a useful framework for examining new types of risks that 
banks  face  and  for  highlighting  some  of  the  shortcomings  of  more  traditional  measures  to  manage 
them.  By  traditional  measures,  I  mean  simple  balance  sheet  ratios  of  capital  adequacy,  historical 
measures  of  potential  losses  on  loan  portfolios,  or  value-at-risk-based  risk  measures  in  the  trading 
book.  
The originate-to-distribute business models depend on several key characteristics: 
• 
• 
First, a growing reliance on liquid markets;  
Second, a healthy risk appetite among various types of investors, in particular those taking 
on the more risky portions of structured credit assets;  
And third, a diverse investor base to whom risk is being distributed.  
• 
Ultimately, what we are concerned about is the ability to transfer or actively manage the various risks 
that  core  intermediaries  face,  not  just  under  favourable  market  conditions,  but  also  during  periods 
when financial market, credit and liquidity conditions are less benign.  
When  seen  through  this  prism,  there  are  a  number  of  new  risks  that  are  not  captured  through 
traditional measures. In particular, I would highlight the following: 
• 
First, a rapid growth of trading book assets relative to traditional banking book assets and a 
fundamental shift in the types of risks retained in the trading book, in particular those arising 
from  structured  credit  products.  This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  improvement  in 
financial technology we are seeing, which enables more and more assets to be priced and 
traded. 
Second, the growth of the trading book is, in turn, producing a rapid growth in counterparty 
credit exposures relative to traditional credit exposures. As with market risk exposures, these 
counterparty exposures are becoming increasingly complex and difficult to measure.  
Third, the valuation of increasingly complex products presents yet another challenge. Many 
of these products have not been tested under periods of stressed liquidity, which could have 
a significant impact on valuations.  
Fourth,  the  use  of  traditional  approaches  by  many  firms  to  assess  their  vulnerability  to 
funding liquidity risk. These approaches may not take into account the growing reliance on 
active  markets  to  manage  the  firm’s  liquidity  in  an  environment  that  is  increasingly 
capital-markets  driven.  Both  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  industry  are  currently  exploring 
issues relating to the management and supervision of funding liquidity.  
Finally, the degree of risk transfer that is actually achieved through credit risk mitigation and 
securitisation  techniques  requires  greater  scrutiny.  In  particular,  how  well  do  these  risk 
transfers hold up under stress? To what extent will risk be put back to firms if counterparties 
were  to  default,  if  investors  were  to  demand  compensation  for  losses,  or  if  investor  risk 
appetites were to shift abruptly?  
    Practical areas of focus for risk managers and supervisors 
Trying to predict how all these risks will play out in practice can be demanding since we have little 
historical  experience  to  guide  us.  Growth  in  credit  markets,  synthetic  securitisations,  new  market 
players and new risk management techniques have largely taken place over the past five years, that 
is, after the last credit downturn. I expect we will only experience a true period of stress when we have 
the combined impact of a credit downturn, a major shift in risk appetites and a withdrawal of market 
liquidity.  
Firms have been challenged to develop more comprehensive stress tests that cut across risk types 
and business lines in a true downturn environment. Stress tests that are produced on a regular basis 
are  most  evolved  in  the  market  risk  area.  Regular  credit  risk  stress  tests  tend  to  be  conducted 
primarily at the level of business lines. More comprehensive firm-wide credit stresses and scenarios 
often tend to be more ad-hoc. Finally, the manner in which different risk types interact under stress 
conditions is still at the frontier of risk management. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2007
I believe, however, that there are a number of additional practical steps that banks and supervisors 
can take to improve their understanding of financial intermediaries’ resilience to stress. Here again, the 
changes we are seeing from the originate-to-distribute models can come to our aid in structuring our 
thinking. 
In  the  case  of  banking  institutions,  this  could  entail  an  assessment  of  where  pressure  points  might 
arise  under  the  new  business  models  if  risk  appetites  were  to  reverse  and  liquidity  conditions  to 
deteriorate. This does not necessarily require a prediction of the magnitude of deterioration, but rather 
a  relative  assessment  of  where  the  greatest  pressure  points  may  emerge.  Building  on  the  earlier 
discussion, such areas might include: 
• 
The  inability  to  distribute  exposures  in  various  types  of  securitisation  and  underwriting 
pipelines, and the need for a deeper understanding of the risks along various points of the 
distribution process; 
Challenges  around  obtaining  valuations  for  more  structured  positions  and  certain  types  of 
collateral; 
The growth of concentrations under stress as borrowers draw down traditional lines of credit, 
conduits require additional support and trading counterparties demand additional financing. 
In the extreme, concentrations could arise by taking back positions if counterparties default; 
And  finally,  the  ability  to  collect  adequate  margin  in  relation  to  risk  through  the  cycle  (as 
discussed in the so-called “Corrigan report” produced by the Counterparty Risk Management 
Policy Group). 
   Conducting such analyses under the umbrella of the originate-to-distribute model provides a common 
denominator across what might otherwise be an unrelated set of risks and control points. Firms might 
also ask themselves where they have the capacity to improve controls on their own versus where they 
must  rely  on  cooperation  across  the  industry,  either  because  of  shared  infrastructures  or  due  to 
competitive issues.  
Bank  supervisors  can  reinforce  these  efforts  through  an  assessment  of  firms’  risk  management 
approaches and how these would perform should risk appetites and market liquidity conditions reverse 
(whatever the cause). Given the cross-border nature of banking institutions, there is significant value in 
supervisors sharing information about the quality of firms’ risk management systems in relation to such 
a scenario. There also is value in sharing across sectors where we see product lines and business 
lines cutting across institutional lines. 
Finally, let me discuss how Basel II fits into this picture. Banks and supervisors are spending a lot of 
time  and  resources  preparing  for  the  practical  implementation  of  the  framework,  including  the 
management of a variety of home-host issues. Basel II also provides a structured framework for firms 
and  supervisors  to  assess  the  robustness  of  risk  management  in  the  originate-to-distribute  market 
environment. A more in-depth discussion of this issue is something I will take up in a future speech, 
but let me end with a few concrete examples about how the Basel II framework can focus dialogue in 
this area: 
• 
First, Basel II requires that firms develop more robust frameworks for capturing less liquid 
products and rapidly growing credit risk in the trading book.  
Second,  the  Basel  II  framework  permits  firms  to  use  their  own  models  to  measure 
counterparty credit risk exposures. This process can focus on how firms capture some of the 
more complex credit risks arising from structured credit and equity derivatives. Under Pillar 
2,  supervisors  can  assess  how  these  risks  are  reflected  in  economic  capital  models. 
Moreover, the framework only allows the recognition of portfolio margining models if they are 
sufficiently robust from a legal and risk management standpoint. 
Third, Basel II establishes benchmarks for recognising risk transfer and mitigation in credit 
derivatives  and  securitisation  structures.  These  provide  a  framework  for  supervisors  to 
assess  the  degree  of  risk  transfer  and  mitigation  under  both  normal  and  more  stressed 
market liquidity conditions. 
Fourth, Basel II seeks to advance comprehensive stress testing frameworks and provides a 
clear  benchmark  for  what  stress  testing  is  intended  to  achieve.  For  banks,  this  means 
demonstrating  to  themselves  and  to  supervisors  that  they  hold  an  adequate  cushion  of 
capital in good times to carry them through a significant credit downturn.  
   BIS Review 18/2007 
 3
 Finally,  under  Basel  II,  firms  must  take  a  close  look  at  the  robustness  of  their  economic 
capital  models.  For  example,  it  requires  banks  and  supervisors  to  discuss  assumptions 
regarding diversification benefits, within and across business lines and risk types.  
Conclusions 
To  conclude,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  around  the  nature  of  risks  in  the  markets,  the 
adequacy  of  risk  premia  and  what  might  trigger  the  next  stress  scenario.  At  the  same  time,  I  think 
there is a lot that banks and supervisors can do in practice to better prepare for the inevitable next 
downturn. By assessing how the business of banks has changed through the prism of the originate-to-
distribute models, banks and supervisors can focus their efforts on strengthening risk management in 
areas that present the greatest vulnerabilities to a deteriorating market liquidity scenario, as well as on 
those  risks  that  are  not  well  addressed  using  more  traditional  risk  metrics.  Moreover,  there  is 
significant value in the industry and supervisors sharing insights on issues and concerns around this 
type of a scenario. Finally, Basel II provides a structured framework for discussing some of the new 
risks we are seeing and creating incentives to better measure and manage those risks. 
Thank you very much, and I wish you an interesting and enlightening conference. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2007
