Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Birmingham  Chamber  of 
Commerce Annual Banquet, Birmingham, 23 January 2007. 
 Lord Mayor, Lady Mayoress, President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Two weeks  ago  your Chamber  of Commerce  called  on  the  Bank  of  England  to  take  manufacturing 
more  seriously  when  it  sets  interest  rates.  In  arguing  against  an  interest  rate  rise,  the  Birmingham 
Chamber said, “we would urge the Bank of England to once again consider the effects this will have 
on the beleaguered manufacturing sector”. It will not have escaped your attention that Bank Rate did 
rise in January and has now increased by 75 basis points since the beginning of August. So tonight I 
want to explain why the Monetary Policy Committee took that action, and why the Bank believes that 
the control of inflation is essential for the success of Birmingham – and all British – manufacturing. 
Last week we learnt that inflation, as measured by the Consumer Prices Index, was 3% in December, 
the highest level since the Monetary Policy Committee was set up almost ten years ago. If it rises by 
one further decimal point to 3.1%, I shall have to write an open letter to the Chancellor explaining why 
inflation has risen to more than one percentage point above the target of 2%, and what measures the 
Committee are taking to bring inflation back to target. 
RPI inflation has risen to 4.4%, the highest rate since December 1991. And RPIX inflation – the target 
which governed our decisions until December 2003 – has risen to 3.8%, which would have triggered a 
letter under the old target. 
In 1997, I suggested that “Given past experience of inflation volatility, it is likely, even allowing for the 
change  in  policy  regime,  that  the  MPC  will  have  many  opportunities  to  restore  the  lost  art  of  letter 
writing to British life”. It is really very surprising that no opportunity has yet arisen. As I stressed back 
then,  it  is  important  to  understand  –  and  many  commentators  seem  to  misunderstand  –  that  the 
inflation  target  is  not  a range  of  1-3%,  but  a  target of  2%  at  which  the Monetary  Policy Committee 
continually aims. 
So an inflation rate of 3.1% is simply a trigger for a public explanation of why inflation has risen above 
target and what the Committee proposes to do about it. Letter writing is a key part of the accountability 
provisions  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  created  in  1997,  and  I  would  welcome  the  chance  to 
demonstrate how the process is meant to work. The opportunity to write to the Chancellor did not arise 
last week. But since we are so close to the level that would trigger a letter, let me instead write a letter 
to you. 
Over the past year CPI inflation has risen by a percentage point, from around 2% to 3%. That was not 
the Committee’s expectation a year ago when it believed the most likely outcome was for inflation to 
stay around 2%. And at that point many commentators were predicting cuts in interest rates in 2006. 
So what happened? Part of the story has been a further sharp rise in energy prices during 2006. But it 
is only a part. It is impossible to be sure what explains the rest of this unexpected drift up in inflation. 
But three factors seem to be relevant. 
First, the historically low level of interest rates and rapid growth of money and credit have contributed 
to rising asset prices and buoyant nominal spending, not just in the UK but around the industrialised 
world.  Spending  and  capacity  pressures  in  the  UK  economy  recovered  from  the  slowdown  in  2005 
faster than many had expected. 
Second,  and  a  direct  consequence  of the  first,  is  that  inflation  expectations  have  risen.  Firms  have 
been able to raise prices a little faster than before with the expectation that now those increases would 
stick.  As  the  Birmingham  Chamber’s  own  recent  quarterly  survey  showed  –  “over  half  of  the  City’s 
manufacturers were intending to increase prices in the next three months”. One of the reasons for the 
success of inflation targeting is the anchor which it gives to inflation expectations. But, when inflation 
moves away from target, we must prevent the anchor from dragging. Expectations need to be firmly 
fixed on the 2% target. 
Third, increasing cost pressures have made it more difficult to sustain profit margins without raising 
prices.  Energy  and  import  prices  are  one  source  of  higher  costs.  Another  is  the  cost  of  employing 
labour which has been rising faster than the growth of real take-home pay. Higher pension costs for 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 1
companies, on the one hand, and higher taxes, petrol and utility prices for employees, on the other, 
have opened up a gap between increases in the pay bill and real take-home pay. If investment and 
employment  growth  are  to  be  maintained,  the  burden  of  these  higher  costs  must  either  be  passed 
back in the form of reduced input costs or forward as higher prices. So far, pay pressures have been 
subdued, but not sufficiently so to mitigate the rise in costs to employers. As a result, companies have 
scaled back their demand for labour and looked to raise prices. 
The risks to money spending, inflation expectations and cost pressures were not overlooked by the 
MPC  and  were  explicitly  identified  as  upside  risks  to  inflation  both  in  speeches  and  in  our  monthly 
minutes back in 2005. In the event, the upside risks to inflation did materialise to some extent. And a 
year ago, the MPC thought the risks to GDP growth were on the downside. Yet, the total output of the 
UK, leaving to one side the energy sector, has been rising at an annual rate of over 3%. And over the 
past month some of the key spending and activity indicators have been strong. 
The  balance  of  risks  to  output  growth  and  inflation  has  shifted  towards  the  upside.  As  those  risks 
began to materialise, the MPC acted. 
The Committee started to raise interest rates to deal with the changing balance of risks last August, 
and has now raised rates by 75bp in total to keep inflation on track to hit the target. But, by responding 
early to changes in the inflation outlook, the MPC ultimately needs to raise interest rates by less than 
would be the case if we delayed. 
Looking forward, some of the factors responsible for the pick up in inflation through 2006 are likely to 
unwind during 2007. Oil prices have fallen by around a third since August, and will feed through to 
petrol and utility prices. The rise in the exchange rate will dampen the impact of higher import prices. 
It is also important not to exaggerate the effect of stronger demand on inflation. As we pointed out in 
our November Inflation Report, the ability to recruit migrant labour continues to offer a safety-valve for 
demand pressures in the economy, and is, no doubt, in some part responsible for the continued muted 
level  of  wage  pressures.  That  is  a  particular  help  in  present  circumstances,  and  has  reduced  the 
extent to which interest rates have needed to rise. 
But how quickly and by how much inflation will fall over the next year or so is difficult to judge. Falls in 
some important prices, such as petrol and utility charges, mean that people will have more disposable 
incomes to spend on other goods and services. That may encourage producers of those goods and 
services  to  raise  prices.  Equally,  companies  will  be  under  less  pressure  to  reduce  other  costs, 
affecting their response to upward pressures on earnings growth. The Committee will be monitoring 
carefully the outcomes month by month. All I can say is that the Committee’s central view remains that 
inflation is likely to fall back in the second half of the year, possibly quite sharply. 
As  ever,  there  are  risks  around  that  central  view  –  in  both  directions.  Some  of  the  biggest  risks 
surround energy prices, supply factors such as migration, the level of asset prices, and the extent to 
which inflation expectations will prove to be a fixed or dragging anchor. Pay growth is also important. 
As  I  said  earlier,  if  investment  and  employment  growth  are  to  be  maintained,  the  burden  of  higher 
costs on employers must either be passed back in the form of lower input costs or forward as higher 
prices. All of us – whether on the shop floor, in the board room, or in the public sector – are coming to 
terms  with  the  fact  that  those  higher  costs  imply  a  temporary,  but  only  a  temporary,  slowing  in  the 
growth of our real take-home pay. That adjustment – difficult but inevitable – will be helped by the fall 
in energy prices since last autumn. But the belief that we could avoid the adjustment by pushing up 
our pay would lead to a self-defeating process of higher wages offset by higher prices. It is the task of 
the MPC to ensure that the process of adjustment does not lead to a persistent rise in inflation. 
Bank  Rate  was  raised  in  order  that  inflation  will  come  back  to  its  2%  target,  and  future  action  will 
depend upon how those risks to the inflation outlook materialise. 
The  month  by  month  path  of  interest  rates  required  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  is  a  matter  of 
judgment.  There  is  certainly  room  for  reasonable  people  to  disagree  about  the  level  or  timing  of 
changes in interest rates. There is no absolute truth here, and it is vital that the MPC keeps an open 
mind at all times. 
That in essence is my letter to you and all the members of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce. 
Achieving the inflation target is, I believe, in the long-run interest of manufacturing no less than the rest 
of the economy. I recognise that the burden of changes in interest rates often falls disproportionately 
on  manufacturers  and  other  exporters  as  increases  in  interest  rates  push  up  the  sterling  exchange 
rate. And that comes on top of a secular decline – fifty years ago almost 40% of GDP was produced 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2007
by the manufacturing sector. Today that share is around 14%. But the continued relative decline of 
manufacturing  –  and  indeed  the  strength  of  sterling  –  over  the  past  decade  or  so  reflects,  not  the 
stance  of  monetary  policy,  but  the  remarkable  wind  of  change  that  has  blown  across  the  world 
economy with the advent of China, India and much of the former Soviet Union into the world trading 
system.  To  their  great  credit,  business  people  and  politicians  have  not  resisted  changes  to  the 
structure of the British economy, unlike many of their counterparts abroad. As a result, total output and 
employment  here  have  grown  rapidly,  and  our  living  standards  are  higher  than  could  have  been 
sustained with policies aimed to defend the old industrial structure. 
Those changes, however, have led to the closure of many manufacturing companies. There are over a 
million  fewer people  employed  in  manufacturing  now  than  a decade  ago, and 200,000  fewer  in  the 
West Midlands. It is just over a hundred years since car production started at Longbridge, just over 
thirty years since it was nationalised, and no vehicle has been built there for over a year. But there are 
also  many  success  stories.  Since  I  became  Governor,  I  have  made  regular  monthly  visits  to  the 
regions and countries of the United Kingdom, and visited around one hundred companies, large and 
small, new and old. I have been impressed by how they have focussed on products in which they can 
add value and exploit their comparative advantage – whether a company in Northern Ireland exporting 
wall heaters to the newly rich of Shanghai and Beijing, a manufacturer in the North-West exploiting a 
patent for paint which is resistant to very high temperatures, or a company in the Potteries passionate 
about  the  plates  they  make  for  the  hotel  and  restaurant  trade.  And  if  you  want  a  digger,  why  look 
further than a JCB? Proof that vehicle assembly in the West Midlands can be successful. 
All of them – as all of you – are working in a highly competitive environment. It is indeed much harder 
to run a business than to run a central bank. But seeing those companies at first hand has made me 
even  more  convinced  that  our  duty  is  to  ensure  that  you  do  not  experience  the  macroeconomic 
instabilities of the past and that we keep inflation on track to meet our 2% target. Stability is in your 
interest just as much as mine. 
Speeches on monetary policy rarely whet the appetite for a good meal, and I apologise for that before 
the splendid dinner your Chamber is about to serve. But tonight has been an opportunity to share our 
analysis  of  the  economic  situation  with  you.  I  hope  you  will  understand  the  reasons  behind  our 
decisions to raise interest rates over recent months, even if it goes against the grain to support them. 
Long before I became Governor I said that my ambition was for monetary policy to be boring. You may 
feel  that  the  latest  decision  was  far  from  boring.  But  while  it  is  true  that  the  precise  timing  was 
unexpected by analysts, the direction in which interest rates were heading was predictable in terms of 
the  underlying  economic  data,  and  indeed  was  quite  clearly  predicted  –  financial  markets  were 
anticipating a 25 basis point rise at the February meeting. Looking behind the stunned surprise in the 
headlines, much of the reaction to our latest decision was that it was only too clear why rates needed 
to  be  raised.  As  one  paper  wrote  last  week,  “while  the  timing  of  last  week’s  rate  rise  caught  many 
commentators on the hop, the reasoning behind the move is not at all a surprise”. 
So I have certainly not abandoned my ambition to be boring. The basis for our prosperity is business. 
And  the  excitement  in  the  economy will,  I  hope,  continue  to  come  from  your businesses, your  new 
products  and  ventures.  After  all,  the  MPC  is  there  to  make  inflation,  and  hence  the  economy  as  a 
whole, more stable. It’s up to you to steal the limelight and the headlines from us. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 3
