Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Efforts to provide an integrated national 
payments and settlements system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Signing  of  the  MOA  on  the  Interconnection  of  PDS 
Settlement  Highway  (PSH)  and  BSP  PhilPaSS,  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  Manila, 
29 August 2007. 
 Monetary  Board  Members;  Mr.  Vicente  Castillo,  CEO,  Philippine  Dealing  System  Holdings 
Corp;  Mr.  Ramon  Sy,  President,  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines;  guests  from  our 
partners  in  the  banking  sector;  BSP  officials;  our  friends  from  the  media;  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good afternoon! 
Today’s MOA signing is another landmark in our joint efforts to provide an integrated national 
payments and settlements system. As partners in the financial reform agenda, we have all 
vigorously  worked  together  to  have  the  various  pieces  of  the  payments  puzzle  be  put 
together. In the process, we continue to work towards the establishment of the infrastructure 
that would allow the secure and timely completion of transactions to reduce systemic risk in 
the financial markets and thereby enhance the integrity of financial transactions.  
In the course of the last five years, the BSP’s PhilPaSS has been interconnected with the 
check  and  peso  clearing  results  of  the  PCHC,  the  Delivery  vs.  Payment  of  Government 
Securities transactions of the Bureau of the Treasury, the ATM transactions of the Megalink 
member  banks,  and  the  Payment  vs.  Payment  (Foreign  Exchange)  transactions  of  the 
Philippine Dealing Exchange. To date, all the commercial banks and 50% of the thrift and 
savings  banks  and  some  non-banks  performing  quasi-banking  operations  settle  these 
various transactions in the PhilPaSS. 
With the signing of the Memorandum of Agreement for the Interconnection of the Philippine 
Dealing System Holdings Corporation’s Settlement Highway with PhilPaSS, all the payment 
instructions  for  transactions  that  would  be  done  through  the  PDS  Group  could  now  be 
transmitted directly to the BSP-PhilPaSS and effected in the DDAs of the counterparties who 
are  PhilPaSS  member  banks  or  through  the  DDAs  of  the  PhilPaSS  member  bank  in  their 
capacity  as  Settlement  Banks  for  non-PhilPaSS  members.  These  transactions  include 
foreign  currency  transactions,  interbank  and  interdealer  repo  transactions,  and  interbank 
fund transfers.  
It  is  also  worthy  to  note  that  this  interconnectivity  comes  at  very  minimal  cost.  This  is 
because  the  infrastructure  is  already  in  place;  all  that  needed  to  be  done  was  minimal 
reconfiguration  of  the  existing  systems  to  capture  these  additional  types  of  financial 
transactions. 
The  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  in  fulfilling  the  third  pillar  of  its  mandate,  will  continue  to 
work  to  improve  the  operations  of  the  PhilPaSS  to  better  address  all  the  concerns  of  our 
stakeholders. We are well aware, however, that we cannot do this alone. We look forward to 
your continued support and partnership.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 1
