Caleb M Fundanga: Broadening access to mortgage financing in Zambia 
Opening speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the re-launch 
of the Pan African Building Society (PABS), Lusaka, 24 July 2007. 
 • The Shareholders of PABS; 
• The Board of Directors of PABS; 
• Senior Government Officials present; 
• The Deputy Governor-Operations and Registrar of Banks and Financial Institutions; 
• The General Manager of PABS; 
• Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It gives me great pleasure and gratitude for having been invited to speak on this occasion of 
the re-launch of the Pan African Building Society. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Today  marks  an  important  day  in  the  calendar  of  Pan  African 
Building Society which brings on board new shareholders. The Bank of Zambia is happy to 
note that this development has turned around the financial condition of Pan African Building 
Society. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware,  there  is  shortage  of  housing  in  Zambia  and 
therefore the demand for housing finance is increasing. 
It follows therefore, that the primary challenge of housing finance institutions in Zambia is the 
broadening of access to mortgage finance particularly to many people in urban areas. 
Due  to  the  prevailing  macro-economic  stability  that  the  country  is  experiencing,  we  have 
seen substantial growth in the housing finance industry in recent years. For instance, in the 
last four (4) years to December 2006, the mortgage portfolio of the building society industry 
has grown five fold. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  recognition  of  the  need  to  provide  a  conducive  regulatory 
environment  which  promotes  sustainability,  accountability,  transparency  and  growth  of  the 
building society industry in Zambia, the Building Societies Act was amended in October 2005 
to harmonise it with the Banking and Financial Services Act pending the modernization of the 
Building Societies Act under the Financial Sector Development Plan law reform programme. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Bank  of  Zambia  is  concerned  about  the  levels  of  lending  interest 
rates charged by most financial institutions in Zambia, building societies included. With the 
achievement  of  relative  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  recent  years  as  evidenced  by  a 
significant reduction in the inflation rate to 11.1 percent as at June 2007, it is the expectation 
of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  that  all  prudent  lending  institutions  would  make  downward 
adjustments  to  their  lending  interest  rates  to  make  financial  services  accessible  and 
affordable. It is also important to note that high lending interest rates can lead to high levels 
of delinquency. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is in this light that we anticipate that credit referencing services will 
help in reducing credit risk through the provision of widely accessible information on the loan 
repayment  profile  of  borrowers.  This  should  also  provide  another  incentive  for  lowering  of 
interest rates. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion I wish to state that the Bank of Zambia is committed to 
broadening  and  deepening  the  financial  sector  through  effective  implementation  of  the 
Financial Sector Development Plan. Bank of Zambia will endeavour to contribute towards the 
creation a stable macro-economic environment. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 1
I would therefore like in this particular instance, to call upon the housing finance industry to 
play  its  role  effectively  so  that  Zambian  people  can  have  access  to  affordable  housing 
finance. 
Thank you and God bless you. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2007
