Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Business continuity and risk management in 
African central banks 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of Bank of the Uganda, at the closing of the 
Regional Workshop on Business Continuity and Risk Management, Entebbe, 9 February 2007. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  join  you  as  you  wind  up  this  workshop.  I  also  wish  to  appreciate  the  support 
provided to this workshop by the Bank of England and Deutsche Bundesbank through the experts they 
sent to guide deliberations. 
In the same way I would like to thank Governors of Central banks of Kenya, Tanzania and Reserve 
Bank of Malawi for honouring my invitation to send representatives to attend this workshop. 
As the Deputy Governor indicated at the opening ceremony, the BOU considered this workshop as 
extremely  important  given  the  roles  our  Central  Banks  are  playing  on  a  day-to-day  basis  in 
macroeconomic management and financial stability of our region. 
From the reports we receive at the EAC Monetary Affairs Committee meetings, all the central banks 
represented  in  this  workshop  are  at  different  phases  of  implementing  business  continuity  and  risk 
management  programmes.  For  the  Bank of  Uganda,  we  have  implemented our  Business  continuity 
program for the last three years while a formal risk management program has now run for slightly over 
two  years.  This  workshop  therefore  has  presented  us  with  an  opportunity  to  initiate  reviews  and 
improvements for resilient business continuity and risk management programs in each of our central 
banks. I hope that the joint training programme has contributed to further networking on the numerous 
issues that you handle. 
Within the context of the East African Community’s set goal to create a single monetary union for the 
East African region, the three central banks in East Africa have spent significant amount of resources 
to  lay  the  groundwork  for  the  eventual  monetary  and  political  union.  Central  Banks  have  been 
engaged  in  efforts  to  harmonise  policies,  practices  and  processes  to  ensure  smooth  integration. 
Business continuity,  risk  management and  IT  governance  are some  of  the areas, which have  been 
highlighted as key in addressing such a harmonisation process. 
In business continuity sphere today, a lot of debate has shifted to the possibility of extending business 
continuity  sites  beyond  territorial  boundaries.  It  is  possible  that  with  common  approaches  and 
practices  discussed  in  this  workshop,  our  central  banks  can  at  some  stage  act  as  backup  to  each 
other and hence help business recovery efforts in the event of business disruptions. 
As we come to the end of the workshop, it is my hope and belief that the outcomes of the workshop 
will  be  an  invaluable  contribution  to  the  ongoing  efforts  to  establish  sound  programs  for  the 
management  of  risks  and  business  continuity.  I  hope  that  this  workshop  has  provided  the  needed 
opportunity  to  re-assess and  evaluate  our  performance  in  the  areas  of  business  continuity  and  risk 
management. 
On behalf of Bank of Uganda I would like once again to thank Bank of England and Bundesbank for 
providing support to this workshop and to thank all the delegates for their participation. 
It is now my duty to declare this workshop officially closed. 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 1
