Alan Bollard: Commodities, dairy prices and the New Zealand economy  
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Waikato 
Grasshoppers, Hamilton, 12 June 2007.  
The speech was prepared by Dr Bollard and Mike Jones.  
 For  much  of  the  20th  Century  the  fortunes  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  were  linked  to  the  world 
commodity  markets.  As  these  markets  declined  through  the  1980s  and  90s,  so  too  did  our 
competitiveness. Over the last year, the signs are that commodity prices are changing again. This is 
very good news for the New Zealand economy, offering better terms of trade, higher growth, and a 
reduced trade deficit. This speech looks at what this might mean for New Zealand, focusing on dairy 
prices and some consequences for monetary policy.  
World commodity prices have increased sharply in the last five years. The commodity price boom has 
coincided  with  a  period  of  buoyant  global  growth.  However,  the  sheer  size  and  speed  of  this 
commodity price boom is somewhat unusual in a historical context, and, in fact, has seen commodity 
prices “decouple” from the global growth cycle (figure 1).  
Part of the explanation likely lies with China. The rapid pace of industrialisation of China, coupled with 
its  relatively  low  per  capita  endowment  of  natural  resources,  has  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  world 
commodity  demand.  For  example,  according  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  China  was 
responsible for 51 per cent of the growth in the world copper market from 2002-2005, 54 per cent of 
the increase in the steel market, 48 per cent of aluminum growth and 87 per cent for nickel.1  
Figure 1: Global growth and growth in real commodity prices2  
                                                       
1   Quoted in Financial Times (2007) “Non-financial risks series: Mining groups encounter tough lessons” June 4. 
2   The  CRB  commodity  price  index  measures  movements  in  global  commodities,  both  ‘hard’  and  ‘soft’.  It  includes  energy, 
grains, industrials, livestock, precious metals, and soft commodities. 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
Initially, the increase in world commodity demand was most obvious in the oil price boom, followed by 
industrial commodities. More recently, many of the same factors that have driven the boom in global 
commodity  prices  have  also  driven  a  surge  in  world  prices  for  some  of  New  Zealand's  commodity 
exports.  
Figure 2: World commodity prices and world prices for New Zealand’s commodity exports 
 
We appear to be going through an interesting (and only partly predicted) phase of world development. 
Emerging market economies in the 1960s and 70s significantly increased their per-capita consumption 
of food grains. In the 1980s and 90s we started to see protein increases which were mainly generated 
from  animal  feed  grains.  This  decade  has  seen  an  intriguing  new  phenomenon:  the  conversion  of 
acreage to biofuels production. Figure 3 gives a visual picture of just how big this consumption trend 
has been. The implication is that a country which can produce animal protein from pastoral production 
has a big competitive advantage.  
 2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
Figure 3: Consumption of food, feed and fuel 
What has been happening to world dairy prices?  
The most marked increases have been in dairy prices. Over the last year, dairy prices have increased 
by 73 percent. Milk powder prices have led the way, rising almost twice as fast as other dairy products.  
Figure 4: World dairy prices 
 In large part, the recent gains in dairy prices can be traced back to a basic imbalance between global 
demand and supply.  
 BIS Review 63/2007 
 3
Global demand for protein has been on a structural uptrend for some time. Demand for protein is very 
income sensitive (figure 5) and rising income levels in emerging markets have led to improvements in 
diet, incorporating more meat, eggs and milk. In recent years, the strongest growth in consumption of 
dairy products has come from emerging Asian markets, particularly China.  
Figure 5: Asian incomes and consumption of agricultural products3 
 
At the same time, dairy production from the major exporting regions, such as New Zealand, Australia 
and  the  European  Union  (EU),  has  been  relatively  lacklustre,  hampering  the  ability  of  global  dairy 
supply to meet the growth in demand.  
In  the  EU,  exports  of  milk  powder  have  now  fallen  significantly  following  the  removal  of  export 
subsidies for milk powders. The elimination of milk powder subsidies has encouraged European dairy 
farmers to shift from exporting milk powder to supplying higher value added products (such as cheese) 
to  their  own  domestic  markets.  Dairy  stock  levels  in  the  EU  have  also  been  run  down  as  a  result 
which, combined with similarly low stocks in the US, has seen milk powder stocks globally hit very low 
levels.  
Australia  is  in  the  midst  of  one  of  the  worst  droughts  on  record.  Despite  the drought,  dairy  exports 
have held up remarkably well, sitting at around similar levels to last year.4 However, with production 
well down on last year, some easing in dairy exports seems likely going forward. Further, it is unlikely 
that production will ever fully recover to pre-drought levels.  
New Zealand dairy exports have recorded relatively modest growth over the past three years (around 
3 percent p.a.).  
The  recent  boom  in  biofuel  demand  has  further  hindered  global  dairy  supply.  Strong  demand  for 
ethanol has seen corn prices, the primary source of livestock feed, advance over 50 percent in the 
past six months.  
                                                      
3  
4   Dairy Australia. 
Includes China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2007
Figure 6: Dairy and corn futures 
This has significantly increased the cost of dairy production for farmers overseas. Higher corn prices 
have also seen the ratio of milk prices to feed prices (for grain-fed cattle) worsen over the past year or 
so, meaning there is now less of an incentive for overseas farmers to increase dairy output (figure 7). 
And with more land in the US now being used for ethanol production there is less land available for 
any expansion in feed and/or dairy production.  
All of these factors may act to slow further expansion in the global dairy herd.  
 Figure 7: Milk-feed price ratio 
BIS Review 63/2007 
  5
Where will dairy prices go from here?  
Any discussion about the outlook has to be heavily qualified. Predictions of future dairy prices involve 
a  range  of  uncertainties  and  we  shouldn’t  pretend  that  the  outlook  is  clearer  than  it  really  is.  The 
evolution of global demand and supply for dairy products depends on a wide range of factors including 
complex interactions with other commodity markets. Even if one can identify the predominant drivers 
of  the  dairy  market,  translating  those  into  accurate  predictions  about  prices  is  another  matter.  We 
shouldn’t forget that the marked run-up in dairy prices over the past six months is a development that 
largely took the industry by surprise even if it can be rationalised in hindsight. Moreover, even if dairy 
prices are moving to new structural levels, it is reasonable to think they will still be subject to cyclical 
fluctuations.  
That said, current spot market shortages do seem to suggest dairy prices are likely to remain at high 
levels in the short term. Looking further ahead, the future path of world dairy prices depends on the 
ability of global supply to respond to higher prices, as well as the ability and willingness of consumers 
to pay higher prices.  
There is certainly no compelling reason to suggest that strong global demand for dairy products will 
slow markedly soon.  
Supply  responses  in  dairy  are  slow  inevitably  slow.  And  with  the  boom  in  biofuel  demand  sending 
production costs in many parts of the world soaring, the ability of supply to “catch-up” to demand will 
be constrained further. As a result, any increase in global dairy supply may well rest on the prospects 
for emerging exporters such as Argentina and the Ukraine, along with the ability of China to increase 
production to meet its own demand. It is certainly possible that we could be heading into a “new era” 
for dairy prices.  
Developments in other soft commodities  
Dairy prices look set to be the star performer amongst New Zealand’s export commodities over the 
next few years. But that is not to say the outlook for other commodities is bleak. In fact, the global 
backdrop seems likely to turn increasingly favourable for prices for meat and forestry, New Zealand’s 
second and third largest commodity exports respectively.  
Forestry prices have been increasing since 2005 on the back of strong Asian (particularly Chinese and 
Korean)  demand  for  logs.  Pulp  prices  have  also  joined  the  fray  lately  due  to  the  increased  bio-fuel 
demand  already  mentioned.  And  looking  ahead,  prices  could  press  even  higher.  Russia  is  set  to 
increase  its  tax  on  log  exports  in  large  incremental  steps  over  the  next  three  years,  with  the  first 
increase starting in July. This should provide support for log prices given Russia’s strong presence in 
international log markets.  
6 
 BIS Review 63/2007
Figure 8: Real commodity prices: total and ex-dairy 
Beef  and  lamb  prices  have  come  under  pressure  in  recent  months  as  drought  conditions  overseas 
have induced higher than normal rates of slaughter. Prices, particularly for lamb, have fallen as this 
“wall of meat” has hit world markets. But, of course, higher slaughter now means lower slaughter later. 
As meat producers in drought stricken regions rebuild their herds, global prices for both meat and beef 
should recover. There is also potential for prices to remain permanently higher if increased feed costs 
(bio-fuels again) prevent some of this herd re-stocking.  
All of this means that, even if dairy prices were to correct downwards, buoyant prices for some of our 
other key export commodities may well provide some offset, limiting the downside to our commodity 
export returns overall.  
 Other effects internationally  
Surging prices for dairy products, as other well as for other soft commodities such as wheat, corn, and 
oats, have sparked international fears over food price inflation.  
There is growing concern within the food industry that the present upswing in prices is structural rather 
than  temporary  and,  indeed,  food  companies  overseas  have  already  begun  passing  these  price 
increases onto consumers. Development agencies providing protein supplements to vulnerable third 
world countries are being particularly affected.  
 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 7
 
This partly explains the accelerating rates of food price inflation in other parts of the world. US food 
prices have risen by 6.7 percent since the beginning of the year while UK food price inflation recently 
reached 6 percent. In comparison, annual growth in New Zealand’s food price index has been more 
muted,  around  4  percent  in  annual  terms.  However,  with  dairy  and  other  food  prices  continuing  to 
increase there may be additional upward pressure on New Zealand’s food prices in future. This has 
implications for monetary policy, which will be discussed later on.  
 Impacts of higher payouts on NZ dairy industry  
Higher dairy prices will flow through into a higher payout for New Zealand’s dairy farmers. We estimate 
that Fonterra’s recent upward revision to its payout forecast for this season and next will add an extra 
$2 billion to dairy farmers’ incomes (at current production levels).  
Just  what  farmers  do  with  this  extra  income  remains  to  be  seen.  The  cash  windfall  is  likely  to  be 
spread across repaying debt, increasing savings, upgrading equipment, buying more cows, fertiliser 
and other farm inputs, purchasing/converting land, and, to some degree, cars and holidays. There are 
also  the  downstream,  multiplier  effects  to  consider,  which  could  see  a  bigger  boost  to  the  rural 
economy than the $2 billion payout increase alone would suggest.  
But let’s not forget the cost side of the equation. Farmers often remind us that the cost of producing 
milk has increased substantially over the last few years. Significant cost increases could dampen the 
overall impact of higher payouts on the rural economy.  
8 
 BIS Review 63/2007
Figure 11: Dairy payout and cost (per kilogram of milk solids) 
Higher payouts may also spur a fresh wave of dairy conversions, which was certainly the experience 
following the record 2001/2002 payout.  
 Figure 12: Rural land use 
  
Before  the  recent  dairy  price  increase,  dairy  farm  prices  were  looking  very  top-heavy,  and  hard  to 
justify on the basis of expected payouts. The rate of increase has been even higher than for house 
prices. The commodity price increases may have saved some farmers from difficult liquidity positions.  
 BIS Review 63/2007 
 9
Figure 13: Dairy land prices and house prices 
More  conversions  seem  all  the  more  likely  considering  the  less  favourable  returns  available  from 
sheep  and  beef  farming  at  present.  The  implications  of  a  higher  conversion  rate  would  be  another 
step-up in on-farm investment which would in turn lead to further increases in dairy sector debt levels.  
 Figure 14: Dairy sector credit 
Changing  land  use  would  also  bring  fresh  consideration  of  the  environmental  impacts  arising  from 
increasing milk production. Examples include water allocation for irrigation in Canterbury and the run-
 10 
 BIS Review 63/2007
off implications of intensive nitrogen use. In a world where customers pay increasing attention to the 
environmental footprint of production, this is a serious issue.  
Other impacts on NZ activity  
There is some evidence to suggest that prices for agricultural commodities are becoming increasingly 
linked to prices for other commodities, particularly energy.  
Figure 15: Oil prices and world prices for New Zealand’s key export commodities 
Strong growth in demand for biofuels suggests greater convergence between agriculture commodities 
and energy commodities in future.  
  Arbitrage from the oil market may support some agricultural commodity prices (in New Zealand’s case 
mostly dairy prices and, to a lesser extent, beef prices) at structurally higher levels, as long as high oil 
prices are sustained.  
But,  if  we  are  going  to  see  dairy  prices  remain  at  high  levels,  there  are  some  other  “winners”  and 
“losers” to bear in mind.  
We  know  that  higher  world  commodity  prices  are  typically  associated  with  a  higher  exchange  rate. 
And, while the recent appreciation in the exchange rate has dampened returns to dairy farmers to a 
degree, it has, at the same time, effectively distributed some of these income gains to consumers via 
lower import prices.  
However, as the increase in commodity prices has mostly been in dairy, the higher exchange rate has 
reduced  New  Zealand  dollar  returns  for  many  other  exporting  industries,  including  some  farm 
production. This phenomenon is known as “Dutch Disease”: very high prices for one export sector can 
crowd-out competitiveness in other export sectors.  
BIS Review 63/2007 
 11
Monetary policy implications  
It  bears  repeating  that  we  cannot  be  sure  about  the  path  of  dairy  prices  over  the  next  few  years 
following their recent run-up. Assuming dairy prices do remain at elevated levels there are likely to be 
many benefits for New Zealand, including higher growth and a reduced trade deficit. However, from a 
monetary policy perspective, a terms of trade shock of this magnitude poses some challenges. It is 
likely that higher dairy prices will affect inflation in a number of ways.  
Firstly,  as  alluded  to  previously,  increases  in  world  dairy  prices  will  lead  to  higher  domestic  dairy 
product prices. This has already begun to occur. Milk and milk based products are part of the CPI, 
increases in domestic dairy prices are likely to have a fairly prompt (though likely small) impact on CPI 
measured inflation.  
Secondly, and most importantly, higher dairy prices will provide a substantial boost to rural incomes. 
Of course, for many this is very good news. However, we are dealing with a stretched economy at 
present.  Domestic  demand  is  already  strong.  Capacity  is  tight.  If  this  extra  income  is  spent  and/or 
invested by farmers it will add to this domestic demand pressure. It may be that a large portion of this 
extra income is saved or used to repay debt. But to the extent that some of it is spent, it may make it 
harder to achieve our medium-term inflation target. This effect could be compounded even further if 
these higher incomes become reflected in higher rural land prices. A reacceleration in land prices risks 
adding to domestic demand pressures through wealth effects and equity withdrawal.  
These two strong influences on inflation will be partly offset to some extent by the strong exchange 
rate.  The  high  New  Zealand  dollar  will  dampen  medium-term  inflation  pressures  by  suppressing 
activity in those exporting sectors not lucky enough to be receiving high commodity returns.  
We should not lose sight of the fundamental message: the trend we are seeing in commodity prices is 
very good news for the New Zealand economy. Assuming they are appropriately conservative in their 
spending, dairy farmers have a real chance to contribute to our growth.  
12 
 BIS Review 63/2007
