Stefan Ingves: Regulatory challenges of cross-border banking – possible 
ways forward 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, Sydney, 23 July 2007.  
 Introduction 
As the integration of financial markets has picked up speed in recent years the subjects of 
supervision  and  crisis  management  of  internationally  active  banks  have  gained  in 
importance.  I  myself  have  on  several  occasions  argued  that  policy  actions  are  needed  in 
order to cope with the challenges arising from financial integration. Today, I will elaborate on 
one of my ideas, namely the creation of a special body for supervision of the major cross-
border  banks  in  Europe.  For  the  sake  of  this  speech  let  us  name  this  body  the  European 
Organisation for Financial Supervision (EOFS). 
Lessons from the past 
Before  elaborating  on my  proposal  let  me  start  by  noting  that  financial  and  banking  crises 
can be costly. From history we know that the economic and political crisis costs can be very 
large.  The  US  depression  and  the  hyperinflation  in  Germany  during  the  1930s  are  clear 
examples. After the Second World War, the conclusion was that the financial sector had to 
be heavily regulated. This gave the national authorities a certain control over the risks in the 
different  national  financial  sectors,  but  at  the  same  time  regulation  stifles  competition, 
product  development,  efficiency  and  proper 
these 
inefficiencies  became  large  and  apparent  and  many  countries  started  deregulating  in  the 
1970s  and  1980s.  In  my  country  we  have  painful  experiences  of  a  banking  crisis  that 
occurred partly because the new deregulated environment posed new challenges for banks 
as well as for regulators; challenges they were not prepared for. 
Eventually banks developed more appropriate risk management techniques and supervisors 
adopted  a  more  risk-  and  process-oriented  form  of  supervision  rather  than  the  previous 
rather formalistic type. This has clearly lowered the risk of financial crises. 
risk  management.  Eventually, 
Internationalisation of banking 
Also after the deregulation, most banks have remained predominantly national. Only in the 
last  decade  have  we  seen  the  emergence  of  some  big  cross-border  banks  with  major 
activities in several countries. And this financial integration is accelerating. Let me here be 
perfectly clear. This development is positive for the economy. It stimulates competition and 
product  development  across  countries.  It  also  means  that  the  banks  can  profit  from 
economies  of  scale  and  scope.  The  spread  of  cross-border  banking  has  reached  different 
levels in different parts of the world. In Europe it has been increasing rapidly in the last few 
years,  but  there  are  also  several  active  cross-border  banking  groups  here  in  the  Pacific 
region. 
This  integration  is  not without  challenges.  In  particular  supervision  and  crisis  management 
arrangements  have  to  be  addressed  hopefully  with  some  foresight,  before  we  get  another 
crisis.  To  explain  this  allow  me  to  draw  a  parallel  to  the  perhaps  most  burning  issue  in 
contemporary debate; the problem of global warming and climate change. The challenges of 
financial integration share some of the same characteristics as the environmental problems 
facing us. There are in short negative externalities. 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
As you all know, the impact of industry emissions on the environment is the classic example 
of what we economists call negative externalities. If the market is left without any intervention 
at all, the costs for the pollution will be borne by others than those who have actually been 
directly involved in the polluting business. The same reasoning can be applied to financial 
crises.  A  crisis  that  severely  affects  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  will  cause 
substantial costs to the entire economy, ultimately in the form of loss of output. These costs 
go far beyond what the financial firms can possibly take – or are willing to take – into account 
when conducting their day to day business activities. 
Both  with  regard  to  pollution  and  financial  crises  there  are  ways  to  manage  the  negative 
externalities.  Public  interventions  can  be  used  so  that  the  negative  externalities  are 
internalised  in  a  way  acceptable  to  society  as  a  whole.  For  industries  polluting  the 
environment,  authorities  can  for  example  impose  taxes  or  issue  emission  rights  to 
compensate for the social cost of pollution. For banks and financial firms this is achieved by 
regulatory  and  supervisory  measures,  such  as  capital  requirements  and  rules  for  the 
establishment and conduct of business as well as provisions giving central banks the right to 
grant emergency liquidity assistance. 
Many stakeholders, but no single authority 
If the negative externalities are limited to a national scale, sufficient public intervention may 
be possible. National authorities have – or could be given – sufficient power to act. When 
environmental  pollution  crosses  national  borders,  containing  the  negative  externalities 
becomes  more  difficult,  since  the  national  authorities  only  have  national  mandates.  Then 
some kind of supra-national organisation or some form of cross-border agreement may be 
required. Similarly, in the financial area, as long as the externalities are limited to one nation, 
the domestic authorities can – at least potentially – be used to internalise the problems. 
Thus, when banks start becoming important in several countries, there will be a mismatch 
between the potential problems and the roles of financial supervisors and regulators. In the 
prevailing  regulatory  structures  there  are  very  few  arrangements  for  supervision  and  crisis 
management  designed  for  managing  externalities  with  cross-border  impact.  Given  that  the 
financial markets get more and more integrated the lack of adequate cross-border regulatory 
structures creates a number of challenges. 
Challenges 
One challenge is that the interdependence between different countries increases. Problems 
in the banking system in one country are more likely to spill over to the other countries where 
the  bank  or  group  is  active.  The  cross-border  contagion  effects  are  likely  to  be  larger  as 
banks are actively involved in several countries. This can be illustrated by one of the largest 
banks in my country, Nordea. It has substantial activities in four of the Nordic countries, and 
is also a significant part of the financial system in all these countries. Any serious problem in 
Nordea will therefore most likely affect all four countries. 
Another  challenge  is  that  decisions  and  actions  by  national  authorities  are  likely  to  have 
considerable  implications  for  the  financial  stability  in  foreign  economies.  This  is  of  course 
particularly true in cases where foreign operations are run through branches, meaning that 
they  are  subject  to  foreign  supervision.  However,  in  Europe  at  least,  the  consolidating 
supervisor  has  an  increased  influence  also  on  foreign  subsidiaries,  within  the  new  capital 
regulation  –  the  Basel  II-framework.  In  the  Nordea  case  –  which  is  now  a  group  with  a 
subsidiary structure – the Swedish consolidating supervisor has a possibility to influence the 
risk management of the group as a whole but also in the different subsidiaries. Now, Nordea 
has announced plans to convert its subsidiaries in the Nordic countries into branches. When, 
and  if,  this  plan  eventually  becomes  a  reality,  Swedish  authorities  will  have  the  full 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
responsibility  for  supervising  three  foreign  branches,  all  of  which  may  be  of  systemic 
importance in the different host countries. 
A third challenge is that the legal distinction between branches and subsidiaries is becoming 
blurred.  Increasingly  banking  groups  are  starting  to  organize  themselves  along  business 
lines rather than along legal and national lines, concentrating various functions to different 
centres  of  competence.  There  are  several  examples  of  this  trend.  Again  Nordea  is  one 
illustrative example. In order to reap the benefits from economies of scale and scope, Nordea 
has  chosen  to  concentrate  its  different  functions,  such  as  treasury  operations,  credit 
decision-making and risk management to specific centres of competence within the group. It 
is  therefore  questionable  whether  the  different  entities  within  the  group  really  are  self-
contained, even if they are legally independent subsidiaries. With this structure, it is also less 
likely that the group as whole can survive a failure of one of its entities. Hence, operationally 
and  in  economic  terms,  Nordea  increasingly  resembles  a  bank  with  a  branch  structure.  A 
consequence  is  that  the  present  regulatory  structure  may  be  less  well-suited  for  efficient 
supervision and regulation of the group. 
A fourth challenge is that the practicalities of supervision and crisis management are greatly 
complicated as the number of relevant authorities increases. In normal times, this means that 
the  regulatory  burden  for  the  financial  firms  increases.  Also,  the  need  for  supervisory 
cooperation  increases,  which  demands  new  supervisory  procedures  and  the  creation  of 
common  supervisory  cultures.  In  times  of  financial  crises,  sharing  information  and 
coordinating action becomes a difficult priority, especially since time is a scarce resource in 
crises. 
A fifth challenge is that conflicting national interests emerge as banks become truly cross-
border. The national authorities have a national mandate and are responsible to the national 
government or parliament. They are therefore unlikely to take the full external effect of their 
actions in other countries into account. Different countries may also have different priorities in 
terms  of  resources  for  supervision  and  crisis  management  or  in  terms  of  their  regulatory 
structures. One reason may be that the financial systems differ quite significantly between 
countries.  Additionally,  in  crisis  management,  the  use  of  public  funds  can  never  be 
completely ruled out. In a cross-border context, serious conflicts of interest can arise when it 
comes to agreeing on how to share the potential burden of such interventions. 
All  these  challenges  have  a  common  theme.  Increasingly,  national  financial  stability  is 
becoming  dependent  on  the  activities  of  banks  and  authorities  in  foreign  countries.  Also, 
given the roles and responsibilities of these authorities, conflicts of interest are likely to occur. 
The  typical  illustration  of  this  problem  is  a  bank  being  of  limited  size  in  the  home  country 
while  having  a  systemically  important  branch  abroad.  While  a  potential  failure  of  the  bank 
would  not  create  any  substantial  disturbance 
the 
consequences to the host country could be destructive. As the host country, in the event of 
failure,  is  likely  to  end  up  with  the  bulk  of  the  bill  for  resolving  the  crisis,  the  incentives  to 
conduct close supervision of the bank are substantial. For the home-country on other hand 
the same incentives do not exist. 
Financial  integration  also  raises  a  number  of  practical  issues.  Do  the  present  legal 
frameworks provide authorities with the necessary tools for supervising cross-border banking 
groups in an efficient way? And do the authorities themselves have arrangements in place to 
produce comprehensive assessments of the operations and the risks of these groups? Under 
the prevailing regulatory structures I am afraid that the answers to both of these questions 
are likely to be no. 
the  home-country  economy 
in 
Policy actions are needed 
As I have tried to illustrate so far, financial integration gives rise to several challenges related 
to the supervision of cross-border banks. Most importantly, I have argued that the present 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 3
supervisory  arrangements  are  not  designed  to  prevent  the  cross-border  externalities  that 
financial crises may result in. This, of course, is a growing problem in an integrated world. 
Furthermore,  I  have  argued  that  there  are  deficiencies  in  how  the  supervision  of 
internationally active banks works in practice, which can partly be explained by limitations in 
legislation and partly by supervisors not being sufficiently coordinated. 
In my opinion all this gives us good reasons to reflect on how to take actions for revising the 
present regulatory frameworks. We need to find ways for countries to cooperate closely and 
establish mechanisms for coordination and conflict resolution. 
Motives for a coordinated financial supervision 
Most  of  what  I  have  said  so  far  is  probably  pretty  uncontroversial  both  in  terms  of  the 
analysis of the challenges of integration and of the need for action. However, it may be more 
difficult to reach agreement on how to move forward. A number of alternative solutions have 
been brought into the debate. For example, proposals such as prohibiting foreign branches 
from  doing  business  domestically  or  extending  home-country  responsibility  have  been 
discussed. 
My take on this, as I said in the beginning, is instead to gradually move towards the creation 
of  a  common  international  body  with  a  mandate  to  conduct  supervision  of  banks  with 
substantial cross-border activities. The simple rationale is that the creation of such a body is 
the only way to fully manage the conflicting national interests. Also, such a body would have 
several other benefits. A single authority supervising cross-border banking groups instead of 
several would most certainly increase the comprehensiveness and the effectiveness of the 
supervision.  For  the  firms  subject  to  supervision,  it  could  mean  that  the  regulatory  burden 
would eventually be reduced considerably. 
In  a  European  context,  the  idea  of  a  European  Organisation  for  Financial  Supervision 
(EOFS) may at a first glance seem overly idealistic, and to be honest, in some respects it is. 
One can argue that it would be virtually impossible to make countries give up parts of their 
sovereignty  to  a  supranational  authority.  However,  looking  at  this  from  a  European 
perspective,  there  is  hope.  Within  the  European  Union  there  is  already  a  framework  for 
supervisory and regulatory cooperation, based on the common legislative process in the form 
of EEC-directives and regulations. Moreover some institutional arrangements for supervisory 
cooperation  are  in  place,  even  if  they  do  not  have  any  legal  powers.  It  may  therefore  be 
easier to reach some progress in Europe than elsewhere in the world. Still, even in Europe, it 
is not very likely that a full fledged Pan-European supervisor can be established in the near 
future. Therefore, my proposal should be seen as a gradual process rather than a fast-track 
to a European FSA. 
Institutional set-up and powers of EOFS 
Let me now go into more detail on how the EOFS would work. As I said earlier, the mandate 
of the EOFS would be to perform a form of supervision of the major cross-border banks at 
the European level. As the focus is strictly on prudential supervision, the supervisory tasks 
related to market conduct and consumer protection would still rest with national supervisors. 
Aligned with the EU-principle of subsidiarity the supervisory duties of the EOFS should only 
include the banks with major cross-border activities. What I have in mind is a three layered 
structure. The 8000 or so European banks which mainly operate domestically would remain 
under the exclusive competence of national authorities. The regionally oriented banks, active 
in a few countries, could use a structure similar to that of today, where supervisory colleges 
deepen  the  cross-border  cooperation.  The  limited  number  of  truly  Pan-European  banks 
would on the other hand be dealt with by the EOFS. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2007
In  the  first  step  the  tasks  for  the  EOFS,  would  in  my  view,  be  threefold:  Firstly,  it  should 
gather  information  about  the  cross-border  active  groups.  Secondly,  with  the  information 
acquired,  unified  risk-assessments  should  be  produced  for  the  banks  subject  to  EOFS 
supervision.  The  third  and  final  task  should  be  to  oversee  the  activities  and  risks of  these 
banking groups. 
To set up the EOFS one would, to start with, need to second staff from national supervisors 
and central banks. Initially the EOFS should probably only have limited powers, namely to 
collect information and undertake on-sight inspections together with national supervisors. All 
other  powers,  such  as  licensing  activities,  regulations,  interventions  and  corrective  actions 
would still remain the responsibility of national supervisors. Consequently, the EOFS would 
act  alongside  the  national  authorities  producing  comprehensive  risk  analysis  of  the 
designated banking groups and based on those analysis give advice on policy actions to the 
national authorities. In the event of conflicting interests between authorities the EOFS could 
also act as neutral mediator. 
Further,  a  coordinated  European  supervision  of  banks  and  groups  with  significant  cross-
border activities would facilitate a more efficient management and resolution of cross-border 
crises. It would be easier to reach a common assessment of the systemic importance as well 
as the solvency of the bank or group in question. 
What I, in content, am proposing is that the EOFS in its embryonic stage would function more 
like  a  non-regulatory  central  bank  than  a  traditional  supervisor.  The  EOFS  would  conduct 
macro-prudential  oversight  and  act  as  an  enlightened  speaking  partner  to  the  supervisory 
authorities. 
In my view, it is important that the EOFS is a separate agency with an independent status. 
The reason is that in order to be successful the EOFS would need a high level of operational 
independency and integrity. It is also important to achieve a necessary division of power. The 
EOFS should cooperate closely with other organisations but should still be free from direct 
guidance  and  involvement  from  national  authorities  as  well  as  from  the  European 
Commission and the ECB. In my opinion, it should be given the same independent status as 
the ECB has today. With many other Pan-European regulatory bodies already in existence, it 
should not be too hard to come up with suggested proper financing arrangements. 
If successful in its initial role, the tasks of the EOFS can gradually be extended by assuming 
additional supervisory powers for the truly cross-border banks. It would however first have to 
prove its merits. 
As  long  as  the  EOFS  operates  in  addition  to  the  national  authorities  another  layer  of 
supervision is added to the present structure. From an industry perspective this would imply 
a  greater  regulatory  burden.  However,  I  believe  –  and  hope  –  that  it  is  something  that 
authorities and banks can live with if the supervision as such improves and if the proposal 
increases the chances of a substantially lower regulatory burden in the future. 
People acquainted with the present regulatory and institutional set-up within the EU may ask 
if  what  I  am  proposing  is  not  already  in  place,  considering  the  existing  consolidated 
supervisory model and the role of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS). 
However, even if both of these functions have their obvious merits they do not quite satisfy 
the needs. The CEBS mandate is to promote harmonisation of regulatory frameworks and 
not to conduct ordinary supervisory work. And even if the consolidated supervisor has group 
responsibility  it  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  the  authority  answers  to  the  home-land 
constituents. Thus, the EOFS would contribute important functions in addition to the present 
regulatory structure within the EU. What I have in mind is an institution with real resources 
and not a “talk shop” primarily designed to build consensus. 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 5
Conclusions 
Let  me  summarise.  During  the  last  decade,  the  banking  sector  has  increasingly  become 
cross-border. We should welcome this rather new form of financial integration as it enhances 
competition  and  stimulates  economic  growth.  This  development  also  raises  challenges  for 
the  regulatory  community.  Our  answer  to  these  challenges  should  not  be  increased 
protectionism. Instead, we need to find new forms for cooperation and supervision that allow 
the benefits from integration to be realised. Today I have presented to you my thoughts on 
the need for a special body with the mission to supervise the major European cross-border 
banks. Since this proposal to some probably seem rather radical and not very conceivable in 
the shorter term, I have advocated a gradual approach. In my view, the time has now come 
to set up the modalities for achieving this goal. 
The reason why I have chosen a European focus is simply that there are already institutional 
arrangements in place which can be used as a platform for bringing us closer to the goal of 
supra-national  supervisory  frameworks.  In  my  view  though,  the  underlying  challenges  of 
financial  integration  are  of  a  global  nature.  Therefore,  even  if  it  may  not  be  possible  to 
achieve the same solutions outside Europe, it should be of wider international interest to at 
least move in the direction of enhanced cooperation between supervisory authorities. I hope 
that I have been saying here today can serve as inspiration for further discussions on this 
issue. 
Considering that financial integration is already widespread and that the process of revising 
present regulatory structures will most certainly be demanding and protracted, we  need to 
get to work. Returning to what I said in the beginning, history shows us the importance of 
having proper regulatory structures in place. Therefore, it would be highly unfortunate if the 
appropriate measures have not been taken before the next major financial crisis occurs. For 
once, it would be encouraging to see pre-emptive policy actions rather than a crisis being the 
catalyst for such actions. 
Thus,  in  the  same  way  as  the  international  community  is  facing  increasing  challenges  to 
cope with the negative externalities in the environmental area, the financial regulators have 
to face the consequences of financial integration. It is my hope that we as regulators show 
enough  courage  and  determination  to  tackle  the  negative  externalities  a  potential  financial 
crisis would entail – before it hits us. 
Let me finish by saying that the issue of financial integration comprises many more aspects 
than  merely  how  to  set-up  supervisory  structures  for  cross-border  banks.  For  example, 
questions on how to establish proper arrangements for emergency liquidity assistance and 
deposit guarantee schemes also need to be considered within the same context. And even if 
these issues are of a somewhat different nature I believe that they do require the same type 
of supranational considerations I have talked about here. The simple reason is that it is only 
when  the  frameworks  for  regulation,  supervision  and  crisis  management  match  the  actual 
structure  of  financial  markets,  that  the  negative  externalities  of  financial  crises  can  be 
managed properly. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2007
