Lucas Papademos: Economic performance, institutions, and human values 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Second 
International  Symposium  on  Universal  Values:  “Science,  Technology  and  Human  Values”,  The 
Academy of Athens, Athens, 2 May 2007. 
 Introduction  
I. 
This conference focuses on a fundamental and broad topic of relevance to all fields of science and 
public policy: the importance of human values. The role of human values in shaping developments in 
different  fields  of  science,  in  assessing  the  implications  of  scientific  advances  and  in  adopting 
appropriate  policies  is  steadily  becoming  more  widely  recognised  and  better  understood.  This 
observation is also true for economic science and public policy. 
Over  the  past  half-century,  economic  science  –  both  theoretical  analysis  and  empirical  research  – 
underwent  a  profound  transformation  with  the  progressive  and  extensive  adoption  of  mathematical 
analysis, statistical methodology and use of computing technology. The “dismal science” has become 
more of a true science. However, the vast majority of the significant advances in economic theory and 
empirical analysis has placed little emphasis on the role of values as well as institutions in influencing 
the  behaviour  of  economic  agents,  the  overall  functioning  of  the  economy  and  the  orientation  or 
conduct of economic policy. This fact may seem rather odd since in previous years the importance of 
institutions and underlying values was at the centre of economic and political thought.  
The relative de-emphasis of institutions and values since the middle of the 20th century did not reflect 
a lack of recognition of their significance in affecting economic behaviour and public policy. I would 
argue that it was largely the result of various factors and assumptions: first, that for a given country 
institutions and values could be taken as given elements of the broader economic environment that 
evolved very gradually over time; second, that their effects on economic behaviour were indirect and 
relatively small, compared with the influence of other determining factors of demand and supply; and 
third, that their role in explaining market developments and economic relationships would be captured 
in  terms  of  two key  fundamental  market  determinants:  “productive  technology”  and  “preferences”  of 
economic agents and authorities. 
There are two key questions of scientific and policy relevance. First, what are the underlying factors 
and forces that shape preferences, drive scientific and technological advances, foster innovation and 
nurture  an  entrepreneurial  spirit  that  ultimately  are  encapsulated  in  the  economy’s  production 
processes  and  the  functioning  of  markets?  Second,  to  what  extent  does  the  observed  economic 
performance of nations reflect these underlying factors and forces, which may be partly captured by 
economic  institutions  and  prevailing  economic  cultures  and  social  models?  Since  the  late  1990s, 
increasing  attention  has  been  paid  by  economists  and  policy-makers  to  finding  answers  to  these 
questions. Recent economic research – both analytical and empirical – is seeking to further explore 
how the economy’s performance is influenced by institutions and values; and, more generally, how the 
economy’s  functioning  may  change  if  we  relax  some  of  the  simplifying  assumptions  about  (1)  the 
behaviour of a seemingly “valueless”, perfectly rational homo oeconomicus; and (2) the functioning of 
markets that are “perfect and complete”, characterised by full information, rational expectations and 
largely unaffected by cultural and social values.  
In  my  presentation,  I  will  address  some  of  these  issues  by  examining  how  and  to  what  extent 
institutions and values may be affecting the performance of the European economy. To this end, I will 
first sketch out a simple conceptual framework indicating how economic performance, the functioning 
of markets, institutions and human values relate to each other. Second, I will show how the growth 
performance of the European economy – compared to that of the United States – can be accounted 
for by differences in the trend growth rates of productivity, labour utilisation and population; and then I 
will discuss – on the basis of the empirical evidence available – the role of economic institutions, social 
preferences,  values  and  attitudes  in  explaining,  at  least  partly,  these  differences.  A  key  issue  of 
practical and policy relevance is whether European economic performance can, in fact, be improved 
without giving up values or preferences that are considered to be quintessentially European. But since 
there  is  no  unique  “European  Social  Model”,  I  will  then  explore  how  differences  in  economic 
institutions, reflecting different cultural values and social models, may explain the divergence in the 
growth performance of European countries. Finally, I will focus on the other important dimension of 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 1
economic performance and a central policy objective: price stability. I will demonstrate the crucial role 
of  the  institutional  frameworks  for  central  banking  and  fiscal  policy  implementation  in  ensuring  the 
preservation of price stability and the sustainability of economic growth. 
II.  
Economic performance, markets, institutions and values: a simple conceptual 
framework 
Before  addressing  the  issues  I  have  raised,  it  will  be  useful  to  define  the  various  concepts  more 
precisely  and  to  specify  a  simple  framework  that  describes  their  likely  relationships  and  potential 
effects.  Needless  to  say,  the  aim  is  not  to  formulate  a  comprehensive  theory  but  to  sketch  out  a 
conceptual structure that can help organise our thinking and analysis. This is illustrated in slide 3.  
The  economic  performance  of  a  country  or  economic  area  will  be  measured  by  its  trend  rate  of 
economic  growth  and  its  ability  to  preserve  price  stability.  These  indicators  of  macroeconomic 
performance  are  the  aggregate  outcome  of  market  mechanisms  and  forces  and  of  the  effects  of 
economic  and  monetary  policies.  Economic  institutions,  as  well  as  other  types  of  institutions  (e.g. 
legal)  underpin  the  functioning  of  product,  labour  capital  and  money  markets.  They  establish  the 
“framework conditions” for the actions of economic agents, and also define the objectives and scope of 
public  policies.  The  final  –  and  fundamental  –  layer  of  this  structure  underlying  both  markets  and 
institutions is the set of “human values” which potentially influences and interacts with both. 
I will use the term “human values”, or simply “values” in a broad sense: to include social and cultural 
values which are reflected in people’s preferences and attitudes and which influence their behaviour, 
including their actions as economic agents and market participants. Edmund Phelps (2006), in a very 
recent paper, uses the term “economic culture” to describe the set of “cultural values, attitudes, morals 
and beliefs”. His concept is similar to the one I have defined as “values” and it seems to relate more to 
cultural attributes than pertain closely to economic behaviour. 
In principle, values can affect markets and economic performance both directly and indirectly, that is 
by shaping the features, objectives and functioning of institutions. There can also be interactions and 
feedback effects. The history of economic and political thought reminds us that great philosophers and 
economists, starting  with Aristotle and including  the  Enlightenment  thinkers  like  Adam  Smith,  David 
Hume, Immanuel Kant, and later on Max Weber (1905) and Joseph Schumpeter (1911), emphasised 
the  role  and  influence  of  a  society’s  values  or  culture  for  the  functioning  and  performance  of  the 
economy.  Karl  Marx’s  (1867)  work  also  centred  on  this  relationship,  but  he  stressed  the  reverse 
causation: the effect of the economy’s structure and markets on society’s values and culture.  
In recent years, and after a prolonged period of neglect, the role of values or culture as an underlying 
determinant  of  market  efficiency  and  overall  economic  performance  has  been  emphasised  and 
explored  by,  among  others,  Banfield  (1958),  Aghion  and  Howitt  (1998,  2005),  Eggertson  (2005), 
Blanchard  (2000,  2003,  2004),  Layard  (2003),  Bruni  and  Porta  (2005),  Sapir  (2004,  2005)  and 
Edmund Phelps (1973, 2003, 2006), winner of the Nobel Prize in economics last year.  
III.  
Economic growth in Europe and the United States: the contribution of productivity, 
labour utilisation and population  
Let me now address these issues by examining the growth performance of the European economy. I 
will use as a benchmark for comparison and assessment the US economy, which is comparable in 
size and degree of development to Europe’s and which has experienced high growth rates, especially 
since  the  mid-1990s.  Economic  growth  in  Europe  over  the  past  decade  and  a  half,  and  especially 
since  the  mid-1990s,  has  been  below  our  expectations  and  unsatisfactory  in  comparison  with  the 
United  States.  The  average  growth  rate  for  the  euro  area  in  the  period  1990-2005,  was  2.0%, 
noticeably below the average growth of 2.3% recorded in the 1980s (1980-1989). Moreover, the gap in 
real GDP growth between the United States and the euro area widened over the period 1980-2005, as 
shown in Chart 1. During the 1980s, aggregate output growth in the euro area was on average about 
0.5 percentage point lower than the US rate of growth. Since the early 1990s, this gap has widened. 
During  the  past  decade  (1996-2005),  when  the  euro  area  economy  expanded  on  average  at  a 
relatively  robust  pace  of  2.3%,  within  the  range  of  estimates  of  its  potential  growth  rate,  the  US 
economy  experienced  an  economic  boom  driven  mainly  by  advances 
information  and 
communication technologies and grew by an average rate of 3.4%, that is about 1 percentage point 
higher  than  the  euro  area  average  rate  of  growth  (see  Chart  2).  We  are  currently  experiencing  a 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2007
turnaround in the relative growth performance of the euro area and the US, which I will discuss later 
on. But I want first to focus on an examination of some key determinants of long-term growth of the 
European economy on the basis of its past performance. 
The  relative  decline  in  Europe’s  trend  growth  since  the  mid-1990s  does  not  imply  that  Europe  has 
become a poorer continent: people’s living standards, as measured by real GDP per capita, have risen 
significantly  over  the  past  decade,  especially  in  some  countries  including  Greece.  The  European 
economy  has  enjoyed  macroeonomic  stability;  there  have  been  no  financial  crisis  or  severe  fiscal 
imbalances although budgetary policies in a number of countries faced serious challenges. Europe is 
home to competitive and globally successful companies; it enjoys comparably efficient and effective 
public  services;  it  boasts  world-class  infrastructure;  it  maintains  advanced  education  systems  and 
generates internationally competitive top technology. And, at the same time, the contours of what may 
be called the European Social Model have remained intact: a well-developed welfare system provides 
a  safety  net  for  the  needy;  income  inequality  is  relatively  contained,  especially  when  compared  to 
other parts of the world.  
Nevertheless, in a comparative perspective, in the light of the economic growth rates registered in the 
United States – not to speak of the spectacular growth dynamics in some emerging market economies 
– the performance of the euro area economy has been rather disappointing. What are the reasons? 
Taking a long-term perspective, and looking beyond the short-term fluctuations of the business cycle, 
we  must  examine  the  fundamental  determinants  of  its  potential  or  long-term  economic  growth: 
demographic trends, developments in labour utilisation and productivity and the variety of underlying 
factors that affect the ability of the European economy to achieve increased efficiency and to create 
more  employment.  In  order  to  better  understand  and  assess  the  relative  contribution  of  these 
determining factors, it is useful to express, by employing a growth accounting framework, GDP growth 
in terms of the rates of change in productivity, labour utilisation and population. 
Table 1 shows the extent to which the rates of change in these three variables have contributed to real 
GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  in  the  United  States  over  the  period  1996-2005.  A  number  of 
interesting conclusions emerge from this decomposition of average economic growth. Since the mid-
1990s, euro area real GDP growth has been driven mainly by labour productivity growth as measured 
by  the  rate  of  change  in  real  GDP  per  hour  worked.  However,  average  productivity  growth  in  the 
United  States  was  significantly  higher,  by  almost  one  percentage  point.  US  output  growth  also 
benefited from faster population growth, which exceeded that of the euro area by 0.7 of a percentage 
point.  The  degree  of  labour  utilisation  improved  in  the  euro  area  and  had  a  positive  effect  on  its 
growth. In the United States, by contrast, it remained unchanged on average and thus had no impact 
on growth. 
The most important determinant of long-term or potential output growth in both the euro area and the 
United States is labour productivity. In the euro area, however, productivity growth has declined since 
the early 1980s, and it continued to decline further in the more recent period 1996-2005, when it fell, 
for  the  first  time,  below  that  of  the  United  States.1  Chart  3  shows  the  turnaround  in  the  labour 
productivity growth performance between the euro area and the United States since the mid-1990s. In 
the  period  from  1996  to  2005,  most  of  the  real  GDP  growth  gap  (about  80%)  between  the  United 
States and the euro area could be attributed to differences in labour productivity growth (measured by 
real  GDP  per  hour  worked),  the  remaining  gap  (about  20%)  being  explained  by  the  joint  effect  of 
population growth and the rate of change in the degree of labour utilisation. 
Labour utilisation, that is, the extent to which labour potentially available in the economy is effectively 
utilised, can be defined as hours worked per head of total population. This is the second important 
determinant of economic growth. It can be expressed as the sum of four components: average hours 
worked per employed person, the unemployment rate, the labour force participation rate and the share 
of the working age population in the total population. Let us look at these components one by one. The 
contribution to growth of the participation rate and hours worked has been much lower in the more 
recent  past  than  in  the  1960s  and  1970s.  The  lower  level  of  the  participation  rate  and  significant 
                                                      
1   The  decline  in  euro  area  productivity  growth  is  manifest  irrespective  of  the  measure  of  labour  input  used.  In  Europe, 
however, productivity growth has generally been  higher  when it is measured per hour  worked rather than by per  person 
employed. Productivity comparisons across countries face various statistical or methodological problems. Nevertheless, it 
appears  that  productivity  growth  developments  in  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  are  largely  independent  of  the 
concepts used. 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 3
reductions  in  working  hours  per  person  employed  in  the  euro  area  can  certainly  help  explain  the 
widening of the gap in the level of output per capita between the euro area and the United States. 
Table  2  shows  how  the  rate  of  change  in  labour  utilisation  can  be  decomposed  into  the  rates  of 
change  of  the  four  variables  I  referred  to.  The  decomposition  is  useful  because  it  helps  to  better 
understand the relative contribution of developments and factors affecting labour utilisation. Some of 
these  factors  can  be  influenced  by  policies  and  changes  in  economic  institutions  in  a way  that  can 
contribute to improving the economy’s growth performance. Since the mid-1990s, labour utilisation in 
the euro area has increased, also relative to the United States. This has contributed positively to euro 
area  growth  and  to  narrowing  the  growth  gap  with  the  United  States.  However,  despite  this 
improvement,  the  level  of  labour  utilisation  –  as  opposed  to  its  rate  of  change  –  in  the  euro  area 
remains much lower than in the United States. This fact reflects a lower labour force participation rate, 
a higher unemployment rate, and lower average working hours per person employed in the euro area.  
The figures in Table 2 show how labour utilisation, and thus GDP growth, in the euro area have been 
supported by an increase in the share of the working age population that is employed (labour force 
participation has risen significantly and the unemployment rate has declined somewhat). At the same 
time, those employed are working, on average, fewer hours, and this has negatively affected labour 
utilisation.  Moreover,  despite  the  relative  improvement  in  the  unemployment  and  labour  force 
participation rates over the past few years, the unemployment rate in the euro area is currently still 
around 3 percentage points higher, and the labour force participation rate around 6 percentage points 
lower,  than  the  corresponding  figures  for  the  United  States  (see  Chart  4).  So  although  significant 
progress has been made in raising labour participation and in reducing the unemployment rate, there 
is still room for increasing the rate of utilisation of the labour force. 
As I stated earlier, euro area growth has been adversely affected by a continued decline in average 
hours  worked  per  person  employed.  Data  for  the  business  sector  show  that  in  2005,  Europeans 
worked,  on  average,  300  hours  less  per  year  than  Americans,  and  less  then  they  did  in  the  early 
1980s  (see  Chart  5).  This  gap  between  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area,  which  has  been 
widening,  reflects  the  shortening  of  statutory  full-time  working  weeks  and  a  rise  in  part-time 
employment in the euro area (see Blanchard, 2004).  
Finally, the more dynamic demographic developments in the United States account for a substantial 
fraction of the real GDP growth gap over the past ten years. Since the mid-1990s, population growth 
has been on average about four times higher in the United States than in the euro area. This implies 
that  living  standards  in  the  euro  area,  in  terms  of  real  GDP  per  capita,  continued  to  improve  and 
developed more favourably than indicated by relative real GDP growth rates. At the same time, what is 
worrisome  is  that  the  gap  in  population  growth  has  been  even  larger  with  regard  to  growth  in  the 
working age population, which manifests that Europe has a more acute problem of population ageing. 
IV.  
Economic growth in Europe: the role of institutions and values 
IV.1.   Market structures and economic institutions 
Policy-makers in Europe have recognised the structural weaknesses of the European economy and 
have  put  together  a  range  of  reforms  and  policy  measures  seeking  to  remedy  the  deficiencies 
identified. The revised and refocused Lisbon strategy, which aims at making the EU “the most dynamic 
and  competitive  knowledge-based  economy  in  the  world”  by  2010,  outlines  the  main  areas  where 
policy  action  is  needed  (see  European  Community  (2004)  and  Sapir  et  al.  (2003)).  There  are  five 
broad areas where reforms are urgently needed:  first, reforms to improve education (and on-the-job 
training),  boost  research  and  development,  enhance  innovation  and  facilitate  the  diffusion  of 
technological  advances,  so  as  to  fully  exploit  the  potential  of  an  increasingly  knowledge-based 
economy;  second, reforms to increase competition in product and services markets;  third, reforms in 
labour markets to increase flexibility and adaptability of the workforce; fourth, policies and institutions to 
create  a  more  favourable  business  climate;  and  fifth,  reforms  to  promote  integration,  enhance 
competition and foster innovation in European financial markets, with a special emphasis on venture 
capital.  
Time constraints do not permit me to go into detail on the multitude of the necessary reforms that I 
mentioned. What I would like to do, in line with the topic of my presentation, is to examine and explain 
how and why the necessary adjustments to market structures should be accompanied by fundamental 
adaptations  of  the  pertinent  economic  institutions  and  changes  in  social  attitudes  (which  are  much 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2007
harder to achieve), in order to improve the performance of the European economy.2 To this end, I will 
now concentrate my remarks on the labour market. In other recent papers, I have examined the role of 
the financial sector and of education in fostering Europe’s growth performance. 
The importance of institutions for the functioning of labour markets in Europe can hardly be overstated. 
In fact, it has been estimated that one half of the dramatic increase in European unemployment from 
the golden days of full employment in the 1960s to the high and persistent unemployment levels of the 
mid-1990s  can  be  explained  by  institutional  factors  (Nickell  et  al.,  2002).  Which  “institutions”  are 
particularly  relevant?  Let  me  mention  three  of  them:  first  and  foremost,  employment  protection 
legislation. Second, tax-benefit-systems, which determine the so-called tax wedge between workers’ 
gross and net incomes, the transfers to the unemployed, and the tax burden on the employed. Third, 
wage bargaining structures and procedures and the role of trade unions. Let us consider employment 
protection legislation. 
Workers can be protected against unemployment in various ways: either by strict regulations against 
layoffs,  or  through  unemployment  benefits,  or  a  combination  of  both.  The  two  are  interrelated:  in 
theory,  employment  protection  legislation  need  not  be  very  restrictive  if  an  unemployed  worker  can 
rely  on  generous  benefits,  and  vice  versa.  What  does  the  empirical  evidence  tell  us?  Generous 
protection  of  “insiders”,  i.e.  those  who  have  a  job,  seems  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  overall 
employment, since it affects the probability of employment of the “outsiders”, especially women, the 
young and the long-term unemployed.3 The validity of this proposition is illustrated in Chart 6 on the 
basis of the evidence from European countries. The lower job turnover and hiring also increases both 
the duration of unemployment and the proportion of long-term unemployed. The impact of employment 
protection legislation may be particularly adverse in industries that are subject to rapid technological 
change.  In  the  context  of  increasing  international  economic  integration,  policies  that  constrain  the 
reallocation of workers from uncompetitive industries to industries with a comparative advantage can 
adversely affect output and employment. To address the challenges of globalisation, institutions have 
to be in place to ensure that people are equipped with the right skills to safeguard their employability 
(Gordon 2004). 
These arguments do not imply that workers cannot be protected against unemployment in an efficient 
manner. An alternative approach is “protect the worker, not the job”. A less restrictive framework of 
employment protection would go hand in hand with better unemployment benefits. Such a combination 
of  labour  market  institutions  is  at  the  core  of  the  Danish  so-called  “flexicurity”  model,  which  has 
recently received considerable attention. In Denmark, job turnover is also relatively efficient, possibly 
as a result of relatively long notification periods which allow displaced workers to search for their next 
job in good time, aided by active labour market measures (such a training, etc.). As a result, the rate of 
long term unemployment is low.  
Another pertinent point, supported by the empirical evidence, is that rigidities in labour markets and 
restrictive  product  market  regulations  are  also closely  connected.  Recent  studies  have shown  a  high 
correlation  between  employment  protection  legislation  and  restrictive  product  market  regulations 
across OECD countries (Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2005)). This should not come as a surprise, since it is 
much easier to sustain a high level of employment protection in an industry if competitors are kept out 
of  its  market.  Therefore,  amendments  to  employment  protection  legislation should  be considered  in 
relation to the implementation of product market reforms to promote competition. Fostering, promoting 
competition in product markets will facilitate the implementation of labour market reforms.  
These arguments suggest that the envisaged policy actions in line with the Lisbon strategy aimed at 
improving  the  functioning  of  labour  and  product  markets  –  and  the  review  of  the  institutions  that 
determine  their  organisation  which  this  reform  agenda  entails  –  can  be  expected  to  have  mutually 
reinforcing beneficial effects on the performance of the economy. The improvement in labour utilisation 
in the euro area witnessed in recent years partly reflects the favourable effects of past labour market 
reforms. However, when looking at the levels of unemployment and labour force participation rates, it is 
clear that, despite the progress made, further improvements on both of these labour market fronts are 
possible and urgently needed. 
                                                      
2   See, inter alia, Nicoletti et al. (2000) and Nickell and Nunziata (2001). 
3   See Bassanini and Duval (2006). 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 5
Values, preferences and economic culture 
IV.2.  
Institutions that are inappropriately designed are thus at least partly responsible for the unsatisfactory 
performance of the European economy. However, we should go one step further and look at the social 
values  and  preferences  that  influence  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents  who  interact  with,  and  are 
affected by, the economic institutions referred to earlier. After all, the various reforms envisaged in the 
Lisbon  agenda  will  fail  to  produce  tangible  results  if  they  run  counter  to  what  many  Europeans 
perceive to be quintessentially European values, preferences and attitudes. As outlined in the simple 
conceptual framework introduced earlier, economic performance and the functioning of markets can 
be directly influenced by values and deeply held beliefs – such as self-realisation, fulfilment in life and 
other  post-materialist  values;  the  relative  importance  of  work,  achievement  and  success;  freedom, 
competition and cooperation; tradition and religion; family and community; safety and protection, etc.  
A number of economists have argued that lower labour force participation rates and shorter working 
hours in Europe relative to the US may reflect a preference on the part of Europeans for more leisure 
time  over  additional  income.4  In  other  words,  that  Europeans  seem  to  place  more  value  on  extra 
leisure  than  having  a  few  extra  euros  in  their  pockets,  while  Protestant  work  ethics  and  a  more 
materialistic attitude to life drive Americans to work harder. Other examples of differences in values 
are that European women may prefer relatively more to stay at home to look after their children than 
pursuing their professional careers in parallel; that older people place greater value on enjoying the 
fruits of their working life through early retirement rather than continuing to seek gainful employment 
until – or even beyond – the official retirement age.  
Nobel  Laureate  Edmund  Phelps  has  recently  investigated  and  sought  to  estimate  empirically,  by 
employing  econometric  techniques,  the  possible  direct  effects  of  deeply  held  values  by  people 
interviewed for the World Values Survey on some of the key determinants of economic performance 
that  I  discussed  earlier:  labour  participation  and  productivity.  He  found,  for  example,  that  the  lower 
number of Europeans, compared to Americans and other nationalities, stating that their job is most 
important  in  their  lives  is  significant  in  explaining  lower  labour  participation  rates  and  lower 
employment in Europe (Phelps 2006). Furthermore, he found that the more people take pride in their 
work,  the  greater  is  their  participation  in  the  labour  market,  and  the  larger  the  reduction  in 
unemployment. In other words, the evidence suggests that (1) Europeans are not as deeply involved in 
their jobs and place relatively lesser importance on work – compared to, say, Americans or Japanese 
– and (2) this fact can be directly linked to lower labour participation rates and higher unemployment 
rates, and thus to slower economic growth in Europe. 
Similar direct effects could be identified in connection with productivity: Phelps found that “acceptance 
of competition” by the public has a strong impact on productivity, meaning that in countries where a 
majority of people state that competition is helpful rather than harmful, productivity in the economy is 
higher.  Similarly,  the  more  people  value  the  opportunity  to  use  initiative  in  their  job,  the  better  the 
productivity performance of the economy.  
Although  this  is  a  partial  analysis,  these  findings  provide  some  striking  evidence  of  direct  linkages 
between  values,  institutions  and  economic  performance.  An  understanding  of  deeply  held  values, 
attitudes  and  preferences  may  thus  help  in  explaining  some  of  the  differences  in  productivity  and 
labour utilisation between Europe and the United States. However, more work is needed to test the 
robustness of the empirical results and to better understand conceptually the linkages between values 
and  the  “intermediate”  determinants  of  economic  performance  such  as  productivity  and  labour 
utilisation. Moreover, differences within Europe are significant and need to be taken into account.  
V.  
Economic performance of European countries: the influence of social values and 
economic culture 
Indeed,  Europe  is  “united  in  diversity”,  as  a  suggested  motto  of  the  European  Union  states.  A 
comparison  of  the  growth  performance  of  the  US  and  European  economies  masks  considerable 
diversity, on both sides of the Atlantic, but especially among European countries, as Chart 7 shows. A 
diversity of growth rates among the members of large monetary unions, such as the euro area and the 
US, is not unusual. In fact, the dispersion of growth and inflation rates within the euro area since the 
                                                      
4   See Blanchard (2004) and Alesina and Giavazzi (2006). 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2007
introduction of the euro is very similar to that observed across regions and states in the US. What is 
characteristic of Europe, however, is the persistence of the observed dispersion in growth rates. This 
persistence may be attributed to a number of factors, such as the stimulative effects of historically low 
interest  rates,  which  sustained  dynamic  growth  over  recent  years,  especially  in  Spain,  Ireland  and 
Greece.  Another  important  factor,  which  has  received  increasing  attention,  is  the  potential  longer-
lasting  influence  of  differences  in  economic  institutions  and  social  values,  encapsulated  in  the  so-
called social models, of different European countries on their economic performance. As Sapir (2005) 
has observed, “the notion of a single “European Social Model” is largely misleading.” 
The prevailing social models in European countries can be meaningfully grouped into four types, as 
shown in Chart 8: 
First, there is what could be called the Nordic model, which applies to Scandinavia, Finland 
and also includes the Netherlands: in this model, social protection benefits, universal welfare 
provision and active labour market policies are highly developed. Public sector employment 
is significant by any standards. The associated fiscal expenditures are large, necessitating 
comparatively  high  tax  rates.  Powerful  labour  unions  ensure  that  wage  disparities  remain 
limited. This model has contributed to generating high employment rates, in combination of 
with a low risk of poverty and relative income equality. 
Second, the Anglo-Saxon model, prevailing in the United Kingdom and Ireland: in this model, 
the welfare system provides a relatively limited safety net of social protection. Employment 
protection legislation is rather weak, recipients of benefits have to be actively searching for 
employment and flexibility in labour markets is considerable. Unionisation is low and there is 
a rather large dispersion in wages between very low pay and very high salaries. Overall, this 
model  has  a  good  record  of  generating  growth  and  employment,  but  does  not  appear  as 
equitable as other models. 
Third, in Germany, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and Austria, the Continental model prevails. 
Here,  the  welfare  state  essentially consists  of  insurance-based  unemployment  benefit  and 
pensions  systems,  meaning  transfers  are  seen  as  unconditional  entitlements,  which 
influence the propensity to actively seek work. Trade unions, despite a general weakening 
over the past years, are still influential, and income disparity is relatively low. The Continental 
model  seems  to  insure  people  relatively  well  against  poverty  but  it  may  do  so  with  less 
efficiency and unsustainably: low levels of labour utilisation (in terms of the number of people 
employed and hours worked) and a relatively large public sector have put pressure on public 
finances.  
Fourth, the Mediterranean model, which can be identified in Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. 
Strict  employment  protection  legislation  and  early  retirement  schemes  keep  employment 
levels below those of other models, because insiders are protected and incentives to take up 
work  are  not  adequate.  At  the  same  time,  a  relatively  low  coverage  of  unemployment 
benefits means that the risk of poverty is comparably high. Rigid wage bargaining structures 
in the formal economy generate a highly compressed wage structure. Together with a large 
and  inefficient  public  sector,  the  features  of  this  model  may  render  public  finances 
increasingly unsustainable. 
The differences in the institutional features of the four models and the related growth and employment 
performance  clearly  show  the  relationship  between  values,  institutions  and  economic  outcomes. 
While,  in  the  first  place,  there  might  be  differences  in  the  importance  which  the  various  European 
nations attach to fundamental values such as protection from poverty, safety of employment or income 
equality,  the  resulting  domestic  institutions  and  regulations  make  a  crucial  difference.  For  example, 
whether  countries  choose  to  protect  workers  from  unemployment  through  restrictive  employment 
protection legislation or through generous unemployment benefits has an impact on the overall level of 
employment: stricter employment protection legislation in the Continental and Mediterranean models 
appears  to  a  have  an  adverse  impact  on  employment  creation,  whereas  generous  unemployment 
benefits seem to play only a secondary role.5 Similarly, the probability of escaping poverty is greater in 
the Nordic and the Continental models, which is not only the result of a generous tax-benefit system, 
but also a consequence of higher human capital endowments (see Chart 8). 
                                                      
5   See Sapir (2005), as well as recent work at the OECD, e.g. van den Noord et al (2006). 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 7
The differences in social models across European countries are likely to persist, precisely because the 
underlying values and preferences are different. What policy-makers can, and should, do is to learn 
from each other and from the different practices and experiences, assess what works and what does 
not, and then adapt the most promising ideas about economic institutions and regulations to the local 
conditions  and  the  prevailing  economic  cultures.  This  is  in  fact  a  great  advantage  of  the  European 
Union’s unique cooperative framework. It can make possible what is neatly encapsulated in the title of 
a paper by Tito Boeri (2002): “Let Social Policy Models Compete and Europe Will Win”. 
VI.  
Price stability: the role of the institutional framework for central banks and fiscal 
policy 
As  stated  at  the  outset,  a  country’s  economic  performance  pertains  to  both  economic  growth  and 
stability.  Macroeconomic stability  includes,  inter  alia,  first  and  foremost price stability,  which  ensures 
that a currency keeps its purchasing power and retains the trust of the people. It also includes a stable 
financial system as well as prudent and sustainable fiscal policies. Also for this aspect of economic 
performance,  the  central  proposition  I  have  emphasised  in  the  context  of  the  presented  conceptual 
framework remains intact: institutions matter and the social values of economic agents are embodied 
in appropriately designed institutions. A characteristic and important example is the set of institutions, 
fiscal rules and provisions enshrined in the Treaty on European Union which lay the foundation for the 
maintenance of price stability and the pursuit of sound fiscal policies.  
The preservation of price stability in a modern economy with fiat money is the responsibility of central 
banks. Their monetary policy can ensure control of the price level over the medium and longer term. 
The  effectiveness  with  which  monetary  policy  can  attain  and  maintain  price  stability  depends  on 
various  factors  pertaining  to  the  way  monetary  policy  is  formulated  and  conducted.  An  essential 
condition for the effective conduct of monetary policy is the central bank’s independence so that it can 
take decisions on the appropriate policy to achieve its objectives without being subject to any pressure 
or  interference  by  the  government  and  any  other  political  authorities.  There  are  strong  theoretical 
arguments why the central bank should be independent. But the most convincing reason, which has 
led many governments to de-politicise monetary policy and grant independence to the central bank as 
an economic institution, is past experience and the empirical evidence. 
Europe’s  “monetary  constitution”  builds  on  the  experiences  of  a  long  historical  process  of  trial-and-
error, often with painful economic consequences, which led to the insight that in order to “safeguard 
the  currency”  (Bundesbank  Act  of  1957)  and  “defend  the  savings”  of  the  people  (Banca  d’Italia 
mandate), the management of the currency should be entrusted to an independent central bank, with 
the primary objective of maintaining price stability, and which should not be allowed to directly finance 
the public sector. The extensive empirical evidence collected over many years and for a wide range of 
countries  broadly  and  unambiguously  confirms  the  beneficial  effects  of  central  bank  autonomy  for 
inflation  performance.6  Chart  9  clearly  demonstrates  that  countries  with  more  independent  central 
banks  have  enjoyed  lower  average  inflation  without  experiencing  lower  average  economic  growth 
(Blinder,  1998).  Recent  studies  show  that  central  banks  in  most  countries  (not  only  in  advanced 
economies but also in emerging market and developing countries) have been granted higher degrees 
of autonomy over the past twenty years (Arnone, 2007). In addition, in the low-inflation environment 
currently prevailing in industrialised countries, those central banks endowed with a larger degree of 
independence  are  succeeding  in  maintaining  price  stability,  as  recent  work  at  the  ECB  has 
demonstrated (Moutot et al., 2007). 
The high degree of independence granted to the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area 
countries by the political authorities of the European Union is the outcome of past experience and their 
assessment  that  the  autonomy  of  the  central  bank  as  an  institution  is  essential  for  the  effective 
achievement of its primary objective. Moreover, the ECB as an independent institution embodies the 
value which the people of Europe attach to price stability. And, if you allow me, with all due modesty I 
would  like  to  point  to  the  Eurosystem’s  successful  performance  over  the  past  eight  years  in 
maintaining  price  stability  and  delivering  a  stable  currency  that  can  be  trusted  by  318  million 
Europeans.  Moreover,  the  track-record  of  preserving  price  stability  and  the  credibility  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary  policy  have  contributed  to  fostering  long-term  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area 
                                                      
6  See for example, Alesina and Summers (1993), Fischer (1994), Eijffinger and De Haan (1996), Blinder (1998) and, more 
recently, Arnone et al., (2007) and Moutot et al (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2007
through  various  channels,  including  the  solid  anchoring  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  to  price 
stability. 
Similarly, the history and experience – not least in this country – of persistent public sector deficits, 
and the resulting accumulation of crippling mountains of government debt led to the recognition that 
the “economic constitution” of Europe had to provide appropriate safeguards. In view of the harmful 
long-term  effects  of  expansionary  and  stop-and-go  fiscal  policies,  the  degree  of  discretion  of  fiscal 
policy-makers had to be limited and clear yardsticks for responsible policy choices had to be provided 
(see  Lucas, 1980).  Europe’s solution was  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  a  rules-based  fiscal  policy 
framework  binding  all  Member  States  and  which  is  essential  for  the  orientation  and  coordination  of 
national fiscal policies towards sound and sustainable public finances. However, the notion of “the law 
as the guardian of economic wisdom” (Herdegen, 1998) is widespread: the fiscal responsibility laws in 
New  Zealand,  the  constitutional  obligations  to  produce  balanced  budgets  in  all  US  Federal  States 
(except Vermont), or the “Golden Rule” of the German Basic Law which prohibits the government from 
borrowing more than it spends on investment, are all based on this reasoning. It is the same reasoning 
that led Odysseus to have himself tied to the mast of his ship in order to achieve his long-term primary 
objective to return home and effectively avoid the temptations of the sirens songs and the potential 
short-term benefits but also long-term risks they entailed.  
Concluding remarks  
VII.  
I  have  covered  a  lot  of  ground  and  I  should  not  further  test  your  patience.  But  the  topic  of  my 
presentation involved a variety of issues and policy dimensions. The relationships between economic 
performance,  market  structures,  economic 
institutions  and  social  values  are  complex  and 
characterised by a multitude of direct and indirect interlinkages. Moreover, the attempt to examine and 
illustrate these relationships on the basis of the performance and the available empirical evidence for 
the European economy – in comparison with that of the US but also with the benefit of the different 
practices and experiences in European countries – did require some time for exposition; but, I believe, 
it has provided us with some useful conclusions of policy relevance. 
Let me end on an optimistic note. The European economy is currently experiencing robust economic 
growth which is expected to continue, benefiting from the ongoing strength of global economic activity, 
despite  the  slowdown  of  the  US  economy,  but  primarily  relying  on  internal  sources  of  growth,  with 
domestic demand projected to expand at a solid pace. There are, of course, uncertainties and several 
risks surrounding this central and likely scenario. But, at the same time, there are encouraging signs 
that the supply-side of the European economy is responding positively to the reforms in markets and 
institutions  implemented  over  the  past  few  years.  Productivity  growth  is  picking  up,  employment  is 
rising and the unemployment rate is projected to further decline. If future developments and further 
analysis  confirm  the  indications  of  supply-side  improvements,  we  can  look  forward  to  a  gradual 
increase in the European economy’s potential for higher sustainable growth. The best way to secure 
this favourable prospect is to continue with the implementation of the necessary reforms in markets 
and  institutions  and  with  the  adoption  of  best  practices  on  the  basis  of  a  free  exchange  and 
competition of ideas and social values.  
References: 
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998), “Endogeneus growth theory”, Cambridge, Mass. The MIT Press. 
Aghion,  P.  and  P.  Howitt  (2005),  “Appropriate  Growth  Policy:  A  Unifying  Framework”,  Schumpeter 
Lecture, Nice, September, revised December. 
Alesina, A. and F. Giavazzi (2006), The Future of Europe, Reform or Decline, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. 
Alesina,  A.  and  L. H.  Summers  (1993),  “Central  Bank 
Independence  and  Macroeconomic 
Performance:  Some  Comparative  Evidence,”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and  Banking,  vol. 25(2), 
pp. 151–162. 
Aristotle  (ca.  350  BC)  Nicomachean  Ethics,  translation  by  H.  Rackham,  Harvard  University  Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., Revised edition 1934. 
Arnone, M., B. J. Laurens, J.-F. Segalotto, and M. Sommer (2007), Central Bank Autonomy: Lessons 
from Global Trends, IMF Working Paper, WP/07/88. 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 9
Bassanini, A. and R. Duval (2006), “Employment patterns in OECD countries: Reassessing the role of 
policies and institutions”, Social, employment and migration working paper series No 35 (OECD, Paris, 
June). 
Baufield, E. (1958), The moral basis of a backward society, New York, Free Press. 
Blanchard, O. (2004), “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 
18, pp. 3-26. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  J.  Wolfers  (2000),  “Shocks  and  institutions  and  the  rise  of  European 
unemployment. The aggregate evidence”, Economic Journal, vol. 110-1, pp. 1-33. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  P.  Portugal  (2001),  “What  hides  behind  an  unemployment  rate.  Comparing 
Portuguese and US unemployment,” American Economic Review, 91-1, March, 187-207. 
Blanchard, O. and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomic effect of regulation and deregulation in goods 
and labour markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118, pp. 879-909. 
Blinder, A.S. (1998), “Central Banking in Theory and Practice”, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. and 
London, England. 
Boeri,  T.  (2002),  Let  Social  Policy  Models  Compete  an  Europe  Will  Win,  paper.  presented  at  a 
Conference hosted by the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 11-12 April. 
Bruni,  L.  and  P.  L.  Porta  (2005),  Economics  and  happiness.  Framing  the  analysis.  Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press. 
Eijffinger, S. and J. De Haan (1996), “The Political Economy of Central-Bank Independece”, Special 
Paper No. 19, International Finance Section, Princeton. 
Eggertsson, T. (2005), “Inefficient institutions”, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press. 
European Community (2004), “Facing the challenge: The Lisbon strategy for growth and employment”, 
Report from the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of 
the European Communities, November. 
Fischer,  S.  (1994),  “Modern  Central  Banking”,  in  F.  Capie  et  al.  The  Future  of  Central  Banking, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gordon,  R.  J.  (2004),  “Two  centuries  of  economic  growth:  Europe  chasing  the  American  frontier”, 
CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 4415. 
Herdegen, M.J. (1998), Price Stability and Budgetary Restraints in the Economic and Monetary Union: 
The Law as Guardian of Economic Wisdom, Common Market Law Review, Vol. 35 (1):9-32, February 
1998, Dordrecht, 1998. 
Layard,  R.  (2003),  Happiness:  Has  Social  Science  A  Clue?,  Lionel  Robbins  Memorial  Lectures 
delivered at the London School of Economics, 3-5 March: 
Lucas,  R.  (1980),  “Rules,  Discretion  and  the  Role  of  the  Economic  Advisor”  and  Fisher,  S.  (ed.) 
“Rational Expectations and Economic Policy”, University of Chicago Press. 
Marx, K. (1867): Das Kapital: Kritik der politischen Ökonomie, Buch I, Hamburg: Otto Meissner; Buch 
II (1885), Buch III (1894) edited by F. Engels. 
Moutot, P., F. Mongelli and A. Jung, “The Eurosystem: Monetary Policy Preparation, Decision-Making, 
and Enlargement - Selected Issues”, ECB Occasional Paper, forthcoming. 
Nicoletti,  G.,  R.  Haffner,  S.  Nickell,  S.  Scarpetta  and  G.  Zoega  (2000),  “European  Integration, 
Liberalization and Labour Market Performance”, in G. Bertola, T. Boeri and G. Nicoletti (eds), Welfare 
and Employment in a United Europe, MIT Press. 
Nickell,  S  and  L.  Nunziata  (2001),  Employment  Patterns  in  OECD  Countries,  Centre  for  Economic 
Performance. 
Nickell, S., L. Nunziata, L., W. Ochel,and G. Quintini (2002), Why Do Jobless Rates Differ?,  CESifo 
Forum 3:1, 50-59. 
Phelps, E.S. (1973), “Altruism, Morality and Economic Theory”, New York, Basic Books for the Russell 
Sage Foundation. 
10 
 BIS Review 43/2007
Phelps,  E.S  (2003),  “Commentary  II”,  in  Philippe  Aghion,  Roman  Frydman,  Joseph  Stiglitz  and 
Michael  Woodford  (eds.),  Information  and  Knowledge  in  Modern  Macroeconomics,  Princeton, 
Princeton University Press. 
Phelps,  E.S.  (2003),  “Globalization  and  Development”,  Public  lecture  in  Bangkok,  Beijing,  Tianjin, 
Shanghai, Singapore and Havana, January-February. 
Phelps,  E.S.  (2006),  “Economic  Culture  and  Economic  Performance:  What  Light  Is  Shed  on  the 
Continent’s  Problem?”,  CCS  Working  Paper  No.17,  Center  on  Capitalism  and  Society,  Columbia 
University, New York, July. 
Sapir, A., P. Aghion, G. Bertola, M. Hellwig, J. Pisani-Ferry, D. Rosati, J. Viñals, H. Wallace (2003), An 
Agenda for a Growing Europe: Making the EU Economic System Deliver, Report of an Independent 
High-Level Study Group established on the initiative of the President of the European Commission, 
Brussels. 
Sapir,  A.  (2005),  Globalisation  and  the  Reform  of  European  Social  Models,  BRUEGEL  Policy  Brief 
No.1/2005, BRUEGEL, Brussels.  
Schumpeter,  Joseph  Alois  (1911),  Theorie  der  wirtschaftlichen  Entwicklung,  Vienna/  Leipzig, 
Humboldt,  translation  by  R.  Fels,  Theory  of  Economic  Development,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Harvard 
University Press, 1932. 
Van den Noord, P., N. Girouard and C. André (2006), Social safety nets and structural adjustment, 
Economics Department Working Papers no. 517; OECD, Paris. 
Weber, M. (1905), “Die Protestantische Ethik und der “Geist” der Kapitalismus”, Sozialwissenschaften 
und der Sozialpolitik, 20 and 21. Trans. Talcott Parsons, Foreword by R. H. Tawney, The Protestant 
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, London: Allen and Unwin; New York: Scribner, 1930. 
 
 
  11
BIS Review 43/2007 
     12 
 BIS Review 43/2007
    BIS Review 43/2007 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 43/2007
    BIS Review 43/2007 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 43/2007
    BIS Review 43/2007 
 17
 18 
 BIS Review 43/2007
