Y V Reddy: The Reserve Bank and the State Governments – partners in 
progress 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Madras School of 
Economics, Chennai, 23 September 2007. 
 Respected Dr. Rangarajan, Dr. Raja Chelliah, Dr. Srivastava, Professor Kumar and friends,  
I am thankful to Dr. Srivastava for affording me the opportunity to participate in the annual 
day  celebrations  of  the  Madras  School  of  Economics.  It  is  an  honour  and  privilege  to  be 
associated with the activities in a distinguished gathering such as this one. 
I  was  born  in  a  village  in  Kadapa  (then  Cuddapah)  district  but  went  to  High  School  in 
Chennai  (then  Madras),  studying  in  Telugu  medium.  After  a  two-year  stint  in  Government 
Arts College, Anantapur, I was back in Chennai for pursuing my university level studies in 
economics. My  participation  today  in  the  annual  day  celebrations  of  the  Madras  School  of 
Economics  gives  me  an  opportunity  to  express  my  gratitude  to  (Madras)  Chennai  which 
helped me in becoming and being a student of economics.  
There are several reasons for selecting this subject for my address today. First, in the Indian 
federal polity, the States, relative to the Centre, have taken the centre-stage in the reform 
process since the areas of highest national priority now fall essentially within the purview of 
the  States.  For  instance,  agriculture,  education,  public  health,  sanitation  and  much  of 
physical infrastructure belong primarily to the domain of the State Governments. Second, Dr. 
Rangarajan  and  Dr.  Srivastava  were  Chairman  and  member,  respectively,  of  the  Twelfth 
Finance Commission, which made historic contribution to the Centre-State relations. It is also 
noteworthy that they addressed the Sixteenth Conference of State Finance Secretaries, held 
at the RBI. Third, it was Dr. Rangarajan who, in 1997, initiated the process of active interface 
between the Reserve Bank and the State Governments a decade ago, when he inaugurated, 
as the Governor of the RBI, the first Conference of State Finance Secretaries. Finally, there 
is very little literature available on the theory or practice of the role of the central banks at the 
level  of  sub-national  governments.  Hence,  there  may  be  some  merit  in  recording  our 
experience in this regard. I am taking this opportunity to chronicle the unique and productive 
partnership  between  the  RBI  and  the  State  Governments  in  securing  the  progress  of  our 
economy, as part of economic reforms.  
On  November  8,  1997,  Dr.  Rangarajan,  the  then  Governor  of  the  RBI,  in  his  inaugural 
address  at  the  First  Conference  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  convened  by  RBI,  had 
flagged the issues that needed to be focussed upon in management of State finances. These 
included: alternative methods for borrowing by the States, statutory ceiling on debt, setting 
up of consolidated sinking fund and the issuance of State Government guarantees. I would 
like  to  report  that  most  of  his  expectations  have  since  been  substantively  met,  as  I  will 
enumerate today, a little later. 
I  would  also  like  to  place  on  record  the  high  priority  that  continued  to  be  accorded  to  this 
collaborative process by Dr. Jalan who succeeded Dr. Rangarajan as the Governor, RBI. For 
instance, in his inaugural address at the Tenth Conference of State Finance Secretaries, on 
June 7, 2002, stressing on the cooperative framework between the Centre and the States, 
Dr. Jalan had pointed out that there were lessons to be learnt from the coordinated approach 
adopted by some of the large federal governments in managing their finances successfully in 
contrast  to  some  of  the  Latin  American  nations.  He  had  noted  that  although  the  Centre’s 
large  deficit  had  constrained  its  ability  to  support  the  States,  the  harmonious  relations 
amongst the States, the Centre and the RBI, which are involved in the management of public 
finances in India, had enhanced the stability and integrity of India’s financial system. He had 
also reiterated the problems associated with the "automatic debit mechanism", stating that a 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
State could not manage its finances if such a mechanism pre-empted a large portion of its 
available funds.  
Mutual trust 
The  “Reserve  Bank  of  India”  and  “banking”  find  a  listing  in  the  Seventh  Schedule  of  the 
Indian  Constitution  and  hence,  fall  within  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  Central 
Government.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  provides  that  the  Central  Government 
shall  entrust  the  RBI  with  all  its  money,  remittance,  exchange  and  banking  transactions  in 
India and the management of its public debt, and shall also deposit all its cash balances with 
the  RBI,  free  of  interest.  On  the  other  hand,  the  RBI  may,  by  agreement  with  any  State 
Government, take over similar functions on behalf of that Government. Accordingly, the RBI 
is the banker to both the Central Government and all the State Governments, except two, in 
the Indian Federation.  
The RBI also manages the open market borrowings of the Central Government and all the 
States, with two exceptions. The market-borrowing programme of the State Governments is 
finalised  by  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Planning  Commission,  keeping  in  view  the 
provisions of Article 293(3) of the Constitution of India. The Article stipulates that a State may 
not, without the consent of the Government of India, raise any borrowings if it has any loan 
outstanding, which is repayable to the Government of India. 
The  RBI  has,  over  the  years,  closely  interacted  with  the  State  Governments  in  its 
developmental role – particularly in areas of development of agriculture, and small industries. 
The RBI was specifically entrusted with an important promotional role, since its inception, of 
financing  agricultural  operations  and  marketing  of  crops.  In  fact,  the  Agricultural  Credit 
Department was created simultaneously with the establishment of the RBI in 1935.  
The  Reserve  Bank  prepares  and  publishes  an  annual  Study  on  the  State  Government 
Finances. This is a unique study since it compiles, consolidates and analyses detailed data 
on the budgets of all the State Governments. It also documents the policy initiatives on State 
finances and debt management by the State Governments, the Government of India and the 
Reserve Bank. The study has been well received by policy makers and academicians, both 
in India and abroad, and is an important reference document. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  the  interface  between  the  RBI  and  the  State  Governments  arises  not 
only out of statutorily mandated obligations but also voluntarily, based on mutual trust. The 
mechanism  of  bi-annual  conference  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  has  formalised  and 
strengthened  the  process  of  partnering  for  progress,  based  on  mutual  respect,  through  a 
process of continuing consultations, but with the States retaining their freedom. Apart from 
the  State  Finance  Secretaries,  senior  functionaries  of  the  Government  of  India,  the 
Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  India,  the  Controller  General  of  Accounts  and  the 
Planning Commission as also heads of select departments of the Reserve Bank are invited 
to the Conference. There are occasions when fiscal experts such as Mr. A. Premchand, Mr. 
M.S.  Ahluwalia 
leading  commercial  bankers  and 
representatives of credit rating agencies are also invited to participate and contribute to the 
specific issues on the agenda. 
the  Planning  Commission, 
from 
Open market borrowings 
The normal procedure followed for open market borrowings, until the first half of the nineties, 
was  that  the  RBI  would  complete  the  combined  borrowings  of  all  States  in  one  or  two 
tranches at a predetermined coupon, which was common to all States and was on par with 
that of the Central Government. After announcement of the loan, the RBI would write to the 
banks indicating the contribution expected from them, mainly based on their market-share of 
deposits, with a request to invest in the State Government bonds. Thus, high statutory pre-
2 
 BIS Review 105/2007
emptions in the form of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) in respect of the banks and the tying-
up of the loans by the RBI ensured a captive market for these loans amongst the banks and 
the successful completion of the allocated borrowing programme. 
With  the  substantial  increase  in  the  market  borrowing  programme  of  the  Central 
Government, progressive reduction in the SLR, increasing sophistication of the Indian debt 
markets  offering  diversified  portfolio  choices  to  banks,  mark-to-market  valuation  norms, 
changes in risk weighted capital prescriptions and the deteriorating financial position of the 
States,  it  was  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  complete  the  market  borrowings  of  the 
States, through the tranche system, at pre-announced coupon. 
To  reflect  these  new  realities,  including  the  market  perception  of  the  status  of  the  State 
Governments, in 1997, the coupon rate for the entire borrowing programme for all the States 
was  fixed  broadly  on  the  basis  of  a  mark-up  (which  was  initially  25  basis  points  and  later 
increased  to  50  basis  points)  over  the  yield  of  ten-year  stock  of  the  Central  Government. 
Apart from the fact that the banks displayed an increasing reluctance to voluntarily invest in 
the  State  Government  paper,  the  market  had  started  discriminating  amongst  the  States 
based on their perceived strengths and weaknesses; thus adversely affecting completion of 
the approved borrowing programme for the States. 
The  Central  Government  had  switched  over  to  the  auction  method  for  its  open  market 
borrowing programme since 1993 and in view of the experience described above, it was felt 
necessary  for  the  State  Governments  to  explore  the  possibility  of  adopting  a  flexible 
approach with regard to interest rate, maturity, etc., of their borrowings. It was also felt that in 
view  of  inter-State  disparities,  a  gradual  and  cautious  approach  was  necessary.  Based  on 
the consensus at the first Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, an option was made 
available to the State Governments to enter the market through a flexible approach, on their 
own,  to  the  extent  of  5  to  35  per  cent  of  their  gross  market  borrowings.  The  timing  and 
volume of issues for auction were to be decided by the RBI, in consultation with the State 
Governments,  taking  into  account  the  market  and  liquidity  conditions.  This  dispensation 
enabled the well-managed States to take advantage of the market conditions and raise loans 
at finer rates while the smaller States were able to protect their interests by substituting a 
part of their borrowings under the totally pre-announced coupon approach, with the auction 
method.  The  State  Governments  were  subsequently  encouraged  to  progressively  further 
increase the share of market-borrowings under the auction route initially to 50 percent and 
thereafter to cover the entire market-borrowings. 
The auction system was experimental since the year 1998-99 with one State adopting the 
auction route in January 1999. The number of States adopting the auction route increased 
gradually in subsequent years. 
With the implementation of the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC), 
the year 2005-06 marked a watershed in the evolution of the finances and the (open market) 
debt management operations of the State Governments. Spurred by the moderation in fiscal 
imbalances and progressive enactment of Fiscal Responsibility Legislation by the States – 
induced in some measure by the incentivised Debt Relief Scheme recommended by the TFC 
– the market perception regarding the fiscal position of the States seemed to have improved 
considerably. As many as 24 States opted for the auction route during 2005-06 as compared 
with  only  three  States  in  the  previous  year.  The  States  raised  48.5  per  cent  of  their  total 
borrowings through the auction route during 2005-06. The cut-off yields in the auctions were, 
in general, lower than the tap issues.  
The market borrowings of the State Governments during 2006-07 and 2007-08 so far have 
been raised entirely through the auction route, with a general decline in spreads. In brief, the 
migration from the system of administered borrowing programme to the auction method of 
borrowing  in  respect  of  the  States  was  achieved  gradually  and  through  a  consultative 
process between the States and the RBI. 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 3
Consolidated Sinking Fund 
At  the  request  of  the  State  Governments,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  prepared  a  model 
Consolidated  Sinking  Fund  (CSF)  Scheme  and  circulated  it  amongst  them  for  adoption  / 
consideration in 1999. By the time of the ninth Conference of the State Finance Secretaries 
held in November 2001, 11 States had set up the CSF, which is being administered by RBI. 
The Twelfth Finance Commission had recommended that the CSF may cover repayments in 
respect  of  all  the  loans  of  the  State  Governments  (and  not  just  open  market  borrowings). 
Furthermore,  the  Bezbaruah  Committee  on  Ways  and  Means  Advances  (WMA)  to  States 
had recommended that the States would be entitled to the Special WMA to the extent of their 
net incremental annual investment in the CSF, subject to the prescribed ceilings. Against this 
backdrop, the Reserve Bank circulated a revised model scheme of CSF amongst the State 
Governments in May 2006. As on June 30, 2007, of the eighteen State Governments that 
had  set  up  the  CSF,  11  had  established  it  as  per  the  revised  CSF  scheme.  Many  more 
States have intimated their intention to adopt the revised CSF scheme, as administered by 
RBI. 
Prepayment of debt 
In the context of build up of cash balances, two States proposed to utilise their surplus cash 
to pre-pay a part of their outstanding open market debt. In this connection, the modalities of 
buyback  auctions  were  finalised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  consultation  with  these  State 
Governments  and  the  Government  of  India.  General  issues  relating  to  the  pre-payment  of 
debt were discussed at the 18th conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in August 
2006. The RBI has conducted two rounds of buyback auctions in February and March 2007. 
State Government guarantees 
Issues relating to State Government guarantees have also been discussed in almost every 
conference  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries.  Against  the  imperative  of  infrastructural 
development, the States have been under pressure to provide guarantees for facilitating the 
flow  of  funds  to  the  high-priority  sectors,  State  public  sector  enterprises,  developmental 
institutions and local bodies, for commercial as well as non-commercial activities as also for 
urban development. The element of risk associated with such guarantees, transparency with 
regard  to  the  guarantee  policies  and  the  magnitude  of  guarantees  extended  by  the  State 
Governments  have  raised  concerns  regarding  the  optimal  or  sustainable  level  of  such 
guarantees. It is well recognised that while the guarantees, being contingent liabilities, do not 
form part of the debt, as conventionally measured, these have, in the eventuality of default, 
the potential of straining an apparently sound fiscal system. 
At the first Conference of the State Finance Secretaries held in November 1997, the issue of 
government guarantees was deliberated upon at length and the view taken was that, in the 
interest of prudent financial management and the credibility of the guarantees issued, there 
was  a  need  for  a  policy  on  guarantees  for  each  State  Government  within  certain  national 
parameters.  Accordingly,  a  Technical  Committee  was  constituted  to  examine  the  issue  of 
State Government guarantees, in all its aspects. The report of the Committee was discussed 
at the third Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in January 1999, and pursuant 
to the recommendations of the Committee, several States have since taken the initiative to 
fix a ceiling on guarantees to be issued by them.  
The devolvement probabilities of various guarantees are not identical and consequently, all 
guarantees can not be treated uniformly in terms of their fiscal impact. In order, therefore, to 
assess  the  fiscal  risk  arising  out  of  guarantees  in  a  more  realistic  and  objective  manner, 
there  was  a  need  to  evolve  a  methodology  for  classifying  guarantees  into  appropriate 
categories,  with  each  category  reflecting  broadly  similar  fiscal  impact.  This,  in  turn,  was 
expected to facilitate the fixing of ceiling on guarantees in a non-mechanistic fashion to better 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2007
capture  the  risk  inherent  in  guarantees,  and  to  enable  adoption  of  better  provisioning 
techniques to cover these contingent liabilities. In this backdrop, it was decided to constitute 
a Group of State Finance Secretaries on the Fiscal Risk on State Government Guarantees to 
examine the fiscal risk of guarantees extended by the State Governments. The report of the 
Group was discussed at the tenth Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in June 
2002. 
The  general  consensus  that  emerged  at  the  Conference  was  to  place  the  Report  of  the 
Group  in  the  public  domain.  It  was  also  agreed  to  explore  the  possibility  of  extending  the 
scope of the relative RBI circular addressed to the banks, to the financial institutions also so 
that  they  too  would  undertake  due  diligence  and  proper  appraisal  in  financing  of  projects 
rather than merely relying on the State Government guarantees in their favour. It was also 
proposed  that  States  could  be  provided  technical  assistance  in  regard  to  assigning 
appropriate risk weights to the guarantees. 
The Reserve Bank organises workshops on the evaluation of fiscal risk of guarantees for the 
benefit  of  State  Government  officials.  Representatives  of  credit  rating  agencies  are  also 
invited  to  give  presentations  at  the  workshops.  So  far,  four  such  workshops  have  been 
organised. It was also decided that the State Governments would be encouraged to seek, for 
their internal use, credit ratings from a rating agency so that they could initiate appropriate 
measures  to  improve  their  financial  performance  when  they  approached  the  market  to 
mobilise resources.  
The  Reserve  Bank  circulated  a  draft  scheme  on  Guarantee  Redemption  Fund  (GRF) 
amongst  the  State  Governments  for  voluntary  adoption.  As  an  incentive  to  build  up  the 
Consolidated  Sinking  Fund  (CSF)  and  GRF,  the  Bezbaruah  Committee  (2005)  had 
recommended that net incremental (i.e., new investment less redemption/liquidation) annual 
investment of States in CSF/GRF would be made eligible for availing Special WMA, but up to 
a  ceiling  equivalent  to  the  Normal  WMA  limit.  Keeping  this  in  view,  the  Reserve  Bank 
circulated revised draft GRF scheme amongst the State Governments in May 2006. As on 
June 30, 2007, eight State Governments had set up the GRF, of which three had put in place 
the revised scheme. 
Ways and Means Advances, and cash management 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been extending Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to 
State Governments since 1937 with the objective of covering temporary mismatches in the 
cash flows of their receipts and payments.  
The WMA Scheme has been periodically revised, right since the early 1950s, in the light of 
the perceived requirements of the State Governments, keeping in view  the evolving fiscal, 
financial  and  institutional  developments  as  well  as  the  objectives  of  monetary  and  fiscal 
management. State-wise limits in respect of Normal and Special WMA are determined based 
on certain parameters and have been revised, periodically, over the years. An overdraft (OD) 
occurs  whenever  these  limits  are  exceeded.  Maximum  time-period  (days)  and/or  financial 
limits up to which the State Governments can remain in overdraft have been specified; these 
limits have also been revised periodically. Payments on behalf of the State Governments are 
suspended in case the OD limits are breached. 
Till the late 1990s, the Normal and Special WMA limits of State Governments were fixed in 
terms of specified multiples of their minimum balances kept with the RBI. Both the minimum 
balances  and  the  “multiples”  to  obtain  the  Normal  WMA  limits,  were  revised  upwards  a 
number of times (though not necessarily at the same time) over the years.  
There have been strong demands from several States, from time to time, for upward revision 
of  the  WMA  limits.  RBI had  taken  the  view  that  WMA  is  meant  for  meeting  the  temporary 
mismatches  in  the  cash  flows  and  hence,  any  upward  revision  in  the  WMA  limits  to  meet 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 5
structural deficits of the States is inappropriate. The matter remained a contentious issue for 
some time.  
The  initiation  of  the  Conference  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  in  1997  induced  a 
transformation in the approach to formulating changes in the WMA Scheme. Distinct from the 
past, Advisory Committees were periodically constituted by the Reserve Bank to review the 
prevailing WMA arrangements and recommend changes, as considered appropriate, in the 
light  of  the  evolving  circumstances.  The  involvement  of  experts  from  outside  the  Reserve 
Bank in such Advisory Committees helped to strengthen and broad-base the modalities for 
effecting appropriate changes in the WMA Scheme. In fact, three Advisory Committees, that 
have been constituted so far, have been chaired by experts from outside the Reserve Bank 
and have included other “external” experts apart from senior functionaries from the Reserve 
Bank, as members. 
The first informal Advisory Committee on the WMA to State Governments was constituted in 
1998, under the chairmanship of Shri B.P.R. Vithal. As a major break from the past practices, 
the Vithal Committee recommended the de-linking of the size of the Normal WMA limit with 
the  minimum  balances  held  by  the  States  on  the  grounds  that  "fixing  the  WMA  limits  as 
multiples of an unchanged minimum balance, as in the past, does not capture the differing 
needs of the States in line with the different growth in their budgetary transactions. This has 
resulted in wide inter-State variations in the WMA limits in relation to the size of the Budget, 
and this needs to be corrected." The Vithal Committee instead proposed linking the normal 
WMA  limit  to  the  cash  flows  of  the  State.  The  recommendations  were  implemented  in  the 
light of further consultations with the States and the Centre. 
Subsequently,  similar  committees  (Ramachandran  Committee,  2003  and  Bezbaruah 
Committee, 2005) have refined and improved upon the WMA arrangements. It is noteworthy 
that WMA arrangements have ceased to be a contentious matter amongst the Centre, States 
and  RBI  on  account  of  the  reliance  placed  on  the  advice  from  the  outside  experts  and 
intensive consultations amongst the stakeholders, in finalising the arrangements. 
The  upsurge  in  the  surplus  cash  balances  of  some  of  the  State  Governments  since  the 
middle of 2004-05, in contrast to the liquidity pressures witnessed in the earlier period, has 
posed  newer  challenges  to  financial  and  cash  management  of  State  Governments.  The 
issues  relating  to  investment  of  cash  balances  of  the  States  were  discussed  at  the  18th 
Conference  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  held  in  August  2006  and  also  in  the  20th 
Conference  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  held  in  August  2007.  Taking  note  of  the 
discussions, the Reserve Bank is in the process of formulating the plans in this regard, in 
consultation with the Centre and the States.  
Advice on fiscal management 
The  importance  of  fiscal  transparency  has  got  reinforced  in  the  recent  years  after 
Government  of  India  subscribed,  in  1997,  to  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standards 
(SDDS) promulgated by the International Monetary Fund. In the light of this development, it 
was  decided  to  constitute  a  Group  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  to  suggest  various 
measures  of  disclosure,  which  could  be  introduced  in  the  budgetary  exercise  of  the  State 
Governments.  It  was  also  decided  that  the  Group  could  lay  down  a  model  budget  for  the 
States, which would enable the Legislature and the public to enhance their understanding of 
the State finances. The Group suggested, inter alia, that it would also be useful if the State 
Governments could publish a document akin to the Budget at a Glance of the Union Budget 
furnishing the estimated levels of Gross Fiscal Defiit (GFD) and Primary Deficit (PD) of the 
State,  including  their  ratio  to  the  State  Development  Product  (SDP).  The  document  could 
also  incorporate  time-series  data  on  important  fiscal  variables  of  the  State.  The  levels  of 
outstanding  debt,  guarantees  extended,  wages  and  salaries,  and  subsidies  could  also  be 
explicitly  indicated.  Many  States  have,  in  the  light  of  these  deliberations,  modified  their 
budget-related documents to enhance fiscal transparency. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2007
A Group was constituted in February 2003 to undertake a study of the pension liabilities of 
the  State  Governments  and  make  suitable  recommendations.  The  Group  observed  that  if 
pension payments of the States were to grow at the historical average growth rate, pension 
payments alone would pre-empt about 20 per cent of the total revenue receipts of the States 
and as much as 30 per cent of the revenue receipts in the year 2010-11. Thus, purely from 
the  perspective  of  fiscal  sustainability  of  the  States  and  the  magnitude  of  the  problem, 
structural  alteration  in  the  existing  pension  scheme,  appeared  necessary.  The  Group 
recommended introduction of contributory pension scheme/s for the new employees of the 
State Governments in lieu of the existing non-contributory defined-benefit pension scheme. 
The Group also recommended three alternative pension models, which are to be acted upon 
by  the  States  as  they  consider  appropriate.  As  per  the  available  information,  19  State 
Governments have notified a defined-contribution pension scheme for their new employees. 
Recognising the absence of unanimity about the exact level, composition, and methodology 
for compiling the liabilities of the State Governments in India, it was decided in August 2004, 
to constitute a working group to evolve a methodology. The Group recommended  that the 
compilation of data on the budgetary liabilities should be consistent with those in respect of 
the  Gross  Fiscal  Deficit  and  accordingly,  specified  the  constituent  items.  The  Group  also 
recommended exclusion of the implicit/contingent liabilities from the definition of budgetary 
liabilities,  reckoning  the  wide  divergence  in  views  on  the  various  items  that  should  be 
included under implicit liabilities. It, however, recommended the disclosure of information on 
various  implicit  liabilities  along  with  the  budgetary  liabilities.  The  Group  recommended 
specific formats for timely release of data on the liabilities in the budget documents of the 
State Governments. The Group also recommended that the Reserve Bank should compile 
and publish the data on the liabilities of the States in its annual study on the State budgets; 
this recommendation has already been implemented.  
Fiscal responsibility legislation 
The  RBI  had  provided  detailed  and  comprehensive  technical  inputs  to  the  Government  of 
India for formulating a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Law, which culminated 
in the enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act by the 
Parliament.  In  view  of  this  successful  outcome,  State  Finance  Secretaries  expressed  a 
desire  for  similar  advice  to  them  from  the  RBI.  Accordingly,  a  group  was  constituted  in 
October  2003  with  select  State  Finance  Secretaries  and  a  representative  from  the 
Government  of  India,  Ministry  of  Finance,  as  members,  to  prepare  a  model  fiscal 
responsibility legislation for the States. The draft Report of the Group was discussed at the 
14th Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in August, 2004 and the final report 
was  submitted  to  the  Reserve  Bank  in  January  2005.  The  Group  decided  that  the  model 
legislation would generally follow the pattern of the Central FRBM Act, and build upon the 
State fiscal responsibility legislations already enacted. The Group also took into account the 
international  best  practices  available  in  the  area  as  well  as  the  recommendations  of  the 
various committees on fiscal transparency and on the issues related to voluntary disclosure 
of  information  by  the  State  Governments.  Various  dimensions  of  the  fiscal  legislative 
framework, such as, the choice of targets, the road map for achievement of the targets, need 
for a detailed set of illustrative rules, independent evaluation criteria, prioritisation of capital 
expenditure, treatment of contingent liabilities including guarantees, computation of pension 
liabilities, etc., were deliberated upon to arrive at a consensus. The Group felt that the model 
Bill  would  provide  guidance  to  the  States  for  enacting  their  fiscal  responsibility  legislations 
with reference to certain benchmarks.  
The objective of the Group was to design a template for the fiscal responsibility legislation for 
the States on the basis of feasibility on pragmatic considerations and enforceability, taking 
into account the diverse requirements of various States. It was considered desirable to allow 
each State to take a view on the sequencing of adoption of various provisions of the model 
Bill,  fixing  the  actual  targets,  time  frame  for  implementation  thereof  and  allocating  the 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 7
provisions  between  the  Act  and  the  Rules,  depending  on  its  fiscal  capabilities  and  further 
refining the provisions given in the model bill within the overall framework of fiscal prudence 
and sustainability.  
All State Governments, except two, have already enacted fiscal responsibility legislation. 
New arrangements for borrowings by the States  
According  to  the  TFC,  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the  States  to  take  advantage  of  the 
prevailing  market  rates  and  avoid  the  spread  charged  by  the  Centre  on  the  assistance 
provided by it. The pattern of Central assistance included loan as a major element in respect 
of general category States, which was implicitly funded from borrowings by the Centre and 
hence, the terms of loans extended to the States reflected the Centre’s cost of borrowings. 
To  the  extent  these  arrangements  prevailed,  there  was,  in  effect,  intermediation  by  the 
Centre  in  the  provision of  loans to  the  States  as  part  of the  Central  assistance.  The  TFC, 
therefore, recommended that the Central Government should not act as an intermediary for 
future  lending  and  allow  the  States  to  approach  the  market  directly.  If  some  fiscally  weak 
States were unable to raise funds from the market, the Centre could borrow for the purpose 
of on-lending to such States, but the interest rates should remain aligned to the marginal cost 
of  borrowing  for  the  Centre.  This  approach  was  accepted  by  the  Central  Government,  in 
principle, to be implemented in phases, in consultation with the Reserve Bank.  
The  new  arrangements  for  ensuring  disintermediation  of  the  Centre  in  respect  of  States’ 
borrowings were deliberated upon, at the Conferences of State Finance Secretaries and by 
the Monitoring Group on Cash and Debt Management of the Government of India and RBI. 
In  the  light  of  these  discussions  and  in  order  to  operationalise  the  new  arrangements,  the 
Government of India constituted a Technical Group, with Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy 
Governor, RBI as chairperson and the officials of the Government of India, select States and 
the  Reserve  Bank,  as  its  members.  The  Technical  Group  submitted  its  report  to  the 
Government of India in December 2005 and made several recommendations. 
In  tune  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Group,  there  has  been  noticeable  progress  in 
regard to drawing up of calendar of borrowings, re-issuance of securities and adoption of the 
auction method for borrowing by the States. In addition, on the lines of the recommendations 
of  the  Working  Group  on  Liquidity  of  State  Government  Securities  (Chairman  –  Shri. 
V.K.Sharma),  2005,  State  Development  Loans  (SDLs)  have  been  made  eligible  for  repo 
transactions  under  the  liquidity  adjustment  facility  of  the  RBI  and  it  has  been  decided  to 
introduce the non-competitive bidding facility in respect of the primary auctions of SDLs. As 
far as the arrangements for sharing the corpus of the National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) 
are  concerned,  in  accordance  with  the  decision  of  the  National  Development  Council,  the 
obligatory  share  of  the  States  has  been  reduced  to  80  per  cent  with  effect  from  the  year 
2007-08.  
the 
framework  of 
Loan Council 
The TFC had also recommended that "…..States, like the Centre, must decide their annual 
borrowing  programme  within 
fiscal  responsibility 
legislations….  The  overall  limit  to  their  annual  borrowings  from  all  sources  should  be 
supervised  by  an  independent  body  like  a  Loan  Council  with  representatives  from  the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Planning  Commission,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  State 
Governments.  The  Council  may,  at  the  beginning  of  each  year,  announce  the  annual 
borrowing  limits  for  each  State,  taking  into  account  the  sustainability  considerations….." 
(Para 15.7).  
It was, however, felt that setting up of a new institution, like the Loan Council, would entail 
additional cost in terms of physical and human resources and would take time. Moreover, a 
their  respective 
8 
 BIS Review 105/2007
large majority of States are currently seized with the task of addressing structural issues in 
managing government finances which, if carried on to their logical conclusion, could usher in 
an  era  of  debt  sustainability  over  the  medium-term  of  the  TFC  period.  The  Loan  Council 
could lose its raison d’etre once the fiscal situation became tractable, as seems to have been 
the case with the Australian Loan Council, which provides the international best practice in 
respect  of  coordinated  borrowings  by  the  Federal  and  State  Governments.  Against  this 
backdrop,  the  Technical  Group  felt  that  the  objective  of  securing  coordinated  borrowings 
between the Centre and the States on the one hand, and between the States on the other, 
could  be  best  served  by  the  setting  up  a  Standing  Technical  Committee  (STC)  with 
representation from the Central Government, State Governments and the RBI. 
The  Terms  of  Reference  of  the  STC  are  to  make  annual  projections  of  borrowing 
requirements of the State Governments; build alternative scenarios and suggest alternative 
strategies  and  instruments  for  raising  resources  of  the  States;  advise on  a  mechanism  for 
annual allocation of market borrowings amongst the States; take note of actual borrowings of 
the  State  governments  during  the  year  vis-à-vis  the  budgeted  GFD  and  develop  an 
appropriate  database  that  would  facilitate  the  monitoring  exercise;  assess  fiscal  risks  from 
issuances  of  State  Government  guarantees;  and  advise  State  Governments  on  various 
issues relating to their borrowings.  
The  first  meeting  of  the  STC  was  held  during  the  20th  Conference  of  the  State  Finance 
Secretaries held in August 2007.  
Management of foreign exchange risk  
The external assistance by multilateral agencies to the States has traditionally been routed 
through the Central Government as part of the Central assistance, with the Centre bearing 
the foreign exchange risk. However, as part of the policy of disintermediation of the Centre in 
the borrowings by the States, it was decided by the Central Government that there should be 
a back-to-back transfer of external assistance to the States. At the 16th Conference of the 
State  Finance  Secretaries,  some  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  suggested  that  the  RBI 
could play an advisory role in assisting the States in hedging their exchange rate risks arising 
from the policy of back-to-back transfer of external assistance. 
In  the  context  of  the  TFC  recommendations  and  following  the  discussions  at  the  19th 
Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in January 2007, the first workshop on the 
management  of  foreign  exchange  risk  by  the  States  through  the  financial  markets  was 
organised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  May  2007,  for  the  benefit  of  the  State  Government 
officials.  
The States have also proposed alternative mechanisms for providing for foreign exchange 
risk by setting aside funds in their budgets, where the Reserve Bank is expected to play a 
role in managing these funds on the lines of the CSF. These proposals were discussed at the 
20th Conference of the State Finance Secretaries, held in August 2007.  
Selective broadening and deepening of relationship  
There are many areas in which there has been close coordination between the RBI and the 
States.  For  some  of  the  important  areas  of  the  RBI’s  responsibilities,  there  are  standing 
institutional mechanisms at the State level, with which the Regional Offices of the RBI and 
the concerned officials of the State Governments are associated. The more important areas 
of  close  coordination  relate  to  the  provision  of  overall  physical  security  for  the  banking 
system, matters relating to coins and currency and responses to natural calamities. 
Considerable decentralisation of powers and responsibilities to Regional Offices of the RBI 
has been brought about to facilitate locally relevant solutions to the problems, as they arise. 
The  empowerment  of  Regional  Offices  has  been  combined  with  promoting  State-specific 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 9
initiatives, both in policy and implementation. The Regional Offices play a facilitating role in 
bringing together the contending parties when some tensions arise, that affect the financial 
system. One of the examples relates to resolution of stand-off between a State Government 
and the microfinance institutions on the terms of loans granted and methods for recovery of 
dues employed by the microfinance institutions. Similarly, considerable latitude is provided, 
to  suit  the  local  conditions,  in  the  deliberations  of  State  Level  Bankers’  Committees,  and 
there are many instances of the State Finance Ministers and Chief Ministers presiding over 
such meetings. 
In  the  broad  area  of  banking,  an  innovative  mechanism  has  been  designed  to  resolve  the 
issue  of  dual  control  in  regard  to  the  urban  cooperative  banks.  Several  States,  together 
accounting for over seventy percent of urban banking activity, have signed Memorandum of 
Understanding with the RBI to constitute in each State a Task Force on Urban Co-operative 
Banks (TAFCUB) to ensure co-ordinated actions to revive and strengthen this sector. This 
has been, by all accounts, an outstanding success. Similarly, Empowered Committees have 
been constituted in all the States to reorganise, strengthen and expand the Regional Rural 
Banks. In the matters relating to revival of rural cooperatives also, State-specific packages 
are considered. Special plans for coordinated actions for select States, where the spread and 
depth  of  banking  services  are  poor,  have  been  mounted,  the  examples  being  the  north-
eastern States, Uttarakhand and Bihar. 
More recently, a vigorous programme of financial inclusion has been initiated to ensure the 
offer of banking services to the whole population. The RBI plays the lead role in each State, 
while the State Government participates in the movement, for operationalising the approach. 
The  States  have  particular  interest  in  this  programme  to  ensure  efficient  and  inexpensive 
disbursal of funds under several social security related and rural employment programmes. 
The  recent  developments  in  technology  are  facilitating  this process.  Simultaneously,  some 
States  have  shown  enthusiasm  for  extending  financial  literacy  and  RBI  is  encouraging  its 
Regional Offices to respond, preferably in the local language, and the RBI website attempts 
to disseminate information in several of these languages. 
We  do  recognise  that  while  we  should  avoid  overstretching  our  resources,  we  should  be 
willing to interact and respond positively to the genuine demands of the State Governments 
that  are  legitimate  concerns  of  the  RBI.  No  doubt,  the  State-specific  considerations  would 
govern State-specific responses, within the overall policy framework of the RBI. There are 
many areas, which are perhaps of greater relevance to the Central Government than to the 
RBI,  in  which  the  States  seek  the  RBI’s  involvement  but  we  are  constrained  to  carefully 
distance ourselves. Some time ago, there was a strong appeal from several States that the 
RBI should award a rating to the quality of fiscal management of all the States, which would 
carry  greater  weight  and  foster  better  response  from  the  political  leadership  of  the  States 
concerned. The RBI had to politely decline the request since, as an institution, it should not 
appear to be ranking the States or passing judgments on their fiscal performance.  
Outcomes and challenges  
Having delineated the efforts and the processes of collaboration between the States and the 
RBI,  it  is  only  appropriate  to  briefly  enumerate  the  outcomes  and  to  recognise  the  critical 
challenges that lie ahead for the State finances and the RBI.  
First, the progressive enactment of Fiscal Responsibility Legislations (FRLs) by as many as 
26 State governments has indeed strengthened the fiscal consolidation initiatives at the State 
level.  
Second, the gross fiscal deficit of States, which had increased from an average of 2.8 per 
cent of GDP in the first half of the 1990s to an average of over 4 per cent of GDP in the first 
half of the present decade, was placed at 2.5 per cent of GDP in 2005-06 and is expected to 
be brought down to 2.4 per cent in the budget estimates for 2007-08. The revenue deficit, 
10 
 BIS Review 105/2007
which  had  increased  to  an  average  of  2.2  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  first  half  of  the  present 
decade, has remained at less than 0.1 per cent since 2005-06. In fact, an aggregate revenue 
surplus (of 0.4 per cent of GDP) has been budgeted for 2007-08. All States, except eight, 
have budgeted for a revenue surplus during 2007-08. 
Third,  open  market  borrowings  of  the  State  Governments  have  been  conducted  entirely 
through the auction route during 2006-07 and 2007-08 (so far). The spreads for almost all the 
States, over the yields of Central Government securities of comparable maturity during 2006-
07 and 2007-08 so far, has remained well below 50 basis points (spread fixed in the case of 
tap issuances), reflecting favourable market perception.  
Fourth,  as  far  as  the  State  Government  guarantees  are  concerned,  the  volume  is  on  a 
declining  path:  guarantees  were  placed  at  6.5  per  cent  of  GDP  as  of  end-March  2005  as 
compared  with  8.0  per  cent  as  at  end-March  2001.  Many  States  have  imposed 
administrative/  legislative  ceilings  on  guarantees.  Eight  States  have  set  up  Guarantee 
Redemption Funds to provide for the possible invocation of guarantees.  
Fifth, 18 States have set up Consolidated Sinking Funds to provide for orderly repayments of 
their open market borrowings. Of these, 11 States have adopted the revised CSF scheme 
which provides for repayments of all liabilities (and not just open market loans). Many more 
States have proposed to set up the revised CSF. 
Sixth, the cash management of the State Governments has shown a marked improvement in 
recent years. The daily average utilisation of Normal WMA, Special WMA and overdrafts by 
the State Governments declined during 2006-07. During 2006-07, eight States availed WMA 
as  against  12  States  in  the  previous  year.  Only  two  States  resorted  to  overdrafts  during 
2006-07 as against eight States in the previous year.  
Notwithstanding the positive developments and prospects, there would remain a few areas of 
concern.  
There are certain risks to the process of fiscal consolidation such as the expected increase in 
expenditure from the revision of pay scales of the State Government employees, pursuant to 
the  implementation  of  the  ensuing  recommendations  of  the  Sixth  Pay  Commission.  In  this 
connection, State Governments would need to make their budgets robust enough to enable 
them to steadfastly adhere to the provisions of their Fiscal Responsibility Legislations. Fiscal 
empowerment through revenue augmentation holds the key to address such fiscal risks. 
Initiatives by the States would be needed to develop a calendar for open market borrowings 
by  the  States,  on  the  lines  issued  by  the  Government  of  India.  This  would  enhance 
transparency,  reduce  uncertainty  for  the  market  participants  and  thereby  help  to  further 
smoothen market-borrowing operations. Re-issuance of State Government securities would 
also  help  to  build  up  a  critical  minimum  size  of  securities,  which  would,  in  turn,  help  to 
enhance their liquidity. 
The Reserve Bank continues to receive complaints from the banks and financial institutions 
regarding  defaults  in  honouring  of  obligations  under  the  State  Government  guaranteed 
bonds. Such issues need to be addressed by the State Governments as this would impact on 
their credibility and market perception of their financial position.  
At  the  same  time,  issues  relating  to  the  insistence  of  certain  (re-financing)  institutions  for 
provision of State Government guarantees, irrespective of the financial viability of projects, 
perhaps  on  account  of  legal  requirements,  also  need  to  be  addressed  at  an  appropriate 
forum. 
The State Government expenditures on education and health remain low at around 2.5 per 
cent and 0.7 per cent of GDP, respectively. These expenditures may need to be enhanced to 
make  a  long-term  impact  on  the  level  of  human  development  in  the  country,  within  the 
framework of Fiscal Responsibility Legislation. At the same time, issues relating to the quality 
and timeliness of providing such social sector services need to be expeditiously addressed. 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 11
From  the  Reserve  Bank’s  standpoint,  initiatives  relating  to  credit  culture,  financial  literacy, 
financial  inclusion  and  priority  sector  lending  would  continue  to  remain  high  on  the  policy 
agenda. 
Concluding remarks  
RBI  has  considerable  professional  skills  and  the  States  recognise  and  value  them  better 
when we are willing to consider State-specific orientation to our broader analysis. The RBI, 
like most of the central banks, commands considerable credibility and good public image and 
as  a  public  institution  is  considered  relatively  apolitical  in  viewing  the  vertical  relations 
between the Centre and the States and horizontal ones amongst the States. The bi-annual 
Conference  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  sponsored  by  the  RBI  has  proved  to  be  an 
excellent forum for wide-ranging discussions. The Technical Committees or Groups that are 
formed,  have  membership  entirely  from  the  States,  though  Centre  may  occasionally  be 
associated, but RBI provides secretarial and technical support. The Centre and each State 
concerned decides the appropriate course of actions. The fact that some of the States have 
adopted  a  few  but  not  all  the  recommendations  of  the  Committees  and  Groups, 
demonstrates  the  shift  away  from  the  perceived  centralisation  of  the  past  towards  a 
participative process. 
I  am  happy  to  submit  that  all  the States,  though  with  varying  degrees  of  enthusiasm,  fully 
endorse the immense contribution of the process of partnering between RBI and the States 
in the cause of better financial sector and fiscal empowerment in the States. 
Let me conclude with profuse thanks to the Madras School of Economics for provoking me to 
think aloud on this subject and share the thoughts with wider audience.  
The School came into existence in 1995, but very soon, it could obtain “A” Grade from the 
National Assessment & Accreditation Council. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has 
also designated the school as a Centre of Excellence in Environmental Economics. 
I have no doubt that the School would emerge to be an internationally recognised Centre of 
Excellence  in  economic  studies  attracting  the  best  of  students  and  teachers  from  different 
parts of the country as well as other countries. 
On our part, we in the RBI are in close touch with the School with a view to obtaining their 
expertise in the process of monetary policy formulation. 
Thank you. 
12 
 BIS Review 105/2007
