Christian Noyer: European financial markets – opportunities for growth and 
value creation 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the First French-Indian Financial 
Forum, Paris EUROPLACE, Mumbai, 16 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  the  absence  of  Mr  Mestrallet,  Chairman  of  Paris  EUROPLACE  and  CEO  of  Suez  Group,  who 
cannot be with us today because of last minute commitments that require his presence in France, I 
have the great pleasure of welcoming you to our first French-Indian Financial Forum in Mumbai. 
India’s  rapid  economic  growth  in  recent  years  makes  it  an  attractive  investment  destination  for 
international  investors.  And  the  economic  revival  in  Europe  also  offers  interesting  opportunities  to 
Indian  investors  and  issuers  wishing  to  diversify  their  investment  strategy.  That’s  why  Paris 
EUROPLACE believes that we all have a common interest in attending this forum today to discuss 
business opportunities between European and Indian Financial Markets. 
I would like to express my warm thanks to my friend Dr. Rakesh MOHAN, Deputy Governor of the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  for  being  with  us  today.  We  are  also  very  honoured  to  welcome  Mr  Ashok 
WADHWA, Chairman, Capital Markets Committee of FICCI, the partner of Paris EUROPLACE in the 
organization  of  this  forum,  Mr  Ravi  NARAIN,  Managing  Director  and  CEO  of  the  National  Stock 
Exchange of India Ltd and Mr Peter KURIAN, Chairman of the Association of Mutual Funds in India, 
as well as all the other distinguished representatives of the Indian and French financial communities. 
As  you  may  know,  Paris  EUROPLACE  brings  together  the  whole  range  of  market  participants  – 
issuers, investors and intermediaries – in order to contribute to the development of European capital 
markets and promote the Paris financial center. 
The financial industry in India, as in Europe, is expanding significantly. And we have already seen in 
the  past  few  years  the  flourishing  of  partnerships  between  French  and  Indian  financial  institutions: 
such  as  in  the  asset  management  industry,  the  joint  venture  between  Sundaram  and  BNP  Paribas 
Asset Management, or the SGAM and SBI Mutual Funds partnership; in insurance services, the Bharti 
and Axa Life Insurance partnership, and the joint venture between SBI Life and Cardiff; and in online 
brokerage: current developments involving Cortal Consors and Geojit. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  was  decided  by  Paris  EUROPLACE  to  focus  our  program  on  the 
development of opportunities and potential new partnerships between Mumbai and Paris, as well as to 
review how the expertise of the Paris financial marketplace can be used and leveraged. 
Let me highlight the following questions: 
- 
- 
Why has the European financial market become a major pillar of international finance? 
And what are the key advantages offered by the Paris financial market place? 
1.  
First, why has the European financial market become a major pillar of international 
finance to compare favourably with the other large markets of the world? 
Today, Europe consists of 27 countries representing a market of around 500 million consumers: the 
largest domestic market in the world in terms of purchasing power. 
The  acceleration  of  the  integration  of  European  financial  markets  has  radically  transformed  the 
international financial environment. All activities are concerned. 
Regarding  bond  markets,  European  debt  instruments  issued  in  euro  on  international  markets  are 
now quite comparable to those denominated in dollars. If we take into consideration bonds issued on 
external  markets  by  “non  euro  area  resident”  companies,  foreign  governments  and  multilateral 
institutions,  we  can  observe  that  in  2006,  total  issues  of  international  bonds  and  notes  in  euro 
represented  an  outstanding  of  an  equivalent  of  1,200  billion  (USD)  against  1,000  billion  (USD)  in 
dollars. 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 1
This fact shows that the euro market has grown considerably since the beginning of the 2000s and 
today constitutes for corporates and governments a vast, safe and liquid source of funds, wider than 
that of the US dollar. 
While  the  US  dollar  remains  dominant  as  an  international  reserve  currency  (65%  of  international 
official reserves against 24% for the euro), bond markets have become bipolar with the euro playing a 
leading role. 
European  equity  markets  have  constantly  developed  since  the  80s  although  they  remain 
smaller than those of the United States. 
In  terms  of  ratios  of  market  capitalisation  to  the  GDP  of  the  countries,  euro  area  equity  markets 
represented 55 % in 2005, while those of the United States amounted to 105 % and Japan to 85 %. 
However, the euro area equity market has been growing progressively at an average rate of 10% per 
year, since 1999. The share of equities in European investment funds has increased by 3 points since 
2002 and amounted to 27% in 2006, while the proportion remained stable in the United States at 45%. 
As regards asset management, we observe that since the launch of the euro in 1999, Europe has 
caught  up  the  United  States  in  terms  of  the  world-wide  distribution  of  investment  fund  assets.  The 
United States and Europe hold the largest market shares in the world, at 50% and 33% respectively. 
2. 
In this context, what are the key advantages offered by the Paris financial center as a 
market and a services provider ? 
The  recent  launch  of  the  euro  has  given  a  big  boost  to  our  financial  center  and  leveraged  our 
structural  strengths:  concentration  of  headquarters  of  big  companies,  innovative  entrepreneurial 
development  in  fund  management  (fixed-income  and  sophisticated  guarantee  funds)  and  strong 
knowledge  of  mathematical  finance,  that  is  the  base  for  French  leadership  in  derivatives  and  risk-
based models. Innovation and expertise had and still have for the future a very positive impact on both 
the  bond  and  equity  markets.  Consequently  French  investment  banks  are  very  well  ranked  in 
European activities. 
Paris  has  taken  a  major  position  in  the  recent  developments  of  the  euro-denominated  bond 
market: 
The  French  government  bond  market  is  today  the  most  liquid  in  the  world  after  the  US  treasury 
market, with an outstanding of € 900 billion, and has a strong innovative strategy: let’s mention the 
launch of a range of index-linked products to European and French inflation, or the introduction of a 
50-year OAT bond, which represents the new frontier of the euro fixed-income market. 
The French corporate bond market is the largest in Europe, with an outstanding of €250 bn, compared 
to €180 bn in London and €85 bn in Frankfurt. 
Most recently, we have seen strong growth of structured and synthetic products. The new legislation 
concerning the French covered bond market boosts this market compartment, which represents today 
an outstanding of €160bn. 
On the equity side, Euronext has been ahead of London and Frankfurt in terms of transactions since 
2006. The new alliance between NYSE and Euronext creates the world’s largest exchange in 
terms  of  market  capitalisation  (€25  trillion),  the  world’s  largest  liquidity  pool,  with  a  daily 
average trading volume of €78 billion, & the world’s premier listings venue, with the presence 
of 80 of the top 100 companies listed world-wide, etc. 
This alliance marks a new era in the global consolidation of financial markets, with its stocks traded 
continuously  for  13  hours  a  day  on  two  continents  and  offering  corporate  issuers  and  international 
investors the opportunity to deal in two of the world's major currencies, the US dollar and the euro. 
French banks today have a leading position in equity derivatives markets, with more than 25% 
of the worldwide market. New opportunities have arisen in this sector, with the development of the 
Asian instruments, which are still at an early stage, as well as products related to environmental and 
sustainable  development  issues.  The  French  expertise  in  these  markets  is  based  on  a  strong 
education in mathematics and finance that leads to excellence in financial fields and a large pool of 
academic talent. In this chain of services, French banks are able to propose an end-to-end secured 
service based also on their leadership in post-trade and securities services. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2007
These market-driven services are reinforced by a strong and innovative “buyside” coming from 
the good position of the French asset management industry. Quality of services in the asset 
management  industry  is  another  key  opportunity  for  international  investors.  Assets  under 
management have tripled over the past ten years and consequently the French asset managers have 
built up a strong and global network and position Five of the largest French firms now rank among the 
top 25 asset management companies in the world, operating worldwide including in new fast-growing 
markets  in  Asia.  The  assets  managed  by  their  foreign  subsidiaries  are  estimated  to  be  worth  more 
than €1 trillion, adding to the €2.5 trillion euro managed out of Paris. 
Finally, with regard to the regulatory aspects, and to meet international requirements, France 
believes  that  regulation  is  a  major  competitive  driver.  First  because  trust,  investor  protection  and 
market robustness are essential and, second, because the regulatory process and better regulation 
principles are worked out to accompany financial innovation in accordance with prudential principles. 
Our  regulators  are  taking  driving  initiatives  to  harmonise  the  European  regulatory  framework  and 
facilitate  the  integration  of  the  European  financial  market  in  order  to  increase  its  critical  mass  and 
therefore  its  efficiency  even  for  non-European  investors  and  issuers.  That  is  why  also  the  French 
market is continually being upgraded to the highest standards of ethics and corporate governance so 
that French companies comply with best international practices. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  we  can  see,  globalization  and  structural  changes  are  driving  all  of  us  to  conduct  business  in  a 
different  way  and  offer  new  and  major  opportunities,  especially  through  the  development  of  cross-
border activities. 
In  this  context,  Paris  EUROPLACE  is  a  key  player  at  the  European  and  global  level  and  the  Paris 
financial center currently offers the best opportunities and environment to invest in Europe. 
Let me conclude by mentioning that Paris EUROPLACE is today launching a financial services cluster 
dedicated to financial innovation and the development of new value added projects between academic 
research  and  industrial  companies  with  the  participation  of  market  professionals,  universities  and 
research centers. 
This new project could be another opportunity to develop new added value projects and partnerships 
between Paris and Mumbai, in both financial research and new business opportunities, as we know 
that  the  Mumbai  financial  centre  aims  to  become  a  world  financial  cluster.  The  Paris  financial 
marketplace  today  offers  to  initiate  closer  cooperation  and  develop  joint  programs  with  the  Mumbai 
financial center. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 3
