Svante Öberg: Productivity and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 7 June 2007. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak to you!  
The rapid increase in productivity is the most important explanation as to why inflation has been low in 
recent years. The low inflation has in turn given us at the Riksbank the possibility to keep the interest 
rate at a low level. But productivity will probably show a slower increase in the future. Combined with 
higher wage increases, this indicates higher inflationary pressures and thereby higher interest rates 
over the coming years. 
In the light of this I shall devote today’s presentation to productivity and monetary policy. My speech 
will have the following structure: I shall begin with an introduction briefly describing how productivity 
has developed in historical terms. Then I shall move on to three important issues: The causes behind 
the  strong  productivity  growth,  developments  in  productivity  over  the  coming  years  and  the 
significance of productivity for monetary policy. 
I would like to make it clear from the start that I will not be talking about current monetary policy. I 
would also like to make it clear that I will today give my own views on productivity and its significance, 
which are not necessarily the views of the Riksbank. How the Executive Board as a collective views 
these issues will be made clear in the next Monetary Policy Report published later this month. 
Introduction 
A measure of productivity that is often used is production per hour or labour productivity. Unless I say 
otherwise, it is labour productivity that I am referring to in this speech. 
How has productivity developed over time? There was a considerable break in the rate of increase of 
productivity in the mid-1970s. From a rate of increase for the business sector of around 6 per cent a 
year during the 1960, the trend increase fell to around 2 per cent a year during the second half of the 
1970s and in the 1980s. Since then the trend has been rising. 
In  the  long  run,  developments  in  productivity  determine  most  of  a  country's  GDP  growth  and 
prosperity.  Another  important  factor  is  the  development  of  the  labour  force  and  employment.  It  is 
therefore important to be able to assess how these will develop in the long run when studying growth 
and its driving forces.  
But also in the short term, productivity growth is important, particularly for monetary policy. Productivity 
affects a large number of other variables in our forecast work, such as employment and inflation. A 
good  example  of  this  is  the  calculations  made  with  the  aid  of  the  Riksbank’s  general  equilibrium 
model. They show that the main reason for the low inflation in recent years is precisely the surprisingly 
high productivity growth. 
In  a  shorter-term  perspective  the  past  five  years  appears  to  have  been  a  period  of  unusually  high 
productivity growth. Productivity in the business sector increased by an average of around 4 per cent a 
year  during  the  years  2002-2006.  From  this  high  level,  the  rate  of  increase  in  productivity  is  now 
declining. At the beginning of the period 2002-2006 employment fell, but in the past two years it has 
increased rapidly. This is the explanation as to why growth is still high, despite the fact that productivity 
is now increasing at a slower rate.  
The statistics on productivity for the first quarter of this year are an excellent example of this. More or 
less  the  entire  increase  in  GDP  was  due  to  the  number  of  hours  worked  increasing  rapidly,  while 
productivity contributed to a very small degree.  
Reasons for the strong productivity growth 
I  have  now  come  to  the  first  of  the  issues,  which  concerns  the  reasons  for  the  strong  productivity 
growth in recent years. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
Structural changes have the greatest significance 
The strong productivity growth in recent years is mainly due to structural changes – deregulation of 
product  markets,  increased  globalisation,  increased  use  of  information  technology,  and  so  on. 
Economic  activity  is  also  significant  in  the  short  term,  but  developments  in  recent  years  have  been 
dominated by structural changes. 
Several  markets  were  deregulated  during  the  1990s.  This  includes  taxis,  domestic  airlines,  post, 
telecommunications  and electricity.  Deregulation  opens up  the current  market  to  competition,  which 
triggers  productivity.  This  is  mainly  due  to  companies  rationalising  their  operations  to  manage  the 
competition with other companies and to new companies being able to enter the market. There are 
several  studies,  made  by  for  instance  the  OECD  and  the  SNS,  which  have  described  this 
development. 
Globalisation also reinforces competition and encourages productivity growth. This applies in particular 
during the past fifteen years, among other things as a result of the EU enlargement, China’s rapidly 
growing  international  trade  and  the  opening  up  of  the  previously  planned  economies  in  eastern 
Europe. For instance, Sweden’s exports as a percentage of GDP have increased from around 30 per 
cent  in  1990  to  around  50  per  cent  in  2006.  Traditionally,  developments  in  trade  are  explained  by 
income and relative price effects. A study made at the NIESR in London shows that this still applies, 
on  condition  that  one  also  takes  into  account  the  trade  agreements  within  the  World  Trade 
Organisation  (WTO),  the  development  of  the  EU  and  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement 
(NAFTA).1
The significance of IT is visible in two ways; in production and use. If we look at the production of IT, 
we  can  observe  that  the  telecom  industry's  share  of  the  total  industry  is  substantial  in  Sweden 
compared with other countries. This means that the rapid development in productivity that has taken 
place in the telecom industry has significance for the development of productivity in the economy as a 
whole. 
If we instead look at use, Sweden has a relatively large share of IT capital in the total capital stock, 
compared with other countries. The use of IT means that one can simplify and automate the work so 
that those who work can carry out more tasks in a shorter time, that is, productivity increases. 
Cyclical factors have also contributed 
But the economic cycle has also played a role in productivity developments over the past fifteen years.  
At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  Sweden  underwent  the  deepest  crisis  since  the  Depression  of  the 
1930s. After the crisis, companies had unusually large scope to increase production using the existing 
resources. In addition, the substantial weakening of the krona contributed in autumn 1992 to a rapid 
increase  in  exports.  When  production  and  resource  utilisation  rose,  this  led  to  an  upswing  in 
productivity. 
The  fact  that  productivity  has  increased  so  rapidly  in  recent  years  is  therefore  partly  due  to  the 
economic cycle. This is because the beginning of an economic upturn is normally associated with high 
productivity growth. The explanation for this is that, at the beginning of an upturn, companies have the 
capacity to increase their production using existing resources. With time, in response to the increasing 
need for more resources, companies start hiring staff. This implies a decline in the rate of increase in 
productivity.  When  the  economic  cycle  enters  a  downturn  phase,  productivity  develops  even  more 
slowly.  
Growth accounting provides a systematic description 
I  am  sure  you  recognise  the  explanations  I  have  mentioned.  But  they  need  to  be  organised 
systematically  into  an  analysis  framework.  A  natural  starting  point  is  what  is  usually  called  growth 
accounting.2   
                                                      
1   Barrell et al (2007) 
2   This focus is based on what is usually called neoclassical growth theory. The starting point is considered to be two papers 
by Robert Solow (Solow, 1956 and 1957). A good and brief description can be found in, for instance, Romer (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
The starting point for growth accounting is an assumption that a company uses two types of resources 
in its production; labour and capital. In addition to these, they also benefit from the available general 
technology, that is, how skilful we are at using capital and labour together. One classical example of 
this technique is the conveyor belt. 
In the simplest example of growth accounting labour productivity is divided into two parts. One part is 
concerned  with  the  capital-worker  ratio,  what  is  known  as  capital  intensity.  The  other  part  of 
productivity,  often  known  as  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  is  concerned  with  the  available  general 
technology. 
If we apply this division into developments during the period 1981-2004, the picture looks like this. The 
rate of increase in productivity for the whole economy during this period was around 2 per cent a year. 
The contribution from increased capital intensity and the contribution from total factor productivity were 
both approximately one percentage point. 
However, the difference between the 1980s and the later years is substantial. The contribution from 
improved technology, that is from TFP, has increased substantially, while the contribution from capital 
intensity has remained roughly the same. 
If  I  now  return  to  my  three  explanations  for  the  high  productivity  growth,  they  can  be  classified 
according to this division. The contribution from IT capital accounts for roughly half of the increase in 
total capital intensity during the 1980s, but significantly more over the past ten years. If we look at the 
deregulated  product  markets  and  globalisation,  they  instead  influence  total  factor  productivity.  This 
contribution has increased significantly.  
But the two reasons mentioned are probably do not entirely explain the increase. This is because total 
factor productivity is calculated as a residual. That which cannot be explained by capital intensity ends 
up in the residual.  
But it is possible to make a better and deeper analysis. Higher productivity can be explained by other 
factors than general technological developments and increased capital intensity. One possibility is to 
make a more detailed division into labour and capital, and another is to divide the business sector into 
industries. The studies on which my figures are based give consideration, for instance, to the fact that 
there is both IT capital and other capital.  
Similarly, one can take into account the fact that there are different types of labour. Merely counting 
the number of persons or hours is rarely correct. The increased level of education and competence 
among  the  staff  also  affects  productivity.  A  study  of  Swedish  data  shows  that  such  changes  have 
contributed approximately 0.2 percentage points a year during the second half of the 1990s(3).3 The 
same picture, although applying to the situation in the United States, can be seen in US studies.4   
Another possibility to improve the accounting is to look more closely at the link between labour and 
capital.  So  far  the  analysis  has  been  based  on  the  two  resources  in  production  being  dealt  with 
separately.  But  there  are  good  examples  of  when  labour  and  capital  are  interdependent.  Technical 
knowledge becomes particularly valuable with regard to the development of programs and systems, 
the production of computer games, etc. Artists, film stars, elite athletes/sportsmen and others active in 
the  experience  industry  get  more  out  of  their  special  skills  through  the  developments  in  IT  and 
communications. 
The US central bank governor Ben Bernanke uses the company Walmart as another example.5 For 
the purpose of using the IT investments the company had made, they reorganised their work, gave the 
staff further training and changed the relationship to their suppliers. This type of technique for general 
use, of which IT can be said to be an example, can in turn push up other investment, such as further 
education.  
There  are  also  other  ways  of  developing  the  analysis.  For  instance,  there  are  studies  based  on 
general  equilibrium  models  indicating  that  the  contribution  of  capital  to  productivity  growth  is 
                                                      
3   Forsling & Lindström (2004) 
4   See, for example, Stiroh (2001) and Jorgenson et al (2006). 
5   Bernanke (2005) 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 3
underestimated in growth accounting.6 If we avoid such underestimations the residual item declines. 
Our knowledge has increased. 
And it is important for us at the Riksbank to increase our knowledge of the development of productivity 
and  of  what  might  explain  it.  One  of  the  current  projects  at  the  Riksbank  aims  to  obtain  greater 
knowledge of how IT investment, reorganisation and further education together affect productivity.  
Better statistics lead to better analysis 
I would like to conclude this section with a few words on the considerable significance of economic 
statistics  for  being  able  to  analyse  productivity  and  the  driving  factors  behind  it.  The  previous  US 
central  bank  governor,  Alan  Greenspan,  was  famous  for  his  ability  to  take  in  large  volumes  of 
statistics.  He  became  legendary  when  in  the  mid-1990s  he  was  the  first  to  predict  that  productivity 
growth in the United States would strengthen as a result of increased use of IT. This led to the central 
bank being able to conduct a more expansionary monetary policy for a period, without inflation rising. 
A few years ago I carried out an examination of economic statistics. My conclusions then were that 
these needed to be improved in four areas. All of them had in common that they were important to be 
able to analyse and understand productivity. They included better price indices in the private services 
sector to be able to better calculate volume growth and thereby productivity growth. Also better capital 
stock  calculations,  better  input-output  statistics  and  better  IT  statistics.  Statistics  Sweden  has  now 
received  money  to  make  these  improvements.  This  can  provide  us  with  better  conditions  for 
understanding productivity and the driving forces behind it. 
Productivity growth over the coming years 
I will now move on to the second of my questions, the question of productivity growth over the coming 
years. My conclusion is that productivity will slow down in the near future. This is indicated by changes 
in both the economic cycle and structure.  
Economic cycle indicates a slowdown 
I shall begin with the cyclical factors. In February we estimated that the rate of increase for productivity 
in the business sector would decline from approximately 4 per cent a year over the past five years to 
an average of 2.4 per cent a year during 2007-2009.  
Productivity  growth  has  been  unusually  strong  in  recent  years.  This  can  be  partly  explained  by  the 
normal course of events in an economic cycle. As I said earlier, productivity usually increases quickly 
in  the  initial  phase  of  an  economic  upturn.  When  the  cycle  then  enters  a  more  mature  phase, 
employment begins to rise. We have been in this phase for the past two years. Employment is now 
increasing rapidly. We expect to enter the next phase over the coming years when GDP growth will 
slow down. This indicates a lower rate of increase in productivity. 
Another factor that indicates a lower rate of increase for productivity is the composition of the labour 
force. The rapid increase in employment means that an unusually large number of new job-seekers 
are  entering  the  labour  market.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  those  who  now  obtain  jobs  have  a 
slightly  lower  productivity  than  those  who  already  have  jobs.  In  addition,  employment  is  mainly 
increasing in the service sector, which also indicates a lower rate of increase in the future. 
Structural factors also indicate a slowdown 
It  is  more  difficult  to  assess  how  globalisation,  deregulation,  IT  investments  and  other  structural 
changes will contribute to productivity growth in the future. Some structural changes are of a one-off 
nature while others are ongoing processes without any clear ending. And even if these changes are of 
a one-off nature, such as the fact that Sweden joined the EU, they may have significance for a long 
period of time. 
Globalisation is a factor that will probably continue to be a driving force behind productivity for a long 
time to come. Integration within the EU is deepening. The countries in eastern and central Europe who 
                                                      
6   Greenwood & Krusell (2007) 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2007
have  moved away  from  planned  economies have  many  years  of rapid  development  ahead of  them 
before they reach levels corresponding to those in western Europe. China, India and other emerging 
economies will continue to grow strongly and to account for an increasing share of the world economy. 
The  international  competition  in  the  product  and  labour  markets  and  the  international  financial 
integration process will thus continue to increase during the foreseeable future. 
The deregulation of several markets during the 1990s has probably largely already made its impact on 
productivity. I interpret the SNS report published at the beginning of the year to say that the most likely 
development is that this factor will contribute less to the rate of increase in productivity during coming 
years.7  At  the  same  time,  there  is  still  relatively  large  scope  for  continued  reforms  in  this  field.  A 
survey indicates that around 32 per cent of consumption was exposed to competition at the turn of the 
millennium. This figure for Sweden can be compared with the figure for the EU of around 45 per cent.8 
A similar picture is shown in a report by the Swedish Competition Authority.9 This states that around 
half of the higher prices compared with the OECD arise from a lack of competition in Sweden. 
IT  will  probably  fuel  productivity  for  a  long  time.  It  takes  time  for  companies  to  adjust  to  the  new 
circumstances. This can be illustrated by means of a historical comparison. IT is just like electricity a 
technique  for  general  use.  The  advent  of  electricity  had  no  noticeable  effect  on  productivity  until 
companies literally rebuilt their factories. Because this cost both time and money, it took a while before 
these changes were implemented.10   
Conclusion – most indications point towards a slowdown 
Historical  averages  are  usually  a  fairly  good  starting  point  for  forecasts  of  future  developments, 
particularly  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  But  in  the  case  of  productivity,  history  gives  us  different 
answers. The reason for this is that the trend in productivity growth has varied so substantially over 
time.  
The  average  increase  in  productivity  growth  in  the  business  sector  was  around  4  per  cent  a  year 
during the past five years, but only around 3 per cent a year if one instead looks at the past fifteen 
years. If one goes further back in time, one can find both higher and lower rates of increase. During 
the 1960s the rate of increase was around 6 per cent a year and during the 1980s it was only 2 per 
cent a year.  
It is thus not history giving us the answers, but the two parts I mentioned just now – changes in the 
economic cycle and structure. 
The cyclical factors indicate a slowdown. Productivity has been unusually strong in recent years during 
the initial phase of the economic upturn, but will probably be weaker in future when economic activity 
slows down.  
The structural factors also indicate a slowdown. While globalisation will continue to contribute to stiff 
competition and IT will in future contribute to continued rationalisation. However, the deregulation of 
the product markets will probably not contribute as much to productivity growth in future.  
The significance of productivity for monetary policy 
Regardless of how fast productivity grows in the future, the Riksbank must act accordingly and adjust 
its  monetary policy  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains at  a  low and  stable  level.  This  is  what  the  third 
question concerns. 
One difficulty when formulating monetary policy is to assess the level of the future long-term trend in 
productivity growth. As I have tried to show earlier, one can use a combination of statistical analysis 
and analyses of the long-term effects of various structural changes. 
                                                      
7   Lundgren et al (2007). 
8   Braunerhjelm et al (2002). 
9   Swedish Competition Authority (2002) 
10   See, for example, David (1990). 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 5
Another  difficulty  is  assessing  whether  the  current  changes  in  productivity  are  due  to  cyclical 
fluctuations  or  to  structural  changes.  It  is  only  possible  to  gain  a  well-founded  opinion  of  this  after 
some  years.  The  methods  we  use  to  estimate  trends  have  the  characteristic  that  they  provide 
particularly uncertain results at the end of the period of time. 
It is therefore necessary to proceed gradually and seek our way forward. This is not something that 
only applies to productivity or only to monetary policy. It also applies to other forms of decision-making 
where decisions are taken under considerable uncertainty. 
A third difficulty is assessing how a change in productivity will affect inflation. If the economy functions 
entirely  without  rigidities,  that  is  to  say  with  flexible  wages  and  prices,  a  higher  growth  rate  in 
productivity has no importance for inflation. If productivity increases, wages rise. This means that the 
companies’ costs do not change and consequently inflationary pressures do not change. 
But the economy does not function entirely without friction. If the growth rate of productivity changes, 
wages  do  not  adjust  immediately.  This  means  that  the  adjustment,  both  upwards  and  downwards, 
comes after a time lag. 
This  is  exactly  what  we  have  seen  in  recent  years.  An  unusually  high  increase  in  productivity  has 
coincided with a relatively moderate wage development. This is the most important explanation as to 
why inflation has been low, which in turn has given us at the Riksbank the opportunity to keep the 
interest rate at a low level.  
If we look ahead, the situation is probably the reverse. Over the coming years, productivity will instead 
probably  grow  more  slowly,  while  wages  will  increase  more  quickly  than  before.  Altogether,  this 
indicates higher inflationary pressures and thus a higher interest rate in the coming years. 
References 
Barrell, R., Liadze, I. and Pomerantz, O. (2007), “Import Growth, Globalisation and the Impact of Trade 
Liberalisation”, National Institute of Economic and Social Research Discussion Paper no. 294. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “Productivity”,  Speech  at  the  C.  Peter  McColough  Roundtable  Series  on 
International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, January 19. 
Braunerhjelm, P., Ganslandt, M., Nyberg, S., Stennek, J. and Wahl, N. (2002), Gränslös konkurrens – 
Sverige  i  ett  integrerat  Europa  (Unbounded  competion  –  Sweden  in  an  integrated  Europe),  SNS 
förlag. 
David,  P.  (1990),  “The  Dynamo  and  the  Computer:  An  Historical  Perspective  on  the  Modern 
Productivity Paradox”, American Economic Review 80, May, 355-361. 
Forsling,  G.  and  Lindström,  T.  (2004),  ”Labor  Quality  and  Productivity:  Does  Talent  Make  Capital 
Dance?”,  Background  Facts  on  Economic  Statistics,  7,  Economic  Statistics  Department,  Statistics 
Sweden. 
Greenwood,  J.  and  Krusell,  P.  (2007),  “Growth  accounting  with  investment-specific  technological 
progress: A discussion of two approaches”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1300-1310. 
Jorgenson,  D.,  Ho,  M.  och  Stiroh,  K.  (2006),  “Potential  Growth  of  the  U.S.  Economy:  Will  the 
Productivity Resurgence Continue?” Business Economics, January, 7-16. 
Swedish Competition Authority (2002), Competition in Sweden 2002, Swedish Competition Authority’s 
report series 2002:4. 
Lundgren,  S.  (ed.),  Edquist,  H.  and  Wallgren,  A.  (2007),  Tillväxt  i  otakt  (Growth  out  of  time),  SNS 
Förlag. 
Romer, D. (2005), Advanced Macroeconomics, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 3rd edition. 
Solow, R. (1956), ”A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 
70, no. 1 (February), 56-94. 
Solow, R. (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”, Review of Economics 
and Statistics 39, no. 3, 313-330. 
Stiroh, K. (2001), “What Drives Productivity Growth?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic 
Policy Review, March. 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2007
