Ben S Bernanke: Embracing the challenge of free trade – competing and 
prospering in a global economy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Montana Economic Development Summit 2007, Butte, Montana, 1 May 2007. 
 Trade  is  as  old  as  humanity,  or  nearly  so.  Archaeological  sites  demonstrate  that  ancient  peoples 
traded objects such as rare stones and shells across fairly long distances even in prehistoric times 
(Guisepi,  2000).  Over  the  centuries,  with  stops  and  starts,  the  volume  of  trade  has  expanded 
exponentially,  driven  in  large  part  by  advances  in  transportation  and  communication  technologies. 
Steamships  replaced  sailing  ships;  railroads  succeeded  canal  barges;  the  telegraph  supplanted  the 
Pony  Express.  Today,  in  a  world  of  container  ships,  jumbo  jets,  and  the  Internet,  goods  and  many 
services are delivered faster and more cheaply (in inflation-adjusted terms) than ever before.1  
Today  I  will  discuss  the  crucial  economic  benefits  we  receive  from  the  ongoing  expansion  of 
international trade. I will also address the adverse effects of trade and some possible ways to mitigate 
them. I will argue that one possible response to the dislocations that may result from trade – a retreat 
into protectionism and isolationism – would be self-defeating and, in the long run, probably not even 
feasible. Instead, our continued prosperity depends on our embracing the many opportunities provided 
by trade, even as we provide a helping hand to individuals and communities that may have suffered 
adverse consequences.  
The benefits of trade 
At  the  most  basic  level,  trade  is  beneficial  because  it  allows  people  to  specialize  in  the  goods  and 
services they produce best and most efficiently. For example, we could conceivably all grow our own 
food and provide our own medical care. But because farming and medicine require special knowledge 
and skills, a far more efficient arrangement is for the farmer to specialize in growing food and for the 
doctor to specialize in treating patients. Through the specialization made possible by trade, the farmer 
can benefit from the doctor's medical knowledge and the doctor can enjoy lunch. The opportunity to 
trade allows everyone to play to his or her own strengths while benefiting from the productive skills of 
the whole community. Indeed, economists have demonstrated that trade between two people can be 
beneficial even if one of them is more skilled than the other at every task, so long as the more-skilled 
person specializes in those tasks at which he or she is relatively more productive. 
What applies to individuals applies to nations as well. Two centuries ago the economist David Ricardo 
famously observed that, if England specialized in making cloth while Portugal specialized in producing 
wine,  international  trade  would  allow  both  countries  to  enjoy  more  of  both  goods  than  would  be 
possible if each country produced only for domestic consumption and did not trade. As in the case of 
individuals, this conclusion applies even if one country can produce both cloth and wine more cheaply 
than  the  other,  so  long  as  each  country  specializes  in  the  activity  at  which  it  is  relatively  more 
productive. A telling confirmation of Ricardo's insight is that, when nations go to war, their first order of 
business is often to try to block the other's access to trade. In the American Civil War, the North won in 
large part because its blockade of Southern ports prevented the Confederacy from exporting its cotton. 
In the twentieth century, the fact that Great Britain and its allies were able to disrupt German trade 
more successfully than Germany could impede the flow of goods into and out of Great Britain bore 
importantly on the ultimate outcomes of both world wars. 
Patterns of trade are determined by variations in a number of factors, including climate, the location of 
natural  resources,  and  the  skills  and  knowledge  of  the  population.  I  suppose  that  one  could  grow 
roses commercially here in Montana for Valentine's Day, but it would likely require climate-controlled 
greenhouses  complete  with  artificial  lighting  –  very  expensive.  A  much  less  costly  solution  is  for 
Montanans  to  grow  and  sell  wheat,  then  use  the  proceeds  to  buy  roses  from  localities  where  the 
weather is balmy in February. 
                                                      
1   Hummels (2006). Bernanke (2006) provides a brief history of globalization. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
This  is  all  standard  textbook  material,  and  it  may  well  leave  you  unconvinced  of  the  importance  of 
international trade. After all, the United States is a big country, and we can certainly achieve many of 
the benefits of specialization by trading within our own borders. How important is it for the health of our 
economy  to  trade  actively  with  other  countries?  As  best  we  can  measure,  it  is  critically  important. 
According  to  one  recent  study  that  used  four  approaches  to  measuring  the  gains  from  trade,  the 
increase in trade since World War II has boosted U.S. annual incomes on the order of $10,000 per 
household  (Bradford,  Grieco,  and  Hufbauer,  2006).2  The  same  study  found  that  removing  all 
remaining  barriers  to  trade  would  raise  U.S.  incomes  anywhere  from  $4,000  to  $12,000  per 
household. Other research has found similar results. Our willingness to trade freely with the world is 
indeed an essential source of our prosperity – and I think it is safe to say that the importance of trade 
for us will continue to grow. 
In practice, the benefits of trade flow from a number of sources. By giving domestic firms access to 
new markets, trade promotes efficient specialization, permits economies of scale, and increases the 
potential returns to innovation.3 U.S. firms increasingly seek to expand production and profits through 
new export opportunities; indeed, U.S. exports grew about 9 percent in real (that is, inflation-adjusted) 
terms  last  year.  Export-oriented  U.S.  manufacturing  industries  include  producers  of  aircraft, 
construction  equipment,  plastics,  and  chemicals.  The  United  States  also  excels  in  the  manufacture 
and  export  of  sophisticated  capital  goods  and  scientific  equipment.  Outside  of  manufacturing,  a 
number of U.S. high-tech companies, including software developers and online service providers, are 
world leaders in their fields. American films and music attract large worldwide audiences. Montana's 
exports  include  wheat,  metal  ores,  and  high-tech  materials  that  are  critical  to  the  production  of 
semiconductors.  
Firms  that  emphasize  exports  are  among  America's  most  dynamic  and  productive  companies. 
Relative  to  firms  that  produce  strictly  for  the  domestic  market,  exporters  tend  to  be  more 
technologically  sophisticated  and  to  create  better  jobs.  Among  U.S.  manufacturers,  for  example, 
exporters  pay  higher  wages  and  add  jobs  more  rapidly  than  non-exporters  (Bernard  and  Jensen, 
1999). A significant portion of U.S. international trade is conducted by multinational firms; studies show 
that these firms generally pay higher wages than purely domestic firms, both in the United States and 
in developing countries (Doms and Jensen, 1998; Bhagwati, 2004, p. 172). U.S. firms with a global 
reach  tend  to  be  better  diversified  and  are  better  able  to  respond  to  new  market  opportunities 
wherever they may arise. 
Exports are important, but so are imports. Without trade, some goods would be extremely expensive 
or not available at all, such as the Valentine's Day roses of my earlier example or out-of-season fruits 
and vegetables. Trade also makes goods available in more brands and varieties; examples include 
automobiles,  consumer  electronics,  garments  and  footwear,  wines,  and  cheeses.  One  of  the  great 
attractions  of  globalization  is  that  it  brings  to  consumers  the  best  of  many  cultures.  And  of  course, 
global trade allows many types of goods, especially consumer goods, to be purchased at lower prices. 
Lower prices help all consumers but may be especially helpful to those with tight budgets. Indeed, a 
number  of  the  large,  import-intensive  retail  chains  in  the  United  States  are  focused  on  low-  and 
moderate-income consumers, who benefit from being able to buy a wide variety of lower-priced goods.  
Another substantial benefit of trade is the effect it tends to have on the productivity of domestic firms 
and on the quality of their output.4 By creating a global market, trade enhances competition, which 
weeds out the most inefficient firms and induces others to improve their products and to produce more 
efficiently. The U.S. manufacturing sector, which is perhaps the sector most exposed to international 
competition, has achieved truly remarkable increases in its productivity in the past decade or so. In 
addition, 
in  communication  and 
transportation, reduce costs and increase the competitiveness of U.S. firms. Trade also promotes the 
transfer of technologies, as when multinational firms or transplanted firms bring advanced production 
methods to new markets. 
international  supply  chains,  made  possible  by  advances 
                                                      
2   The estimates ranged from $7,000 to $13,000. 
3   Cox and Alm (2007) discuss the benefits of trade in the modern global economy. 
4   Bernard and Jensen (1999) find that exporting firms are more productive than non-exporters. Bernard, Jensen, and Schott 
(2006)  document  the  tendency  of  trade  to  reduce  production  at  low-productivity  plants  and  to  increase  output  at  high-
productivity plants in the United States, a shift that raises average productivity. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2007
Trade  and  finance  are  closely  linked  and  mutually  supporting,  and  in  recent  decades  international 
financial flows have grown even more quickly than trade volumes. The globalization of finance plays to 
the strengths of U.S. financial institutions and financial markets. The United States has a large surplus 
in  trade  in  financial  services,  and  U.S.  firms  are  leaders  in  providing  banking,  investment,  and 
insurance services  to  the world.  Financial  openness  allows  U.S.  investors  to  find  new  opportunities 
abroad and makes it possible for foreigners to invest in the United States. The ability to invest globally 
also permits greater diversification and sharing of risk. 
Trade benefits advanced countries like the United States, but open trade is, if anything, even more 
important for developing nations. Trade and globalization are lifting hundreds of millions of people out 
of  poverty,  especially  in  Asia,  but  also  in  parts  of  Africa  and  Latin  America  (Bhagwati,  2004).  As  a 
source of economic growth and development in poor countries, trade is proving far more effective than 
traditional development aid (Easterly, 2006). The transition economies of central and eastern Europe 
have also benefited greatly from trade, especially trade with the rest of the European Union. A recent 
study by the World Bank compared two groups of developing countries, dubbed the "globalizers" and 
the  "nonglobalizers."  Collectively,  the  globalizers  have  doubled  the  ratio  of  trade  to  their  gross 
domestic product (GDP) over the past twenty years, in part because of sharp cuts in tariffs on imports; 
the nonglobalizers, collectively, have seen a decline in their trade-to-GDP ratio over the same period 
(Dollar and Kraay, 2004). Among the globalizers, economic growth accelerated from 2.9 percent per 
year  in  the  1970s,  to  3.5  percent  in  the  1980s,  to  5  percent  in  the  1990s.  In  contrast,  the 
nonglobalizers have seen their growth decline from 3.3 percent per year in the 1970s to 0.8 percent in 
the 1980s and 1.4 percent in the 1990s. The study also found that, among the globalizers, absolute 
poverty declined significantly and the degree of income inequality changed little.5  
If  trade  is  so  beneficial,  why  do  we  sometimes  see  political  resistance  to  freer,  more  open  trade? 
Notably, negotiations in the so-called Doha Round of trade talks now under way have proceeded very 
slowly,  notwithstanding  a  consensus  among  economists  that  all  countries  involved  would  enjoy 
substantial  benefits  from  further  trade  liberalization.  One  important  reason  is  that,  although  trade 
increases overall prosperity, the benefits for some people may not exceed the costs, at least not in the 
short  run.  Clearly,  the  expansion  of  trade  helps  exporting  firms  and  their  workers.  As  consumers, 
nearly all of us benefit from trade by gaining access to a broader range of goods and services. But 
some  of  us,  such  as  workers  in  industries  facing  new  competition  from  imports,  are  made  at  least 
temporarily worse off when trade expands. Because the benefits of trade are widely diffused and often 
indirect, those who lose from trade are often easier to identify than those who gain, a visibility that may 
influence  public  perceptions  and  the  political  process.  That  said,  the  job  losses  and  worker 
displacement sometimes associated with expanded trade are a legitimate economic and social issue. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on the impact of trade on U.S. jobs – both positive and 
negative – and discuss some possible policy responses. 
Trade and jobs 
Does  opening  U.S.  markets  to  foreign  producers  destroy  jobs  at  home?  The  expansion  of  trade  or 
changes  in  trading  patterns  can  indeed  destroy  specific  jobs.  For  example,  foreign  competition  has 
been  an  important  factor  behind  declining  employment  in  the  U.S.  textile  industry,  including  in  my 
home state of South Carolina. Job loss – from any cause – can create hardship for individuals, their 
families, and their communities. I will return shortly to the question of how we should respond to the 
problem of worker displacement. 
For  now,  however,  I  will  point  out  that  trade  also  creates  jobs  –  for  example,  by  expanding  the 
potential market overseas for goods and services produced in the United States, as I have already 
discussed.  Trade  creates  jobs  indirectly  as  well,  in  support  of  export  activities  or  as  the  result  of 
increased economic activity associated with trade. For example, gains in disposable income created 
by lower consumer prices and higher earnings in export industries raise the demand for domestically 
produced goods and services. Domestic production and employment are also supported by expanded 
access  to  raw  materials  and  intermediate  goods.  The  U.S.  jobs  created  by  trade  also  tend  to  offer 
higher pay and demand greater skill than the jobs that are destroyed – although a downside is that, in 
the short run, the greater return to skills created by trade may tend to increase the wage differential 
                                                      
5   Refer also to Bhagwati (2004). 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 3
between higher-skilled and lower-skilled workers and thus contribute to income inequality (Bernanke, 
2007). 
The effects of trade on employment must also be put in the context of the remarkable dynamism of the 
U.S.  labor  market.  The  amount  of  "churn"  in  the  labor  market  –  the  number  of  jobs  created  and 
destroyed  –  is  enormous  and  reflects  the  continuous  entry,  exit,  and  resizing  of  firms  in  our  ever-
changing economy. Excluding job layoffs and losses reversed within the year, over the past decade an 
average of nearly 16 million private-sector jobs have been eliminated each year in the United States, 
an annual loss equal to nearly 15 percent of the current level of nonfarm private employment.6 The 
vast majority of these job losses occur for a principal reason other than international trade (Kletzer, 
2001; Bernanke, 2004). Moreover, during the past ten years, the 16 million annual job losses have 
been more than offset by the creation of about 17 million jobs per year – some of which, of course, are 
attributable  to  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  trade.  Truly,  the  U.S.  labor  market  exhibits  a 
phenomenal capacity for creative destruction. 
If  trade  both  destroys  and  creates  jobs,  what  is  its  overall  effect  on  employment?  The  answer  is, 
essentially none. In the long run, the workings of a competitive labor market ensure that the number of 
jobs  created  will  be  commensurate  with  the  size  of  the  labor  force  and  with  the  mix  of  skills  that 
workers bring. Thus, in the long run, factors such as population growth, labor force participation rates, 
education and training, and labor market institutions determine the level and composition of aggregate 
employment. To see the irrelevance of trade to total employment, we need only observe that, between 
1965 and 2006, the share of imports in the U.S. economy nearly quadrupled, from 4.4 percent of GDP 
to 16.8 percent. Yet, reflecting growth in the labor force, employment more than doubled during that 
time,  and  the  unemployment  rate  was  at  about  4-1/2  percent  at  both  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
period.  Furthermore,  average  real  compensation  per  hour  in  the  United  States  has  nearly  doubled 
since 1965. 
Although  many  readily  accept  that  balanced  trade  does  not  reduce  aggregate  employment,  some 
might argue that the United States' current large trade deficit must mean that the number of U.S. jobs 
has been reduced on net. However, the existence of a trade deficit or surplus, by itself, does not have 
any  evident  effect  on  the  level  of  employment.  For  example,  across  countries,  trade  deficits  and 
unemployment  rates  show  little  correlation.  Among  our  six  Group  of  Seven  partners  (the  world's 
leading  industrial  countries),  three  have  trade  surpluses  (Canada,  Germany,  and  Japan).  However, 
based on the figures for February of this year, the unemployment rates in Canada (5.3 percent) and in 
Germany  (9.0  percent)  are  significantly  higher  than  the  4.5  percent  rate  in  the  United  States;  and 
Japan's  unemployment  rate,  at  4.0  percent,  is  only  a  bit  lower.7  Factors  such  as  the  degree  of 
flexibility  in  the  labor  market,  not  trade,  are  the  primary  source  of  these  cross-country  variations  in 
unemployment. 
What about outsourcing abroad? 
The  debate  about  the  effects  of  trade  on  employment  has  been  intensified  by  the  phenomenon  of 
outsourcing  abroad,  or  "offshoring."  Offshoring  has  been  driven  by  several  factors,  including 
improvements in international communication, the computerization and digitization of some business 
services, and the existence of educated, often English-speaking workers abroad who will perform the 
same services for less pay. A portion, though not all, of these wage differentials reflects differences in 
skills and productivity; for example, outsourced programming work is usually simpler and more routine 
than programming done in the United States. 
The increase in outsourcing abroad has led to dire predictions about a wholesale "export" of U.S. jobs 
in  coming  years.  Although  globalization  and  trade  will  continue  to  be  forces  for  economic  change, 
concerns about a massive loss of jobs due to offshoring do not seem justified. Companies have found 
                                                      
6   According  to  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  (BLS),  over  the  past  ten  years,  gross  job  losses  in  the  United  States  have 
averaged about 7.8 million per quarter. Multiplying 7.8 million by 4 suggests that about 31 million U.S. jobs come to an end 
each  year.  This  figure  includes  temporary  layoffs,  seasonal  closings,  and  other  short-term  job  losses;  some  research 
suggests that longer-term job losses amount to about half of the total (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1996). Dividing 31 
million gross job losses by 2 yields about 16 million long-term job losses each year. 
7   February 2007 is the latest month for which these rate comparisons are available. The data are from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, which has adjusted them to approximate the U.S. definition of unemployment. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2007
outsourcing abroad profitable primarily for jobs that can be routinized and sharply defined. Certainly, 
advancing  technology  will  continue  to  increase  the  feasibility  of  providing  services  from  remote 
locations. For the foreseeable future, however, most high-value work will require creative interaction 
among  employees,  interaction  which  is  facilitated  by  physical  proximity  and  personal  contact. 
Moreover, in many fields, closeness to customers and knowledge of local conditions are also of great 
importance. These observations suggest that, for some considerable time, outsourcing abroad will be 
uneconomical for many types of jobs, particularly high-value jobs.8  
Moreover, a balanced discussion of outsourcing abroad should reflect that, just as U.S. firms use the 
services of foreigners, foreign firms make considerable use of the services of U.S. residents. Many do 
not  realize  that,  in  contrast  to  its  trade  deficit  in  goods,  the  United  States  runs  a  significant  trade 
surplus  in  services  –  particularly  in  business,  professional,  and  technical  services.  This  country 
provides  many  high-value  services  to  users  abroad, 
legal,  engineering, 
architectural,  and  software  development  services,  whereas  many  of  the  services  imported  by  U.S. 
companies  are  less  sophisticated  and  hence  of  lower  value.9  A  recent  study  of  twenty-one 
occupations  that  are  most  likely  to  be  affected  by  outsourcing  found  that  net  job  losses  were 
concentrated  almost  exclusively  in  the  lower-wage  occupations  and  that  strong  employment  gains 
have occurred in the occupations that pay the highest wages.10 Further expansion of trade in services 
will help, not hurt, the U.S. economy and the labor market. 
Just as discussions of the outsourcing of business services tend to ignore the services U.S. firms sell 
to other countries, so do discussions of the movement of jobs offshore ignore the fact that foreign firms 
also move jobs to the United States. Between 1996 and 2004 (the most recent data available), the 
employment  of  U.S.  residents  by  majority-owned  nonbank  affiliates  of  foreign  companies  operating 
within the United States increased by about 1 million jobs. In 2004, U.S. affiliates of foreign companies 
accounted  for  more  than  $500  billion  in  value  added  (about  half  in  manufacturing)  and  about  $180 
billion in exports. Globalization and offshoring work both ways. 
financial, 
including 
Responding to job displacement 
Although  trade  has  many  positive  effects  in  the  labor  market,  nothing  I  have  said  this  morning  is 
intended to minimize the real costs imposed on workers and communities when new competition from 
abroad leads to job losses and displacement. What can be done to help workers who lose their jobs as 
a consequence of expanded trade?  
Restricting trade by imposing tariffs, quotas, or other barriers is exactly the wrong thing to do. Such 
solutions might temporarily slow job loss in affected industries, but the benefits would be outweighed, 
typically  many  times  over,  by  the  costs,  which  would  include  higher  prices  for  consumers  and 
increased costs (and thus reduced competitiveness) for U.S. firms. Indeed, studies of the effects of 
protectionist policies almost invariably find that the costs to the rest of society far exceed the benefits 
to  the  protected  industry.  In  the  long  run,  economic  isolationism  and  retreat  from  international 
competition would inexorably lead to lower productivity  for U.S. firms and lower living standards for 
U.S. consumers (Bernanke, 2004). 
The  better  approach  to  mitigating  the  disruptive  effects  of  trade  is  to  adopt  policies  and  programs 
aimed at easing the transition of displaced workers into new jobs and increasing the adaptability and 
skills  of  the  labor  force  more  generally.  Many  suggestions  for  such  policies  have  been  made. 
Currently,  the  government's  principal  program  for  helping  workers  displaced  by  trade  is  the  Trade 
Adjustment  Assistance  program,  which  is  up  for  renewal  before  the  Congress  this  year.  As  now 
structured, the program offers up to two and a half years of job training, allowances for job search and 
                                                      
8   The economic importance of physical proximity is the underlying reason that people and businesses are willing to pay high 
rents and other costs to live in or near major cities, where they can be near large numbers of other people and businesses 
that have related expertise and interests. 
9   Another  type  of  service  in  which  the  United  States  has  a  strong  export  position  is  higher  education.  In  2005-06,  U.S. 
institutions of higher learning trained nearly 600,000 foreign students, of whom about half were studying for graduate and 
professional degrees. Many foreign students who study in the United States spend at least some time here subsequently, 
adding their skills to those of the domestic workforce (Institute of International Education, 2006). 
10   Mann (2006, pp. 140-41) analyzes changes from 1999 to 2004. Updating the analysis with 2005 data from the Bureau of 
Labor  Statistics  does  not  change  these  results.  Some  of  the  low-wage  occupations,  such  as  data  entry  and  word 
processing, may have lost jobs to automation rather than outsourcing. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 5
relocation, income support for eligible workers, and health insurance assistance for some. Elements of 
other proposals being discussed (Kletzer and Rosen, 2006; Kling, 2006; Mann 2003, 2004) include 
job-training tax credits and wage insurance, which would help offset pay cuts that often occur when 
displaced workers change jobs. Another approach is to focus on establishing policies that reduce the 
cost  to  workers  of  changing  jobs,  for  example,  by  increasing  the  portability  of  pensions  or  health 
insurance  between  employers.  As  new  technologies  expand  the  range  of  occupations  that  may  be 
subject  to  international  competition,  measures  to  assist  affected  workers  become  all  the  more 
important. It would not be appropriate for me to endorse specific programs; that is the prerogative of 
the Congress. However, I can safely predict that these and other policy proposals to address concerns 
about worker displacement will be the subject of active debate in coming years. 
More generally, investing in education and training would help young people entering the labor force 
as well as those already in mid-career to better manage the ever-changing demands of the workforce 
(Bernanke,  2007).  A  substantial  body  of  research  demonstrates  that  investments  in  education  and 
training  pay  high  rates  of  return  to  individuals  and  to  society  as  a  whole  (Acemogulu  and  Angrist, 
2001; Becker, 1964; Card, 1999; Topel, 2004). Importantly, workforce skills can be improved not only 
through K-12 education, college, and graduate work but also through a variety of expeditious, market-
based  channels  such  as  on-the-job  training,  coursework  at  community  colleges  and  vocational 
schools, extension courses, and online training. An eclectic, market-responsive approach to increasing 
workforce skills is the most likely to be successful. 
Whatever the specific approaches chosen, helping workers who have lost jobs – whether because of 
trade or other causes – to find new productive work is good for the economy as well as for the affected 
workers and their families. Moreover, if workers and their families are less fearful of change, political 
pressure in favor of trade barriers or other measures that would reduce the flexibility and dynamism of 
the U.S. economy would be reduced (Kull, 2004). 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  international  trade  in  goods,  services,  and  assets,  like  other  forms  of  market-based 
exchange,  allows  us  to  transform  what  we  have  into  what  we  need  or  want  under  increasingly 
beneficial  terms.  Trade  allows  us  to  enjoy  both  a  more  productive  economy  and  higher  living 
standards.  
Of  course,  current  trading  arrangements  are  far  from  perfect.  Some  features  of  the  world  trading 
regime, such as excessive restrictions on trade in services and the uneven protection of intellectual 
property rights, are both unfair and economically counterproductive. Working through the World Trade 
Organization or in other venues, we should continue to advocate the elimination of trade distortions 
and  barriers  in  our  trading  partners  even  as  we  increase  the  openness  of  our  own  economy.  We 
should also work to ensure that both we and our trading partners live up to existing agreements under 
the  World  Trade  Organization.  When  trading  partners  do  not  meet  their  obligations,  we  should 
vigorously  press  our  case.  Ultimately,  a  freer  and  more  open  trading  system  is  in  everyone's  best 
interest. 
Although  expansion  of  trade  makes  the  U.S.  economy  stronger,  as  I  have  noted  today,  the  broad 
benefits of trade and the associated economic change may come at a cost to some individuals, firms, 
and  communities.  We  need  to  continue  to  find  ways  to  minimize  the  pain  of  dislocation  without 
standing  in  the  way  of  economic  growth  and  change.  Indeed,  the  willingness  to  embrace  difficult 
challenges  is  a  defining  characteristic  of  the  American  people.  With  our  strong  institutions,  deep 
capital  markets,  flexible  labor  markets,  technological  leadership,  and  penchant  for  entrepreneurship 
and  innovation,  no  country  is  better  placed  than  the  United  States  to  benefit  from  increased 
participation  in  the  global  economy.  If  we  resist  protectionism  and  isolationism  while  working  to 
increase the skills and adaptability of our labor force, the forces of globalization and trade will continue 
to make our economy stronger and our citizens more prosperous. 
References 
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist (2001). "How Large Are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence 
from  Compulsory  Schooling  Laws,"  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 9-59.  
6 
 BIS Review 41/2007
of 
of 
Hole, 
Duke 
Wyo., 
March 
School 
August 
February 
Chamber 
Business, 
Commerce, 
Becker, Gary S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference 
to Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). "Trade and Jobs," speech delivered at the Distinguished Speaker Series, 
Fuqua 
University, 
30, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040330/default.htm
______ (2006). "Global Economic Integration: What's New and What's Not?" speech delivered at the 
thirtieth  annual  economic  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
Jackson 
25, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060825/default.htm
______ (2007). "The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being," speech delivered at the Greater 
Omaha 
6, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2007/20070206/default.htm
Bernard,  Andrew  B.,  and  J.  Bradford  Jensen  (1999).  "Exceptional  Exporter  Performance:  Cause, 
Effect, or Both?" Journal of International Economics, vol. 47 (February), pp. 1-25.  
Bernard,  Andrew  B.,  J.  Bradford  Jensen,  and  Peter  K.  Schott  (2006).  "Trade  Costs,  Firms,  and 
Productivity," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53 (July), pp. 917-37.  
Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004). In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press.  
Bradford, Scott C., Paul L. E. Grieco, and Gary Clyde Hufbauer (2006). "The Payoff to America from 
Globalisation," The World Economy, vol. 29 (July), pp. 893-916.  
Card,  David  (1999).  "The  Causal  Effect  of  Education  on  Earnings,"  in  Orley  Ashenfelter  and  David 
Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A. New York: Elsevier, pp. 1801-63.  
Cox, Michael, and Richard Alm (2007). "The Best of All Worlds: Globalizing the Knowledge Economy," 
in Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2006 Annual Report, pp. 3-28. 
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996). Job Creation and Destruction. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press. 
Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay (2004). "Trade, Growth, and Poverty," The Economic Journal, vol. 114 
(February), pp. F22-F49.  
Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen (1998). "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity between 
Domestically  and  Foreign-Owned  Manufacturing  Establishments  in  the  United  States,"  in  Robert  E. 
Baldwin, Robert E. Lipsey, and J. David Richardson, eds., Geography and Ownership as Bases for 
Economic Accounting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
Easterly, William (2006). The White Man's Burden: Why the West's Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done 
So Much Ill and So Little Good. New York: Penguin Press.  
Guisepi, Robert A. (2000). "The Stone Age: The General Picture," International World History Project, 
http://history-world.org/stone_age2.htm (accessed April 13, 2007) 
Hummels,  David  (2006).  "Transportation  Costs  and  Trade  over  Time,"  in  David  Hummels,  Anthony 
Venables,  Harry  Broadman,  and  John  S.  Wilson,  rapporteurs,  Transport  and  International  Trade: 
Round  Table  130.  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  and  European 
Conference of Ministers of Transport. Paris: OECD.  
Institute of International Education (2006). "New Enrollment of Foreign Students in the U.S. Climbs in 
2005/06," press release, November 13, http://opendoors.iienetwork.org/?p=89251. 
Kletzer,  Lori  G.  (2001).  Job  Loss  from  Imports:  Measuring  the  Costs.  Washington:  Institute  for 
International Economics.  
Kletzer, Lori G., and Howard Rosen (2006). "Reforming Unemployment Insurance for the Twenty-First 
Century  Workforce,"  Hamilton  Project  Discussion  Paper.  Washington:  Brookings 
Institution, 
September.  
Kling,  Jeffrey  R.  (2006).  "Fundamental  Restructuring  of  Unemployment  Insurance:  Wage-Loss 
Insurance  and  Temporary  Earnings  Replacement  Accounts,"  Hamilton  Project  Discussion  Paper. 
Washington: Brookings Institution, September.  
BIS Review 41/2007 
 7
January 
Networks, 
Kull, Steven (2004). Americans on Globalization, Trade, and Farm Subsidies , The American Public on 
International  Issues,  PIPA/Knowledge  Networks  Poll,  Program  on  International  Policy  Attitudes  and 
Knowledge 
22, 
www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/Globalization/GlobalTradeFarm_Jan04/GlobalTradeFarm_Jan04_rpt.pdf 
(900 KB PDF). 
Mann, Catherine L. (2003). "Globalization of IT Services and White Collar Jobs: The Next Wave of 
Productivity  Growth,"  International  Economics  Policy  Briefs  PB03-11.  Washington:  Institute  for 
International Economics, December, www.iie.com/publications/pb/pb03-11.pdf (389 KB PDF). 
______  (2004).  "Global  Sourcing  and  High-Tech  Jobs:  Productivity  Gains  and  Policy  Challenges," 
presentation  on  "White  Collar  Outsourcing"  at  the  Institute  for  International  Economics,  March  11, 
www.iie.com/publications/papers/mann0304.pdf (138 KB PDF). 
______ (2006). Accelerating the Globalization of America: The Role for Information Technology, with 
Jacob Funk Kirkegaard. Washington: Institute for International Economics.  
Topel,  Robert  (2004).  "The  Private  and  Social  Values  of  Education,"  in  Education  and  Economic 
Development, proceedings of a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, November 
18-19,  pp.  47-57,  www.clevelandfed.org/research/conferences/2004/November/cbook.pdf  (891  KB 
PDF).  
David Dodge: Bank of Canada’s views on the Canadain economy and its 
monetary policy objective 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 1 May 2007.  
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with your committee, which we usually do twice a year, following the release of our Monetary Policy 
Report. We believe that these meetings help us to keep Members of Parliament and, through you, all 
Canadians, informed of the Bank's views on the economy and about the objective of monetary policy 
and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When Paul and I appeared before the Finance Committee last October, we noted then that the outlook 
for growth in the Canadian economy had been revised down slightly from earlier expectations. In our 
latest Monetary Policy Report, which we released last Thursday, we noted that Canada's economic 
growth did indeed slow, but recently, inflation has been higher than expected. After considering the full 
range  of  indicators,  the  Bank  now  judges  that  the  Canadian  economy  was  operating  just  above  its 
production capacity in the first quarter of this year.  
We expect that, over the projection horizon, domestic demand will continue to be the main driver of 
growth  in  Canada.  With  the  U.S.  slowdown  now  expected  to  be  somewhat  more  prolonged  than 
previously projected, net exports should exert a slightly greater drag on Canada's growth in 2007. The 
Canadian economy is now projected to grow by 2.2 per cent in 2007 and 2.7 per cent in both 2008 
and 2009. This would return the economy to its production capacity in the second half of 2007 and 
keep it there through 2008 and 2009.  
Core inflation should remain slightly above 2 per cent over the coming months, given pressures on 
capacity  and  the  impact  of  higher  core  food  prices.  But  with  the  economy  projected  to  return  to  its 
production capacity in the second half of this year and with further easing of pressures from housing 
prices, upward pressure on core inflation is expected to moderate, bringing the core inflation rate back 
to 2 per cent by the end of 2007.  
Total CPI inflation is projected to rise above the 2 per cent inflation target in the second half of this 
year, peaking below 3 per cent near the end of 2007 before returning to the target by mid-2008.  
We  at  the  Bank  continue  to  judge  that  the  risks  to  our  inflation  projection  are  roughly  balanced, 
although there is now a slight tilt to the upside.  
8 
 BIS Review 41/2007
Last Tuesday, the Bank left its key policy rate unchanged at 4 1/4 per cent. The current level of the 
policy interest rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the 
medium term. 
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I will now be happy to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 9
