European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 8 March 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  press 
conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by Mr Steinbrück, 
President of the ECOFIN Council, and Commissioner Almunia. 
At today’s meeting, we decided to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. This decision 
was taken in view of the upside risks to price stability over the medium term that we have identified 
through both our economic and monetary analyses. Today’s decision will contribute to ensuring that 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing 
contribution  towards  fostering  sustainable  economic growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  After 
today’s increase, given the favourable economic environment, our monetary policy continues to be on 
the accommodative side, with the key ECB interest rates moderate, money and credit growth vigorous, 
and liquidity in the euro area ample by all plausible measures. Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a 
firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is  warranted.  The  Governing 
Council will monitor very closely all developments so that risks to price stability over the medium term 
do not materialise.  
Turning first to the economic analysis, according to Eurostat’s first estimate, the quarter-on-quarter 
growth rate of real GDP in the euro area for the fourth quarter of 2006 was 0.9%, which was above 
previous expectations. Our current assessment is that the quarterly profile of real GDP growth is likely 
to be somewhat smoother in response to the impact of indirect tax changes in one large euro area 
country than had originally been anticipated. The strength of real GDP growth in the fourth quarter is 
thus indicative of ongoing robust growth in the euro area. Both domestic demand and exports made 
significant contributions to real GDP growth, confirming the sustained and broad-based nature of the 
current  expansion.  The  information  on  economic  activity  from  various  confidence  surveys  and 
indicator-based estimates supports the assessment that robust economic growth has continued into 
2007. 
Looking ahead, the medium-term outlook for economic activity remains favourable. The conditions are 
in  place  for  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  solidly.  As  regards  the  external  environment,  global 
economic  growth  has  become  more  balanced  across  regions  and,  while  moderating  somewhat, 
remains robust, supported in part by lower oil prices. External conditions thus provide support for euro 
area  exports.  Domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area  is  also  expected  to  maintain  its  relatively  strong 
momentum. Investment should remain dynamic, benefiting from an extended period of very favourable 
financing  conditions,  balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  corporate 
earnings, and gains in business efficiency. Consumption should also strengthen further over time, in 
line with developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions continue to improve. 
This  outlook  is  also  reflected  in  the  new  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections.  The  projections 
foresee average annual real GDP growth in a range between 2.1% and 2.9% in 2007 and between 
1.9% and 2.9% in 2008. In comparison with the December Eurosystem staff projections, the ranges 
projected  for  real  GDP  growth  in  2007  and  2008  have  been  revised  upwards,  largely  reflecting  the 
strength of GDP growth in the second half of 2006 and the lower energy prices, which, if sustained, 
would have a positive impact on real disposable income. 
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding this favourable outlook for economic growth are 
broadly balanced over the shorter term. At longer horizons, risks lie mainly on the downside. The main 
risks  relate  to  the  possibility  of  a  renewed  increase  in  oil  prices,  fears  of  a  rise  in  protectionist 
pressures and concerns about possible disorderly developments owing to global imbalances.  
As  regards  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  was 
1.8% in February 2007, unchanged from January 2007. The fall in headline inflation rates since the 
summer  of  2006  has  been  predominantly  due  to  lower  energy  prices.  Looking  ahead,  last  year’s 
volatility  in  energy  prices will  lead  to  significant  base  effects,  affecting  the profile  of  annual  inflation 
rates this year. On the basis of the current level of oil prices and oil price futures, annual inflation rates 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 1
are likely to fall during the spring and summer before rising again towards the end of the year and then 
most likely hovering again at around 2%. 
The new ECB staff macroeconomic projections foresee annual HICP inflation averaging between 1.5% 
and  2.1%  in  2007  and  between  1.4%  and  2.6%  in  2008.  Compared  with  the  December  2006 
Eurosystem staff projections, the upper bound of the range projected for inflation in 2007 is somewhat 
lower, largely reflecting the fall in oil prices. By contrast, the projected range for inflation in 2008 is 
slightly higher, largely on account of the anticipated stronger economic growth, which could exert more 
intense  pressure  on  factor  utilisation  and  factor  costs.  In  this  context,  let  me  remind  you  of  the 
conditional  nature  of  these  projections,  which  are  based  on  a  series  of  technical  assumptions, 
including market expectations for future short and long-term interest rates as well as for oil and non-
energy commodity prices.  
At  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon,  the  outlook  for  price  developments  remains,  in  the 
Governing Council’s view, subject to upside risks. These relate to the possibility of renewed oil price 
increases and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced 
and decided thus far. More fundamentally, stronger than currently expected wage developments would 
pose significant upward risks to price stability, not least in view of the favourable momentum of real 
GDP  growth  observed  over  the  past  few  quarters.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  the  social  partners 
continue to meet their responsibilities. In this context, wage agreements should take into account price 
competitiveness  positions,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many  economies,  as  well  as 
productivity developments. The Governing Council will monitor the upcoming wage negotiations in the 
euro area countries very carefully. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons. Annual M3 growth was unchanged at 9.8% in January, thus remaining at the highest rate 
observed since the introduction of the euro. 
At  10.6%,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  also  remained  strong  in  January. 
Strong  growth  in  private  sector credit  reflects  the  continuation  of  the  upward  trend  in  the  growth  of 
borrowing  by  non-financial  corporations  seen  since  mid-2004.  Meanwhile,  in  the  context  of  rising 
mortgage rates throughout the euro area and a slowing increase in house prices in some regions, the 
growth of household borrowing has shown some further signs of moderation in recent months, albeit 
remaining at still high rates.  
Taking the appropriate medium to longer-term perspective for assessing trends in money and credit 
growth, the latest developments confirm the continuation of a persistent upward trend in the underlying 
rate of monetary expansion. Following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation 
in the euro area is ample by all plausible measures.  
The robust expansion of money and credit reflects the accommodative monetary policy stance over a 
prolonged  period  of  time  and  the  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  In  an 
environment  of  ample  liquidity,  it  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer 
term. Monetary developments therefore continue to require very careful monitoring, particularly against 
the  background  of  a  solid  expansion  in  economic  activity  and  continued  strong  property  market 
developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look through any short-term volatility in inflation 
rates. The relevant horizon for monetary policy is the medium term. Risks to the medium-term outlook 
for price stability remain on the upside, relating in particular to stronger than currently expected wage 
developments in a context of robust ongoing growth in employment and economic activity. Given the 
vigorous monetary and credit growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of 
the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  The  Governing  Council  will 
continue to monitor very closely all developments so that risks to price stability over the medium term 
do not materialise. This will support the solid anchoring of medium to longer-term inflation expectations 
in the euro area at levels consistent with price stability. Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and 
timely manner to ensure price stability in the medium term remains warranted.  
As regards fiscal policy, there is growing confirmation that the favourable cyclical developments led 
to better than expected budgetary outcomes in 2006 in a number of countries and in the euro area as 
a  whole.  However,  updated  stability  programmes  foresee  only  moderate  progress  with  fiscal 
consolidation in the coming years. In this respect, some countries’ consolidation targets appear not 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2007
fully  in  line  with  the  requirements  of  the  revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Risks stem  in particular 
from a lack of well-specified and credible measures, notably on the expenditure side of budgets.  
Given  the  favourable  economic  environment,  the  Governing  Council  considers  it  essential  that  pro-
cyclical  policies  are  avoided  in  all  euro  area  countries  and  that  sufficiently  ambitious  fiscal 
consolidation  efforts  are  made  in  the  countries  with  remaining  budgetary  imbalances  and/or  high 
public debt outstanding. The opportunity should be seized to attain sound public finances within the 
programme horizons and by 2010 at the latest in all euro area countries. Fiscal consolidation that is 
part of a medium-term-oriented, credible and expenditure-based reform strategy would support longer-
term output and employment growth and help prepare for the fiscal impact of population ageing.  
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  European  Council  will  discuss  the  current  state  of,  and  future 
progress in, the implementation of the Lisbon strategy at its meeting which starts today. It is positive to 
see  that  reforms  and  moderate  increases  in  labour  costs  have  helped  to  bring  about  higher 
employment and lower unemployment in recent years, although progress has been uneven across EU 
Member States. We encourage action to create incentives and structures which support the integration 
of all groups into the labour market, including those for which employment rates have been relatively 
low in the past. Reforms of tax and benefit systems should enhance incentives to work and to create 
jobs. Reducing labour taxes (including social security contributions) and thereby labour costs would 
support employment, while setting minimum wages at a level not in line with productivity reduces the 
employment chances of less skilled workers. We fully support policies to improve education and the 
adoption of technological innovations in order to raise productivity growth. Coupled with initiatives to 
create  a  business-friendly  environment,  such  policies  would  broaden  the  opportunities  of  all  to 
participate in an enhanced growth process. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 3
