Jean-Claude Trichet: Swiss monetary policy as viewed by the European Central 
Bank 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
100th anniversary of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 22 June 2007. 
 Madame la Présidente de la Confédération suisse, 
Monsieur le Président du Gouvernement du Liechtenstein, 
Ministers, Excellencies, 
Dear President of the Bank Council of the Swiss National Bank, 
Dear Jean-Pierre Roth, Dear Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, 
Dear fellow Governors, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an immense pleasure for me to be here today with such a distinguished audience to celebrate the 
100th anniversary of the foundation of the Swiss National Bank (SNB). The SNB is to be especially 
congratulated because, in spite of the turbulences which have characterised the period since 1907 – 
two  world  wars,  the  Great  Depression,  and  the  Great  Inflation  –  it  has  succeeded  in  delivering,  on 
average, a remarkably low inflation rate. I regard a historical and international perspective on Swiss 
price stability as being especially appropriate. 
A historical and international perspective: a low-inflation country 
It  has  been  noted  that,  notwithstanding  the  Great  Inflation  episode,  and  the  temporary  inflationary 
outbursts corresponding to the two world wars, the United States should correctly be characterised, 
when  seen  from  a  very  long-run  perspective,  as  a  low-inflation  country.  This  is  a  claim  made,  in 
particular, by Bradford DeLong in his analysis of the US inflationary experience since the time of the 
Civil War.1
Historical  experience  suggests  that  Switzerland  deserves  such  a  characterisation  to  a  significantly 
greater  extent.  First,  since  1880  Swiss  annual  inflation  has  been,  on  average,  just  2.2%,  to  be 
compared to 2.6% in the US. Second, in an international comparison with 13 other OECD countries 
since  1880,  and  excluding  from  the  computation  the  years  corresponding  to  the  First  and  Second 
World  Wars  and  their  immediate  aftermath  (in  order  to  avoid  a  distortion  of  the  results  through  the 
extraordinary  turbulence  associated  with  the  two  world  wars),  Switzerland  comes  out  on  top  once 
again, with an annual average inflation rate of just 1.5%. Finally, focusing on the period following the 
creation of the Swiss National Bank, and excluding, once again, the years of the two world wars and 
their immediate aftermath, Switzerland, with an average annual inflation rate of 2.1% is, together with 
Germany, again the best performer. 
Switzerland’s consistent “credible currency, low-inflation” strategy clearly emerged during the episode 
which can reasonably be characterised as the Swiss National Bank’s “finest hour”: the Great Inflation 
of the 1970s. As pointed out by Edward Nelson2, 
“[i]n Switzerland, […] while a debate on the nature of inflation did take place in the early 1970s, it was 
resolved  quite  rapidly  in  favor  of  the  monetary  view,  leading  to  an  eschewing  of  non-monetary 
approaches to inflation control”. 
In subscribing to the ultimately monetary nature of inflation, the Swiss National Bank was accepting 
the lesson of Milton Friedman as remarkably exposed in the Monetary History of the United States3, 
the single piece of research which – more than any other – contributed to changing policy making. And 
                                                      
1   See DeLong (2000). 
2   See Nelson (2007). 
3   See Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
indeed, as emphasised by Robert Lucas in the remarks he delivered at Otmar Issing’s Festschrift one 
year ago4, 
“[t]he first central banks to deal effectively with the 1970s inflation were the Bundesbank and the Swiss 
National Bank, and both did so in the mid-1970s by deliberate reductions in money growth rates. In 
October 1979 the US Federal Reserve followed suit […].” 
Monetary policy and monetary aggregates 
As  stressed  by  Lucas,  recalling  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  –  and  the  Bundesbank’s,  as  well  as  a 
number of European central banks’, including Banque de France’s –acceptance, back in the 1970s, of 
the ultimately monetary nature of inflation, and their use of monetary means to bring it under control, is 
especially important today, when the relevance of monetary analysis for monetary policy is sometimes 
questioned. As Charles Goodhart sarcastically put it5  
“[m]onetarism,  in  any  of  its  guises,  has  become  somewhat  unfashionable;  and  the  New  Keynesian 
three-equation synthesis […] rides high. […] Deviate from this, and you are not a member of the In 
Crowd.” 
The reasons why the role of monetary aggregates in monetary policy analysis is today questioned are 
well  known.  On  the  conceptual  front,  the  ascendancy  of  Neo-Wicksellian  theory6  which  assigns  to 
monetary aggregates a purely residual role. At the practical level, the breakdown, in several countries, 
of the empirical relationship between money growth and inflation, which led the former Governor of the 
Bank of Canada, Gerald Bouey, to famously quip that “ We didn’t abandon monetary aggregates, they 
abandoned us”. I have three comments on this. 
First, empirical evidence7 shows that – since the first half of the nineteenth century, and in a number 
of  countries  –  fluctuations  in  trend  money  growth  have  almost  always  led  to  fluctuations  in  trend 
inflation, with upswings or downswings in trend money growth having been followed, a few years later, 
by upswings or downswings in trend inflation. The crucial point to stress here is that the resilience of 
the lead of trend money growth over trend inflation over time, and across radically different monetary 
regimes, clearly suggests that such a lead is a structural feature of the economy – that is, embedded 
in the structure of the system so as to be invariant to occasional changes in the monetary regimes. 
This  empirical  finding  represents  a  bedrock  fact  that  any  model  –  including  those  built  on  New-
Keynesian  synthesis  principles  –  has  to  confront  and  seek  to  reproduce.  Since,  over  the  last  two 
centuries,  fluctuations  in  trend  money  growth  have  almost  always  been  followed  by  fluctuations  in 
trend  inflation  in  the  same  direction,  an  upswing  in  trend  money  growth  points  to  the  existence  of 
upward medium to long term risks to the inflation profile. In the light of the evidence coming from the 
last two centuries of data, totally ignoring trend movements in money growth would therefore entail – 
in my view – excessive and unreasonable risks. The practice of the SNB – and of the ECB – of closely 
monitoring monetary trends in order to identify long-term risks to price stability is therefore validated by 
the monetary history of the last 200 years. 
Second, as recently stressed, in particular, by Philippe Hildebrand at a central banking conference at 
the ECB8, prolonged periods of low and stable inflation – like those that OECD countries have been 
experiencing for several years now – can give rise to distortions in empirical analyses, and can make it 
extremely difficult to correctly assess the informational content of a specific indicator of future inflation. 
To put it differently, in an equilibrium in which the central bank is successful at keeping inflation low 
and  within  a  narrow  range,  the  empirical  relationship  between  inflation  and  any  indicator  tends  to 
disappear. This is precisely why the experience of the Great Inflation – which can be regarded as the 
ultimate off-equilibrium event – is important. That persistent and prolonged deviation from equilibrium 
revealed, in a fundamental sense, the authentic nature of reality, which today, in a stable, low-inflation 
world, has become more difficult to extract from the data. And so, in the same way as the experience 
                                                      
4   See Lucas (2006). 
5   See Goodhart (2006). 
6   Exemplified in the work of Michael Woodford. 
7   See Benati (2007). 
8   See Hildebrand (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
of  the  Weimar  Republic  hyperinflation  was  the  key  “founding  memory”  for  the  Bundesbank,  or  the 
dramatic  experience  of  the  revolutionary  “assignats”  for  Banque  de  France,9  the  experience  of  the 
Great  Inflation  can  be  regarded  by  today’s  central  banks  as  the  cornerstone  of  their  institutional 
architecture. Indeed, as pointed out by the Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve,10 “[g]reater support 
for independent central banks […] was one of the results of the lessons of the great inflation of the 
1970s.”  
Third,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  link  between  money  growth  and  inflation  can  be  blurred  by 
systematic fluctuations in the velocity of money. Recent work carried out at the Swiss National Bank11 
has shown that, after controlling for systematic shifts in the equilibrium component of money velocity 
caused by Fisherian movements in the opportunity cost of money, the long-run relationship between 
money growth and subsequent inflation is still in the data, and not only for the euro area, but also for 
the United States, where the stability of such a relationship has been most strongly questioned in the 
past.  This  finding suggests  that  monetary  indicators  should not  be  hastily  discarded when  their  link 
with inflation appears to have weakened. Rather, it suggests that monetary data should be subjected 
to  a  thorough  and  broad-based  analysis,  in  order  to  filter  out  the  noise  and  to  fully  understand 
movements  in  trend  velocity  which  distort  their  low-frequency  signal  for  long-term  risks  to  price 
stability. 
The new Swiss monetary policy concept: an ECB perspective 
From 1974 until the end of the century, the Swiss National Bank consistently pursued a strategy of 
targeting monetary aggregates, announcing targets first for M1, and then, from 1980, for the monetary 
base. (Only during a very brief period in 1978-1979 did the SNB abandon monetary targeting in favour 
of an exchange rate target.) Owing to the increasing instability of the monetary base over the second 
half of the 1990s, however, the SNB decided, at the end of 1999, to announce a new monetary policy 
framework. The new framework is based on three key elements: 
• 
An explicit definition of price stability “[…] expressed in terms of the headline CPI. [The SNB] 
defines price stability in the same manner as the European Central Bank, [as] a CPI inflation 
rate of less than 2 per cent per year.”12 
An  inflation  forecast  as  the  main  communication  tool  in  order  to  explain  to  the  public  the 
rationale behind monetary policy decisions. 
From  an  operational  point  of  view,  a range  for  the three-month LIBOR rate as  the  way  to 
actually implement policy decisions in practice. 
  I find from time to time statements suggesting that, with its new monetary policy strategy, the SNB has 
essentially renounced its monetarist past. I believe such a position to be incorrect, and in what follows 
I will make two main points. First, I will stress the significant elements of continuity with the pre-2000 
monetary policy strategy. Second, I will argue that, if one looks carefully at the details, the monetary 
policy strategy of the Swiss National Bank is, in many respects, quite close to that of the European 
Central Bank. Let me elaborate on these points in turn. 
As stressed by SNB staff members13, the SNB 
“[…]  retained  important  ingredients  of  monetary  targeting  in  its  new  monetary  policy  concept.  At 
various  occasions,  the  SNB  stressed  that  it  continues  to  monitor  two  sets  of  indicators  providing 
leading  information  on  future  price  developments  […].  The  first  set  of  indicators  is  useful  for 
forecasting short-run price developments, i.e. over a horizon of one and a half to two years. It includes 
various indicators of the cyclical state of the economy, notably the output gap and supply and demand 
conditions in the labour market, as well as the real exchange rate of the Swiss franc. The second set 
                                                      
9   For an analysis of the revolutionary experience with the ‘assignats’, see Sargent and Velde (1995, Section IV, ‘Rise and Fall 
of the Assignat’). 
10   See Kohn (2005). 
11   See Reynard (2006). 
12   See Jordan, Peyrignet and Rich (2000). 
13   See Jordan, Peyrignet and Rich (2000). 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 3
of indicators comprises the monetary aggregates, which provide useful leading information on long-run 
price developments.” 
The elements of continuity with the pre-2000 strategy emerge quite clearly, in particular in the form of 
the important role assigned to a deep analysis of monetary aggregates. The justification for closely 
monitoring monetary aggregates, their components, and their counterparts, is the same as that given 
by the European Central Bank, namely the information content they comprehend as regards inflation 
in  the  long  run,  which  has  been  documented  for  both  Switzerland  and  the  euro  area.  Precisely 
because of this long-run link with inflation, and of the previously mentioned lead of trend money growth 
over trend inflation, a strong upward trend in money growth points to the existence of upward risks to 
the  profile  for  trend  inflation.  When  the  ECB  started  raising  rates  in  December  2005,  for  example, 
monetary analysis, and a close monitoring of trends in a number of money supply indicators, played a 
crucial  role,  by  highlighting  risks  to  the  inflation  profile  which  were  not,  at  the  time,  immediately 
apparent just from the economic analysis. As the “Financial Times”14 recently pointed out, the decision 
to  raise  rates,  at  that  time  “controversial”,  has  been,  18  months  later,  “vindicated”  by  subsequent 
events. 
The SNB’s differentiation between the two groups of indicator variables – on the one hand, short to 
medium-run indicators, such as a range of statistics including, prominently, inflation itself; on the other 
hand, monetary indicators, mostly relevant at a longer horizon – is clearly reminiscent of the ECB’s 
“two-pillar” strategy. And research undertaken at the SNB15 has indeed shown such a dichotomy to 
provide  a  good  characterisation  of  short-term  and  medium  to  long-run  inflation  dynamics  for  both 
Switzerland and the euro area. 
A further important element common to both the SNB and the ECB is that neither central bank adjusts 
its  policy  by  mechanically  reacting  to  deviations  of  the  inflation  forecast  from  their  respective 
definitions  of  price  stability.  Rather,  both  central  banks  focus  on  low-frequency  –  that  is,  trend  – 
movements in the variables of interest, and both are willing to see through the shocks that buffet the 
economy occasionally from a medium-run perspective if overall macroeconomic circumstances require 
it. 
There  are,  of  course,  also  differences  between  the  monetary  policy  strategies  of  the  ECB  and  the 
SNB.  For  example,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  at  the  SNB  monetary  information  is  taken  into 
account in the construction of the inflation forecast, while at the ECB the results from the monetary 
analysis are used by the Governing Council to cross-check – on the basis of an expanding range of 
monetary tools – the signals coming from the economic analysis. In a sense, the SNB delegates the 
“cross-checking” activity to the projection process, whereas the ECB assigns that responsibility to the 
Governing  Council,  once the  projection  process  has  run  its  course  independently.  At  that  point,  we 
cross-check  the  outputs  coming  from  models  and  formal  frameworks,  often  from  within  a  variety  of 
non-nested alternatives. We adopt something similar to what my friend Alan Greenspan would call a 
Bayesian  approach  to  policy  and  Alan  Blinder  would  describe  as  a  rough  approximation  of  optimal 
information  processing:  “Use  a  wide  variety  of  models,  and  don’t  ever  trust  any  one  of  them  too 
much.”16
I view these differences as minor. Our two central banks conduct similar exercises in robust policy-
making within a shared framework of common principles: a clear definition of price stability, a medium-
term policy orientation, and an important role assigned to monetary indicators for the assessment of 
longer-term risks to price stability. 
Conclusions 
Permettez-moi en conclusion, cher Jean-Pierre, cher Président, de souligner trois points.  
D’abord,  il  est  particulièrement  émouvant  pour  l’ancien  gouverneur  de  la  Banque  de  France  que  je 
suis, d’être à Zurich. Nous avions célébré le 200ième anniversaire de la Banque de France, il y a 7 
ans,  en  rendant  un  vibrant  hommage  à  un  citoyen  suisse.  La  Banque  de  France  a  été  créée  par 
                                                      
14   See “Under fire, on target”, by Ralph Atkins and Lionel Barber, “Financial Times”, 18 May 2007, page 9. 
15   See Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2006a, 2006b). 
16   See Blinder (1998, page 12). 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2007
in  Basel  zu  verdanken  haben, 
Napoléon en 1800 sur une proposition du financier Jean-Frédéric Perregaux, qui en a été ensuite le 
responsable. Monsieur Perregaux était l’un de ces financiers suisses, à la fois très imaginatifs, très 
sages et très prudents, dont la réputation est légendaire à travers les siècles. 
Anschließend möchte ich hervorheben, wie vorbildlich die Beziehungen sind, die alle Zentralbanken 
der Welt mit der Schweiz sowie der Schweizerischen Nationalbank unterhalten. Die Offenheit der SNB 
und ihre aktive Beteiligung an geldpolitischen Fragestellungen und der geldpolitischen Forschung auf 
europäischer  und  internationaler  Ebene  werden  sehr  geschätzt.  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  dem  wir  unsere 
regelmäßigen  Zusammenkünfte 
leistet  als  Präsident  des 
Verwaltungsrats  der  Bank  für  Internationalen  Zahlungsausgleich  hervorragende  Arbeit.  Ihm  möchte 
ich heute meine besondere Anerkennung aussprechen. 
Finally,  let  me  particularly  emphasise  that  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable 
growth and sustainable job creation. I made the point recently several times that since the creation of 
the  Euro  on  the  1st  of  January  1999,  during  the  first  eight  years,  more  than  12  million  jobs  were 
created in the euro area. I underlined it could be compared with less than 3 million during the eight 
years before the Euro. I also stressed that the current level of unemployment, at 7.1%, is the lowest for 
25 years. Can I also stress here in Switzerland that the sound and wise monetary policy of the Swiss 
Central Bank and the level of price stability which has been attained throughout the last hundred years 
are one of the major causes of the full employment success of your country.  
I thank you for your attention. 
References 
Assenmacher-Wesche, Katrin, and Gerlach, Stefan (2006a), “Interpreting Euro Area Inflation at High 
and Low Frequencies”, BIS Working Paper No 195, February 2006 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Katrin,  and  Gerlach,  Stefan  (2006b),  “Money  Growth,  Output  Gaps  and 
Inflation  at  Low  and  High  Frequency:  Spectral  Estimates  for  Switzerland”,  Swiss  National  Bank 
Working Paper 2006/5 
Benati, Luca (2007), “Long-Run Evidence on Money Growth and Inflation”, European Central Bank, 
mimeo 
Blinder, Alan (1998), “Central Banking in Theory and Practice”, Cambridge, Mass. The MIT Press 
DeLong, Bradford J. (2000), “America’s Historical Experience with Low Inflation”, Journal of Money, 
Credit, and Banking, Vol 32(4), pp. 979-993 
Friedman,  Milton,  and  Schwartz,  Anna  Jacobson  (1963),  “A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States, 
1867-1960”, Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research 
Goodhart,  Charles  (2006),  “Otmar  Issing  and  the  Monetary  Pillar”,  remarks  delivered  at  “Monetary 
Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice  –  An  ECB  Colloquium  Held  in  Honour  of  Otmar  Issing”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 16-17 March 2006 
Hildebrand, Philippe (2006), “Comments on Fischer et al.’s paper”, delivered at the fourth ECB Central 
Banking Conference, “The Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 9-10 November 2006 
Kohn,  Donald  (2005),  “Central  Bank  Communication”,  remarks  by  Governor  Donald  L.  Kohn  at  the 
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, January 9, 2005 
Lucas,  Robert  E.,  Jr.  (2006),  “Remarks”  delivered  at  “Monetary  Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to 
Practice – An ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Otmar Issing”, Frankfurt am Main, 16-17 March 2006 
Jordan,  Thomas  J.,  Peytrignet,  Michel,  and  Rich,  George  (2000),  “The  Role  of  M3  in  the  Policy 
Analysis of the Swiss National Bank”, paper presented at the Central Bank Workshop on Monetary 
Analysis organised by the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 20-21 November 2000 
Nelson, Edward (2007), “Ireland and Switzerland: The Jagged Edges of the Great Inflation”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 
Reynard,  Samuel  (2006),  “Money  and  the  Great  Disinflation”,  Swiss  National  Bank  Working  Paper 
2006/7 
Sargent,  Thomas  J.,  and  Velde,  Francois  R.  (1995),  “Macroeconomic  Features  of  the  French 
Revolution”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol 103(3), pp. 474-518. 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 5
