Frederic S Mishkin: Estimating potential output  
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  at  the  Conference  on  Price  Measurement  for  Monetary  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Dallas, Dallas, 24 May 2007. 
 This conference focuses on measurement issues, and in my remarks I want to focus on one of the 
most  important  measurement  issues  that  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  face: 
How  do  we  determine  whether  the  economy  is  operating  above  or  below  its  maximum  sustainable 
level? That is, how do we estimate the path of potential output?1  
The  Federal  Reserve  operates  under  a  dual  mandate  to  achieve  both  price  stability  and  maximum 
sustainable employment. In that context, it is natural to think of potential output as the level of output 
that is consistent with the maximum sustainable level of employment: That is, it is the level of output at 
which  demand  and  supply  in  the  aggregate  economy  are  balanced  so  that,  all  else  being  equal, 
inflation tends to gravitate to its long-run expected value. 
The combination of the dual mandate and this definition suggests two reasons that estimating the path 
of  potential  output  is  so  central  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  First,  to  evaluate  whether  our 
policies  will  help  achieve  the  maximum  sustainable  employment  objective  of  the  dual  mandate,  we 
need know the level of future output that would be consistent with that objective. Second, the level of 
output relative to potential output, which is referred to as the output gap, plays an important role in the 
inflation process. When the actual level of output is above potential output – so that the output gap is 
positive – labor and product markets are excessively tight; then, if things such as expected inflation 
and temporary supply factors are held constant, inflation will tend to rise. Conversely, when the output 
gap is negative and labor and product markets are slack, inflation will tend to fall. Estimates of the 
future path of potential output are therefore needed to assess whether the projected path of output 
that is implied by current monetary policy will lead inflation to move in a direction that is consistent with 
price stability. 
Because estimates of potential output are an important part of central bankers' toolkits, the Federal 
Reserve  and  other  central  banks  devote  considerable  resources  to  getting  the  best  measures  of 
potential  output  possible.  In  this  talk,  I  want  to  explore  something  that  Bismarck  warned  us  we 
shouldn't  want  to  examine:  "what  goes  into  the  sausage"  –  or  in  this  case,  what  goes  into  central 
bankers' thinking about how to estimate potential output. 
Broadly  speaking,  there  are  three  basic  approaches  to  estimating  potential  output:  (1)  aggregate 
approaches; (2) production function, or growth-accounting, approaches; and (3) the newest kid on the 
block, dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) approaches. Let's look at each of these in turn, 
with the major focus on the production function approach, one to which we at the Federal Reserve 
currently pay a lot of attention.  
(Please note that my comments here reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Board of 
Governors or the Federal Reserve System.)  
Aggregate approaches 
Aggregate  approaches  to  estimating  potential  output  can  be  thought  of  as  top  down  approaches 
because they look at relationships involving aggregate variables and use them to derive measures of 
potential output. For example, one way of estimating potential output is to assume that if a change in 
employment or output is sustainable, then it is likely to be permanent. This assumption suggests using 
univariate statistical methods to identify the permanent component of changes in output, which could 
then be viewed as a reasonable measure of potential output. Examples of such an approach include 
the  work  of  Beveridge  and  Nelson  (1981)  and  Clark  (1987).  Although  univariate  approaches  to 
measuring potential output have the advantage of simplicity and can provide a feel for what potential 
                                                      
1  
I want to thank Andrew Figura, Charles Fleischman, John Roberts, and William Wascher for their helpful comments and 
assistance on this speech. 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
output  might  be,  they  suffer  from  several  disadvantages.  First,  they  require  a  variety  of  statistical 
assumptions about which economic theory provides little guidance – for example, about the correlation 
between  permanent  and  transitory  components  or  whether  the  permanent  component  should  be 
modeled  as  a  random  walk.  Perfectly  sensible  alternative  assumptions  can  lead  to  very  different 
estimates of potential output. Second, these purely statistical approaches do not tell us whether this 
measure  of  the  permanent  component  of  output  movements  provides  information  about  the  most 
important aspect of potential output from a central banker's perspective – namely, its association with 
a stable rate of inflation.  
In measuring potential output, we therefore need to bring in some economics. One potentially valuable 
economic  relationship  we  can  use  is  the  "natural  rate"  version  of  the  Phillips  curve,  which  followed 
from the seminal research of Nobel prize winners Milton Friedman (1968) and Edmund (Ned) Phelps 
(1967).  Friedman  and  Phelps  demonstrated  that  there  should  not  be  a  long-run  tradeoff  between 
inflation and unemployment and that the economy will gravitate to some natural rate of unemployment 
in  the  long  run  no  matter  what  the rate  of  inflation  is.  In  other  words,  the  long-run  Phillips  curve  is 
vertical, and attempts to lower unemployment below the natural rate will only result in higher inflation. 
According  to  the  natural-rate  hypothesis,  there  is  a  natural  rate  of  unemployment  –  also  more 
commonly  referred  to  as  the  NAIRU  (non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment)  –  at  which 
inflation tends to gravitate to its long-run expected value.2 A natural rate of output – that is, potential 
output – corresponds to the NAIRU. The difference between actual and potential output, the output 
gap, tells us whether inflation will tend to move up or down, holding things like inflation expectations, 
energy  prices,  import  prices,  and  so  forth  constant.  The  natural-rate  hypothesis  thus  suggests  that 
potential  output  can  be  estimated  from  a  multivariate  approach  in  which  potential  output  is  an 
unobserved  component  in  the  relationship  between  inflation  and  the  output  gap.  Kuttner  (1994) 
provides a good example of this approach.3  
An  alternative  approach  involves  deriving  the  NAIRU  directly  from  estimates  of  Phillips  curves  and 
then  using  Okun's  law  –  which  relates  the  output  gap  to  the  unemployment  gap  (the  actual 
unemployment rate minus the NAIRU) – to estimate potential output.4 These multivariate approaches 
are  reasonably  simple  and  make  intuitive  sense,  but  they  also  have  serious  drawbacks.  First,  they 
require that the specification of the Phillips curve is correct. For example, the model needs to correctly 
characterize the relationship between the unemployment rate gap and inflation dynamics while taking 
into account how inflation expectations are formed, and it should not leave out any other variables that 
have  an  impact  on  inflation.5  Indeed,  many  economists  criticize  the  Phillips  curve,  with  some  even 
declaring it dead.6  
Second,  using  Okun's  law  to  derive  potential  output  requires  an  appropriate  specification  for  the 
dynamics of the relationship between output and unemployment gaps. However, cyclical fluctuations 
in productivity and labor supply can complicate this relationship. Moreover, Okun's law can be thrown 
well off course during periods of unanticipated structural change in the economy, such as the early 
1970s,  when  U.S.  productivity  growth  slowed.  As  a  result  of  these  influences,  Okun's  law  has  not 
                                                      
2   The  term  "NAIRU"  comes  from  a  paper  by  Nobel  prize  winner  Franco  Modigliani  and  Lucas  Papademos,  now  the  vice 
president  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (Modigliani  and  Papademos,  1978).  Although  NAIRU  and  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment  are  frequently  used  interchangeably,  there  is  a  subtle  distinction  between  the  two.  The  natural  rate  of 
unemployment is the rate at which inflation would tend to gravitate to its long-run expected value, while NAIRU, as originally 
defined, is the unemployment rate at which inflation will have no tendency to move up or down. Depending on what shocks 
are hitting the economy, the NAIRU could deviate from the natural rate of unemployment (for example, see Estrella and 
Mishkin, 1999). Because the NAIRU terminology is more common than the natural rate of unemployment terminology, I am 
using the NAIRU terminology even though I think that the natural rate of unemployment terminology is more accurate. 
3   Other examples of the multivariate approach include Apel and Jansson (1999), Cochrane (1994), and Dupasquier, Guay 
and St-Amant (1999). 
4   Okun's law was originally specified as the relationship between real GDP growth and changes in the unemployment rate 
(see Okun, 1962). 
5   See Gordon (1982 and many subsequent papers) for a description of the "triangle" model of inflation. The three sides of the 
triangle are inflation inertia (captured by the lags of inflation), excess demand (measured by the unemployment rate gap or 
GDP gap), and supply shocks – such as the relative prices of imports, food, and energy. Following George Perry's (1970) 
early work, it is common to adjust the NAIRU for changes in the composition of the labor force. Fallick, Fleischman, and 
Pingle  (2006)  estimate  that  shifts  in  the  demographic  composition  of  the  labor  force  can  explain  a  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate of nearly 1 percentage point between 1977 and 2006. 
6   See, for example, Atkeson and Ohanian (2001). 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2007
always been a reliable guide to the relationship between the unemployment gap and the output gap 
and thus has not always been the most useful guide for estimating potential output.7 Finally, even if 
the Phillips curve and the Okun's law relationships are specified correctly – a big  if – the statistical 
uncertainty about the estimates of the NAIRU, and therefore also about potential output, is very large – 
certainly  larger  than  a  policymaker  would  like.  For  example,  the  estimates  of  Staiger,  Stock,  and 
Watson  (1997a  and  b)  of  the  95  percent  confidence  interval  for  the  NAIRU  were  as  much  as  3 
percentage  points  wide.  Thus  estimates  of  the  NAIRU,  in  isolation,  provide  policymakers  with  little 
real-time insight for assessing the effect of labor markets on inflation pressures. 
Production function (growth-accounting) approaches 
Because  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  aggregate  approaches  described  above,  some  researchers 
estimate potential output using a production function approach that generates an estimate of potential 
from  the  underlying  factors  of  production.  This  approach  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  "growth 
accounting"  because,  after  the  log  of  a  production  function  is  differentiated,  output  growth  can  be 
expressed as a weighted average of the growth of factor inputs – that is, capital services and labor 
input  (hours  worked  and  labor  quality)  –  and  a  residual  –  multifactor  (also  called  total  factor) 
productivity growth. The NAIRU concept still plays an important role in this approach because it helps 
to determine the level of potential output.  
A  major  advantage  of  the  growth-accounting  approach  is  that  it  focuses on  the  various  factors  that 
drive growth in potential output, rather than simply on the historical behavior of output growth or on the 
historical relationship between output and labor inputs as in Okun's law. The disaggregated nature of 
the  growth-accounting  approach  means  that  more  data  can  be  used  to  estimate  potential  output. 
These  additional  data  are  likely  to  be  particularly  valuable  when  the  economy  is  undergoing  major 
structural changes – for example, the productivity slowdown starting around the early 1970s, the surge 
and subsequent slowdown in population growth from the baby-boom generation's entry and (now) exit 
from the labor force, the remarkable upsurge in labor participation of females in the 1970s and 1980s, 
and the pickup in productivity growth starting in the second half of the 1990s. Given these advantages, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  growth-accounting  framework  is  widely  used  to  estimate  the  path  of 
potential output, both by central banks such as the Federal Reserve and by academic researchers. 
In its simplest formulation, the growth-accounting framework characterizes output growth as the sum 
of the growth rate of raw labor hours and the growth rate of output per hour, that is, labor productivity.8 
In  turn,  the  growth  rate  of  labor  hours  is  described  as  the  sum  of  population  growth  (civilian  non-
institutional population aged sixteen and older), the rate of change of the labor force participation rate, 
the  rate  of  change  in  the  employment  rate,  and  the  rate  of  change  in  the  number  of  hours  in  the 
average workweek. Labor productivity is decomposed into the contributions of capital deepening (the 
marginal product of capital – typically estimated as capital's share of income – times the growth rate of 
capital services per hour), changes in labor quality, and the growth rate of multifactor productivity. 
To obtain estimates of potential output growth, researchers can use economic analysis to estimate the 
individual components above that go into the growth-accounting framework. Much research has been 
conducted along these lines in the Federal Reserve System and elsewhere. For example, Aaronson 
and  others  (2006)  examine  what  variables  influence  individual  decisions  to  participate  in  the  labor 
market  (birth  cohort,  age,  sex,  number  and  age  of  children,  and  so  forth).  They  then  use  this 
information together with the relative size of different cohorts to show that the aging of the baby-boom 
cohort can explain much of the decline in labor force participation since 2000 and why the participation 
rate is likely to continue to decline further in the future. Given slower projected population growth and 
what appears to be a downward trend in the number of hours in the average workweek, these results 
suggest that potential output growth will be slower than it otherwise would have been. Of course, such 
projections are subject to uncertainty, and economists hold a range of views about the prospects for 
future labor force growth. One important unknown is whether increases in longevity and better health 
                                                      
7   See, for example, Altig, Fitzgerald, and Rupert (1997), Rudebusch (2000), and Groshen and Potter (2003). 
8  Because official series for productivity for all sectors of the economy are not available, the growth-accounting framework 
most often focuses on the private nonfarm business (NFB) sector, which in the United States accounts for more than three-
quarters of total output. Productivity for the overall economy is then derived from estimates for the nonfarm business sector 
and  then  cruder  estimates  for  the  other  sectors  (government,  farm,  housing  services,  and  households  and  institutions) 
generally based on the univariate and multivariate statistical approaches described earlier.  
BIS Review 53/2007 
 3
will boost the labor force participation rates of older individuals more than currently embedded in these 
projections. 
Similarly,  economists  at  the  Fed  have  been  at  the  forefront  of  research  on  why  labor  productivity 
growth ratcheted upward in the second half of the 1990s and continued at a surprisingly robust pace 
over  the  first  half  of  this  decade.  Oliner,  Sichel,  and  Stiroh  (2007),  for  example,  find  that  the  IT 
(information technology) sector has been a key element in the higher productivity growth that we have 
been experiencing since the mid-1990s.9 But they also find that the sources of growth in the second 
half  of  the  1990s  were  quite  different  than  in  the  period  after  2000.  In  the  1995-2000  period,  labor 
productivity growth was driven by substantial gains in multifactor productivity in the tech sector, which, 
in turn, led to sharp reductions in the prices of high-tech equipment and stimulated investment in this 
type of capital in other sectors of the economy. Since 2000, high productivity growth has apparently 
been  driven  importantly  by  industry  restructuring  in  response  to  pressures  on  profits  (the  firms  that 
saw the sharpest drops in profits were those that had the largest gains in labor productivity) and by a 
reallocation of material and labor inputs across industries. Their estimate for the current trend labor 
productivity  growth  is  centered  around  2-1/4  percent,  but  they  find  large  uncertainty  around  this 
estimate,  with  a  95  percent  confidence  interval  that  ranges  from  1-1/4  percent  to  3-1/4  percent. 
Roberts (2001) estimates even larger uncertainty around structural labor productivity growth. 
Despite the advantages of the growth-accounting framework, it still presents some difficulties. For one, 
there  is,  as  I  just  highlighted,  a  large  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  estimates  of  the 
components  that  go  into  the  growth-accounting  formulas.  In  addition,  the  growth-accounting 
framework  requires  a  substantial  amount  of  data,  some  of  which  are  not  especially  reliable.  For 
example,  it  is  especially  difficult  to  measure  the  growth  rate  of  capital  services,  and  the  Bureau  of 
Labor Statistics releases its initial estimates with a lag of at least one year. In addition, the bureau's 
two  measures  of  employment,  one  derived  from  a  survey  of  firms  and  the  other  from  a  survey  of 
households, often provide very different pictures of what is happening in the labor market. Also data 
for  capital  services,  labor  composition,  and  multifactor  productivity  are  not  readily  available  for  all 
sectors of the U.S. economy.  
Because it is so difficult to reliably estimate potential output using either the aggregate or the growth-
accounting  approach,  it  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  use  a  lot  of 
judgment in constructing our estimates of potential output. In particular, we see judgment as playing 
three important roles in our procedures. First, it enables us to take account of the effects of structural 
changes  in  the  economy  that  cannot  be  modeled  directly.  Second,  it  allows  us  to  deal  with  model 
misspecifications that cannot be corrected. Third, we can use judgment to correct for measurement 
errors  or  inconsistencies  in  economic  data.  For  example,  we  judgmentally  adjust  model-based 
estimates of the NAIRU to account for movements in the unemployment rate unrelated to changes in 
labor market slack. Of these, the most important has been the shift in the demographic composition of 
the  labor  force,  driven  largely  by  the  entrance  and  subsequent  maturation  of  the  baby-boom 
generation. But economists have pointed to a number of other factors that would influence the NAIRU 
as well. 
Another  example  relates  to  the  way  in  which  we  estimate  the  trend  growth  rate  of  multifactor 
productivity. In particular, estimates of trend multi-factor productivity growth tend to be sensitive to the 
choice of modeling strategy, a problem that became particularly apparent during the "jobless recovery" 
of  the  early  1990s,  when  the  normal  relationship  between  output  growth  and  employment  growth 
appeared to break down. Statistical filtering models like those described by Roberts (2001) tended in 
real  time  to attribute  much  of  the weak  employment  growth  to  an  acceleration  in  trend  productivity. 
Later  on,  however,  after  employment  recovered,  it  became  clear  that  the  unusual  behavior  of 
employment during that period was explained better as a temporary reluctance by firms to hire than as 
a step-up in the rate of trend productivity growth. In a similar vein, it may at times make sense to down 
weight  more-recent estimates  of  the data  used  in  filtering  exercises  to  account  for  the  possibility  of 
future revisions to the data. 
Finally, it can often be useful to look at Okun's law as a check on the estimates of potential output 
derived  from  the  growth-accounting  approach.  Although,  as  I  noted  above,  one  should  not  expect 
Okun's law to hold from quarter to quarter, the relationship is relatively robust over longer periods, and 
                                                      
9   See also Oliner and Sichel (2000, 2002), Corrado and Slifman (1999), and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2004), among others. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2007
a  persistent  deviation  in  the  unemployment  rate  from  that  predicted  by  Okun's  law  might  call  into 
question the estimated trends in one or more of the components in potential output.  
Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium approaches 
The real business cycle literature, which started with the work of Nobel Prize winners Finn Kydland 
and  Edward  Prescott  (1982),  features  optimizing  agents  and  emphasizes  the  role  of  technology 
shocks  in  explaining  both  economic  growth  and  business  cycles.  Dynamic  stochastic  general 
equilibrium  (DSGE)  models  contain  many  features  of  the  earlier  real  business  cycle  literature,  but, 
because  they  allow  for  rigidities  and  imperfections  in  markets,  they  are  often  referred  to  as  New 
Keynesian  models.  The  New  Keynesian  DSGE  models  provide  more-realistic,  yet  still  theoretically 
elegant, representations of the economy, and their development has been an exciting area of research 
in macroeconomics in recent years.  
New Keynesian DSGE models provide a somewhat different, but complementary, perspective on the 
definition of potential output than the one I outlined at the beginning of this speech. In particular, we 
might think of potential output as the level of output that an economy could attain if the inefficiencies 
resulting from nominal wage and price rigidities were removed – that is, if wages and prices were fully 
flexible.10 The definition of potential output as a flexible price equilibrium has much in common with the 
more  conventional  definition  I  discussed  earlier  because  over  time  prices  (and  wages)  do  gravitate 
toward their equilibrium levels. As a result, the DSGE definition accords with the idea that potential 
output is the level of output at which inflation tends neither to rise nor fall.  
 That  said,  the  DSGE  view  of  potential  output  also  has  important  differences  with  the  earlier 
approaches  to  estimating  potential  output.  Although  research  on  using  DSGE  models  to  estimate 
potential output is in its infancy and so should be read cautiously, papers such as Neiss and Nelson 
(2005)  and  Edge,  Kiley,  and  Laforte  (2007)  are  finding  that  the  properties  of  potential  output  and 
output  gap  fluctuations  can  be  quite  different  from  conventional  measures.  For  example,  in  many 
DSGE models, potential output can undergo swings over the business cycle, a result that should not 
be surprising considering that the early real business cycle models viewed the business cycle as being 
primarily an efficient response to shocks to the economy. In addition, fiscal policy shocks, changes in 
households' preferences with regard to saving and consumption, changes in preferences about leisure 
that  affect  labor  supply,  and  terms-of-trade  shocks  can  all  cause  potential  output  to  fluctuate.  In 
contrast,  growth-accounting  approaches  to  estimating  potential  output  generally  assume  that  such 
shocks  have  no  important  effects  on  potential  output  at  business-cycle  frequencies.  As  a 
consequence,  their  estimates  typically  have  smaller  fluctuations  than  measures  of  potential  output 
derived from DSGE models, and thus the output gaps in the current generation of DSGE models tend 
to be less variable than conventional measures and can be quite different for particular periods. 
Although the research on DSGE models is promising, measures of potential output and the output gap 
from  these  models  are  controversial.  The  DSGE  measures  of  potential  output  are  far  more  model 
dependent than more-conventional measures because they depend on the estimated parameters of 
the  model  and  on  the  model's  estimates  of  the  structural  shocks  hitting  the  economy.  As  a  result, 
DSGE  models  with  different  characterizations  of  the  economy's  underlying  structure  can  produce 
substantially  different  estimates  of  potential  output.  This  is  apparent,  for  example,  in  the  large 
differences between the potential output measures in the DSGE models of Neiss and Nelson (2005) 
from  those  in  Edge,  Kiley,  and  Laforte  (2007).  Moreover,  DSGE  models  often  require  strong 
assumptions to identify the shocks to potential output from model equation residuals. The finding that 
these models imply smaller and less persistent output gaps than traditional models may simply reflect 
the  fact  that  inefficiencies  other  than  price  rigidities,  such  as  real  wage  rigidities,  are  important  for 
output  fluctuations.11  As  a  result,  some  policymakers  have  been  quite  critical  of  the  implication  of 
DSGE  models  that  a  substantial  fraction  of  business-cycle  fluctuations  are  efficient  and  so  do  not 
require a response from monetary policymakers.12  
                                                      
10   See, for example, Goodfriend and King (1997) or Woodford (2003). 
11   For example, Blanchard and Gali (2007) have proposed a model with real wage rigidities that, if incorporated into a DSGE 
model, would likely show output gap estimates that are more similar to traditional gaps. 
12   See, for example, Bean (2005). 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 5
Implications for policy 
Now that we have looked inside the sausage of estimating potential output, I hope you have not lost 
your  appetite  for  thinking  about  what  these  measurement  issues  mean  for  monetary  policy.  As  I 
indicated  earlier,  considerable  uncertainty  surrounds  the  measures  of  potential  output  derived  from 
any  of  the  approaches  I  have  discussed.  In  addition,  there  is  also  what  economists  call  Knightian 
uncertainty (named after the famous University of Chicago economist Frank Knight) – the fact that we 
are  not  even  sure  of  the  appropriate  modeling  approach  to  measure  potential  output.  Adding  even 
more to the uncertainty of potential output measures are (1) that the observable data do not always 
correspond  to  the data we  would  like to  have  to  produce  measures  of potential  output  and  (2)  that 
initial  estimates  of  observable  data  can  subsequently  be  revised  substantially,  resulting  in  a  very 
different picture of what is happening to potential output and the output gap. Orphanides (2001) points 
out that output gaps were grossly mismeasured in the 1970s, in part because the initially published 
data did not reflect the true state of the economy.13  
Where does the high uncertainty about actual and potential output leave us at central banks? Does it 
mean that we should abandon our focus on potential output and output gaps in making decisions on 
monetary policy? I think not. For better or worse, we cannot escape the need for information on output 
gaps  so  that  we  can  forecast  the  future  path  of  inflation  and  evaluate  the  current  setting  of  our 
monetary policy instruments. However, we also need to recognize that because measures of potential 
output  and  output  gaps  are  so  uncertain,  we  must  always  be  aware  that  they  might  be  providing 
misleading signals as to the future course of inflation and the appropriateness of the stance of policy. 
In assessing whether there is slack in the economy, we at central banks look not only at our estimates 
of  output  gaps  but  also  at  a  wide  range  of  indicators  drawn  from  the  labor,  product,  and  financial 
markets to provide us with a perspective on the balance of supply and demand in the economy. Most 
important, the substantial uncertainty in our measures of potential output implies that we need to be 
cautious  about  taking  on  board  the  implications  of  our  current  estimates  of  the  output  gap.  For 
example,  if  inflation  is  moving  in  a  different  direction  than  the  output  gap  would  suggest,  then  we 
should  take  seriously  the  possibility  that  our  output  gap  measure  is  not  providing  us  with  reliable 
information. 
The bottom line is that we must never take our eye off of the inflation ball. Good policymaking requires 
that we acknowledge what we are unsure about, and this requirement applies particularly to measures 
of potential output. 
References 
Aaronson,  Stephanie,  Bruce  Fallick,  Andrew  Figura,  Jonathan  Pingle,  and  William  Wascher  (2006). 
"The Recent Declines  in  the  Labor  Force  Participation Rate and Its  Implications  for  Potential  Labor 
Supply," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 2006, pp. 69-154.  
Altig,  David,  Terry  Fitzgerald,  and  Peter  Rupert  (1997).  "Okun's  Law  Revisited:  Should  We  Worry 
about Low Unemployment?" Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (May). 
Apel,  Mikael,  and  Per  Jansson  (1999).  "A  Theory-Consistent  System  Approach  for  Estimating 
Potential Output and the NAIRU," Economics Letters, vol. 64, pp. 271-75. 
Atkeson,  Andrew,  and  Lee  Ohanian  (2001).  "Are  Phillips  Curves  Useful  for  Forecasting  Inflation?" 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 2-11. 
Bean, Charles (2005). "Comment on Bob Hall's “Separating the Business Cycle from Other Economic 
Fluctuations”,"  speech  delivered  at  "The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,"  a  symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 25-27. 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2005/PDF/Bean2005.pdf (86 KD PDF)  
Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson (1981). "A New Approach to Decomposition of Economic 
Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular Attention to Measurement of 
the 'Business Cycle'," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 7 (March), pp. 151-74. 
                                                      
13   See also Orphanides and others, (2000) and Orphanides and van Norden (2002). 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2007
Blanchard,  Olivier,  and  Jordi  Gali  (2007).  "Real  Wage  Rigidities  and  the  New  Keynesian  Model," 
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 35-65. 
Clark,  Peter  K.  (1987).  "The  Cyclical  Component  of  U.S.  Economic  Activity,"  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, vol. 102 (November), pp. 797-814. 
Cochrane,  John  H.  (1994).  "Permanent  and  Transitory  Components  of  GNP  and  Stock  Prices," 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109 (February), pp. 241-65. 
Corrado,  Carol,  and  Lawrence  Slifman  (1999).  "Decomposition  of  Productivity  and  Unit  Costs," 
American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May), pp. 328-32. 
Dupasquier, Chantal, Alain Guay, and Pierre St-Amant (1999). "A Survey of Alternative Methodologies 
for Estimating Potential Output and the Output Gap," Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 21 (Summer), 
pp. 577-95. 
Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Pierre Laforte (2007). "Natural Rate Measures in an 
Estimated  DSGE  Model  of  the  U.S.  Economy,"  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-8 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March). 
Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1999). "Rethinking the Role of NAIRU in Monetary Policy: 
Implications  of  Model  Formulation  and  Uncertainty,"  in  John  B.  Taylor,  ed.,  Monetary  Policy  Rules. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 405-30. 
Fallick,  Bruce,  Charles  A.  Fleischman,  and  Jonathan  Pingle  (2006).  "How  the  Graying  of  the  Baby 
Boom Affects the U.S. Labor Market," in The Economic Outlook for 2007: Papers Presented at the 
Fifty-Third  Annual  Conference  on  the  Economic  Outlook.  Ann  Arbor:  University  of  Michigan,  pp. 
102-18. 
Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), 
pp. 1-17. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin,  and  Robert  G.  King  (1997).  "The  New  Neoclassical  Synthesis  and  the  Role  of 
Monetary Policy," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 
1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  (1982).  "Inflation,  Flexible  Exchange  Rates,  and 
the  Natural  Rate  of 
Unemployment," in Martin Neil Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs, and Inflation. Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution, pp. 89-158. 
Groshen,  Erica  L.,  and  Simon  Potter  (2003).  "Has  Structural  Change  Contributed  to  a  Jobless 
Recovery?"  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  vol.  9 
(August).  
Jorgenson,  Dale  W.,  Mun  Sing  Ho,  and  Kevin  Stiroh  (2004).  "Will  the  Productivity  Resurgence 
Continue?"  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  vol.  10 
(December).  
Kydland,  Finn  E.,  and  Edward  C.  Prescott  (1982).  "Time  to  Build  and  Aggregate  Fluctuations," 
Econometrica, vol. 50 (November), pp. 1354-70. 
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (1994). "Estimating Potential Output as a Latent Variable," Journal of Business 
and Economic Statistics, vol. 12 (July), pp. 361-68. 
Modigliani,  Franco,  and  Lucas  Papademos  (1978).  "Optimal  Demand  Policies  against  Stagflation," 
Weltwirtschafliches Archiv, vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 736-82. 
Neiss, Katharine S., and Edward Nelson (2005). "Inflation Dynamics, Marginal Cost, and the Output 
Gap: Evidence from Three Countries," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 37 (December), pp. 
1019-45. 
Okun, Arthur (1962). "Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance," Proceedings of the Business 
and Economics Section of the American Statistical Association, pp. 98-104. 
Oliner,  Stephen  D.,  and  Daniel  E.  Sichel  (2000).  "The  Resurgence  of  Growth  in  the  late  1990s:  Is 
Information Technology the Story?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 3-22. 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 7
Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel (2002). "Information Technology and Productivity: Where Are 
We Now and Where Are We Going?" Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, vol. 87 (3rd 
Quarter), pp. 15-44. 
Oliner,  Stephen  D.,  Daniel  E.  Sichel,  and  Kevin  Stiroh  (2007).  "Explaining  a  Productive  Decade", 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming. 
Orphanides,  Athanasios  (2001).  "Monetary  Policy  Rules  Based  on  Real-Time  Data,"  American 
Economic Review, vol. 91 (September), pp. 964-85. 
Orphanides, Athanasios, Richard D. Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow, and Frederico Finan 
(2000). "Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of Monetary Policy," Journal of 
Economics and Business, vol. 52, (January-April), pp. 117-41. 
Orphanides, Athanasios, and Simon van Norden (2002). "The Unreliability of Output Gap Estimates in 
Real Time," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84 (November), pp. 569-83. 
Perry,  George  L.  (1970).  "Changing  Labor  Markets  and  Inflation,"  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, 3: 1970, pp.411-48. 
Phelps,  Edmund  S.  (1967).  "Phillips  Curves,  Expectations  of  Inflation,  and  Optimal  Inflation  over 
Time," Economica, vol. 34 (August), pp. 254-81. 
Roberts,  John  M.  (2001).  "Estimates  of  the  Productivity  Trend  Using  Time-Varying  Parameter 
Techniques,"  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2001-8  (Washington,  D.C.:  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve Board, February). 
Rudebusch,  Glenn  D.  (2000).  "How  Fast  Can  the  New  Economy  Grow?"  FRSBF  Economic  Letter 
2000-05, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 25. 
Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997a). "How Precise Are Estimates of the 
Natural  Rate  of  Unemployment?"  in  Christina  Romer  and  David  Romer,  eds.,  Reducing  Inflation: 
Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 195-242.  
Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997b). "The NAIRU, Unemployment, and 
Monetary Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (Winter), pp. 33-49. 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.  
8 
 BIS Review 53/2007
