Jean-Claude Trichet: Slovenia’s adaption of the euro 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
"€ conference  Slovenia",  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Slovenia  and  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Ljubljana, 15 January 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to talk to you here, in Ljubljana at a conference celebrating the adoption of the 
euro on the very first day, when the euro is the single currency in circulation in Slovenia. Let me first 
and foremost congratulate to all parties involved in the successful cash changeover two weeks ago, 
that went very smooth and without any problems. Not only did Slovenia perform exceptionally well in 
its convergence process to the euro area, but the last bit, the cash changeover was also exemplary so 
far. 
It is amazing to recall that Slovenia had three currencies over a period of just 15 years (Dinar, tolar 
and euro) - even disregarding the coupons or vouchers that were in circulation for about 1 year prior to 
the introduction of the tolar. To me this is clearly a sign that economic developments can happen very 
fast  if  a  country  is  determined  to  make  rapid  progress.  After  all,  who  would  have  thought  10  or  15 
years ago that Slovenia would today celebrate the adoption of the euro? 
It  has  been  exactly  five  years  since  the  first  –  and  until  two  weeks  ago  the  last  –  euro  area 
enlargement,  when  Greece  joined  the  original  eleven  euro  area  members.  Let  me  say  that  I  am 
delighted that after half a decade we can today welcome again a new country to the euro area and 
expand  the  number  of  participating  countries  from  12  to  13.  Measured  in  terms  of  population  and 
economic  activity,  the  euro  area  is  one  of  the  largest  economies  in  the  world.  The  euro  serves  as 
single  currency  to  more  than  300  million  citizens;  today  around  317  million  people  including  the 
Slovene population of two million, and the euro area GDP amounts to just above 8000 billion euros. 
Slovenia is the first of the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 that managed to comply with the 
criteria to join the single currency, thus allowing it to introduce the euro as the national currency. After 
all it is only two and a half years after Slovenia joined the EU and today we already have the pleasure 
to welcome Slovenia also in the euro area.  
The adoption of the euro that we are celebrating today is a result of the macroeconomic policies that 
the authorities of Slovenia have pursued and the macroeconomic performance they have achieved. As 
a result, Slovenia has made significant progress in nominal and real convergence over recent years, 
owing  to  a  successful  policy-mix,  in  particular  well-managed  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies, 
sound fiscal policy and a range of structural reforms. Inflation came down from 8.9% in 2001 to 2.5% 
in 2006. Accordingly, both short-term and long-term interest rates fell considerably and are now in line 
with  the  euro  area  average.  While  the  short-term  interest  rate  differential  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area 
persisted until recently, reflecting the monetary policy strategy pursued by Banka Slovenije, long-term 
interest rates approached levels close to the euro area already in 2004, reflecting market confidence in 
general  economic  and  fiscal  developments  in  Slovenia  and  the  credibility  of  the  monetary  and 
exchange rate policy.  
The process of nominal convergence has been accompanied by robust economic growth. Real GDP 
growth  in  Slovenia  has  been  well  above  the  euro  area  in  the  recent  years.  Growth  has  been 
underpinned by domestic demand as well as strong exports, which reflects the increased integration of 
Slovenia with the EU and the euro area. In this respect, foreign direct investment (FDI) has also been 
an  important  factor.  Nevertheless,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  Slovenia  has  a  good  opportunity  to 
catch  up  further  with  the  euro  area  average  income.  Slovenia’s  GDP  per  capita  (in  PPP  terms) 
progressed  from  60 %  of  the  euro  area  average  in  1995  to  76  %  in  2005:  this  is  a  significant 
improvement, which also still gives room for catching up towards the EU average.  
High economic growth and advances in income per capita levels clearly indicate the progress made in 
real convergence. Indeed, nominal and real convergence are interdependent processes and nominal 
convergence provides the necessary environment for lasting real convergence. At the same time, real 
convergence also requires continued efforts to remove rigidities in the labour and goods markets, as 
well as continued efforts to reform the financial system. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
It  is  remarkable  that  Slovenia  has  achieved  its  progress  in  nominal  and  real  convergence  without 
experiencing  major  imbalances;  in  particular  the  Slovenian  current  account  balance  has  remained 
contained over quite a long period of time. The fiscal balance (the deficit-to-GDP ratio) has been on a 
broadly  improving  trend  since  2000  (even  though  further  consolidation  is  required  for  Slovenia  to 
comply  with  the  medium-term  objective  quantified  in  the  convergence  programme).  Looking  at  the 
financial side, Slovenia is experiencing a substantial process of financial deepening, which has been 
reflected in robust credit activity. In  this context let  me say that the process of financial deepening, 
which  is  taking  place  in  almost  all  countries  that  joined  the  EU  in  2004  and  2007  will  also  support 
economic development as it is expected to promote more efficient investment. However, this process 
does require careful monitoring and strong prudential supervision, in particular if financial deepening 
takes place at a very rapid pace.  
Another element of Slovenia’s successful convergence experience is its participation in the Exchange 
Rate Mechanism II (ERM II). Slovenia’s participation in the Mechanism has been smooth. The parity at 
which Slovenia entered the ERM II was set at the market rate at the time of ERM II entry and the tolar-
euro exchange rate remained very close to the parity for the entire period of ERM II participation. As a 
consequence, the EU Council decided that the central parity should also become the final conversion 
rate of the tolar to the euro. 
Let me use this opportunity to stress again that participation in ERM II is a very important step on the 
road to the euro. A smooth participation in ERM II is testimony for the sustainability of the necessary 
convergence process prior the adoption of the euro. ERM II participation ties the exchange rate and 
hence  acts  as  a  “testing  phase”  of  the  irrevocably  exchange  rate  fixation.  In  this  respect,  the 
mechanism  provides  flexibility  with  a  15%  band  around  the  parity  and  the  possibility  of  mutually 
agreed  realignments  of  the  parity.  Let  me  also  recall  that  while  two  years  of  participation  are  the 
minimum period required, there are no limits on the maximum length of the participation. This in turn 
allows countries which have not yet achieved a sufficient level of sustainable convergence with regard 
to  all  criteria  to  adequately  prepare  for  the  single  currency  while  already  enjoying  the  benefits  of  a 
stable exchange rate anchor.  
Let me at this point also mention that currently there are seven countries participating in the ERM II 
(Denmark since 1979 [ERM I], Estonia and Lithuania that joined ERM II in 2004, Cyprus, Malta, Latvia 
and Slovakia that joined in 2005). For these countries, the ERM II experience has been and remains a 
useful test to check whether their economies can work smoothly under conditions of stable exchange 
rates or whether further efforts are needed to make the convergence process sustainable.  
Finally, let me say that the ECB has established excellent working relations with Banka Slovenije over 
the last couple of years. Already prior to EU accession, the Banka Slovenije was invited to participate 
in selected activities of the European System of Central Banks and the ECB at various levels. Since 
2004, the colleagues from Banka Slovenije have attended numerous working groups and committees 
and thus contributed to our work. Governor Mitja Gaspari has been a member of the General Council 
of the ECB since May 2004. Since August 2006 he attended the meetings of the Governing Council as 
an Observer, and became official member of this decision-making body for monetary policy in the euro 
area on 1 January 2007.  
Once the EU Council had taken the decision to abrogate the derogation of Slovenia, thus paving the 
way  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  ECB  and  Banka  Slovenije,  together  with  the  National 
Changeover Board, the European Commission and national and international authorities cooperated 
closely in many ways for preparing the adoption of the euro. As a result today we can celebrate the 
successful  cash  changeover.  I  am  sure  that  the  good  working  relationship  between  the  Banka 
Slovenije  and  the  ECB  will  also  continue  in  the  future  and  will  even  become  closer  as  the  Banka 
Slovenije  is  now  a  fully  integrated  part  of  the  Eurosystem.  As  you  may  know,  close  cooperation 
between  the  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB  is  essential  for  our 
work and crucial to ensure the success of the single monetary policy in the euro area. 
From now on Slovenia will enjoy the general benefits of participation in the single currency area, such 
as no exchange rate risks with respect to its most important trade partners and price transparency, 
which will promote trade. It will also benefit from the stability oriented policy of the ECB, which will help 
anchor inflation expectations. Furthermore, as Slovenia is a small open economy, adopting the euro 
provides  considerable  protection  against  international  financial  disturbances,  which  often  have  a 
disproportional effect on smaller economies. All this will translate into strong growth and job creation 
over time. Nevertheless, in order to reap the benefits of participation in the single currency area to the 
greatest  extent  possible,  Slovenia  (as  all  countries  that  are  members  of  the  euro  area)  needs  to 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
ensure appropriate national policies, in particular fiscal and structural policies, as well as appropriate 
wage developments. This will, in turn, help to maintain price stability in Slovenia and to preserve its 
competitiveness and growth.  
Certainly, in the first period of the changeover there have been concerns arising related to price rises 
in certain parts of the economy, especially in the services sector. This was dealt with by the Slovene 
authorities and consumer associations, by means of the long dual pricing period and price monitoring 
teams, to name a few. Let me stress that the citizens of Slovenia play a very important role here: the 
consumers  in  a  market  economy  have  a  major  influence  on  price  formation.  Consumers  will  be  a 
major force in preventing any unjustified price increases.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  again  congratulate  to  all  the  achievements  of  the  process  of  euro 
adoption in Slovenia and give my warm welcome to the new member in the family of the Eurosystem. 
Bravo, Slovenija!  
BIS Review 5/2007 
 3
