Jens Thomsen: A brief look at developments in the Danish economy  
Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the meeting of the 
Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 31 May 2007.  
 Since 2004, global growth has been around 5 per cent, and forecasts indicate that it will continue at 
this level in 2007 and 2008. 
In  Europe,  growth  expectations  are  higher  than  the  Council  states,  as  the  European  Commission's 
spring forecast shows. This implies a greater potential for Danish exports. 
In  other  words,  demand  will  still  be  considerable,  notwithstanding  the  slower  growth  in  private 
consumption than in 2006. 
Whether consumption growth will fall to 1.8 per cent is doubtful in view of the development in incomes 
and the employment situation. 
Thus, the economy is still characterized by a pronounced shortage of labour in many areas. 
Developments in 2006 show that in an upswing it is indeed possible to boost employment by reducing 
unemployment, increasing the participation rate and importing labour from abroad at the same time. 
This strategy should be maintained. 
The Council's forecasts indicate that the capacity pressure will continue, and consequently fiscal policy 
should not stimulate activity. 
In  terms  of  the  proposal  for  an  automatic  fiscal-policy  response  to  output  gaps  of  a  certain  size, 
calculating the output gap constitutes a problem. 
Different  institutions  do  not  reach  the  same  result,  and  major  revisions  take  place.  (See  also: 
Orphanides,  A.  and  S.  van  Norden:  "The  Reliability  of  inflation  Forecasts  Based  on  Output  Gap 
Estimates in Real Time", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2005.) 
Consequently, a sort of a Taylor rule for fiscal policy is not expedient. 
On the other hand, output gap is a relevant – but not the only – indicator when designing fiscal policy 
since, as the proposal entails, it will be necessary to deviate from a neutral fiscal-policy stance in only 
a few cases.  
 BIS Review 58/2007 
 1
