Stanley Fischer: Bank of Israel’s achievements   
Main points of the address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, on receiving 
the Prime Minister’s Award, at the Presentation of the Awards by the CFO (Chief Financial Officers) 
Forum, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 2 January 2007. 
 First of all, I would like to thank you on behalf of the staff and managers of the Bank of Israel and on 
my own behalf for granting us this award. I know that we are being given the award because of the 
Bank of Israel’s achievements as reflected in the survey carried out by the CFO, and my colleagues 
and I are truly proud of that. 
I will not be letting out any secrets if I tell you that recently the Bank of Israel has been the object of 
much criticism. Much of the criticism is unjustified and petty, but some is justified, and we treat that 
part very seriously and are taking steps to improve ourselves where necessary. 
I  must  stress  one  thing,  however.  I  have  not  encountered  any  justified  complaints  about  the 
professionalism of the Bank’s staff in their work. Professional arguments and differences of opinion 
regarding  the  activity  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  are  legitimate  and  will  continue  to  be  so.  But  there  are 
hardly any complaints about lack of professionalism. And the CFO survey corroborates this. 
Thus, with regard to the decisions on the interest rate, there is no end to the differences of opinion and 
suggestions  as  to  what  to  do  with  the  interest  rate.  But  these  are  generally  based  on  professional 
considerations. The whole process of analysis and decision making in the Bank of Israel in this area is 
one of the finest I have come across. I inherited this excellent legacy from my predecessors. 
Likewise  with  regard  to  the  Banking  Supervision.  Sometimes  differences  of  opinion  arise,  and 
conflicting  claims  are  made  both  by  the  banks  and  the  public.  But  these  are  professional 
disagreements, and there will always be such. The staff in the Banking Supervision Department are 
rightly  considered  to  be  of  the  highest  caliber,  and  that  was  one  of  the  points  made  by  the  IMF 
delegation in its report on banking supervision in Israel a year ago. 
The same applies to the management of Israel’s foreign currency reserves, which currently stand at 
about $ 29 billion. The Bank of Israel is considered by the international institutions to be one of the 
best central banks in this area, and experts from the Foreign Currency Department are invited quite 
regularly to advise other central banks. 
The picture with regard to the payments system in Israel is the same. Most of the public do not know 
how it works and are not very interested either. That just goes to prove that the public knows that the 
payments system works well and that someone, i.e., the Bank of Israel, is taking care of it. 
I could go on and say similar things about each of the areas of the Bank’s activity, such as its role as 
economic advisor to the government, and in this context the excellent degree of professionalism of the 
Research Department, and the Currency Department, and its expertise in its field. But time does not 
allow me to do so. 
It would be remiss of me at this point if I did not mention the important role played by the Bank of Israel 
in fashioning Israel’s economy, in particular since 1986 following the implementation of the Economic 
Stabilization Program. In the second half of the 1980s and during the 1990s the Bank of Israel initiated 
many  far-reaching  changes  in  Israel’s  economy,  including  liberalization,  opening  the  economy  to 
capital flows, and embarking on the disinflation process. This was not an easy period, and there was 
heated public debate and controversy all along the way. But the Bank of Israel, and I make special 
mention of the then Governor Professor Jacob Frenkel, succeeded in pushing the changes through, 
and the economy is currently enjoying the fruits of that success, and it can certainly be stated that it 
provided the very important infrastructure for the excellent situation of the economy today. 
Since  I  took  up  office  I  have  been  trying  to  correct  things  that  need  correcting  and  to  promote  the 
process of streamlining and modernizing the Bank. In these efforts I am joined by my colleagues, in 
particular the Director General of the Bank, Jacob Danon. 
The  objectives  we  are  pursuing  are:  (a)  to  solve  the  labor  dispute  in  the  Bank;  (b)  to carry  out  the 
reorganization process in the Bank; (c) to allow a few dozen employees who are under-employed to 
retire, so that the staff complement will drop by about 10 percent; (d) to get a new Bank of Israel Law 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
passed; and (e) to make extensive changes in the decision-making process in the Bank. I have not 
included  the  matters  we  have  already  dealt  with  and  will  continue  to  deal  with,  such  as  setting  up 
procedures for encouraging excellence in the Bank and formulating a new organizational culture. 
With regard to the new law we have reached a very advanced stage of preparation, after a long period 
of working vis-à-vis the Ministry of Finance and the Prime Minister’s Office, and the government has 
adopted the principles we formulated. The proposed law is appropriate for a modern economy, with 
decision-making  processes  and  mechanisms  that  ensure  transparency  and  internal  and  external 
controls suited to an independent central bank operating in a democracy. 
The new law will define the aims of the Bank more correctly and accurately, with the maintenance of 
price  stability  as  its  top  priority.  The  independence  of  the  Bank  in  the  use  of  the  instruments  to 
implement  its  policy  will  be  clearly  specified,  and  a  new  mechanism  will  be  instituted  for  decision 
making regarding the interest rate policy and the management of the Bank. 
Two  new  bodies  will  be  established:  (1)  a  monetary  committee  headed  by  the  Governor,  whose 
members will include people from outside the bank with the appropriate professional background and 
with no potential conflicts of interest; (2) an administrative council that will act as the Bank’s board of 
directors, with a majority of members from outside the Bank, one of whom will serve as chair of the 
council. The council will approve the administrative aspects of the Bank’s operations, including work 
plans,  the  Bank’s  budget,  and  salaries.  The  decisions  of  the  monetary  committee  and  the 
administrative council will be transparent to the public, the Knesset, and the government. 
To conclude, I would like to express the hope that the Bank of Israel will be able to continue with the 
goals we have set ourselves, and that we will soon present to Israel a central bank that will enjoy the 
continued  confidence  of  the  public  not  just  in  its  professionalism  but  also  in  the  legal  and 
administrative framework in which it operates. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
