Timothy F Geithner: Credit markets innovations and their implications  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the 2007 Credit Markets Symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, Charlotte, North Carolina, 23 March 2007. 
 I am grateful to Jeff Lacker for including me in this conference, and my compliments to him and the 
Richmond  Fed  for  bringing  together  an  excellent  group  to  discuss  the  implications  of  recent 
innovations in credit markets. 
The past few years have seen remarkable changes in credit markets, and this is a good time to take 
stock of what we know about those developments and their implications. 
The latest wave of credit market innovations has elicited some concerns about their implications for 
the stability of the financial system, concerns similar to those associated with earlier periods of rapid 
change  in  financial  markets.  Will  the  most  recent  credit  market  innovations  amplify  credit  cycles, 
contributing  to  "excessive"  lending  in  times  of  relative  stability,  and  then  magnify  the  contraction  in 
credit that follows? Will they introduce greater volatility in financial markets? Will they create greater 
risk of systemic financial crisis? 
These concerns have been heightened in some quarters by the problems currently being experienced 
in the subprime mortgage sector. It will take some time before the full implications are understood and 
the full impact can be assessed. As of now, though, there are few signs that the disruptions in this one 
sector of the credit markets will have a lasting impact on credit markets as a whole. 
Indeed, economic theory and recent practical experience offer some reassurance against both these 
specific concerns and more general worries about the implications of credit market innovations for the 
performance of the financial system. 
The rapid growth in these new types of credit instruments is, of course, a sign of their value to market 
participants.  For  borrowers,  credit  market  innovation  offers  the  prospect  of  increased  credit  supply; 
better pricing; and a relaxation of financial constraints. For investors, new credit instruments bring the 
prospect  of  broader  risk  and  return  opportunities;  the  ability  to  diversify  portfolios;  and  increased 
flexibility. And for lenders, innovations can help free up funding and capital for other uses; they can 
help improve credit risk and asset/liability management; and they can improve the return on capital 
and provide new and cheaper funding sources. 
By  spreading  risk  more  broadly,  providing  opportunities  to  manage  and  hedge  risk,  and  making  it 
possible to trade and price credit risk, credit market innovation should help make markets both more 
efficient and more resilient. They should help make markets better able to allocate capital to its highest 
return  and  better  able  to  absorb  stress.  Broad,  deep  and  well-functioning  capital  markets 
complemented by strong, well-capitalized banks, able to provide liquidity in times of strain, make for a 
more efficient financial system: one which contributes to better economic growth outcomes over time. 
There  are  therefore  compelling  arguments  in  favor  of  a  generally  positive  assessment  of  the 
consequences  of  innovation.  Does  experience  provide  support  for  these  arguments,  or  are  these 
changes too new for us to know? 
The recent changes in credit markets have been dramatic. We have seen rapid growth of structured 
credit  products,  credit  default  swaps  and  new  types  of  collateralized  debt  and  loan  obligations. 
Although these instruments are very new, they are the natural extension of earlier innovations in credit 
markets. Over a long period we have seen innovations ranging from the syndication of bank loans and 
the direct provision of credit through the capital markets, to the spread of asset-backed securities and 
products that separate different parts of the payments stream and different dimensions of the risk in a 
credit obligation into different instruments. 
These changes have contributed to a substantial reduction in the share of total credit held by banks. 
They have produced a greater separation or distance between the entity that first arranges a loan and 
those who end up holding the risk, and more intermediaries in that chain. And they have contributed to 
a dramatic increase in the number and diversity of creditors to any individual borrower, and a greater 
capacity to actively trade credit risk. 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 1
We  are  now  well  into  the  third  decade  of  experience  with  the  consequences  of  these  earlier 
innovations, and this history offers some useful lessons for evaluating the probable impact of the latest 
changes in credit markets. 
The ease with which the U.S. financial system absorbed the substantial scale of corporate defaults 
that peaked in recent years in 2002 provides some support for the argument that broader and deeper 
capital markets make the system more resilient. 
In  general,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  strong  empirical  support  for  the  proposition  that  derivatives 
increase volatility in financial markets. Volatility is not higher where derivatives are most prevalent. 
Credit  market  innovation  does  not  appear  to  have  resulted  in  a  large  increase  in  leverage  in  the 
corporate sector, as some had feared. Indeed, nonfinancial corporate leverage in the United States is 
currently  low  by  recent  historical  standards.  The  overall  degree  of  balance  sheet  leverage  by 
corporations, for example, is higher in some more traditional financial systems than it is in systems 
where credit market innovations are more advanced. 
Default rates do not appear to have risen, nor recovery rates fallen as these credit innovations have 
spread, despite concerns they might lead to excess lending, the mis-pricing of credit risk and more 
messy and more complicated workouts, resulting from the greater diffusion of the investor base. 
And although the sources of the broad moderation in GDP volatility observed in the United States over 
the past two decades are still the subject of debate, the fact that this moderation occurred during a 
period of extensive innovation in credit and other financial markets should provide some comfort for 
those who expected the opposite. 
Innovations  in  credit  markets  are  inevitably  accompanied  by  challenges.  Indeed,  the  history  of 
innovation in financial markets provides many examples of periods of rapid change accompanied by 
fraud  and  abuse,  by  challenges  in  assessing  value  and  risk,  by  concerns  about  the  adequacy  of 
investor and consumer protection, and by unexpected behavior of prices, defaults and correlations. To 
some degree, these types of problems are the inevitable consequence of change and innovation. 
Although  recent  experience  as  well  as  theory  provide  some  reassurance  against  the  concern  that 
credit market innovation would make markets more volatile and the financial system more vulnerable, 
these judgments require qualification. Some aspects of this latest wave of innovation are different in 
substance – therefore potentially in their implications – from their predecessors. And these differences 
require attention. 
There are three aspects of the latest set of changes which I think deserve more reflection. 
The first is about the role of market liquidity and liquidity risk in how credit markets work. Credit market 
innovations have transformed the financial system from one in which most credit risk is in the form of 
loans, held to maturity on the balance sheets of banks, to a system in which most credit risk now takes 
an incredibly diverse array of different forms, much of it held by nonbank financial institutions that mark 
to market and can take on substantial leverage. 
U.S. financial institutions now hold only around 15 percent of total credit outstanding by the nonfarm 
nonfinancial sector: that is less than half the level of two decades ago. For the largest U.S. banks, 
credit exposures in over-the-counter derivatives is approaching the level of more traditional forms of 
credit exposure. Hedge funds, according to one recent survey, account for 58 percent of the volume in 
credit derivatives in the year to the first quarter of 2006. 
Financial shocks take many forms. Some, such as in 1987 and 1998, involve a sharp increase in risk 
premia that precipitate a fall in asset prices and that in turn leads to what economists and engineers 
call "positive feedback" dynamics. As firms and investors move to hedge against future losses and to 
raise money to meet margin calls, the brake becomes the accelerator: markets come under additional 
pressure, pushing asset prices lower. Volatility increases. Liquidity in markets for more risky assets 
falls. 
In systems where credit is more market-based and more credit risk is in leveraged financial institutions 
outside  the  banking  system,  a  sharp  rise  in  asset-price  volatility  and  the  concomitant  reduction  in 
market  liquidity,  can  potentially  have  greater  negative  effects  on  credit  markets.  If  losses  in  these 
institutions force them to withdraw from credit markets, credit availability will decline, unless or until 
other institutions in a stronger financial position are willing to step in. The greater connection between 
asset-price  volatility,  market  liquidity  and  the  credit  mechanism  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  a 
system in which credit risk is dispersed outside the banking system, including among leveraged funds. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2007
This does not make the system less stable, though, only different. For if risk is spread more broadly, 
shocks  should  be  absorbed  with  less  trauma.  Moreover,  the  system  as  a  whole  may  be  less 
vulnerable to distortions introduced by the moral hazard associated with the access that banks have to 
the safety net. 
A  second  issue  we  need  to  consider  stems  from  the  complexity  of  the  new  credit  instruments,  the 
challenges  they  present  in  terms  of  valuation  and  risk  measurement  and  their  short  history  of 
experience in times of stress. 
Even  the  most  sophisticated  participants  in  the  markets  for  these  instruments  find  the  risk 
management  challenges  associated  with  these  instruments  daunting.  This  raises  the  prospect  of 
unanticipated losses. Default rates are harder to predict where there has been a substantial change in 
the financial attributes of borrowers. The prices of instruments may not respond as expected to a given 
change in losses or in the value of the assets underlying these instruments. Hedging strategies may 
prove  to  be  less  effective  than  expected.  Similarly  rated  instruments  can  behave  very  differently  in 
stress events. 
The response of prices and volatility to the downgrades in the automobile sector in the spring of 2005 
and  the  recent  experience  in  subprime  mortgages  and  related  asset-backed  securities  and  credit 
derivatives illustrate different types of surprises faced by the participants in these markets. They are a 
reminder  of  the  dimensions  of  uncertainty  that  exist  about  the  shape  of  the  distribution  of  potential 
returns. This is particularly true of what we might call the adverse tail, or the negative extreme. These 
challenges exist for all participants in these markets: for the institutions that underwrite, structure and 
distribute these risks; for those who trade or hold them; and for third parties, like the rating agencies. 
These challenges of complexity are significant as well because they can exacerbate the problem of 
dealing  with  classic  principal-agent  problems.  You  can  see  this  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market 
where, for example, a person may be rewarded for generating new mortgages on the basis of volume, 
without  being  directly  exposed  to  the  consequences  of  default;  but  these  problems  exist  wherever 
incentives  diverge  and  contracting  is  imperfect.  Financial  institutions  typically  maintain  a  range  of 
different checks and balances to deal with the risk of misaligned incentives: for example, between a 
trader and the principal whose resources are at risk, or between the mortgage broker or underwriter 
and the firm that ultimately ends up holding the risk. But these checks and balances depend in part on 
the  capacity  of  risk  managers  to  observe  and  understand  the  underlying  economic  risk  in  these 
instruments. Where that is harder because of this combination of complexity, imbedded leverage, and 
short loss history, then market discipline will be weaker. 
A third issue relates to the dynamics of failure and the infrastructure that supports these markets. The 
dramatic growth in the volume of over-the-counter derivatives and the growth in the number and size 
of leveraged funds inevitably complicate the resolution of the failure of a large financial institution that 
is active in these markets. The sheer number of financial contracts that would have to be unraveled in 
the  context  of  a  default,  the  challenge  that  a  former  colleague  of  mine  likes  to  refer  to  as 
"unscrambling  the  eggs,"  could  exacerbate  and  prolong  uncertainty,  and  complicate  the  process  of 
resolution. 
As is typical during periods of rapid innovation, these markets grew much more quickly than did the 
supporting  infrastructure.  Take  credit  derivatives,  for  example.  For  most  of  the  early  years  of  this 
market,  much  of  the  post-trade  processing  system  was  not  automated  and  required  substantial 
manual intervention. Positions were assigned without the knowledge of counterparties. Confirmations 
backlogs  rose  to  very  high  levels.  As  Alan  Greenspan  put  it,  the  market  was  using  19th  century 
methods of dealing with 21st century financial instruments. 
This created a greater risk of operational problems and uncertainty about exposures in the event of 
stress. The capacity of market participants to mitigate these risks by improving the infrastructure was 
hampered  by  classic  collective  action  problems,  magnified  by  the  greater  number  and  diversity  of 
participants. 
All  these  challenges  merit  attention.  They  describe  some  of  the  risks  that  have  accompanied  the 
substantial benefits of credit market innovation. And they help illustrate why these broad changes in 
financial markets may have contributed to a system where the probability of a major crisis seems likely 
to be lower, but the losses associated with such a crisis may be greater or harder to mitigate. 
What should policymakers to do mitigate these risks? 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 3
We  cannot  turn  back  the  clock  on  innovation  or  reverse  the  increase  in  complexity  around  risk 
management.  We  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  monitor  or  control  concentrations  of  leverage  or  risk 
outside the banking system. We cannot identify the likely sources of future stress to the system, and 
act preemptively to diffuse them. 
The most productive focus of policy attention has to be on improving the shock absorbers in the core 
of  the  financial  system,  in  terms  of  capital  and  liquidity  relative  to  risk  and  the  robustness  of  the 
infrastructure. 
These  issues  are  the  principal  focus  of  day-to-day  supervision  and  market  oversight  in  the  major 
financial  centers  around  the  world.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  actively  involved  in  a  range  of  efforts, 
working closely with the primary supervisors of the major global financial institutions and the critical 
parts of the financial infrastructure, to encourage further progress. In this context, we are working to 
put  in  place  a  stronger  regulatory  capital  regime  and  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  firms  to  absorb 
losses  in  stress  conditions.  We  are  encouraging  more  sophisticated  and  more  conservative 
management of credit exposures in over-the-counter derivatives and structured financial products, as 
well  as  of  exposures  to  hedge  funds.  And  we  are  encouraging  a  range  of  efforts  to  modernize  the 
operational infrastructure that underpins the over-the-counter derivatives markets, and to improve the 
capacity of market participants to manage a major default. 
The stronger these shock absorbers, the more resilient markets will be in the face of future shocks, 
and the more confident we can be that banks will be a source of strength and of liquidity to markets in 
periods of stress and that the financial system will contribute to improved economic performance over 
time. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2007
