Hamad Al-Sayari: Housing finance in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, to the 
“Conference on Housing Finance in the Kingdom”, Riyadh, 17 January 2007. 
 Dear Audience, 
It  gives  me  a  great  pleasure  to  inaugurate  the  activities  of  the  second  day  of  the  “Conference  on 
Housing Finance in the Kingdom”. 
I would like to thank Euromoney and all other entities organizing this important and vital conference in 
the Kingdom at a time when we need, more than any time before, to shed more light on the issue of 
real  estate  finance,  exchange  views  and  benefit  from  the  experiences  of  other  nations  in this  area. 
Undoubtedly, this will contribute to developing the proper strategies and mechanisms to overcome the 
challenges of finance in this significant sector. 
Dear Audience, 
As  everybody  knows,  the  Saudi  economy,  in  general,  and  the  housing  sector,  in  particular,  have 
witnessed strong growth during the past years. The accelerated population growth rate in our country 
is considered among the highest growth rates in the world, calling for more financing needs for various 
development sectors, especially the housing sector. The government of Saudi Arabia, represented by 
the  Real  Estate  Development  Fund,  has  made,  and  continues  to  make,  great  efforts,  under  its 
development  plans,  in  order  to  provide  necessary  finance  to  ensure  the  provision  of  appropriate 
housing  for  Saudi  citizens,  especially  those  of  limited  income.  The  Government  has  enhanced  its 
efforts in this area by raising the capital of the Fund by Rls 9.0 billion to Rls 92 billion as from 2006. 
However,  the  accelerated  population  growth  and  the  rising  demand  for  housing  have  urged  the 
creation  of  other  real  estate  financing  mechanisms  in  addition  to  the  government’s  financing 
mechanism.  More  finance  and  contribution  by  the  private  sector  and  reducing  reliance  on  the 
government  will  give  the  private  sector  an  opportunity  to  play  a  key  role  in  this  area  which  offers 
lucrative investment opportunities. Nonetheless, it is fair to say that the private sector in general and 
the  banking  sector  in  particular  seek  to  obtain  more  guarantees  to  enter  as  financers  in  this  vital 
sector. This demands working effectively by all relevant entities to develop mechanisms for meeting 
the rising demand in this sector. 
Dear Brothers, 
Over  the  preceding  years,  the  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia  has  undertaken  many  economic  reform 
measures,  updated  and  streamlined  its  laws  and  regulations,  restructured  the  national  economy, 
approved a number of mega development projects, and joined the World Trade Organization (WTO). It 
has  also  made  many  important  decisions  aimed  at  attracting  foreign  investments  and  continued 
opening  of  the  markets  which  will  be  reflected  on  the  competitiveness  of  the  national  economy.  All 
these  positive  developments  are  an  incentive  for  investment  in  the  Kingdom  in  general  and  in  the 
housing sector in particular. 
Dear Brothers,  
This conference is held at a time when the Kingdom has achieved outstanding development results in 
all sectors of the economy. In 2006, the real GDP (at current prices) grew by 12.4 percent and by 4.2 
percent (at constant prices). It is expected that strong growth rates will be maintained in the medium 
term. This will contribute to increasing the production capacity of the national economy and have a 
positive impact on all its sectors. International credit rating agencies have raised the credit rating of the 
Kingdom to advanced grades, and commended the efficiency and soundness of the national economy 
and the economic reform programs. This climate has made domestic and international investors more 
interested  to  participate  in  and  benefit  from  the  various  investment  opportunities  in  the  Saudi 
economy.  The  banking  system  in  the  Kingdom  has  exercised  a  vital  role  in  boosting  the  national 
economy.  It  has  made  great  progress,  using  the  latest  technologies  and  various  banking  products, 
under  a  supervisory  system  keen  to  meet  domestic  requirements  and  legislation  as  well  as 
international  standards.  The  contribution  of  the  banking  sector  to  housing  finance  is  expected  to 
increase as soon as the real estate mortgage law is enacted. It is worth mentioning that the size of real 
estate finance provided by commercial banks reached Rls 13.4 billion at the end of the second quarter 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
of 2006. SAMA has permitted a number of banks to offer products for real estate financing. Banks are 
constantly working to develop innovative products to meet the needs of the housing market.  
Dear Brothers, 
A  review  of  the  topics  addressed  on  the  first  day  of  this  conference  by  the  distinguished  speakers 
shows that they touched upon important issues and gave a future vision of housing in the Kingdom, 
and how to benefit from the experiences of different countries in this area. Today will be an extension 
of  those  topics  that  are  directly  related  to  housing  finance.  In  general,  I  find  that  the  conference 
broadly covers all aspects of housing finance in the Kingdom. 
In conclusion, I thank the audience and the organizers of this conference, and wish you all success in 
your deliberations. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2007
