Savenaca Narube: Fiji – the way ahead 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  official 
opening of the Colonal National Bank Namaka branch, Suva, 23 February 2007. 
 Introductory remarks 
Mr. John Duncan, Acting Chairman of the Colonial Board; 
Directors of Colonial National Bank; 
Mr. Laurie Mellsop, Managing Director, Colonial Fiji Group; 
Mr. Ross Munn, General Manager Banking; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good evening. 
I am pleased to be in Namaka today for the opening of Colonial’s newest branch. 
Colonial  has  opened  3  branches  in  the  last  14  months.  In  December  2005,  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
opening  Colonial’s  branch  in  Pacific  Harbour.  Since  then,  Colonial  has  opened  another  branch  at 
Centrepoint in Laucala Bay, Suva, which caters for the busy Nausori/Nabua corridor. This Centrepoint 
branch opens also on Saturday from 9.00am to 1.00pm. 
The  official  opening  today  of  the  Namaka  branch  makes  it  the  18th  Colonial  branch  in  Fiji.  By  far, 
Colonial  has  the  most  number  of  branches  in  Fiji.  Colonial  also  has  36  ATM  sites  and  two  bureau 
operations at Suva Central and Sofitel Resort and Spa. Colonial’s assets are growing strongly.  
That is an impressive achievement and I congratulate Colonial for its contribution to the provision of 
financial services to the people of Fiji. This branch reflects Colonial’s confidence in the Fiji economy. 
And let me say that this confidence is very refreshing in the environment that we currently face. 
Namaka CNB branch and customer service 
Positioning a bank in Namaka is very timely. We know that Nadi town is becoming very busy. Namaka 
provides an alternative venue to do business and shop. Namaka now boasts many shops, restaurants 
and other service amenities which make it an important stop for both locals and the tourists. Namaka 
was a wise choice.  
I understand that this Colonial branch opened for operations on 8 January 2007 with 10 staff. 
I wish to congratulate Mr. Mellsop and his Team for this initiative particularly at this time. I am sure 
your customers will appreciate your presence here.  
In  this  modern  era  of  banking,  customer  service  drives  financial  businesses.  Financial  services  are 
being taken to the customers. Gone are the old days of bankers waiting for customers to walk through 
their doors, hat in hand with a hopeful smile. Competition has driven this customer focus. More and 
more, bankers are walking about offering innovative products that best address customer needs. 
Modernisation 
Modernisation and technology has catalyzed this new financial age. The provisions of ATMs, phone 
banking,  internet  banking and  so  forth have  provided  customers easier access  to  financial  services 
from the comfort of their homes and offices. I am glad to say that Fiji is not lagging too far behind the 
rest of the world in financial technology and innovation.  
I appreciate the commercial banks’ effort to modernise our financial system. A lot has been done in 
this automation and modernisation. Later this year, the Reserve bank will be introducing an automated 
payments system which will facilitate faster clearance of cheques amongst banks. I wish to thank the 
banks for their support and guidance in this project. 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
The Fiji economy 
Let me say a few words on the economy.  
Our estimate before December last year was for the economy to grow by around 2 percent in 2007. 
This projection as you know is no longer relevant. We now expect the economy to decline by 2 to 4 
percent in 2007.  
I know that this growth range is a bit wide. But it is deliberately left wide as we are still evaluating the 
full  impact  of  the  political  crisis  on  the  economy.  To  make  matters  worse,  the  impact  of  the  recent 
flooding in the West and the North will now need to be factored into this scenario.  
Unfortunately, we have carried many economic problems with us for some time. Sugar continues to 
struggle. Fishing, forestry and agriculture have not performed to their potential. Production of garments 
is now less than half of what it used to be. The mining of gold has now stopped altogether. 
The political crisis has brought an additional dimension to these challenges. 
Our exports of goods are not doing well. To make matters worse, imports are booming. And to make 
matters even worse, the rise in the price of oil has come at the worst possible time. Our oil imports are 
four times what we used to pay some six years ago. The balance of payments therefore continues to 
come under pressure. This is the number one challenge that we face. Reviving exports is the key. 
The only bright spot in our scenario is tourism. It has been the driving force of our economic growth 
since 2000. Tourism will play a critical part in our economic recovery as it did in 2000. We hear some 
good news that tourism is bouncing back very quickly and we hope that this continue. Without tourism, 
it is fair to say that the economy would have been worse off. Tourism therefore needs our full support 
while we furiously work at reviving commodity exports. 
We must work together to restore growth. I am confident that we can overcome the challenges and not 
only to return the economy to a positive growth cycle but even to lift this growth rate. However, in our 
pursuit  of  growth,  we  must  not  take  the  easier  way  out.  We  must  build  our  strategy  on  a  firm 
foundation  –  one  that  will  last  for  a  long  time.  We  therefore  have  no  choice  but  to  address  long 
standing reforms that are critical to lift economic growth towards the five percent mark. We know what 
these reforms are and we have known them for many, many years. These include sugar, land lease, 
public enterprise, public service and exports.  
Next Friday, the Interim Administration will be presenting its budget for 2007. We are looking forward 
to the policy content of this budget to map out for us the economic way forward. We hope that it will 
address convincingly the fundamental hurdles that I have mentioned.  
Monetary policy  
The Reserve Bank has been highlighting the imbalance between exports and imports for some time 
now. We will continue to do so. We realise though that the solutions to this problem are largely outside 
the direct influence of the Reserve Bank itself.  
In many ways, we are therefore dealing with the effects rather than the cause. But we have no choice 
but to protect our financial position while we try to solve the root cause which is exports. Solving the 
root cause however is taking a lot of time – a luxury that we are running out of very quickly. Our task 
therefore becomes more difficult and complex as time slips by. 
Over the last five years, the Reserve Bank has therefore used the tools available to us to stabilize the 
situation.  We  have  progressively  raised  interest  rates  in  the  last  four  years.  We  have  tightened 
liquidity. And since December last year we have imposed a credit ceiling on commercial banks and 
also reduced their delegated limits on selected overseas transactions.  
At  this  point,  let  me  point  out  two  things  on  our  policy.  First,  we  have  not  curtailed  any  foreign 
remittances. We only have asked that in a few types of transactions, you seek our approval if you want 
to remit more than the amount delegated to commercial banks. Second, while the credit ceiling is in 
place, the Reserve Bank continues to encourage lending for investment. Commercial banks can seek 
our approval for these lending on a case by case basis.  
No one likes higher interest rates. Neither do we. But do we have a choice? In my view, we really have 
none. Using other monetary instruments is not an alternative. Our efforts to raise exports need to bear 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2007
fruit  sooner rather  than  later. With  exports  rising,  interest  rates will come  down naturally and,  more 
importantly, sustainably. I am confident that we can achieve this within the next three years. 
I wish to thank the commercial banks for their understanding and support in our effort to address this 
economic challenge more so after December 5th last year. 
We do we go from here? All I can say at this time is that the economic picture will need to become 
clearer on the sustainability of our foreign reserves before we can be able to review the existing stance 
of monetary policy. However, I know that the liquidity in the market place is extremely tight and we 
expect it to remain so for some time. This puts a lot of pressure on lending rates. Therefore, when 
necessary, the Reserve Bank will release funds into the system to moderate liquidity and ease undue 
pressure on interest rates. 
Let me also assure you that our financial system is sound. The comprehensive review of our financial 
system undertaken last year by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank confirmed that 
this is so.  
Concluding remarks 
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Mellsop for inviting me here today. I must say that the Colonial Group 
has contributed well to the development of the Fiji economy. It offers a diversified range of financial 
services in banking, insurance, property and trusts. It has invested considerably in the provisions of its 
services and widening its outreach to the community. The Group has grown strongly in the last five 
years. 
I congratulate you on the opening of your 18th branch. I take this opportunity to wish the Colonial team 
all the best in its future endeavors. 
Official opening 
I have much pleasure in declaring this Namaka branch of the Colonial National Bank open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 3
