Durmuş Yilmaz: Financial security and stability  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the forum 
“Measuring  and  Fostering  the  Progress  of  Societies:  The  OECD  World  Forum  on  Statistics, 
Knowledge and Policy”, Istanbul, 28 June 2007. 
 Dear guests, 
I would first like to welcome you all to Istanbul, the city where the two continents meet. And today it is 
so delightful to see that it is a meeting point for high level delegates from all the continents. In that 
regard, it is a great pleasure for me to be given the opportunity to share my views on financial stability 
and security with such a distinguished audience. 
Today, I would like to begin my speech by underlining the importance of financial stability, why and 
how we should keep an eye on the stability of the financial system, including the Turkish perspective. 
Finally, I will try to emphasize the interrelatedness between financial security and stability. 
Importance of financial stability… 
As a result of the liberalization and deregulation processes, financial markets became more integrated 
and underwent radical transformation, starting, in fact, with developed countries in the late 70’s and 
spreading to developing countries in the 80’s and 90’s. At the same period, capital movements were 
seen  to  have  accelerated  and  reached  to  high  levels.  This,  in  turn,  led  to  financial  innovation  and 
heavy use of sophisticated instruments. 
The degree of sophistication in financial markets urge all market participants to increase their focus on 
risk management and policy makers to monitor closely the developments and identify risks in these 
markets. This shift in market participants’ perceptions is particularly important, considering the lessons 
derived from painful experiences of crises, which especially occurred during the last two decades all 
around the world. These lessons taught us how costly and disruptive financial instability can be and 
how effective risk management can be to avoid adverse conditions in advance. 
Even  though  there  is  no  consensus  on  how  to  define  financial  stability,  its  importance  is  widely 
accepted.  Due  to  the  financial  crises  experienced  on  the  road  to  globalization,  along  with  financial 
liberalization and  technological  improvements, “financial stability” in  line with  the  target  of achieving 
price stability, has become one of the leading policy issues of central banks. However, I should point 
out that, although price stability has a commonly accepted and clear definition, I can say that it is much 
more difficult to define financial stability. 
The European Central Bank defines financial stability as the financial system capability to withstand 
shocks without impairing the transformation of savings to investment opportunities. Another definition 
draws attention to the absence of crises in the financial system and a robust financial sector. It is also 
defined as the efficient performance of the financial system in the event of shocks, stress situations 
and profound structural change. 
Policy  makers  very  well  recognize  that  financial  instability  can  harm  growth  and  cause  serious 
disruptions,  revealing  itself  in  decreased  market  liquidity,  excessive  volatility  in  asset  prices  and 
ending  up  in  banking  and  currency  crises.  Therefore,  many  central  banks  now  consider  financial 
stability as an objective complementing the price stability. In recent years, there has been a noticeable 
increase  in  central  banks’  autonomy  in  monetary  policy,  and  also  a  transfer  of  supervisory  and 
regulatory  responsibilities  regarding 
to  other  autonomous  bodies.  The 
maintenance  of  financial  stability  is,  and  will  remain,  a  core  function  for  all  central  banks.  In  the 
modern era, central banks' involvement in matters relating to financial stability has become broader 
and more formalized. 
Central  banks  recognize  financial  stability  as  an  important  and  self-contained  objective.  Central 
bankers see price stability and financial stability as connected due to the fact that serious disruption in 
the  financial  system  would  affect  the  implementation  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  while 
macroeconomic stability helps reduce risks to financial stability. 
institutions 
financial 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 1
Obviously, measurement of financial stability is not as straightforward as price stability since there is 
no single measure or indicator, which shows if the financial system is stable or not. Considering the 
substantial developments in innovative financial products including hedge funds and the contagion risk 
inherent  in  them,  accurate  statistical  data  requirements  step  forward.  Moreover,  a  thorough 
assessment  of  financial  stability  makes  it  essential  to  monitor  the  risks  driven  by  household  and 
corporate  sectors.  In  this  regard,  every  central  bank  all  around  the  world  is  concentrating  on 
developing  new  tools  and  stress  tests  for  assessing  financial  stability.  They  are  reorganizing 
themselves in order to directly and effectively monitor financial stability and to develop new analysis 
techniques regardless of whether a central bank is also the supervisory authority or not. 
Financial stability from the Turkish perspective… 
If we consider the last two decades of the Turkish economy, we can say that Turkey learned its lesson 
very well by actually going through several crises and economic downturns. Thus, we now are aware 
of how important it is to have a sound financial system, which is resilient to potential shocks. 
The  distortions  in  the  banking  sector  and  weak  institutional  structure  of  the  financial  system  led  to 
important  systemic  risks  in  the  Turkish  economy  making  it  impossible  for  the  economy  to  survive 
without  financial  sector  reforms  taking  place.  Therefore,  the  restructuring  program  for  the  financial 
sector was launched with the goal of eliminating the distortions in the financial sector, improving its 
intermediary  function  and  thus  enhancing  its  competitiveness  by  international  standards.  Banking 
Regulation  and  Supervision  Agency  has  become  operational  as  a  separate  body  to  improve  the 
banking supervision. The Banks Act was amended to bring the supervision standards in line with the 
EU directives and international best practices. Moreover, the Central Bank Law has been amended 
and instrumental independence of the Central Bank was provided and the primary goal of the Bank 
was determined to be maintaining the price stability. To support this main goal, the Bank was assigned 
with the duty of maintaining financial stability, and within this context, the Central Bank continued to 
assess  the  main  risks  and  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system  and  to  develop  alternative  policies 
against these risks by monitoring the financial system as a whole. In the last couple of years, Turkey 
has  shown  a  remarkable  progress  considering  the  soundness  of  the  economy  and  the  financial 
system. Today, we have a stronger banking sector, which forms the basis of macroeconomic stability, 
as well. 
Of  course,  considering  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  economies,  the  conditions  do  not  always  stay  as 
what they are especially due to the increasingly interlinked global financial markets. In May-June 2006, 
international developments such as the deterioration in global liquidity conditions and the decrease in 
risk appetites of foreign investors towards developing countries, and the uncertainty occurring after it, 
adversely affected developing countries, including Turkey. However, tight monetary and fiscal policies 
of the current economic program, on-going structural reforms and flexible exchange rate regime have 
increased the resilience of the system to shocks. 
Additionally, the strengthened legal infrastructure and the improved risk culture in the banking sector 
have alleviated the adverse effects of May-June fluctuations. 
I believe nobody in this room would deny the fact that today almost all financial developments will have 
implications for all decision makers around the world-ranging from investors to policy makers. When a 
decision is made by the FED, ECB, Bank of Japan or China, it is a concern for most countries. I am 
sure you will all agree with me when I say, in today’s integrated markets when any country catches a 
cold there will be many others sneezing. In such an environment we are now increasingly aware of 
contagion risk. 
Financial security and financial stability… 
Within  this  framework,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  close  linkage  between  financial  security  and 
financial stability. 
In  my  opinion,  financial  security  can  be  enhanced  by  the  existence  of  a  smoothly  operating 
infrastructure.  This  actually  is  a  comprehensive  concept  and  includes  the  payment  system,  the 
technological infrastructure, as well as the regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Overseeing  the  payments  system  is  an  essential  duty  of  the  central  banks.  In  this  respect,  a  basic 
continuing  responsibility  of  any  central  bank  is  to  assure  stable  and  smoothly  functioning  payment 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2007
systems. Linked to this is the lender of last resort function of the central banks. Emergency liquidity 
assistance,  perhaps  the  most  traditional  function  for  dealing  with  financial  instability,  is  a  way  out 
provided by central banks. Central banks can have a calming influence on markets in case of a market 
disruption  simply  by  standing ready  to  provide  liquidity  assistance  if  necessary.  It  includes  both  the 
provision  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  through  market  operations,  as  well  as 
emergency lending to individual banks. Altogether these two important functions facilitate the security 
in the system. 
Technological  infrastructure  is  another  component  to  secure  financial  operations.  Financial  systems 
continuously need to adapt themselves to the rapidly increasing technological innovations. This also 
includes new products, necessitating increased awareness by the users and supervisors of the risks 
and benefits inherent in them. At this stage integrity and accuracy of data comes forward to facilitate 
risk management by the institutions and effective supervision by the regulators. 
The  supervisory  authorities  increasingly  need  to  be  proactive  and  concentrate  on  consolidated 
supervision. In my opinion, it is crucial for policy makers to be aware of the dynamics in the highly 
correlated markets. Creating widespread transparency with regard to their objectives; identifying risks; 
sharing  views  with  financial  market  participants  to  increase  their  awareness  of  risks  and  to  act 
accordingly; starting or promoting initiatives to reduce the financial system’s vulnerability to crises and 
to reinforce financial infrastructure, especially in the field of payment services and securities settlement 
should be given priority. 
International initiatives ease this process by specifying best practices and defining principles. In these 
international platforms, we find the opportunity to cooperate and exchange information. As we would 
all agree, although it is highly comprehensive and demands our devotion, Basel II is a significant step 
towards that end. There is no doubt that the main pillar of Basel II regarding capital adequacy is a core 
requirement for the financial soundness of institutions. However, I want to point out the importance of 
its two other pillars. Supervisory Review is very essential to evaluate an institution’s risk management. 
Complementary  to  this  is  the  effective  corporate  governance  in  an  institution.  And  finally,  market 
discipline ensures that the market provides another set of eyes on the soundness of institutions. 
In the broader sense, we could conclude that strengthening market discipline within a clear prudential 
framework  can  help  achieve  a  better  balance  between  financial  system  stability  and  economic 
efficiency.  In  that  sense,  as  the  Central  Bank,  we  are  very  well  aware  of  our  responsibility  in 
implementing sound and coherent policies and delivering these policies and policy related messages 
to the markets within the context of maximum transparency and timeliness. 
All these components contribute to financial security and in turn enhance the financial stability in the 
system, accommodating policy makers’ further decisions. Actually, financial security and stability are 
so much interrelated that one could easily argue that the stability is also a prerequisite for the security 
in the system or vice-versa. 
Lastly, financial security and thus, stability contributes to the health of the financial systems, efficient 
allocation of resources and effective management and distribution of risks in the economy. Maintaining 
and safeguarding financial stability is a must for the authorities of every country not only to have a 
sound national financial system but also to contribute to the overall soundness of the world financial 
markets. Policy coordination between institutions on international and national levels will certainly be 
the most important aspect of this dynamic process. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 3
