Kazumasa Iwata: The current state of the Japanese economy and its outlook 
Excerpt of a speech by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
Business Leaders, Niigata, 7 March 2007. 
 Introduction 
Today, as a representative of the Bank of Japan, I am pleased to have this opportunity to present the 
Bank's view on the current state of the Japanese economy and its outlook. I would also like to explain 
the Bank's decision to raise the policy interest rate at its Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) in February 
as well as the thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. 
Overseas economic and financial developments 
I. 
Let me start with overseas economies. In the United States, the economy expanded at an annual rate 
of 2.0-2.5 percent over the last three quarters with housing investment continuing to cool significantly. 
However, spillover effects from the housing adjustments have been limited, and private consumption 
has  continued  to  show  solid  growth.  As  for  price  developments,  the  rates  of  increase  in  the  core 
consumer price index (CPI) and in the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator have 
been at relatively high levels. 
Both  upside  and  downside  risks  currently  coexist  in  the  U.S.  economy,  surrounding  the  inflation 
situation  and  the  economic  growth  rate,  respectively.  Nevertheless,  given  the  robustness  and  the 
flexibility of the economy it is likely to avoid a significant slowdown in the growth rate and to realize a 
soft landing, returning to its potential growth path from the current 2.0-2.5 percent by late 2007, with a 
gradual decline in the rate of inflation. In the euro area, economic recovery continues to be solid, while 
in China and India strong expansion is continuing on the back of growth in demand both at home and 
abroad. Overseas economies taken as a whole continue to exhibit strong growth. At the G-7 meeting 
held  about  a  month  ago,  there  was  a  consensus  view  that  the  world  economy  is  likely  to  keep 
expanding with more balanced growth. 
Turning  to  global  financial  markets,  a  plunge  in  the  Chinese  stock  market  at  the  end  of  February 
resulted  in  large  fluctuations  in  stock  prices  worldwide  and  higher  volatility  in  asset  prices.  Up  until 
then, volatility in asset prices had been very low internationally, resulting in tighter credit spreads and 
smaller term premiums. With investors appearing "overly complacent" about asset price changes and 
various other risks, a situation developed in which investors focusing on the interest rate differential 
between  Japan  and  abroad  favored  the  yen  carry  trade.  Recently,  however,  there  has  been  some 
unwinding  of  this  trade.  Although  these  adjustments  seem  so  far  to  have  been  limited  basically  to 
technical corrections in position-taking by those who felt overexposed, careful attention should be paid 
to  whether  the  higher  volatility  in  asset prices  may have  some  implications  for  investors' risk-taking 
behavior in the future. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
II. 
Against  the  background  of  the  strong  growth  in  overseas  economies,  Japan's  economy  has  been 
experiencing a sustained period of moderate expansion. The economy maintained a rate of growth of 
about 2 percent from fiscal 2003 to fiscal 2006, a pace which it seems likely to sustain during fiscal 
2007. 
Slow permeation of strength in the corporate sector through to the household sector 
A. 
The  current  economic  expansion  is  now  six  years  old,  but  partly  because  of  the  gradual  pace  of 
growth, it is not making itself felt by households to the same extent as in past economic expansions. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 1
In the corporate sector, however, corporate profits have been favorable and business fixed investment 
is  growing  at  a  rapid  pace,  especially  among  manufacturers.  Corporate  profits  and  business  fixed 
investment  are  expected  to  keep  increasing  steadily,  and  this  suggests  that  the  engine  of  the 
economic expansion remains intact. 
Despite  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector,  the  pace  at  which  this  positive  influence  has  filtered 
through  into  the  household  sector  has  been  slow.  Faced  with  intensifying  global  competition  and 
greater exposure to the discipline of the capital market, corporate management has been increasing 
the emphasis it places on raising profitability. 
Reflecting  these  factors,  growth  of  wages  has  been  modest.  Especially  since  summer  2006,  the 
effects of the baby-boomers' retirement and of cuts in personnel expenses for local civil workers are 
exerting additional downward pressure on the growth of wages per person.1
 The modest increase in 
wages seems also due to management's greater efforts to reduce fixed costs to cope with sharp rises 
in prices of crude oil and other materials from 2004 through fall 2006, and employees' preference for 
employment  stability  over  a  wage  increase  after  their  past  experiences  of  a  severe  employment 
situation. 
With regard to the employment situation, the number of employees has continued to increase steadily 
at an annualized rate of slightly over 1 percent, and labor market conditions are gradually becoming 
tighter. The unemployment rate for women was 3.8 percent in January 2007, lower than that for men 
(4.1 percent), and women's wages have been increasing steadily since 2005. Hourly wages for part-
time workers have posted year-on-year increases since 2003, and the rate of increase rose gradually 
through 2006. Looking forward, wages, including those for men, are expected to rise steadily as labor 
market conditions become increasingly tight. 
With the number of employees increasing steadily, household income has continued rising moderately 
and private consumption has been firm. A more distinct upward momentum in private consumption is 
likely  to  emerge  as  the  adverse  effects  from  temporary  factors  --  such  as  last  year's  weather 
conditions (a long spell of rainy weather in early summer as well as the unseasonably warm winter 
weather) and consumers' reluctance to buy before the introduction of new products -- fade and wages 
resume their upward trend reflecting improved labor market conditions. 
Production and inventory adjustments 
B. 
Production exhibited high quarter-on-quarter growth of 2.6 percent in the October-December quarter of 
2006, but a downward reaction to this high growth coupled with adjustments in the IT-related sector 
will likely suppress growth in the January-March quarter of 2007. Unlike inventory adjustments in IT-
related goods during 2002-03 and 2004-05, adjustments this time seem largely due to weaker-than-
expected demand for cellular phones and new game consoles, although the impact of the introduction 
of a new personal computer operating system has still to be fully ascertained. 
Developments in consumer prices 
C. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was flat in January, and depending 
on developments in crude oil prices and foreign exchange rates, it may turn slightly negative in the 
short  term.  From  a  longer-term  perspective,  however,  consumer  prices  are  expected,  over  time,  to 
display trend increases given that the economy has expanded at an annual rate of around 2 percent 
over  the  last  four  years  and  that  the  expansion  is  expected  to  be  long-lasting.  With  the  continuing 
economic expansion, the utilization rates of production capacity and of labor have been rising steadily, 
and  they  are  expected  to  increase  further.  As  the  recent  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan) indicates, corporate managers are increasingly feeling shortages of production 
capacity and labor, while a positive output gap suggests that demand currently exceeds supply in the 
economy as a whole. 
Since autumn last year, upward movement in the CPI has been subdued partly because of sluggish 
growth  in  private  consumption  and  wages.  However,  the  CPI  is  expected  to  resume  a  moderate 
upward trend as the effects of the drop in crude oil prices fade out. When considering the effects of the 
                                                      
1  
The modest growth of wages, despite increased demand for labor, can be attributed to the flexibility of the labor supply, 
witnessed for example in an increase in the rate of femaleparticipation in the labor force.
2 
 BIS Review 32/2007
fall in crude oil prices, we should note the consequential improvement in Japan's terms of trade and 
concomitant decrease in the amount of wealth transferred to oil-producing countries, which will boost 
private consumption in Japan by improving households' real income through higher corporate profits 
and lower prices.2
Decision at the MPM in February 
III. 
Based on the "New Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy" announced in March 2006, the 
Bank examines future risks from two perspectives. 
The  first  perspective  examines  the  prospects  as well  as  risks  for the  economy  and  prices  basically 
within a projection period of one and a half to two years. At the MPM held in February, it was judged 
that Japan's economy "is likely to continue its moderate expansion with a virtuous circle of production, 
income, and spending in place." It was also judged that although the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI (excluding fresh food) may register around zero in the short run, depending, for example, on 
developments  in  the  prices  of  crude  oil,  it  is  likely  to  "increase  as  a  trend"  given  the  expected 
continuation of the economic expansion. 
The second perspective extends the horizon beyond that of the above forecasting period and takes 
into account various risks that would significantly impact the economy should they materialize, even 
though the probability of such materialization may be low. At the February MPM, it was noted that "[i]f 
expectation takes hold . . . that interest rates will remain low for a long time regardless of economic 
activity  and  prices,  there  is  a  possibility  that  sustained  economic  growth  will  be  hampered  by 
misallocation of funds and resources through excess financial and economic activities." 
Based on its assessments from these two perspectives, the Bank has decided to change the guideline 
for its money market operations so as to encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain 
at  around  0.5  percent.  At  the  same  time,  the  basic  loan  rate  applicable  under  the  complementary 
lending facility (the standby lending facility through which the Bank will extend a loan at the request of 
a counterparty up to an amount not exceeding the value of that counterparty's collateral) was set at 
0.75  percent.  With  respect  to  the  outright  purchases  of  long-term  interest-bearing  Japanese 
government  bonds,  the  Bank  has  decided  that  purchases  will  continue  at  the  current  amount  and 
frequency for some time.  
With  regard  to  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  stated  that  it  will  adjust  the  level  of 
interest rates gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and prices, while maintaining 
the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates for some time. 
Thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy 
IV. 
It takes quite a while for the effects of a monetary policy change to filter through to the economy and 
prices.  Because  of  the  long  and  variable  lag  length,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  needs  to  be 
forward looking, based on the outlook for the economy and prices over a sufficiently long term. 
The Bank releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report) semiannually, in 
which  it  describes  its  forecast  for  the  economy  and  prices  over  a  horizon  of  one  and  a  half  to  two 
years.  The  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  based  on  this  forecast.  It  has  become  a  common 
practice among central banks to conduct monetary policy based on published forecasts for economic 
activity and prices. 
The key point of a "forward-looking policy framework" is to conduct policy on the basis of a forecast of 
the  most  likely  outlook  for  the  economy  and  prices,  as  well  as  identification  of  the  accompanying 
upside and downside risks, by conducting a careful analysis of incoming indicators and other relevant 
data. Especially in cases where the implications of the available data are mixed, the accuracy of the 
                                                      
2   The  significance  of  the  transfer  of  wealth  to  oil-producing  countries  can  be  approximated  by  the  difference  between  the 
growth rate of the GDP deflator and that of the domestic demand deflator. Based on this estimation, the transfer of wealth 
accounted for on average about 0.7 percent of nominal GDP from 2004 through 2006. If this wealth were not transferred to 
oil-producing countries but instead spent in Japanese markets, it could be expected to deliver a positive fillip to the growth of 
domestic demand. For details, see K. Hamada and K. Iwata, "National Income, Terms of Trade and Economic Welfare," 
Economic Journal, Vol. 94, December 1984.  
BIS Review 32/2007 
 3
forecast  should  be  carefully  examined  in  making  policy  decisions.  Coming  to  a  decision  through 
painstaking examination of the available economic data and other relevant information, therefore, is 
the basis of forward-looking monetary policy. Arguments that treat the assessment of available data 
and the conduct of forward-looking monetary policy independently of each other are incompatible with 
the basic reasoning behind the Bank's new policy framework. 
Reviewing  the  forecasts  presented  in  the  October  Outlook  Report  in  January,  it  was  judged  that 
Japan's  economy  and  prices  had  so  far  deviated  slightly  below  the  outlook  forecasts,  but  that 
economic expansion was likely to continue under price stability. Although at the January MPM many 
members said that they were not confident enough about the outlook to prescribe a policy change, at 
the  February  MPM,  after  examining  all  available  data,  most  Policy  Board  members  were  able  to 
reaffirm that the virtuous circle of production, income, and spending remained intact. This increased 
their confidence in the outlook for economic activity and prices, and therefore the decision to raise the 
target rate was taken. 
In the "New Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," it is stated that Policy Board members 
will conduct monetary policy in the light of their understanding of what constitutes medium- to long-
term price stability. Taking account of the actual measurement bias in the CPI and Japan's history of 
low  inflation,  an  approximate  range  between  0  and  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI  is  generally  consistent  with  the  individual  distributions  given  by  Policy  Board 
members  to  describe  their  own  understandings  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability.3  The  range 
includes  0  percent,  but  this  does not mean  that  the  Bank  is conducting  monetary  policy  to  achieve 
zero percent inflation. On the contrary, it should be noted that most Policy Board members' median 
figures fell on one side or the other of 1 percent. 
As I have stated earlier, the rate of change in the CPI may temporarily be around zero or even slightly 
negative in the short run depending on developments in the prices of crude oil. Also, it is possible that 
the sensitivity of prices to higher rates of domestic resource utilization may have been reduced due to 
the  progress  of  economic  globalization.  Meanwhile,  a  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  may  contribute  to  the 
continuing  economic  expansion,  since  it  would  improve  Japan's  terms  of  trade,  thus  boosting  real 
wages and private consumption. 
What is important in terms of the forward-looking monetary policy is the basic trend of inflation. Under 
the  assumption  that  overseas  economies  are  to  continue  their  expansion  and  that  the  growth 
mechanism underpinning the domestic economy is firmly maintained, trend increases in the CPI are 
likely to take hold in the long run, as the influence of declining crude oil prices fades. In any event, it is 
important to make an effort to achieve price stability in the medium to long term based not on short-
term fluctuations in prices but on forecasts for the economy and prices from a sufficiently long-term 
perspective. 
There has been criticism that dialogue between the Bank and financial markets has not been smooth. 
Central banks need to carefully explain to market participants and the public the basic thinking behind 
their monetary policy conduct and their assessment of the economic and financial situation. Through 
careful explanation of these two points, not only will the transparency of monetary policy conduct be 
ensured but the effectiveness of the policy will be enhanced.4
Market participants form expectations regarding future interest rates by adjusting their views on the 
economy  and  prices  on  the  basis  of  information  provided  by  the  central  bank.  Meanwhile,  central 
banks  deduce  market  participants'  views  on  the  economy  and  prices  from  movements  in  market 
                                                      
3  
It  is  important  for  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability"  to  become  common  knowledge  among 
market participants as well as among Policy Board members, and be a focal point in terms of communication policy, as 
this will in turn facilitate consensus-building among the public. For more details,  see K. Iwata and M. Fukao, "Keizai 
Seido no Kokusaiteki Chosei (International Adjustment of Economic Systems)," Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc., 1995. 
 
4  
4 
 On the subject of the Bank of England's policy regarding communication between itself and financial markets, Governor 
Mervyn King, in his speech, said that central banks should provide markets with two key pieces of information -- the 
objective of monetary policy and the central banks' analysis of and outlook for the economy -- to facilitate the formation 
of market expectations regarding the path of future policy rates. However, he disapproved of providing direct hints about 
the path of interest rates, since the results of specific policy decisions regarding interest rates remain unknown until after 
voting within the policy committee has taken place. For details, please refer to the speech by Mervyn King, Governor of 
the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor's Banquet for bankers and merchants of the City of London at the Mansion 
House on June 21 2006.
BIS Review 32/2007
interest rates or shifts in the yield curve. Dialogue with markets thus constitutes a two-way exchange 
of  information.  The  key  point  here  is  that  central  banks  provide  information  concerning  the  basic 
direction of monetary policy but do not specify the timing of an actual policy change. 
At an MPM, the Policy Board members discuss the current and future state of the economy and prices 
based on the latest data and information to have become available by the time of the meeting. It is 
therefore impossible to inform markets of the timing of the policy change in advance. Even if it were 
possible to do so, the result would be to deprive the Bank of the benefit of information that it could 
have gleaned from markets. It is desirable that dialogue between the Bank and markets be left to take 
place as free as possible from noise and distortion. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 5
