Ric Battellino: The strength of the Australian economy and financial 
markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Launch of the 2007 Australian Financial Markets Report and the Invest Australia Gold Book, 
Sydney, 19 September 2007. 
 It’s a pleasure to take part in the launch of these two reports that highlight the strength of the 
Australian economy and financial markets.  
I  would  like  to  congratulate  Invest  Australia,  the  ASX  and  AFMA  for  putting  together  such 
comprehensive and informative documents. They are of immense benefit not only to market 
participants and foreign firms looking to enter the Australian market, but also to regulators, 
academics and students.  
I would also like to congratulate the three organisations more generally for the excellent job 
they do in supporting, promoting and helping to regulate Australian financial markets. This is 
important work because finance makes such a vital contribution to the Australian economy, 
not only directly, but also through its role in supporting other sectors of the economy.  
As  noted  in  the  Invest  Australia  report,  Australia  has  had  an  extended  period  of  strong 
economic growth, which is about to head into its seventeenth year. Even if we take just the 
past decade, real GDP has grown by a cumulative 40 per cent and nominal GDP has grown 
by 90 per cent.  
Financial  markets  have  exhibited  even  faster  growth  over  this  period.  The  value  of 
companies listed on the ASX has grown by 275 per cent, and the value of debt securities on 
issue in Australia has increased by 170 per cent.  
The growth of turnover in financial markets has been even more dramatic, increasing by 290 
per cent over the decade. So while the nominal economy has almost doubled in size over the 
past ten years, turnover in financial markets has almost quadrupled.  
The remarkable thing is that the pace of growth shows no sign of slowing.  
The  members  of  the  Campbell  Inquiry,  who  helped  set  Australia  on  the  path  of  financial 
deregulation and market development, would I think be very pleased at the way the financial 
system has evolved over the ensuing 25 years or so.  
The previous speakers have outlined the highlights of the reports being launched today, so I 
won’t repeat them. Rather, what I would like to do is take a step back from the impressive 
figures contained in those reports, and consider two questions:  
• 
why  do  financial  markets  and  market  turnover  consistently  grow  faster  than  the 
economy as whole? and  
what does all this increase in financial activity mean for the real economy?  
 Turnover and GDP  
Let me start with the first question.  
Financial  markets  play  an  important  role  in  mobilising  savings  and  allocating  them  to  the 
most  productive  investment  opportunities.  There  are  therefore  strong  links  from  financial 
markets to the economy. The Australian economy would not have been able to record the 
strong growth that it has if there had not been such a strong expansion in financial markets. 
Of  course,  the  links  between  markets  and  the  economy  also  run  strongly  in  the  other 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 1
direction:  without  strong  economic  growth,  we  would  not  have  seen  financial  markets 
develop as they have.  
Even acknowledging these strong two-way links, however, we are still left with the question 
of why financial activity consistently rises faster than economic activity.  
Part of the answer is that the rapid growth in financial activity is due to rising private sector 
wealth,  as  this  also  has  been  rising  faster  than  GDP.  Over  the  past  decade,  for  example, 
household financial wealth has risen by about 170 per cent, compared with the 90 per cent 
increase in nominal GDP noted earlier. A lot of this increase in wealth has found its way into 
the  superannuation  industry,  where  it  is  professionally  managed  across  a  wide  range  of 
markets, and this no doubt has contributed to financial market activity.  
But even this rapid growth in wealth still falls short of growth in financial activity. So I don’t 
think this is the complete answer.  
The other part of the answer, I think, is innovation.  
Innovation has been a key feature of financial markets throughout the past 25 years. This 
has  increased  the  range  of  financial  products  available  to  savers  and  investors,  providing 
them with more opportunities to adjust their assets and liabilities to fit in with their risk/return 
preferences.  Often  this  has  been  done  by  breaking  down  financial  products  into  their 
component parts. A good example is the way in which derivative products have allowed the 
various risks that are inherent in financial products to be separated, so that investors need 
only take on those risks with which they are comfortable.  
One only has to look at how the variety of financial products has expanded over the years, 
and the broad range of markets that are now listed in the AFMA report, to get a feel for how 
innovative and dynamic the finance industry has been.  
This innovation has encouraged market turnover in several ways:  
• 
First, there is the new product effect. Like all new products, new financial products 
typically  experience  very  rapid  growth  in  their  early  years,  as  users  discover  their 
advantages.  
Second,  innovation  has  provided  savers  and  investors  with  more  variety,  giving 
them greater scope to adjust their portfolios.  
And  lastly,  and  perhaps  more  importantly,  innovation  has  reduced  costs,  so  the 
barriers  to  saving  and  investment,  and  to  changing  portfolio  structures,  have 
diminished.  
  What does the increase in financial activity mean?  
Let me now move to the second question.  
Financial  market  activity  is,  of  course,  not  an  end  in  itself  –  at  least  for  those  people  not 
employed in the finance sector – so the important question most people want to know is what 
this increase in financial activity means for the real economy.  
Here, I think, the answer is a very positive one.  
Vibrant,  competitive  and  innovative  financial  markets  work  to  increase  the  availability,  and 
reduce the cost, of finance.  
There are some obvious examples of how this affects our day-to-day lives.  
Take the housing market. The development of wholesale capital markets provided funding 
for non-bank lenders and allowed them to compete with deposit-taking institutions in housing 
lending. This led to a substantial reduction in interest margins on housing lending, from about 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2007
400 basis points 15 years ago to a little over 100 basis points today. This has been a very 
material benefit to Australian households.  
The  benefits  of  financial  market  development  have  not  been  restricted  to  households. 
Interest margins and the cost of borrowing have also come down for businesses, as financial 
intermediaries  have  competed  with  capital  markets  in  meeting  businesses’  funding  needs. 
Fifteen  years  ago,  the  average  interest  margin  on  business  loans  was  570  basis  points; 
today it is only 135 points.  
In short, the trading and innovation that we see in financial markets eventually flows through 
to reduced costs for the users of financial services. This has meant that the amount spent by 
households and businesses on financial services has grown much less than financial activity. 
For example, even though financial activity has risen by a factor of several times GDP over 
the past decade, the finance and insurance sector’s share of national income has risen only 
slightly, from around 5½ per cent to around 7 per cent.  
Financial  innovation  has  also  allowed  households  and  businesses  to  reduce  risks.  Firms 
have  been  better  able  to  structure  their  financing  to  suit  the  characteristics  of  their 
businesses and to manage the risks associated with their revenue flows. Foreign exchange 
and  commodity  derivatives  are  good  examples  of  innovations  that  have  helped  many 
Australian companies in this regard.  
The overall effect of all this has been to make the economy more resilient and stable. The 
ability of the Australian economy to come through the Asian financial crisis largely unscathed 
owed importantly to the fact that Australian firms and financial institutions had been able to 
hedge a lot of the risks that caused so much damage elsewhere in Asia.  
The  diversity  and  depth  of  Australian  markets,  by  ensuring  that  avenues  of  financing  are 
always available, also add to the resilience of the economy.  
I  would  also  give  some  credit  to  the  financial  sector  for  contributing  to  the  reduction  in 
inflation  volatility  we  have  seen  over  the  past  15  years.  Part  of  this  can  be  traced  to  the 
reduced pass-through to inflation of changes in the exchange rate, which, in turn, has been 
partly attributable to the increased use of exchange rate hedging by firms.  
Conclusion  
So let me end by saying that it is clear that the growth of financial markets and the growth of 
the economy are closely intertwined. Financial markets need a strong economy to thrive, and 
the economy needs strong, vibrant and well-regulated markets if it is to continue to expand.  
I think that it is fair to conclude that Australia to date has been well served by its financial 
markets, and I would encourage you to continue to work to maintain these high standards. 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 3
