Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan Islamic banking – past, present and future 
outlook 
Keynote address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at Dawn 
Asia Finance Conference, Karachi, 11 September 2007. 
 Introduction 
A.  
Islamic  finance  has  gripped  the  world  with  a  strong  fervor  and  passion.  Interest  in  this 
discipline  has  proliferated  to  almost  60  countries,  going  beyond  the  Islamic  world  to  the 
leading global financial centers. For quite sometime, United Kingdom has adopted an open 
door  policy  and  provided  a  level  playing  field  to  Islamic  finance  and  now  Singapore  is 
following its lead. Every day, Islamic finance is breaking new boundaries and new frontiers. 
Leading Islamic banks have fast spread their network from home base to develop a regional 
and global reach. Some of the Middle East banks are now entering into African and Central 
Asian markets and are sizing up Australian financial market.  
Motivation and renewed interest in Islamic finance industry stems from its strong economic, 
financial  and  social  considerations,  backed  by  its  unique  features.  Most  significant  is  its 
appeal  to  add  to  financial  diversity  and  innovation  being  skewed  towards  (i)  asset  backed 
and equity based transactions, which promote entrepreneur friendliness and consideration of 
project viability; (ii) equitable distribution of risks and rewards among the stakeholders; and 
(iii)  inculcating  market  discipline  and  higher  ethical  standards  given  its  emphasis  on  non-
exploitation and social welfare. In the wake of high Asian domestic savings rates and build 
up of the region’s foreign exchange reserves as well as oil surpluses of Middle East in the 
last few years, Islamic finance is now also emerging as a way to wealth management, both of 
richer nations and high net worth individuals.  
While the world is now recognizing the significance of Islamic finance industry, in Pakistan, 
as early as in 1948, Mr. Muhammad Ali Jinnah emphasized the virtues of Islamic principles 
and in his address at the inauguration of the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), said:  
“I shall watch with keenness the work of your Organization in evolving 
banking  practices  compatible  with 
ideas  of  social  and 
economic life. We must work our destiny in our own way and present to 
the  world  an  economic  system  based  on  true  Islamic  concept  of 
equality of manhood and social justice1.” 
Islamic 
Historical context of Pakistan’s Islamic finance 
B. 
Pakistan  has  a  protracted  history  of  Islamic  banking  with  the  initial  attempt  to  Islamize 
banking  system  in  1980s2,  leading  to  sweeping  changes  in  the  Banking  Companies 
Ordinance,  1962  (BCO’62)  and  associated  laws  and  regulations  to  accommodate  non-
interest  based  banking  transactions.  Some  specific  developments  around  this  period  are 
noteworthy: 
i. 
In 1979, two Government-owned mutual funds in Pakistan, the NIT and ICP, started 
to eliminate interest from their operations by eschewing investment of their funds in 
                                                 
1   Quaid-e-Azam: Speech at the foundation laying stone of the State Bank of Pakistan, 1st July 1948.  
2   Aurangzeb Mehmood, “Islamisation of Economy in Pakistan: Past, Present and Future” Islamic Studies 41:4 
(2002). 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
interest bearing securities. Investor scheme of ICP was substituted as from October 
1, 1980 by a new scheme based on profit and loss sharing.  
The state-run House Building Finance Corporation (HBFC) also eliminated interest 
from its operations from July 1, 1979.  
In June 1980, legal framework was amended to permit issuance of a new, interest-
free instrument of corporate financing called Participation Term Certificate (PTC).  
A  new  law,  namely,  the  Modaraba  Companies  and  Modarabas  Ordinance,  1980 
along with the Modaraba Companies and Modaraba Rules, 1981 was promulgated 
to  introduce  modarabas,  as  a  two-tier  fund  structure,  for  undertaking  Shariah 
compliant businesses.  
In 1984, the Banking and Financial Services Ordinance, 1984 amended seven laws 
and Banking Tribunals Ordinance, 1984 provided a new system of recovery of non-
interest based modes of financing.  
From January 1, 1981, separate interest-free counters started operations in all the 
nationalized commercial banks to mobilize deposits on profit and loss sharing basis. 
Concurrently,  banks  were  prohibited  from  specified  interest  based  transactions, 
which resulted in development of Islamic modes of financing. 
Finally, SBP issued BCD Circular No. 13 of 1984 that called for elimination of Riba 
from  the  banking  system  and  in  January  1,  1985  all  financing  to  Federal  and 
Provincial Governments, public sector corporations and public or private joint stock 
companies was directed to be only through interest-free modes.  
From July 1, 1985 all commercial banking in Pak Rupees was made interest free.3 
Resultantly,  profit  and  loss  sharing  (PLS)  deposits,  as  a  percentage  of  total 
deposits, rose from 9.2% at the end of 1981 to 61.6% by end of 1985.  
These  measures  resulted  in  a  country-wide  roll  out  of  Islamic  banking.  However,  the 
premature and sudden conversion of banking system to Islamic system coupled with the lack 
of preparedness and understanding among financial institutions and public posed difficultly in 
implementation.  The  Federal  Shariat  Court  challenged  some  emerging  products  and 
processes and declared them un-Islamic. The Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court 
upheld the decision of the Federal Shariat Court and offered guidelines to address the issues 
involved, setting a timeline for implementation. This decision was later set aside in a review 
petition filed by the United Bank.  
Current state of industry 
C. 
Some key lessons emerge from Pakistan’s experience of 1980s. Firstly, it is prudent to allow 
industry to adopt an evolutionary process, rather than adopting a revolutionary approach, in 
order  to  nurture  acceptability  and  development  of  Islamic  finance  industry.  Secondly, 
flexibility  rather  than  rigidity  allows  for  effective  accommodation  of  changing  needs  of  a 
dynamic  market.  Thirdly,  the  markets  and  customers  must  have  confidence  in  Shariah 
compliance  by  the  Islamic  finance  industry  to  ensure  sanctity  of  the  system.  Lastly,  all 
stakeholders  involved,  including  the  regulators  and  the  industry,  have  to  be  properly 
equipped and prepared for the eventual launch of a new system.  
Valuable experience and lessons learned by the policy makers and the industry helped in the 
re-launch  of  Islamic  banking  in  Pakistan  in  1990s.  In  recent  years,  a  notable  element  of 
SBP’s financial sector strategy was the introduction of Islamic Banking Policy in December 
2001. Under this policy, Islamic banking is being promoted in parallel to the development of 
                                                 
3 
 Mohsin S. Khan and Abbas Mirakhor: Islamic Banking, Experiences in Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan.  
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
conventional finance industry in an integrated, gradual and steady manner. SBP has been 
issuing licenses for Islamic banking to stand alone Islamic banks and Al-Meezan Investment 
Bank, which had been functioning as an Islamic Investment Bank, became the first Islamic 
bank of the country upon award of Islamic banking license by SBP. In addition, SBP allows 
conventional  banks  to  set  up  Islamic  banking  subsidiaries  or  dedicated  Islamic  banking 
branches to offer range of financial services.  
SBP  has  put  into  place  a  comprehensive  and  robust  multi-tiered  Shariah  compliance 
mechanism  to  lend  customers  and  investors  confidence  in  the  Islamic  banking  industry. 
Shariah  compliance  mechanism  has  three  main  pillars:  (i)  a  Shariah  Board  at  SBP  which 
approves  policies  and  guidelines  as  well  as  the  fit  and  proper  criteria  for  Advisors;4  (ii) 
Shariah  Advisors  in  all  banks  to  provide  guidance  to  banks  and  comfort  to  customers  on 
Islamic financial services; and (iii) a Shariah audit system.  
SBP  has  introduced  nine  model  agreements  and  contracts  for  major  Islamic  modes  of 
financing  and  Shariah  audit  guidelines  for  banks,  after  vetting  and  approval  of  the  SBP 
Shariah  Board.  Work  is  underway  on  three  more  model  contracts,  namely,  Diminishing 
Musharaka, Istijrar and Wakalah. Shariah compliance inspection of Islamic banks will start 
this  year  and  will  cover  a  review  of  the  Islamic  banks’  arrangements  and  operations,  their 
services  and  products,  financial  statements  and  accounting  records  to  ensure  that  all 
transactions are being carried out in accordance with the injunctions of Shariah.  
Backed  by  this  elaborate  structure,  today  6  full  fledged  Islamic  banks  (IBs)  and  13 
conventional banks offer a network of around 170 branches. Total assets of Islamic banks 
are close to Rs135 billion5 while Islamic deposits and financings stand at 2.9% and 2.4 % of 
market share respectively.  
Future strategy and outlook 
D. 
While the number and operations of Islamic banks are fast expanding, this segment of the 
market is still small relative to the appetite for Islamic finance. Pakistan, in light of its past 
experience,  is  launching  a  gradual  and  steady  approach  to  Islamic  banking.  Despite  rapid 
expansion in industry, the share of Islamic banking in the total banking system is a modest 
3.2%.  Moreover,  it  only  caters  for  around  23,000  borrowers  through  around  170  branches 
relative  to  the  country-wide  5  million  borrowers  (or  4.8  million  excluding  microfinance 
borrowers) tapped through 7,700 branches by conventional banks. Financing and investment 
levels  of  Islamic  banks  barely  range  around  Rs77  billion,  which  is  below  3%  of  the  total 
banking system’s advances6. On the product side, Islamic banks so far offer about 75% of 
products  currently  available  in  conventional  banking  while  clean  lending  for  consumer 
financing products, like personal loans and credit cards, still pose a challenge. Islamic banks 
operate exclusively in large cities with some now venturing into secondary cities but they are 
absent from rural areas where there is great potential for business growth. 
Global interest in Islamic finance industry and Pakistan’s success in laying basic foundation 
and  core  infrastructure  of  Islamic  financial  system  lends  confidence  that  the  country  has 
                                                 
4   Further, it has also been specified that a Shariah Advisor shall not hold any executive/non-executive position 
in any other financial institution, except working as Shariah Advisor of Islamic mutual funds of the same IBI. 
Needless to mention that, Shariah Advisors of IBIs are also prevented from having any substantial interest in 
or  becoming  employees  of  same  types  of  organizations  like  Exchange  Companies,  Corporate  Brokerage 
Houses or Stock Exchange. These provisions in the Fit and Proper Criteria for Shariah Advisors have ensured 
objectivity in evaluation criteria, minimization of conflict of interest and induction of new lot of Shariah advisors 
in the market. 
5   As on End March 2007 
6   End March 2007 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
good  potential  and  prospects  to  further  exploit  this  industry.  Going  forward,  however,  it  is 
important that Pakistan adopts a more calibrated and coordinated approach and strategy for 
the development of Islamic finance industry. In designing this strategy, Pakistan will conform 
to  the  standards  being  promoted  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  –  the 
sixteen member Council of Governors of Central banks with several associate and affiliate 
members – whose chairpersonship Pakistan assumes effective January 2008.  
The  goal  and  objectives  of  the  forward  looking  strategy  should  be  to  offer  an  alternative 
avenue of financial intermediation, which is competitive and promotes efficient allocation of 
resources in an equitable manner. Strategy should aim to supplement conventional banking 
industry’s efforts to broaden and deepen the process of financial intermediation and financial 
penetration. Islamic banking can serve as a key vehicle to improve and strength the access 
to  development  finance  by  bringing  in  financial  innovation  that  can  cater  adequately  to 
diverse demands of the population as well as corporate sector’s and country’s infrastructure 
financing  requirements,  while  ensuring  that  it  nurtures  faith  based  system  of  financing 
consistent with the Shariah principles.  
Major elements of this strategy would require both industry and SBP to closely work together 
on multiple fronts. Some of the key areas of focus include: 
Aggressive deposit mobilization to augment domestic financial savings of the country. 
Although  late  starter,  Islamic  banks  have  phenomenal  potential  to  exploit  resource 
mobilization.  Substantial  savings  have  still  not  been  channeled  into  the  financial  system 
because  of  reservations  relating  to  interest  based  system  or  return  deficiencies  of  the 
conventional  system.  Islamic  banks,  besides  catering  to  the  needs  of  small  depositors 
through profit and loss sharing basic accounts with no charges, need to tap high net worth 
investors  and  companies  which  are  increasingly  being  driven  to  the  attractive  options  and 
returns  being  offered  by  more  innovative  players  worldwide.  Fast  adaptation  of  these 
practices  by  the  Islamic  finance  industry  will  be  helpful  in  competing  more  effectively  with 
conventional  banks  in  raising  deposits.  Resource  mobilization  is  critical  for  Islamic  finance 
industry to grow effectively and meet the alternative requirements of economy and society.  
Diversification and innovation of financial structures. This would involve either applying 
innovative  Islamic  products  on  a  stand  alone  basis  or  applying  a  combination  of  Islamic 
instruments to suit project finance needs. In attempting the latter, it needs to be ensured that 
vanilla  Islamic  products  such  as  Murabaha,  Ijara  and  diminishing  Musharaka  etc.  are 
implemented  with  their  necessary  preconditions,  consistent  with  Shariah  principles,  to 
promote  modes  that  can  be  used  to  finance  commercial  and  project  finance  activity.  This 
would require greater reliance on equity based financing, given that it is akin to participation 
and risk sharing consistent with infrastructure financing requirements and Islamic principles. 
At the same time, it requires financial engineering, flexibility in the evolving Sahriah system 
and  alliance  both  among  domestic  and  with  the  bigger  global  players  (such  as  Standard 
Chartered,  HSBC,  UBS,  Citibank  etc.)  to  diversify  Islamic  financial  structured  products  to 
support  project  finance  in  addition  to  associated  real  estate,  shipping,  trade,  and  aircraft 
financing.  
Islamic financing products/structures are now quite common in Middle East and Saudi Arabia 
and have gained ground in non-Muslim countries too. In most cases it has to be recognized 
that Islamic financing is incorporated within a multi-sourced project financing offering, along 
side  the  conventional  project  financing  structures  backed  with  or  without  supportive  credit 
enhancement  or  export  credit  agencies  financing.  The  Islamic  financing  element  of  the 
project  is  provided  pari  passu  with  the  other  senior  debt.  Istisna’s  and  variant  structure  of 
Ijara  are  frequent  products  used.  If  required,  there  should  be  standard  legal  structure  for 
establishing and operating with ease Islamic SPV as the financing vehicle. Islamic finance 
tranches are known to offer additional benefit of competitive pricing and tenor.  
There  should  be  harmonization  of  these  alternate  and  multi-financing  legal  and  regulatory 
structures  and  appreciation  that  conventional  project  financing  documentation  could  be 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
acceptable  to  different  Shariah  Boards/Committees.  Pakistan  has  been  exposed  to  these 
structures,  given  its  earlier  experience  with  the  Hub  River  project,  which  in  early  1990s 
incorporated Islamic Tranche of Istisna, and more of such recent deals. In designing such 
structures there has to be more tolerance among participants to: 
• 
integrate Islamic and conventional funds to allow co-financed projects with different 
players;  
accept ownership risks (since in all Islamic transactions, lender is at some stage the 
owner  of  financed  goods)  but  with  comfort  of  clarity  of  legal  issues  surrounding 
ownership;  
ensure proper tax treatment of the proposed Islamic financing structures, avoiding 
adverse  treatment  relative  to  conventional  borrowing,  e.g.  often  profit  participating 
payments are subject to tax while interest payments on loans are tax deductible;  
ensure flexibility in selection of assets for Islamic tranche;  
understand issues surrounding asset risks; and 
provide  for  payment  of  insurance  and  maintenance  expenses  for  Islamic  financed 
assets etc.  
   Extend  the  outreach  of  financial  services  in  a  holistic  manner  with  focus  on 
underserved regions and poor and vulnerable groups. Islamic banks will be allowed to 
pursue their plans for branch expansion as long as Islamic banks, like conventional banks, 
open at least 20% of new bank branches in rural areas. Conventional banks will have the 
option  to  seek  partial  or  full  conversion  to  Islamic  banks.  Microfinance  banks  are  to  be 
allowed to set up special windows or dedicated branches for Islamic Microfinance operations 
and  licenses  will  be  given  to  dedicated  Islamic  Microfinance  banks.  Guidelines  have  been 
already issued to promote Islamic Microfinance industry. Similar initiatives will be launched to 
issue guidelines for promoting SME, Agriculture and Infrastructure financing.  
Promote  financial  industry  diversification  by  requiring  that,  in  tandem  with  Islamic 
banking, there is adequate development in Islamic capital markets, which so far has lagged 
behind the banking sector.  
Enhance  understanding  and  capacities  of  Islamic  Banking  Risk  Management.  Risk 
magnifies  in  Islamic  banking,  considering  that  banks  and  customers  operate  on  profit  and 
loss  sharing  mechanism.  Because  of  this  participatory  risk  relationship,  the  financial 
institution may not be exposed to traditional credit risk associated with conventional banking 
but more to risks associated with assets financed and off-balance sheet risk linked with the 
transfer of assets and its management as well as any volatility in the values of underlying 
assets. In structuring new products, there is need for institutions to factor in appropriate risks 
of  real  commodities,  properties  and  equipment  being  financed  with  proper  risk  mitigation 
management and techniques. The strategy has to recognize the risk associated with Islamic 
banking and as such it has to include appropriate mechanisms and approaches to mitigate 
these.  
Promote  development  of  liquidity  management  instruments  to  ensure  investor 
confidence while effectively managing Islamic banking system’s systemic risk. Apart 
from  Government’s  efforts  to  launch  Shariah  compliant  SLR  securities,  SBP  will  need  to 
launch Shairah compliant Treasury Bills along the lines of other central banks which have a 
range of short term securities based on sales and purchase contracts that are tradable in the 
secondary market and launch Sukuk cum Ijarah instrument proposed by the Central bank-
Islamic Industry Task Force in 2006. Islamic repos would be also need to be structured. To 
facilitate the issuance of these types of instruments, amendments will be required in SBP Act 
as well as setting aside of specific assets of public sector by the Government. Once these 
instruments  grow,  SBP  will  align  the  SLR  for  Islamic  banks  at  par  with  the  conventional 
banks’ SLR as the risk associated with Islamic banks are in some senses far greater than in 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 5
conventional banks given their reliance on equity based diversified products. Some countries 
have even considered higher SLR for Islamic banks as their inherent risks are often times 
varying in nature and far steeper.  
Promote  international  standards  and  best  practices  in  Islamic  Industry.  Aside  from 
standard application of conventional banking regulations and guidelines, Islamic banks will 
be  encouraged  to  adopt  IFSB  and  AAOIFI  (Accounting  and  Auditing  of  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions)  standards  with  appropriate  tailoring  to  suit  domestic  requirements.  SBP  is  an 
active member of these international bodies and has provided input into the technical design 
and formulation of these standards.  
Promote  good  corporate  governance  in  Islamic  banking.  Islamic  banks  must  exhibit 
unique  fiduciary  responsibilities  towards  investment  account  holders,  ensure  Shariah 
conformity and select investments that are Shariah compliant (avoiding products/businesses 
that are haram) as well as implement sound internal risk management. As such, they will be 
required to follow a distinct corporate governance framework in line with the IFSB’s Guiding 
Principles on Corporate Governance. 
Launch joint capacity building efforts for Islamic finance industry. SBP and the industry 
will  promote  capacity  building  for  greater  understanding  of  Shariah  principles,  asset  and 
liability management, and features of product structure. In addition, specialized training will 
be needed to promote smooth and effective implementation of IFSB and AAOIFI standards.  
Conclusion 
E. 
With its promising prospects and potential, Islamic banks will need to grow at least by 40-
50%  annually  to  be  able  to  raise  its  share  from  3.5%  to  about  15%  of  the  total  banking 
system.  Given  that  banking  industry  as  a  whole  has  been  growing  at  a  substantively  fast 
pace,  the  level  of  effort  required  for  Islamic  banks  would  have  to  be  steeper  to  claim  this 
share. Given the success of some countries in achieving this share for Islamic banking, it is 
important  that  concerted  efforts  are  put  in  to  propel  Islamic  banking  system  further  and 
deeper in Pakistan.  
6 
 BIS Review 106/2007
