Ric Battellino: Central bank market operations 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Retail Financial Services Forum, Sydney, 28 August 2007. 
 Central bank market operations around the world have been in the news in recent weeks, so 
I thought it might be useful to take this opportunity to run through those developments. While 
this topic may seem somewhat distant from retail financial services, there is in fact a strong 
relevance to today’s conference, because much of what central banks do in financial markets 
eventually flows through the whole financial system, including retail services. 
Background 
The Reserve Bank has been using market operations to implement monetary policy since the 
1980s.1  Essentially,  this  involves  dealing  in  markets  to  influence  the  interest  rate  on 
overnight funds in the money market – also known as the cash rate. Central banks are able 
to  closely  control  the  overnight  interest  rate  because  they  have  unlimited  ability  to  inject 
funds into, or withdraw funds from, the money market. This model for implementing monetary 
policy is now fairly standard across the developed world. 
The Reserve Bank Board sets the stance of monetary policy in terms of a target for the cash 
rate because this rate ultimately influences the broad spectrum of interest rates in the money 
and  capital  markets  and  the  interest  rates  that  intermediaries  charge  on  loans,  including 
those in the retail market. In effect, all interest rates in the financial system are determined in 
one way or another relative to the cash rate. By targeting the cash rate, central banks are 
therefore able to exert broad influence over the overall cost of credit in the economy and, in 
turn, economic activity and inflation. 
After  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  has  decided  the  target  for  the  cash  rate  each  month,  the 
Domestic Markets Department of the Bank is responsible for keeping the actual cash rate in 
the market as close as possible to the target over the ensuing inter-meeting period. A major 
determinant of the cash rate is the aggregate level of balances held by commercial banks in 
their  exchange  settlement  accounts  at  the  Reserve  Bank.  These  are  the  funds  that  banks 
rely on to meet their daily settlement obligations to each other and to the Reserve Bank. If 
banks do not have enough of these funds, they risk failing in their payments, so a shortage of 
funds  causes  banks  to  bid  more  aggressively  in  the  money  market  to  try  to  restore  their 
holdings. On the other hand, because these funds earn an interest rate that is below the rate 
that could be earned in the market (25 points below the cash rate), banks do not want to hold 
more  than  necessary.  As  such,  a  build-up  in  exchange  settlement  balances  makes  banks 
more eager to lend funds, and this pushes market interest rates down. 
The job of Domestic Markets Department is therefore to ensure that the aggregate supply of 
exchange settlement balances is sufficient for the cash market to clear each day at the target 
cash  rate.  As  can  be  seen  from  Graph  1,  the  level  of  exchange  settlement  balances 
necessary to achieve this is typically around $700-800 million. However, for various reasons, 
there  are  times  when  banks  need  more,  or  less,  cash.  In  these  cases,  the  Reserve  Bank 
responds by adjusting the amount it provides, in order to equilibrate demand and supply. It 
does this by buying securities to increase the supply of exchange settlement balances and 
selling securities to reduce the supply. These transactions may be either outright purchases 
or sales, or repurchase agreements which involve the sale of a security with an undertaking 
                                                 
1   For details of the Reserve Bank’s market operations see www.rba.gov.au/MarketOperations/. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 1
to repurchase it at a future agreed date and at an agreed price. In recent years, the Reserve 
Bank’s operations have been predominantly by way of repurchase agreements.  
Graph 1  
 It is worth noting that the range of securities that the Bank is prepared to deal in has been 
widened over the years. Ten years ago, the Bank only dealt in Commonwealth Government 
securities, but in response to the diminished supply of these securities and in recognition of 
growing  markets  in  other  securities,  the  Bank  over  the  years  has  added  semi-government 
securities, bonds issued by international organisations and Australian bank bills to the list of 
securities in which it is prepared to deal. 
International practice by central banks in this regard is quite varied: some central banks take 
a narrower range of securities than the Reserve Bank; others take a broader range. There 
has, however, been a general tendency over the years for central banks to widen the range 
of securities in which they are prepared to deal. 
Over time, the Reserve Bank has also widened the range of counterparties with which it is 
prepared  to  deal.  Currently,  it  deals  with  any  holder  of  securities  that  is  able  to  settle  its 
transactions electronically through the dedicated RITS settlement system. In this regard, the 
Reserve  Bank  is  at  the  more  liberal  end  of  the  international  spectrum.  Many  other  central 
banks limit their dealing to banks or selected groups of primary dealers. 
The daily routine in market operations is fairly straightforward. The Bank’s dealing intentions 
are  announced  at  9.30  am  each  morning,  dealing  is  completed  over  the  subsequent  half 
hour, and details of dealings are published at around 10.15 am. Second rounds of dealing 
may be undertaken later in the day if needed, but such circumstances have been rare. 
As  well  as  these  regular  operations,  the  Bank  has  put  in  place  a  standing  facility  to  allow 
market  participants  to  access  cash,  at  their  discretion,  in  unforeseen  circumstances.  This 
facility allows banks and other holders of exchange settlement accounts to borrow overnight 
on a secured basis, though at a penalty of 25 basis points over the cash rate target. Banks 
typically  use  this  facility  only  if  they  experience  some  operational  difficulty  or  miscalculate 
their daily funds flows, which is rare. 
With banks able to borrow from the Reserve Bank at their discretion at 25 points above the 
cash  rate,  and  the  Reserve  Bank  paying  interest  on  exchange  settlement  balances  at  25 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2007
points under the cash rate, the rate at which cash can trade in the market is confined to a 50 
point corridor around the target. In practice, the degree of fluctuation is much less than this. 
As shown in Graph 2, so far this year there have only been three days when the cash rate 
has deviated from the target, on each occasion by only one or two basis points.  
Graph 2  
Even though each central bank around the world has its own idiosyncratic arrangements in 
relation to market operations, the essence of the arrangements is the same. It involves the 
central bank buying and selling securities in the market to supply enough funds to banks to 
keep the actual short-term interest rate as close as possible to the target. These operations 
essentially work through the banking system and rely on banks passing on funds not only to 
each  other  but  also  to  market  participants  more  generally.  Most  of  the  time  this  works 
seamlessly, but there are times, such as the present, when it doesn’t. Let me move therefore 
to these recent events. 
 What changed in the past couple of weeks? 
The problems experienced in money markets in recent weeks had their origins in the credit 
and  market-related  losses  incurred  by  investors  who  had  bought  securities  collaterised  by 
US sub-prime mortgages. Various investment funds worldwide, including in Australia, have 
been reporting losses on these securities for some months now. Most of these have been 
hedge  funds,  and  while  the  losses  incurred  in  some  cases  have  been  severe,  these 
problems  for  quite  some  time  did  not  seem  to  have  any  significant  ramifications  more 
generally through the financial system. 
That  changed  on  9  August,  after  a  large  European  bank  announced  that  it  was  freezing 
withdrawals from three of its investment funds due to losses incurred by those funds and the 
difficulty  in  valuing  their  security  holdings.  This  seemed  to  trigger  a  shift  to  a  much  more 
risk-averse approach by money market participants in dealing with each other. 
What seemed to be worrying people was that, while the US Fed had calculated the losses in 
the  sub-prime  market  as  being  potentially  as  high  as  US$100  billion,  only  a  few  billion  of 
losses had been announced by investment funds. This naturally led market participants to 
question  who  was  sitting  on  the  prospective  losses,  and  what  this  meant  for  the 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 3
creditworthiness  of  market  counterparties.  Investors  became  much  more  risk-averse  and 
banks severely curtailed their lending to each other, causing gridlock in the money market. 
The  process  spread  quickly  because  once  banks  started  to  worry  that  others  may  stop 
lending to them, they in turn stopped lending to others. 
While there has been a widespread tightening in the availability of credit in all markets, those 
most affected have been the vehicles used by banks to invest in, or warehouse, mortgages. 
These vehicles, known variously as conduits, credit arbitrage funds or warehouses, had been 
set up by many banks around the world to finance mortgages off their balance sheets. The 
funding  came  from  the  issue  of  short-term  securities  backed  by  mortgages  –  so-called 
asset-backed commercial paper. 
Until recently, these vehicles had found it very easy and cheap to raise money. Despite the 
fact  that  hardly  a  day  went  by  without  some  respected  commentator  around  the  globe 
warning that credit risk was being under-priced, investors remained enthusiastic and credit 
spreads if anything continued to decline. For example, the yield on US 90-day asset-backed 
commercial paper for much of the past year had been similar to the overnight rate on fed 
funds. The amount of such paper issued almost doubled over the past couple of years, to 
US$1 200 billion. 
The market for asset-backed commercial paper extended well beyond the US, as banks in 
most  countries  had  set  up  these  conduit  vehicles.  Many  of  the  securities  issued  by  these 
vehicles  were  in  international  markets  with  the  funds  swapped  back  into  the  relevant 
domestic  currency.  Cross-border  flows  were  large,  creating  strong  links  between  national 
markets. 
Cross-border  links  were  also  generated  by  the  credit  lines  that  these  vehicles  had 
established  with  banks  in  the  event  that  the  commercial  paper  market  failed.  These  lines 
were  spread  across  banks  in  a  range  of  countries,  so  problems  experienced  by  a  conduit 
vehicle in one country affected banks in many countries. 
When investor attitudes to credit risk changed abruptly in early August, these links quickly 
spread the problems worldwide. Asset-backed commercial paper markets came to a virtual 
standstill,  forcing  the  bulk  of  these  conduit  vehicles  to  turn  to  the  lines  of  credit  they  had 
negotiated  with  banks.  This  in  turn  meant  that  banks  in  a  wide  range  of  countries  found 
themselves under increased funding pressure in order to meet commitments on credit lines. 
The effects on markets across countries were very similar: 
Overnight money market rates rose above the level targeted by central banks. For example, 
while the US Fed is currently targeting 5.25 per cent, the actual rate in the market rose to 6 
per cent on 9 August (Graph 3).  
4 
 BIS Review 94/2007
 Graph 3  
In  LIBOR  and  swap  markets,  which  are  further  away  from  the  direct  influence  of  central 
banks  because  they  are  more  internationally  focussed  and  have  a  greater  diversity  of 
participants, margins widened relative to cash rates (Graph 4).  
Graph 4  
 BIS Review 94/2007 
  5
Yields  on  securities  issued  by  banks,  such  as  short-term  bankers  acceptances,  rose 
noticeably. In the US they were up by 0.25 percentage points for terms of 90 days (Graph 5). 
Graph 5  
Yields on asset-backed commercial paper, which as noted had been at the same level as the 
fed funds rate for much of the past year, rose even more sharply, by about 60 basis points 
(Graph 6). More importantly, activity in this market dried up sharply, the effect being that for a 
time funding was not available at any price.  
Graph 6  
 6 
  BIS Review 94/2007
Yields on US treasury bills fell by almost 2 percentage points, to 3.25 per cent, as investors 
scrambled into secure and liquid investments (Graph 7). 
Graph 7  
There were also spillovers to other markets, including sharp falls in share prices, particularly 
for financial stocks, and some significant re-adjustment of exchange rates (Graph 8).  
Graph 8  
 BIS Review 94/2007 
  7
These were all symptoms of rising risk aversion. 
Central banks responded to this by sharply increasing the amount of funds supplied to their 
banks in the money market. Among the developed economies, the European Central Bank, 
the US Fed, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, the Swiss National Bank, the Norges 
Bank, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, as well as ourselves here in Australia, all did so to 
varying degrees. Some also took other measures. The Fed, for example, cut the penalty rate 
on its discount window from 100 points to 50 points in order to lessen the cost of emergency 
funding  to  banks.  Some  central  banks  also  widened  the  range  of  securities  in  which  they 
were prepared to deal. 
None  of  these  measures  was  intended  as  a  change  in  monetary  policy  settings  and  no 
central bank has reduced its interest rate target. Neither should these measures be seen as 
an  attempt  to  “bail  out”  banks  or  markets.  Rather,  the  measures  have  been  technical 
operations aimed at breaking up the log jams in money markets and encouraging funds to 
flow again, in order to prevent monetary conditions becoming tighter than the settings that 
had  been  determined  by  the  central  bank  monetary  policy  committees  and  boards  in  the 
various countries. 
The operations have restored some degree of calm to markets but conditions have not yet 
returned to normal. Notably, yields on asset-backed commercial paper as yet have not fallen, 
indicating a continuing high degree of nervousness among investors. 
Yields on US treasury bills have reversed some of their earlier fall, but still remain unusually 
low, again indicating a continuing strong risk aversion among investors. On the other hand, 
share markets in many countries have recovered strongly and some of the earlier exchange 
rate moves have also been largely reversed. 
The Australian situation 
Despite  the  fact  that  Australian  banks  are  in  very  sound  condition  and  have  been 
experiencing  minimal  credit  losses,  they  were  nonetheless  affected  by  the  spread  of  the 
global money market turmoil. On the morning of 10 August, banks started telling us that they 
were noticing a reduced flow of funds through the market. The cost of raising funds in global 
markets  through  swaps  had  risen  noticeably,  putting  more  pressure  on  domestic  funding 
sources. Yields on banks bills had jumped sharply overnight, and LIBOR rates by even more 
(Graph 9).  
The  Reserve  Bank  decided  to  supply  more  than  the  usual  $700-800  million  of  exchange 
settlement funds, so that the overnight interest rate would not rise above the target set by the 
Board in early August. Those operations were successful in maintaining the cash rate at the 
6.5  per  cent  target,  though  other  short-term  market  interest  rates  remained  unusually 
elevated. 
Since  then,  the  Bank  has  continued  to  supply  whatever  amounts  of  exchange  settlement 
balances were necessary to keep the cash rate at the target. In the process, balances rose 
to a peak of $5.5 billion in the middle of last week, the highest level for some years, though 
some of this has been reversed recently. The Bank also skewed its market operations more 
towards bank bills, rather than government securities, to enhance confidence in the liquidity 
of highly-rated instruments in the bill market. 
 
8 
 BIS Review 94/2007
 Graph 9  
The proportion of the Bank’s operations undertaken in bank bills has risen to around 80 per 
cent, well above the usual 30 per cent share. This has lifted the Bank’s domestic bill repo 
book from a little over $18 billion at the start of August to around $40 billion today (Graph 
10).  The  term  of  repos  has  also  been  lengthened  appreciably,  from  the  usual  average  of 
around 20 days to over 100 days, to provide greater certainty of funding (Graph 11).  
Graph 10  
  BIS Review 94/2007 
 9
Graph 11  
 These  operations  have  held  the  cash  rate  at  the  target,  and  helped  to  stabilise  market 
conditions  more  generally.  Nonetheless,  some  pressures  remain.  Yields  in  the  bill  market 
remain  somewhat  higher  than  usual  relative  to  the  cash  rate,  and  yields  on  asset-backed 
commercial  paper  even  more  so.  The  volume  of  securities  issued  has  fallen,  and  the 
maturities have shortened. Banks have switched some of the funding of their conduits from 
the asset-backed commercial paper to on-balance-sheet, where it is supported by the banks’ 
capital. This seems appropriate. 
In recent days, there have been some encouraging signs of improvement in markets, both 
here in Australia and overseas. The Bank will continue to monitor the situation carefully. If 
market  developments  warrant,  the  Bank  has  scope  to  further  expand  the  provision  of 
liquidity. These matters are being kept under review. 
10 
 BIS Review 94/2007
