Y V Reddy: Random thoughts on statistics and surveys 
Valedictory address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the SEACEN – Irving 
Fisher  Committee  –  RBI  Workshop  on  Use  of  Surveys  by  Central  Banks,  College  of  Agricultural 
Banking, Reserve Bank of India, Pune, 29 June 2007. 
 Dr. Barman, Mr. Paul Van den Bergh, Dr. Karunasena, Mr. Sandip Ghose, distinguished participants, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  thankful  to  the  organisers  for  giving  me  the  privilege  and  pleasure  of  being  with  you  at  the 
Workshop on “Use of Surveys by Central Banks”, organised jointly by the South-East Asian Central 
Banks  (SEACEN),  Irving  Fisher  Committee  (IFC)  –  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). It is a collaborative effort of several institutions and spread over many 
countries, but with a unity in purpose. Let me extend a warm welcome to all our visitors.  
I  notice  that  participants  from  the  central  banks  of  several  countries  from  Asia  and  Far  East  are 
participating  and  we  had  the  privilege  of  having  the  guest  speakers  from  the  European  and  Asian 
central banks, apart from the speakers from the RBI. The schedule of the workshop indicates that a 
wide gamut of subjects relating to surveys in central banks has been deliberated upon in the workshop 
and different country perspectives have been appreciated. The valedictory address that I have been 
called  upon  to  deliver  is  basically  in  the  form  of  sharing  some  thoughts  on  statistics  and  surveys 
considered relevant from the perspective of central banking. 
Today is the National Statistics Day, commemorating the birth of P C Mahalanobis, FRS the founder of 
Indian  Statistical  Institute,  who  had  contributed  immensely  for  the  development  of  statistics  globally 
and in particular, in India. Professor Mahalanobis was President of International Statistical Institute in 
1957, Chairman of United Nations Statistical Commission during 1954–58, and was associated with 
many  other  international  fora.  He  was  the  architect  of  the  Central  Statistical  Organisation  and  the 
National Sample Survey Organisation – two major statistical wings of Government of India. In his view, 
statistics is a “key technology”, having its bearing in every walk of life. This message has far reaching 
implications  and  the  objective  of  National  Statistics  Day  is  to  assess  where  we  stand  vis-à-vis 
international standards. Let me add that we observe Statistical Standards and Codes and follow best 
practice on coverage, periodicity and timeliness on data dissemination as prescribed in IMF’s Special 
Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS).  
As regards importance of statistics in national development, Professor Mahalanobis said: 
"Statisticians,  in  fact,  have  a  four-fold  task  in  national  development.  Firstly,  to  conduct  properly 
organised surveys for the collection, analysis, and interpretation of relevant statistical data. Secondly, 
on  the  basis of  such  information,  to  help  in  the choice of  an  efficient  programme  of  action.  Thirdly, 
when  the  plan  goes  into  operation,  to  measure  the  progress  of  work  and  to  assess  the  results 
achieved. And, finally, on the basis of such assessment, either to report that the work is proceeding as 
desired or to give the danger signal that the results attainted are not proceeding in accordance with 
the  plan  or  are  not  commensurate  with  the  effort;  in  which  case  the  plan  itself  may  have  to  be 
modified. In this way the four-step cycle would begin again." 
This  succinctly  explains  the  importance  of  statistics  in  the  formulation  of  policy  and  its  evaluation. 
Infact,  many  developments  since  the  statement  was  made,  in  terms  of  technology,  quantitative 
methods,  and  marketisation  as  well  as  globalisation  have  reinforced  what  Professor  Mahalanobis 
observed. The use of statistics has increased manifold and the demand is for real time or near real 
time data on almost all aspects of life and economy. The System of National Accounts and the related 
accounting system on balance of payments, fiscal and financial statistics provide the basic framework 
for collection of statistics. As the monetary policy responds quickly to emerging developments in the 
economy, and its effectiveness depends on market expectations, the set of data required for the same, 
like business expectations and inflation expectations, need to be collected through quick surveys.  
With increased globalisation and liberalisation of financial system, informed decision holds the key to 
successful implementation of policy. While administrative (regulatory) and supervisory information are 
collected  by  statutory  and  control  returns,  information  gap  on  financial  statistics  and  other  related 
areas in central banks is typically supplemented by surveys. In today’s world, central banks’ surveys 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
conducted exclusively for monetary policy can broadly be defined as a type of analysis of conjunctural 
developments.  
I  would  like  to  highlight  the  importance  of  surveys  with  reference  to  experience  with  regulation.  In 
some economies, the control systems in financial and external sectors were dismantled without putting 
in  place  appropriate  monitoring  mechanism,  which  led  to  a  vacuum  in  availability  of  information  on 
ongoing  economic  activity.  In  other  words,  deregulation  must  be  accompanied  by  appropriate 
monitoring systems, or alternatively, by surveys to make up for the loss of information due to removal 
of controls. In fact, many analysts hold the view that the financial crisis that hit the Asian economies 
about ten years ago was partly occasioned by inadequate data on the activities of the banking system. 
In  highly  deregulated  regimes,  sometimes,  conducting  a  survey  is  the  only  option  available  for 
obtaining the data necessary for policy making. However, we do recognise that a survey has to be 
properly designed to serve the objectives. Firstly, quality of data derived from surveys depends on the 
methodology and standards used for these surveys. An international conference of this type is useful 
for sharing  of  country experiences  on  these  issues and,  hopefully,  you  will  benefit  by  learning  from 
varied experiences in making judgments on the complex issues involved.  
Secondly, in a country like India with significant diversity, the matching of survey–design with target 
population is important. The diversity encompasses several languages, different customs and culture, 
and variation in levels of literacy and understanding. No doubt, respondents vary across objectives of 
surveys.  
Thirdly, even a perfectly prepared questionnaire is of no use if large number of people fail to complete 
it. Thus, the main goal of any survey implementation plan should be to obtain a high response rate. As 
far  as  our  experience  with  survey  responses  is  concerned,  we  do  not  encounter  problems  with  the 
regulated entities like banks from whom the response is generally more than 90 per cent in most of the 
surveys  conducted  whereas  the  response  rate  drops  significantly  when  the  survey  is  conducted 
amongst  non-regulated  entities.  However,  the  response  of  households  to  the  inflation  expectations 
survey is almost 100 per cent. Even after increasing the sample size considerably, we continue to get 
good response, though it is difficult to ascertain the reliability of responses from different categories of 
households, in view of the varying degrees of awareness. In any case, the erroneous responses in this 
sector  are  likely  to  be  higher  than  in  the  case  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  where  the 
percentage of erroneous responses is normally remaining in single digit.  
Fourthly, survey data are subject to well-known types of bias. For example, since respondents know 
that they are being studied, and have at least some idea why, they may change their answers, either 
consciously or unconsciously, to show themselves in a better light or to conform to the expectations of 
those who are studying them. This is fairly common in inflation expectation survey.  
Fifthly,  from  the  perspective  of  policy-making,  the  primary  purpose  of  conducting  a  survey  is  to 
produce data that will help answer important policy questions. Once collected, the data must be so 
collated,  organised,  summarised,  and  described  as  to  be  eminently  useful  for  policy  purposes.  For 
example, summary measures such as means, frequencies, standard deviations, and correlations and 
creating tables and graphs that illustrate important findings, are of immediate use to us, though they 
need to be viewed with great caution, especially in terms of level of confidence that one can have in 
the sample estimate. 
Finally, a word of caution. If conducted properly, surveys can accurately represent the opinions and 
judgments  of  a  population  of  people  but  this  doesn't  mean  that  these  opinions  are  right.  Further,  a 
survey  can  establish  whether  or  not  a  relationship  exists  between  two  variables  but  may  not  be 
sufficient to determine the direction of causality.  
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the  survey-work  by  RBI  in  India  and  our  current 
intentions.  
Among the surveys conducted by RBI in the past, the most important one was “All-India Rural Credit 
Survey”.  Results  of  this  survey  had  significant  bearing  on  subsequent  credit  polices  of  RBI.  The 
objective  of  the  survey  was  to  collect  data  that  would  assist  RBI  and  the  Government  of  India  in 
formulating an integrated credit policy for rural credit and to assess the extent of indebtedness of rural 
households to financial institutions in the organised and unorganised sectors. After nationalisation of 
major  commercial  banks  in  1969,  there  was  need  to  evolve  a  suitable  credit  policy  to  meet  the 
developmental  needs  of  select  sectors  of  high  priority.  In  this  context,  RBI  conducted  two separate 
surveys viz., “Survey of Small Scale Industries” and “Survey of Traders and Transport Operators”. In 
addition, the “Survey of Non-Profit Institutions Serving Households” (NPISHs), conducted by the RBI, 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
provided information about the structure, employment, financial resources, financial performance, etc., 
of NPISHs. Furthermore, an ad hoc survey on “remittance of non-resident Indians” helped the RBI in 
formulating policies on non-resident deposits. 
At  present,  we,  in  the  RBI,  are  conducting  around  20  surveys  on  a  regular  basis,  with  varying 
periodicity; we also conduct several need-based ad hoc surveys. In view of the size of the population 
of  the  country  –  in  terms  of  individuals,  corporates  and  financial  institutions  –  we  are  sometimes 
consciously not considering the entire sector while conducting some of the surveys because of cost, 
time and efforts involved. In such cases, we are conducting some supplementary surveys to capture 
more  details from  reduced  samples  like  the  small  borrowal  accounts  survey  in  the  case  of  banking 
sector and survey of unclassified receipts in the case of external sector.  
The surveys conducted by the RBI can be broadly classified into five categories. In the external sector, 
these include survey of foreign liabilities and assets for corporate, insurance and mutual fund sectors; 
coordinated portfolio investment survey; survey on software export; unclassified receipt survey used 
for  BoP;  survey  on  balances  in  Nostro/Vostro  account  used  in  BoP,  and  survey  on  non-resident 
deposits.  In  the  banking  sector,  the  surveys  cover  distribution  of  credit,  deposits  and  employment; 
composition and ownership of deposits; investment portfolio; debits to deposit accounts; international 
assets  and  liabilities  of  banks  and  small  borrowal  accounts.  In  the  corporate  sector,  the  survey  of 
performance of private corporate business sector, conducted since 1951-52, has been of considerable 
interest to the analysts.  
Surveys in India directly relevant to monetary policy are industrial outlook survey, inflation expectation 
survey for households, and survey of inventories, order books and capacity utilisation. There are also 
ad hoc surveys such as census of non-banking financial companies not accepting public deposits. 
Of greater interest to this group may be the steps recently initiated by the RBI to make use of survey 
methods for operational purposes like assessing the extent of financial inclusion. You may be aware 
that in India, Government as well as the central bank attach importance to financial empowerment of 
the rural poor and the RBI has taken steps for Financial Inclusion and spread of the Self Help Groups.  
I  should  confess  that  we  have  to  considerably  strengthen  the  surveys  required  for  formulation  of 
monetary  policy.  In  this  regard,  we  are  collecting  information  on  the  surveys  conducted  by  other 
central banks. Among the surveys conducted by other central banks, we observe that some relate to 
household  sector  such  as  access  to  financial  services,  demand  for  housing,  consumer  confidence, 
credibility  of  monetary  policy,  etc.  There  are  also  those  relating  to  markets  such  as  assessment  of 
efficient and fair conduct of financial markets, survey of professional forecasters and of economists’ 
expectations. I would, therefore, urge Dr. Barman and his team to monitor international developments 
carefully, take into account the country experiences and draw upon the expertise of the multilateral 
institutions in charting the further course of survey work in the RBI. 
Before concluding this address, I would like to endorse two observations made by Governor Njuguna 
Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  a  couple  of  weeks  ago  (12th  June  2007)  in  his 
opening address  at  the workshop  on  the compilation  of banking statistics  in  Kenya.  First,  there  are 
varied users of the banking data such as government, central bank, market participants, researchers, 
etc. The data and analysis, therefore, have to be user friendly. Second, he stated that the dynamic 
nature of our economies necessitates our becoming dynamic in our approach to data compilation. For 
my part, I would like to add, by way of concluding remarks, that in data or surveys, there should be 
consistency with global standards but the scheme has to be tailored to meet the domestic interests 
and  needs.  No  doubt,  we  have  to  learn  from  each  others’  experience  but  need  to  adapt  to  the 
country-specific context.  
Let  me  conclude  by  wishing  you  all  the  best,  and  a  safe  journey  with  pleasant  memories  of  a 
productive stay in Pune.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 3
