Y V Reddy: The Indian economy – review and prospects 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Metropolitan Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry, Dhaka, 17 May 2007. 
 Mr.  Latifur  Rahman,  President  –  Metropolitan  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  Mr.  Mahbubur 
Rahman,  President  –  ICC,  Bangladesh,  the  distinguished  members  of  the  trade  bodies  and  dear 
Friends, 
I am honoured to be invited to deliver this address today at the Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry, Dhaka. We, in the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), had the pleasure of receiving recently 
your delegation. On that occasion, I had accepted the invitation, in principle, to address this gathering. 
I am glad to be able to fulfil my assurance.  
I have the honour of being associated, for over three decades, with several distinguished civil servants 
from Bangladesh – notable among those who continue to be close friends are Mr. Syeduzzaman and 
Mr. Gholam Kibria, former Finance Secretary Government of Bangladesh. I have had the privilege of 
working closely, among others, with respected Dr. Fakhruddin Ahmed, while he was the Governor of 
Bangladesh Bank, and also the current Governor, Dr. Salehuddin Ahmed – a well-known authority on 
microfinance issues.  
My  familiarity  with  the  economy  of  Bangladesh  is  long  and  rather  intimate.  It  dates  back  to  my 
association  with  the  Executive  Director’s  office  in  the  World  Bank  during  1978  to  1983,  and  more 
recently,  as  Executive  Director  on  the  Board  of  the  IMF  during  2002-03.  Further,  as  the  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  RBI  during  1996  to  2002  and  as  the  Governor  since  2003,  I  have  the  privilege  of 
working  with  the  Bangladesh  Bank,  with  mutual  trust  and  understanding  in  several  fora  such  as 
SAARCFINANCE  Group  and  Asian  Clearing  Union  (ACU).  In  fact,  I  came  to  Dhaka  to  attend  the 
annual  meeting  of  the  ACU  whose  Chairmanship  is  currently  with  Dr.  Salehuddin  Ahmed  of 
Bangladesh Bank.  
One of the great contributions of your country to the global community is the demonstration of what 
voluntary  and  selfless  service  can  achieve  in  poverty  alleviation  and  restoration  of  appropriate 
personal  dignity  to  every  citizen:  the  slogan  is  "credit  as  a  right”.  We,  in  the  RBI,  are  grateful  to 
Professor Muhammad Yunus for having accepted our invitation to visit us and address us. Our Board, 
officers  and  staff  have  been  inspired  by  his  example  and  the  address  delivered  by  him  with  great 
passion and utmost sincerity.  
Mr. President, as agreed in Mumbai when we met recently, I will share my thoughts on certain aspects 
of the Indian economy – randomly encompassing the recent past, the short-term outlook and the way 
forward. 
Before  doing  so,  perhaps,  I  should  respond  to  some  comments  you  made.  Mr.  President,  in  your 
address of welcome, you have been highly professional in assembling your thoughts for the occasion. 
More impressive, to my pleasant surprise, you sent me a copy of your proposed address on my arrival 
in  Dhaka.  So,  I  am  under  some  moral  obligation  to  respond  to  some of  the  observations you  have 
made, specially in regard to the ACU and SAARCFINANCE Group.  
SAARCFINANCE and ACU – some aspects 
Mr. President, you made very important, indeed significant, general observations on monetary policy, 
on which we need to deliberate. I would like to refer to two sentences in your address:  
"Mr. Governor, it is our view that with the exception of one or two, monetary policies in the South Asian 
countries are yet to be fully able to foster and help the growth process."  
and 
"Monetary policies were of limited help to such achievements." 
We  believe  that  monetary  policies  help  the  growth  process  in  South  Asia  in  three  ways:  first,  by 
providing  price  stability;  second,  by  ensuring  financial  stability;  and  third,  by  enabling  availability  of 
financial resources for an efficient growth process. Monetary policies do contribute significantly to the 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 1
growth process but it is not fully appreciated for a simple reason. There is satisfaction when output and 
employment growth occurs and frustration when it stalls. When instability occurs, there is severe pain 
but the benefits of sustained stability – that is, the absence of instability – go largely unnoticed, taking 
it for granted. Sometimes, the efforts of the monetary authorities to assure stability may entail some 
short-term burdens for some of the segments of the economy, but the overall positive contribution of 
such measures to the larger population and to growth through stability may not be directly felt. For 
example, it can be argued that it was possible for the economies of South Asia to show impressive 
macro-economic  achievements  in  the  last  five  years,  precisely  because  of  the  enabling  monetary, 
financial and external sector environment, as managed by the central banks.  
More  specifically,  in  the  case  of  India  –  and  I  believe,  in  most  of  the  South  Asian  countries  –  our 
mandate encompasses both, growth and stability. We do not have a single over-riding objective, such 
as an inflation target. But the relative emphasis in the policy varies from time to time, depending on the 
context. Let me give you an example. A few years ago, the Reserve Bank of India was encouraging 
expansion of bank credit, while, more recently, we are trying to moderate such expansion. 
Mr. President, you made a strong case for greater monetary co-operation in South Asia. I do agree 
that  there  are  close  monetary  linkages  amongst  South  Asian  economies  and  hence,  greater 
harmonisation of monetary policies, specially through staff exchanges and exchange of information, 
would be useful. The point is well taken and I trust that all members of the SAARCFINANCE Group 
would  give  due  consideration  to  such  suggestions  by  the  respective  Chambers  of  Commerce  and 
Industry.  
Mr.  President,  you  raised  an  interesting  issue  of  harmonisation  amongst  trade,  investment  and 
financial integration. We, in the Reserve Bank of India, have a view on this. The view is that the trade 
integration is undeniably beneficial but financial integration has both, benefits and risks, at our stage of 
development. Capital, particularly the portfolio flow, is highly mobile, can easily reverse its direction 
and it is difficult to invoke the "rules of origin" in regard to such capital. Hence, we believe in a gradual 
process of fuller capital account liberalisation, while recognising the growing ineffectiveness of micro 
controls  in  a  world  of  deep  trade  integration.  Thus,  the  trade,  investment  and  financial  flows  do  go 
together, but in a somewhat harmonious as well as well-sequenced manner and not necessarily, in a 
simultaneous manner.  
Finally, in the ACU and SAARCFINANCE Group meetings in Dhaka, the deliberations, by and large, 
reflected your sentiments, calling for greater co-operation, recognising the emerging global realities. 
Governor  Salehuddin  Ahmed  has  already  briefed  the  media  on  major  conclusions  of  the  meetings. 
Since I formally took over the charge as the Chairman of the SAARCFINANCE Group in Dhaka, let me 
share with you one highlight of our exchanges in the meeting of the SAARCFINANCE Group.  
We noticed that the South Asian region seems to be emerging, in the recent years, as a very dynamic 
economic hub. The growth has been impressive, inflation moderate in spite of the elevated prices of oil 
and  food  grains,  and  the  external  sector  is  stronger.  There  is  a  feeling  that  the  prospects  for  the 
economies of South Asia appear brighter than ever before in history, with a potential to be amongst 
the most-rapidly growing economies of the world – while contributing to significant reductions in global 
poverty.  I  believe  that  the  South  Asian model  has some  inherent  and  unique strengths.  The  output 
growth  and  enhanced  efficiency  is  led  by  domestic  entrepreneurial  class.  It  is  private-sector-  and 
business-led, though the public sector still dominates. It is decentralised and bottom-up. The growth is 
enabled  by  the  public  policies,  banking  system,  capital  markets,  foreign  direct  investment,  export 
demand,  etc.,  but  the  main  thrust  –  the  push  and  the  pressure  –  is  coming  from  the  domestic 
entrepreneurship,  domestic  investment  and  consumption  demand.  Thus,  there  are  good  prospects 
that  the  growth  in  South  Asia  will  be  self-accelerating  and  reasonably  stable.  In  this  process,  the 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry, like yours, have to be in the forefront of reforms and poverty 
alleviation.  
I would like to end my response to your thoughts on this very optimistic note for South Asia, in general, 
and Bangladesh, in particular. I will now move on to narrate the prospects for the Indian economy.  
Macroeconomic performance – a review 
The average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 has been 
about  6.0  per  cent,  which  is  a  significant  improvement  over  the  previous  three  decades  when  the 
annual growth rate was only 3.5 per cent. Over the last four years during 2003-07, the Indian economy 
has  entered  a  high-growth  phase,  averaging  8.6  per  cent  per  annum.  The  acceleration  of  growth 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2007
during this period has been accompanied by a significant moderation in volatility, especially in industry 
and services sectors. In the past, the occurrence of even one of the shocks, either food or oil shock, 
would  have  produced  a  sharp  loss  of  growth,  balance  of  payments  difficulties  and  perhaps,  some 
financial disruption. Seen in this context, this robust macroeconomic performance, in the face of oil as 
well as food shocks, demonstrates the vibrancy and resilience of the Indian economy. In this context, it 
is important to note that India's growth is mainly driven by domestic consumption, contributing on an 
average  to  almost  two-thirds  of  the  overall  demand,  while  investment  and  export  demand  are  also 
accelerating. It must also be noted that over 95 per cent of investment during this period was financed 
by the domestic savings only. 
The  combined  effects  of  these  have  given  impetus  to  a  sharp  acceleration  in  the  per  capita  GDP 
growth. For example, during the 1970s, the per capita income in India grew by 0.6 per cent, which 
implicitly meant that a person might not see doubling of his income even once in his lifetime. Since the 
1990s, the per capita income has been growing at an average rate of around 4.0 per cent, implying 
that a person’s income will double in nearly 18 years. A person with a life expectancy of, say, 72 years 
could thus see his income doubling at least three times in his adult life. If the current GDP growth rate 
of  around  9  per  cent  is  maintained,  a  person  can  hope  to  see  the  standard  of  living  multiplying  by 
almost five times in his lifetime. 
There is evidence of ongoing improvements in total factor productivity and the efficiency of capital use. 
Thus,  while  there  are  cyclical  factors  underlying  the  current  growth  momentum,  there  is  a  growing 
confidence that a structural acceleration of growth is underway.  
The  acceleration  of  growth  in  the  real  sector  has  been  reflected  in  the  upward  shift  in  the  growth 
trajectory of non-food credit extended by commercial banks. The expansion in non-food credit at 29.8 
per  cent  in  the  period  2003-07  is  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the  Indian  economy.  Bank  credit 
growth has accommodated the buoyancy in consumption and investment demand, and has enabled 
greater  credit  penetration  in  the  economy.  Besides,  the  rapid  growth  of  bank  credit  has  also  been 
accompanied by a wider dispersal across society than ever before. In particular, the growth of bank 
credit  has  favoured  agriculture,  retail  lending,  particularly  housing,  i.e.,  the  sectors  involving 
households, which were hitherto largely priced out of the credit market.  
It  is  noteworthy  that  high  growth  in  the  last  four  years  has  been  associated  with  a  moderation  of 
inflation.  The  headline  inflation  rate,  in  terms  of  the  wholesale  price  index,  has  declined  from  an 
average  of  11.0  cent  during  1990-95  to  5.3  per  cent  during  1995-2000  and  to  4.9  per  cent  during 
2003-07. The trending down of inflation has been associated with a significant reduction in inflation 
volatility which is indicative of well-anchored inflation expectations, despite the visitations of adverse 
shocks, both domestic and external.  
In  this context,  I  quote  from  a recent book  by  Mr. Sadiq  Ahmed  of  World  Bank,  titled “India's Long 
Term  Growth  Experience”,  which  has  analysed  the  growth  experience  of  India  in  two  phases:  from 
1950 to 1980 (Phase I) and from 1980 till date (Phase II): 
"On the whole, the ability to contain India's inflation rate at substantially below the world rate and the 
rate  prevailing  in  non-oil-exporting  developing  countries  during  both  phases  is  a  testimony  to  the 
sound conduct of monetary policy. This is particularly encouraging because India faced many external 
shocks  and  associated  adverse  effects  of  imported  inflation  during  phase  II  when  it  opened  up  the 
economy as opposed to the closed economy environment of phase I."  
Yet another positive feature of developments in recent years is the marked improvement in the health 
of Government finances. The revenue deficit (RD), gross fiscal deficit (GFD) and the primary deficit 
(PD)  moderated  to  2.7  per  cent,  4.1  per  cent  and  0.1  per  cent,  respectively,  during  2003-07  from 
higher  levels  in  the  preceding  period.  There  are  also  indications  of  the  beginning  of  sustained 
buoyancy  in  the  tax/GDP  ratio,  indicating  the  onset  of  intrinsic  strengths  in  public  finances.  The 
improvement in the fisc is reflected in a turnaround in public sector dissaving from 2003-04 onwards. 
The improvement in the fiscal positions of both the Centre and the States, even after accounting for 
cyclical component in more recent years, has considerably alleviated the burden of fiscal dominance 
that monetary policy in India has had to traditionally contend with.  
Perhaps, the most impressive gains in macroeconomic performance are reflected in India’s external 
sector, which has shown dynamism and resilience in a fiercely competitive, globalised and somewhat 
uncertain  international  environment.  Merchandise  exports  have been  growing  at  an  average  rate  of 
around 25 per cent during the last four years, with a steady increase in global market share, reflecting 
the  competitiveness  of  the  Indian  industry.  At  the  same  time,  exports  of  software  and  business 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 3
services have expanded sizeably in recent years, indicative of the knowledge-based domestic services 
sectors and their competitive advantage. Greater integration into the global economy has enabled the 
Indian  corporates  to  access  high-quality  imports  from  abroad  and  also  to  expand  their  overseas 
assets, dynamically.  
International confidence in the performance of the Indian economy has built up strongly, as reflected in 
the recent upgrade of India to investment grade by all the leading international rating agencies. With 
the significant strengthening of the current and capital accounts, the foreign exchange reserves have 
more than doubled from US$ 76 billion at the end of March 2003 to US$ 200 billion at the end March 
2007. The level of foreign exchange reserves, currently the sixth largest in the world, exceeds a full 
year’s imports and is far in excess of the external debt.  
The financial sector – a retrospect 
The thrust of the financial sector reforms has been on strengthening the financial institutions as well as 
developing various segments of the financial-market spectrum. The focus of reforms has also been on 
promoting  the  integration  of  financial  markets  so  that  financial  intermediaries  have  the  requisite 
flexibility in their operations. Indian banks’ balance sheets have strengthened considerably, financial 
markets  have  deepened  and  widened  and,  with  the  introduction  of  the  real  time  gross  settlements 
(RTGS)  system,  the  payment  system  has  also  become  robust.  In  addition,  more  recently,  the 
endeavour  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  on  greater  financial  inclusion  and  reaching  out  to  the 
common person.  
The efficacy of financial sector reforms is reflected in the significant improvement in the asset quality 
of  the  banking  sector.  Currently,  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  are  compliant  with  the  minimum 
capital adequacy ratio of nine per cent. The overhang of gross non-performing assets of the scheduled 
commercial banks has declined from 8.80 per cent of advances in 2002-03 to 3.30 per cent in 2005-
06. Operating expenses, as a ratio of total assets, have declined from 2.24 per cent in 2002-03 to 2.11 
per cent in 2005-06. Thus, in terms of indicators of performance, given the background, the scheduled 
commercial  banks  have  been  able  to  deliver  significantly  in  terms  of  stability,  penetration  and 
technological  progress.  In  the  process,  the  public  sector  banks’  efficiency  has  also  increased  in  an 
impressive manner and they are playing a very salutary role in financial inclusion. No doubt, there is 
scope and indeed a compelling need to increase penetration of banking services to all segments of 
the population and enhance both, efficiency and resilience in the system.  
While  the  stability  and  efficiency  imparted  to  the  large  commercial  banking  system  is  universally 
recognised,  there  are  some  other  segments  which  warranted  restructuring  as  well.  The  experience 
with the urban co-operative banks (UCBs) at the dawn of the decade led to the enforcement of strict 
prudential parameters, and currently the issue of multiple controls in this sector has been addressed. 
A  vision  document  for  their  healthy  growth  has  been  formulated.  Large-scale  restructuring  has 
commenced and is well under way. Similarly, issues relating to rural co-operative banking structures, 
regional  rural  banks  (RRBs),  non-banking  financial  companies  (NBFCs)  and  development  finance 
institutions (DFIs) have been considered actively and comprehensive measures have been planned 
and some of them are under implementation.  
Short-term outlook 
On the basis of assumption of trend growth in agriculture, on account of initial forecast of long-period 
average rainfall; expected impulses for expansion emanating from the industrial and service sectors; 
and taking into account expected deceleration of global GDP growth by 50 basis points in 2007, the 
Reserve Bank of India in its Annual Policy Statement for 2007-08, placed, for policy purposes, the real 
GDP  growth  in  the  range  of  8.5  per  cent  during  2007-08,  assuming  no  further  escalation  in 
international crude prices and barring domestic or external shocks. 
The  inflation  rates  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  have  been,  by  and  large,  benign  despite 
sustained external capital inflows and continued surge in fuel prices. Reserve Bank’s policy endeavour 
would be to contain inflation close to 5.0 per cent in 2007-08. In view of the self-imposed medium-term 
ceiling on inflation having a salutary effect on inflation expectations and resultant reduction in socially 
tolerable rate of inflation, coupled with the evolving integration of India with the global economy, the 
Annual  Policy  Statement  for  2007-08  contains  a  resolve  to  condition  the  policy  and  perceptions  for 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2007
inflation  in  the  range  of  4.0-4.5  per  cent.  This  objective  would  be  conducive  for  maintaining  self-
accelerating growth over the medium-term. 
India’s external sector has become resilient with the current account deficit being maintained at very 
modest levels and the recent trends are expected to continue to shape the outlook for the balance of 
payments. India’s share of world trade has increased from 0.76 per cent in 2003-04 to above 1 per 
cent,  reflecting  the  growing  competitiveness  of  the  economy.  On  the  whole,  the  overall  trade  and 
current account deficits in 2007-08 are expected to be adequately financed by the expected net capital 
inflows in 2007-08.  
Taking into account the high expansion of money supply worldwide, and given the monetary overhang 
of 2005-07, it is important to contain monetary expansion in 2007-08 at around 17.0-17.5 per cent, in 
consonance with the outlook on growth and inflation. The Annual Policy Statement for the year 2007-
08  also  placed  aggregate  deposits  growth  in  2007-08  at  around  Rs.4,900  billion  and  a  graduated 
deceleration of non-food credit to 24.0-25.0 per cent in 2007-08 from the average of 29.8 per cent over 
2004-07.  
The fiscal position of the Government, both Central and States, is undergoing consolidation in terms of 
targeted reduction in fiscal deficit indicators. The improvement in the fiscal position of several States is 
particularly impressive, which augurs well for the sustained growth of the economy and lower inflation. 
The Union Budget for 2007-08 has placed the fiscal deficit at 3.3 per cent of GDP for the year 2007-
08, as against 3.7 per cent in the previous year, in keeping with the spirit of the FRBM Act, 2003. 
Way forward – challenges and strengths 
There are, undoubtedly, many challenges for the Indian economy, but it is  useful to focus on more 
urgent of these.  
First, the poor state of the physical infrastructure, both in terms of quantity and quality is considered by 
many  to  be  the  most  critical  hindrance  for  India’s  progress.  The  most  important  issues  here  are 
regulatory framework and overall investment climate, which are being addressed by the Government.  
Second, the most complex and challenging issue relates to development of agriculture. While over 60 
per cent of the workforce is dependent on agriculture, the sector accounts for barely 20 per cent of the 
GDP. Further, the GDP growth generated from agriculture is only marginally above the rate of growth 
of  the  population,  which  is  not  adequate  to  ensure  rapid  poverty  reduction.  The  results  of  recent 
surveys  on  poverty  in  India,  however,  provide  grounds  for  some  optimism  in  regard  to  accelerated 
reduction in absolute poverty since the reform period.  
Third,  delivery  of  essential  public  services  such  as  education  and  health  to  large  parts  of  our 
population is a major institutional challenge. It is strongly felt that education will empower the poor to 
participate in the growth process and the large gaps in availability of health care, in terms of minimum 
access to the poor, need to be filled.  
There are reasons to believe that these challenges will be met, with some assurance of success, on 
account of many inherent strengths in the Indian society. I will narrate a few of these, relevant to this 
gathering.  
First,  India  is  a  country  of  great  diversities  but  with  incredibly  harmonious  co-existence  of  various 
religions, languages and a unified culture. The familiarity with multiple languages in India prepares the 
people to adapt better to multi-lingual environment, making it easier for them to fit into international 
systems very smoothly. Also, a vast and growing pool of science and technology graduates and the 
millions who are familiar with English language are sources of strength for the emerging India. 
Second, India will remain one of the youngest countries in the world in the next few decades. This 
“demographic dividend” is seen as an inevitable advantage, provided the prerequisites such as skill-
upgradation  and  sound  governance  are  put  in  place  to  capitalise  on  it.  More  importantly,  the 
demographic transition is likely to be stretched over a longer period since various states in India are at 
different stages of such transition - from Kerala to Uttar Pradesh.  
Third, India has the advantage of having a thriving business culture. In terms of business environment, 
the  impressive  growth,  coupled  with  market  orientation  of  the  economy,  has  been  a  bottom-up 
exercise, with a very broad-based and growing entrepreneurial class. These tendencies are perhaps 
reflective of a penchant for innovation amongst the growing entrepreneurial class in India, imbued with 
professionalism and seeking to be globally competitive. Friends, this area of business culture of India 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 5
should  be  of  great  interest  to  the  Chambers  of  Commerce  in  Bangladesh.  Business-to-business 
contacts amongst the countries are, almost always, win-win situations since no business transaction 
will take place if it were not perceived to be so. Institutions like Reserve Bank of India are happy to 
enable such business relations thrive and prosper – be it for trade or investment.  
Before concluding, let me share with you how a good business culture can be distinguished from not-
so-good a business culture. When two persons commence a train or bus or plane journey as business 
partners  and  end  up  as  strangers,  it  is  not-so-good  a  culture.  But  when  two  persons  commence  a 
journey as strangers and end up as business partners, that is a good business culture. My appeal to 
you  is  that  there  should  be  intensive  business-to-business  interactions,  dialogues  and  partnership 
between India and Bangladesh as long as they benefit businesses and peoples of both the countries. 
Public  institutions  like  Reserve  Bank  of  India  assure  a  policy  environment  that  is  conducive  to  the 
growth of productive business culture that would help generating employment for the millions of youth 
in our countries. 
Let me thank you all again for giving me this opportunity to share with you my thoughts on the Indian 
economy.  
6 
 BIS Review 50/2007
