L Wilson Kamit: Difficulties, risks and opportunities for Papua New Guinea 
Address by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the Fifth Annual 
Report  Meeting  of  Papua  New  Guinea  Sustainable  Development  Program  Limited,  Port  Moresby, 
25 May 2007.  
 “The  Chairman  of  PNGSDP  Prof.  Ross  Garnaut,  members  of  the  Board,  Chief  Executive  Officer 
Mr Robert  Igara  and  the  staff,  Chief  Secretary  Ambassador  Isaac  Lupari,  Department  Heads, 
members of the Diplomatic Corps representatives of the private sector, ladies and gentlemen. I thank 
you  for  inviting  me  to  the  5th  Annual  Report  meeting  of  PNG  Sustainable  Development  Program 
Limited.” 
There  are  many  reasons  potential  investors  give  for  not  investing  in  Papua  New  Guinea.  Lack  of 
infrastructure, scarcity of skilled labour, high cost and unreliable utilities, small urban centres result in 
fragmented markets, law and order problems and the non accommodating land tenure system are the 
causes given by those familiar with the present state of affairs in Papua New Guinea. 
As you all know Papua New Guinea is a very old nation but a new country. We can boast about having 
one  of  the  most  diversified  and  rich  ecological  systems  in  the  World  in  flora  and  fauna.  Five  large 
islands with several  hundred small  ones  of  unspoiled  white beaches,  outstanding  sceneries  of  high 
mountains, fast flowing rivers, swamps and thousands of kilometers of waterways. We have very rich, 
highly diversified cultures and traditions, with more than 800 languages of which more than 200 are 
advanced to a stage that the Bible can be translated into. There are huge tracks of arable land and 
tropical  forests,  very  substantive  marine  resources  in  the  200  mile  fishing  zone,  the  most  known 
resource is tuna but there are many other smaller ones. Last but not least an abundance of mineral 
resources of gold, copper, nickel, oil and gas which have already been discovered, and exploration for 
others is on the rise. 
I know that there are difficulties and risks as stated in the opening paragraph of my address. Now I will 
state the opportunities. 
The mining and petroleum industries are attracting many investors from all over the world. There are 
new substantive entrants such as the State owned Chinese Mining Company at Ramu Nickel, Barrick 
that  took  over  the  Porgera  gold  mine  from  Placer,  and  many  companies  investing  large  sums  in 
exploration and others that have submitted exploration applications. There are undersea explorations 
for  minerals  (gold)  with  positive  results.  The  Gas  developments  are  moving  into  a  new  stage  of 
developing a Liquefied Natural Gas project as well as a Gas Condensate project. The outcome is high 
demand for gas exploration licenses and many new companies have commenced exploration work. 
The investment incentive and tax regimes are considered very competitive and favourable. 
The areas with great potential are in tourism specifically eco-tourism, agriculture, and small to medium 
sized  manufacturing.  These  are  the  least  developed  sectors  and  the  ones  that  badly  need 
entrepreneurial initiatives and skills. These are the industries that in the long run will provide the back 
bone of economic growth and income generating opportunities and employment for the great majority 
of the population. 
In our thirty one years of independence we have had, fourteen years of stable low growth up to 1989, 
ten  years  of  very  difficult  times  up  to  1999,  following  the  Bougainville  crisis.  This  lost  decade  was 
characterized  by  gross  mismanagement  of  the  economy  that  resulted  in  an  almost  default  on  our 
foreign currency liabilities in 1994, which forced us to float the Kina our national currency, the Sandline 
affair in 1997 of hiring mercenaries to fight on Bougainville, an almost second default in 1998 to 1999, 
the  combined  effect  of  a  very  severe  drought,  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  and  the  world  economic 
slowdown exacerbated by continued gross mismanagement of the economy. 
We were very fortunate that in mid 1999, a new government was formed, that undertook some major 
reforms. 
It took four years to stabilize the economy, re-establish the confidence of the public, and realising that 
the Constitutional Changes introduced to the political system through the Integrity of Political Parties 
Act, will result in political stability. We are experiencing for the first time a government which lasted a 
full term of five years. 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 1
These  developments  assisted  by  very  high  commodity  prices  of  oil,  copper  and  some  of  the 
agricultural  exports  like  rubber,  resulted  in  a  very  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  of  fiscal 
surpluses,  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates,  an  appreciating  exchange  rate  and  fast  accumulation  of 
foreign  exchange  reserve.  I  am  not  going  to  bore  you  with  numbers,  but  just  as  an  indication,  our 
foreign currency reserves increased from around US$300 million to US$1.5 billion in three years, and 
the increase is continuing. Inflation and interest rates are lower than in Australia. 
Economic activity as measured by GDP growth is around 4 percent in recent years. For a low income 
developing country it is very low. To ensure that the great majority of the population is benefiting from 
the  mineral  boom  we  have  to  generate  a  6  to  7  percent  growth.  I  am  sure  that  following  the 
consolidation, and the stability period, we are moving into a fast growth phase in the years head. 
The initiatives of PNGSDP of investing its substantial resources in removing some of the impediments 
to investment by improving the efficiency and reducing the very high cost structure of public utilities 
and basic infrastructure services, will enhance private sector investment and economic growth. The 
use of the very substantial resources to partner with private sector investors, investing in economic 
activities in all areas but specifically in agriculture, will go a long way to generate sustainable income in 
the Western Province and the rest of Papua New Guinea. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  open  this  fifth  Annual  Report  Meeting.  I  wish  you  all  the  best.  Your 
success in implementing the projects presented in your 2006 Annual Report to stakeholders, will take 
this country and people a big step forward and make up for the lost decade and the low growth in 
recent year. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2007
