Radovan Jelašić: Corporate social responsibility in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Corporate 
Social  Responsibility  Conference,  organized  by  Ekonomist  Media  Group,  Belgrade, 
27 September 2007. 
   Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Only a few days are left until 5 October, the day when all of us as individuals, but also as 
employees  or  managers,  should  look  back  on  the  first  seven  years  of  transition  and  ask 
ourselves questions, among which I would like to particularly stress the following:  
• 
What kind of Serbia have we built in the first seven years and is Serbia today what 
we first dreamed, and later on, planned it to be?  
What did we who know, can, and moreover, should change Serbia do to make our 
country still more beautiful, cleaner, responsible, competitive… to make it a country 
of content and smiling people?  
And finally, is privatization a goal in itself, or is it just a necessary, but insufficient, 
prerequisite that has to be fulfilled on our way to a higher level of economic welfare?  
The National Bank of Serbia acquired corporate social responsibility in quite a simple way – 
as in most other cases, we have earned accountability primarily by hard work and care for 
our employees, our environment, our country and our planet. The reason we are here today 
at this gathering is to learn further and meet people who care about the future of this country. 
If we join our efforts, we will be much stronger. 
You will allow me to go back to the questions I mentioned and tell you what I personally think 
about  privatization:  The  main  goal  of  privatization  cannot  be  achieved  by  mere 
transformation of ownership structure – this is a necessary, but not a sufficient prerequisite! 
The  main  goal  of  privatization  is  achieved  through  its  ensuing  effects  such  as  additional 
investments,  improved  work  conditions,  style  of  company  management,  etc.  Finally, 
ownership transformation is not implemented only to fill state coffers, but to get new owners 
committed to strengthening corporate social responsibility in the newly-privatized companies.  
Companies which have completed ownership transformation, as well as all other companies 
operating in Serbia, may be classified into two groups: 
1. 
the  first  one  is  composed  of  companies  who  automatically  implement  corporate 
social responsibility practice regardless whether they operate in Belgrade, Berlin or 
Rome, and  
the second one is made of companies that have to be a bit, or a lot, “reminded” that 
their  entry  in  the  Serbian  market  does  not  mean  that  they  have  to  embrace  the 
“ways  of  the  Balkans”,  but  that  they  too  should  take  their  part  of  responsibility  in 
changing Serbia!  
2. 
Although I truly hoped there would be no second group, I have no problem in “reminding” that 
group of companies of their duties in the area of corporate social responsibility! 
Now let us have a look at what the National Bank of Serbia has done in this respect, both 
internally and externally:  
1. 
I will mention just some of the internal activities illustrating our responsibility towards 
employees  
• 
organizing  medical  check-ups  for  employees,  including  general  medical 
check-up program;  
BIS Review 109/2007 
 1
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Our external activities included:  
• 
• 
• 
2. 
enabling membership in voluntary pension funds;  
organizing training programs for employees who signed agreement on the 
termination of employment, against an appropriate severance pay;  
providing  solidarity  assistance  and  financial  aid  both  to  employees  and 
homes for children with special needs;  
organizing sports activities;  
organizing seminars and study visits in the country and abroad;  
organizing educational workshops for the children of employees;  
enabling use of the Bank’s holiday resorts (Zlatibor, Soko Banja, Budva…)  
opening restaurants for employees;  
Activities of the NBS Call Centre, that citizens may contact free of charge;  
National Bank of Serbia’s numismatic exhibition;  
Donations  –  humanitarian  projects  for  children  deprived  of  parental  care, 
assistance  to  the  organization  “Mali  –  veliki  ljudi”,  as  well  as  to  the 
Zvečanska Centre for Children, Infant and Youth Care;  
Education of Roma population – computer courses held by NBS employees 
and English language courses;  
Taking  part  in  Moba  –  a  manifestation  for  children  from  diaspora  and 
Kosovo and Metohija, within which an educational visit to the Institute for 
Manufacturing Banknotes and Coins was organized;  
Organizing summer practice for final-year students;  
Offering new posts for apprentices – young people with a degree and no 
experience;  
Setting up Academy for Banking and Finance;  
Taking part in the human resources fair “Careеr days“;  
      In addition to these, we have several new projects: 
  Introduction  of  waste  management  system  that  will  develop  in  three 
directions:  
o 
o 
o 
Building a wheelchair ramp in the NBS office building in Kralja Petra Street;  
Organizing a promotional campaign for dinar savings.  
collection of PET and plastic packaging waste materials;  
collection of paper waste;  
collection of electronic waste.  
The  list  for  2007  is  pretty  long,  and  we  will  present  it  to  the  public  for  the  first  time  in  a 
separate section of the regular report on NBS activities. We are taking part in this gathering 
because of our profound conviction that today’s topic is essential for the quality of transition 
in Serbia. Please note that we are more than  willing to give our modest contribution to all 
other actions and ideas! 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2007
