Lucas Papademos: The financial market turmoil, the European economy, 
and the role of the European Central Bank 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at an event 
organised by The European Institute, New York, 27 September 2007. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
I.  
The  European  Institute  in  the  United  States  has  a  long  tradition  of  “fostering  transatlantic 
dialogue”. Through a variety of activities, including the publication of its “European Affairs” 
journal,  it  succeeds  in  providing  a  thorough  analysis  of  and  in  stimulating  a  constructive 
debate  on  issues  pertaining  to  the  European  Union  and  on  key  aspects  of  transatlantic 
cooperation. I like to thank you for the invitation to address some issues of relevance to the 
economies and public policies on both sides of the Atlantic. 
The  recent  financial  market  turmoil  confirmed  how  closely  integrated  our  economies  have 
become and, in particular, how events that have a direct impact on financial markets in the 
United  States  can  have  immediate  and  significant  repercussions  on  European  financial 
markets, which in turn can have feedback effects on American markets. The financial market 
tensions also underscored the importance of information exchange and cooperation between 
central  banks  and  other  relevant  authorities  across  the  Atlantic  –  cooperation  which  can 
reinforce the effectiveness of the policies pursued. 
In my remarks I would like to share with you some thoughts on two topics: 
• 
The  recent  financial  market  turbulence  and  its  potential  impact  on  the  European 
economy; and 
The  role  of  the  European  Central  Bank  in  preserving  price  stability,  safeguarding 
financial stability and fostering economic growth in the euro area. 
 The ECB and other major central banks have been very much in the news in recent weeks 
as a result of their money market interventions during the financial market turmoil. Moreover, 
over  the  past  few  months  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  central  banks  have  been 
occasionally at the centre of public debate triggered by concerns that interest rate increases 
might  adversely  affect  economic  activity,  as  well  as  by  more  general  considerations 
regarding their policy mandates. 
It is said that it is the job of central banks in the economy “to take away the punchbowl just as 
the  party  gets  going.”  Looking  at  the  developments  in  financial  markets  over  the  past  two 
months,  it  looks  like  the  party  in  some  market  segments  was  a  rather  exuberant  affair, 
characterised  by  quite  a  few  excesses!  And  some  market  participants  are  feeling  the 
consequences,  having  woken  up  with  a  severe  hangover!  Which  begs  a  question:  what, 
then, is our role in such a situation? This is precisely one of the issues that I would like to 
discuss.  
The financial market turmoil 
II.  
In  early  August,  before  tensions  emerged  in  financial  markets,  the  ECB’s  diagnosis  of  the 
economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  was  that  the  economic  environment  was  positive  with 
conditions in place – both external and internal – for economic activity to continue to expand 
at  a  sustained  rate,  close  to  potential  growth.  It  was  noted,  however,  that  there  were 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 1
downside risks to this favourable outlook for economic growth which included “the possibility 
of potential abrupt shifts in global financial market sentiment leading to a repricing of risks”.  
The month of August was characterised by a substantial increase in financial market volatility 
and a reappraisal of risk. The financial market turbulence was triggered by a series of events 
which  intensified  tensions  in  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market.  This  resulted  in  an 
adjustment of investors’ attitudes towards risk – a diminished appetite for risky assets – and 
led  to  an  increase  in  uncertainty  about  financial  market  conditions  and  prospects.  Market 
volatility rose sharply in almost all asset classes. Stock markets tumbled, as investors sold 
equities  and  moved  funds  into  safe-haven  investments,  like  government  bonds.  Several 
investment  funds  holding  asset-backed  securities  –  with  subprime  mortgage  elements  – 
suspended withdrawals. At roughly the same time, a number of European banks made public 
their direct and indirect exposures to the US subprime mortgage market. These exposures 
were  sometimes  sizeable  but  were  not  sufficiently  significant  to  materially  impact  the 
soundness  of  core  financial  institutions.  In  addition,  several  banks,  especially  in  Europe, 
were subject to rumours about severe losses stemming from exposures to mortgage-backed 
securities.  
What were the factors and the channels that contributed to the propagation of shocks and 
tensions from one market on one side of the Atlantic to several markets on both sides? The 
tensions  fundamentally  reflected  increased  uncertainty  and  a  loss  of  confidence  in  the 
valuations  of  structured  credit  instruments,  where  the  underlying  assets  are  US  subprime 
mortgages. This loss of confidence caused disruption in the asset-backed commercial paper 
(ABCP) market where “conduits” and structured investment vehicles (SIVs) were borrowing 
to fund their holdings of asset-backed securities. These financial “conduits” and SIVs faced 
difficulties to refinance themselves, that is, to roll over maturing ABCP because of concerns 
about their credit quality. The tensions in the ABCP markets – both in US dollar and euro – 
spread to the interbank money market on both sides of the Atlantic, as banks began hoarding 
liquidity to fund their commitments to provide liquidity and credit to these conduits and to put 
the  underlying  assets  on  their  balance  sheets.  Moreover,  banks  curtailed  their  lending  to 
other banks because of uncertainty surrounding potential exposures of their counterparties. 
These  developments  drove  up  interest  rates  for  the  very  short  term  funds  to  levels 
significantly above the ECB’s policy rates. 
The actions of the European Central Bank 
In this situation of heightened tension and a severe impairment of the functioning of the euro 
money market, the ECB stepped in and provided overnight liquidity to the interbank money 
markets  in  a  series  of  fine-tuning  operations.  These  took  the  form  of  reverse  repurchase 
agreement,  whereby  the  ECB  lends  funds  to  commercial  banks  against  eligible  collateral 
which are repurchased the next day, at the agreed price, by the counterparty. Initially, the 
ECB provided such funds at the policy interest rate of 4.00% without limit. Throughout the 
month of August, the ECB conducted a number of additional fine-tuning operations. It also 
provided  liquidity  through  its  weekly  main  refinancing  operations  and  two  supplementary 
longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of 3 months.  
The  aim  of  these  operations  was  to  ensure  orderly  conditions  in  the  interbank  money 
markets, to reduce short-term interest rate volatility and to contain the risk that tensions in 
the financial markets would propagate through the banking system. The ECB conducted the 
money  market  operations  without  changing  the  overall  stance  of  monetary  policy  and, 
needless to say, without aiming to “bail out” any specific financial institution with a special 
liquidity need. I emphasise this point because there has been a certain degree of confusion 
about  this.  It  is  important  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  two  types  of  key  central 
banking  actions.  On  the  one  hand,  central  banks  take  decisions  on  monetary  policy  and 
official  interest  rates  and  these  have  a  clear  medium-term  orientation  geared  towards  the 
preservation of price stability and they rest on the macroeconomic assessment of the risks to 
price stability. On the other hand, central banks may conduct money market operations that 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2007
provide liquidity to ensure the orderly functioning of the interbank money market. Put simply, 
monetary policy decisions are about the level of official interest rates, whereas certain central 
bank operations in the money market aim at the reduction of short-term interest rate volatility 
around  a  given  level  of  official  interest  rates,  for  the  purpose  of  safeguarding  financial 
stability.  
I  should  also  emphasise  that  throughout  this  episode  and  the  related  money  market 
operations, the ECB and the Eurosystem have been in close contact with other central banks 
in  the  world,  notably  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  While  each  monetary  authority  took 
decisions  to  attain  its  own  objectives  and  in  line  with  its  own  assessment  and  operational 
framework,  it  is  unquestionable  that  this  liquidity  squeeze  which  had  manifestly  global 
dimensions called for a response with commensurately global cooperation. 
Did the actions of the ECB and other central banks accomplish what had been intended? For 
the  European  side,  I  can  state  that  the  ECB’s  liquidity-providing  operations  clearly  had  a 
stabilising  effect  on  euro  money  market  rates  at  the  shortest  end,  and  overall,  the  money 
markets  have  recovered  somewhat.  However,  market  liquidity  remains  thin  and  activity 
limited in the unsecured inter-bank market, and spreads comparably higher. There are two 
main  reasons  for  this:  first,  banks’  liquidity  needs,  especially  in  US  dollar,  have  risen, 
because the credit lines extended to the various “conduits” and other financial entities have 
been  largely  used.  Second,  a  number  of  banks  are  still  reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other, 
particularly on an uncollateralised basis, in view of perceived counterparty risk. This attitude 
contributed  to  reduced  interbank  activity  –  and  this  in  spite  of  the  availability  of  abundant 
liquidity in the banking system as a whole. 
Lessons to be learnt 
In  the  light  of  these  developments  we,  as  policy-makers,  need  to  find  answers  to  two 
questions: What have been the sources and reasons of what we have witnessed? And what 
are the lessons to be learnt so as to try to avoid any repetition? It is still too early to make a 
definitive assessment of the combination of factors that explain what happened – and is still 
happening  –  in  credit  markets  and  of  the  consequences  of  the  market  liquidity  squeeze. 
However,  recent  developments  have  revealed  several  vulnerabilities  in  credit  markets  and 
allow  us  to  reach  some  tentative  conclusions.  I  should  note  that  a  number  of  these 
vulnerabilities and risks had been previously identified by the ECB, in its Financial Stability 
Review as well as by other central banks and international financial institutions. Some other 
vulnerabilities or structural weaknesses became visible during the recent developments. 
These vulnerabilities relate to features of new financial instruments and markets, new market 
participants,  new  business  models  of  credit  origination  and  risk  transfer  and  incentive 
structures that can affect the behaviour of market participants. In particular, I would like to 
stress  four  vulnerabilities  that  have  been  exposed  and  that  stem  from:  (i)  the  lack  of 
transparency  in  the  broader  credit  markets,  (ii)  the  valuation  of  structured  credit  products 
which  are  not  traded  frequently,  (iii)  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies,  and  (iv)  special-
purpose investment vehicles that are highly leveraged. 
First,  the  lack  of  transparency  in  credit  markets.  In  recent  years,  the  market  of  credit  risk 
transfer has facilitated a widespread sharing of credit risk across the financial markets which 
in general should enhance their efficiency and stability. Nevertheless, the market turbulence 
confirmed  previously  expressed  concerns  about  the  risks  stemming  from  the  lack  of 
transparency  as  to  where  credit  risks  ultimately  reside  in  the  financial  system,  that  is, 
whether they have been acquired by market participants that can manage them properly and 
how imperfect knowledge of the distribution and concentration of risks can affect participants’ 
behaviour and the liquidity of markets.  
Second, structured credit products whose valuations are model-determined. Even if risks are 
well  dispersed  across  the  system,  in  a  crisis  situation,  a  suspicion  that  some  financial 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 3
institutions could have exposures, event modest, to such assets for which no market value 
can be computed, can significantly impair the functioning of the market.  
Third, the activity of rating agencies has recently come under particular scrutiny. The issues 
related to the very small number of rating agencies, the possible conflicts of interest and the 
lack of benchmarks clearly need to be addressed in order to provide optimal conditions for 
the  efficient  functioning  of  the  complex  and  sophisticated  global  financial  markets.  What 
should be clear, however, from the current episode is that financial institutions should not rely 
exclusively on credit ratings for their risk assessments.  
Fourth, special-purpose investment vehicles that are highly leveraged. The financial market 
turmoil  has  highlighted  the  vulnerabilities  created  by  such,  off-balance  sheet,  investment 
vehicles, namely that such vehicles have proven, in the context of mark-to-market accounting 
of asset pools, to be prone to liquidity mismatches between their assets and liabilities. These 
mismatches caused contingent credit (and liquidity) lines to be drawn on banks and resulted 
in the increased demand for liquidity by banks in the (interbank) money market. 
These four issues are only some of the lessons to be learnt from this episode of financial 
market turmoil; there are others, pertaining, for example, to the liquidity risk management of 
banks.  We  need  to  carefully  assess  all  factors  of  relevance  to  the  recent  financial  market 
developments,  and  should  not  be  rushed  into  conclusions  without  a  thorough  and 
comprehensive analysis. 
Possible impact on the European financial system 
What  is  the  likely  overall  impact  of  the  recent  financial  market  developments  on  the 
European  financial  institutions?  Some  institutions  have  experienced  losses  from  their 
holdings  of  asset-backed  securities,  in  particular  as  a  result  of  both  direct  and  indirect 
exposures to US sub-prime mortgage securities. Moreover, a number of banks have faced 
liquidity pressures as credit lines to special-purpose investment vehicles had to be activated 
to  meet  commitments  to  provide  liquidity  support  and  as  a  result  of  increased  uncertainty 
about  counterparty  risk.  Nevertheless,  on  the  whole,  exposures  to  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage market manageable given the capital buffers. After several years of strong profit 
growth, including strong profitability in the first half of 2007, and with capital bases in excess 
of regulatory requirements, the shock-absorbing capacity of the euro area financial system – 
especially  the  core  financial  institutions  –  has  been  enhanced.  Although  the  profitability  of 
some European financial institutions is likely to be adversely affected to varying degrees by 
the recent strains in financial markets, the euro area banking system on the whole should 
have no major problems in absorbing the impact of recent disturbances. 
Looking  forward,  the  most  likely  scenario  is  that  financial  market  conditions  will  normalise 
progressively  over  a  period  of  time  –  which  could  be  protracted  depending,  among  other 
factors, on the progress made in restoring confidence in the valuation of credit instruments 
and the creditworthiness of counterparties. However, it cannot be excluded that some low-
probability, but plausible and challenging, scenarios for financial stability could be triggered 
by adverse market disturbances or “credit events” which would further affect global market 
liquidity  conditions.  A  potential  further  deterioration  in  credit  quality  could  lead  banks  to 
tighten  their  lending  standards  and a  less  benign  scenario  could  emerge  involving  a  more 
significant re-pricing of risk and de-leveraging. 
Concluding this assessment of some of the underlying causes and the likely consequences 
of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  I  want  to  stress  the  following:  The  recent  market  liquidity 
squeeze originated from a surge in default rates by a subset of borrowers with particularly 
weak credit histories and economic fundamentals. In other market segments and economic 
sectors, the fundamentals are broadly strong. In order to contain financial market volatility, it 
is  crucial,  at  the  current  juncture,  that  unanticipated  shocks  and  investor  concerns  do  not 
lead to unwarranted contagion to markets and sectors where the fundamentals are sound. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2007
The outlook for the European economy 
III.  
Against the background of this assessment of financial market developments, how do we see 
the outlook for the European economy? To what extent does the recent episode influence 
real economic activity in the euro area? The overall potential impact on the real economy of 
increased financial market volatility and the repricing of risk is difficult to gauge. So far, the 
effects of the market turbulence on the euro area economy have not been significant, despite 
some  tightening  of  financing  conditions.  Clearly,  the  potential  effect  will  depend  on  future 
financial market developments. The longer credit market tensions persist, the greater will be 
their  impact  on  the  economy.  The  most  likely  scenario  –  that  financial  market  conditions 
progressively normalise over a period of time – implies that the effects of the financial market 
turbulence  on  bank  intermediation  and  the  cost  of  capital  are  likely  to  be  contained. 
Therefore, even if lending standards are somewhat tighter than before and risk premia and 
the cost of capital increase by a modest amount, their impact on economic activity can be 
expected to be moderate.  
More  generally,  looking  ahead  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon,  we  should 
assess the likely effects of all relevant factors – economic, financial and monetary – on the 
European economy’s prospects. The good news is that the fundamentals of the euro area 
economy  remain  strong  and  global  economic  activity  is  expected  to  remain  robust.  The 
expected  slowdown  of  the  US  economy  is  likely  to  be  largely  offset  by  strong  growth  in 
emerging markets. In particular, the fast pace of expansion of economic activity in emerging 
Asia  is  expected  to  contribute  to  more  50%  of  the  projected  rate  of  growth  of  global 
aggregate  demand  outside  the  euro  area.  It  will,  therefore,  continue  to  provide  support  to 
European  exports  and  investment.  Moreover,  domestic  consumption  growth  should  rise 
gradually over time, as employment conditions are expected to improve further and in line 
with real disposable income developments. 
All in all, the strong economic fundamentals, the expected global robust economic growth in 
the remaining part of this year and in 2008, and our current assessment of the likely future 
financial market developments imply that average euro area real GDP growth in 2007 and in 
2008 will be negatively affected only slightly by the recent financial market turmoil and euro 
area  economic  activity  will  continue  to  expand  at  sustained  rates,  in  line  with  potential 
growth.  The  Eurosystem  staff  projections  published  earlier  this  month  foresee  average 
annual real GDP growth in a range between 2.2% and 2.8% in 2007, and between 1.8% and 
2.8% in 2008, the same range projected last June. I would like to emphasise, however, that 
there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the central, or most likely, scenario for future 
growth  and  that  there  are  several  downside  risks.  These  relate  mainly  to  a  potentially 
broader impact from the ongoing reappraisal of risk in financial markets, global imbalances, 
protectionist pressures, and further rises in oil and commodity prices. 
How about the outlook for and the risks to price stability? The medium-term outlook for price 
stability remains subject to upside risks. These risks relate to further increases in oil prices 
and  prices  for  agricultural  products,  stronger  than  expected  wage  developments,  and  a 
possible  increase  in  the  pricing  power  in  some  sectors,  and  the  continued  vigour  of  the 
underlying monetary and credit expansion, despite some stabilisation in the growth of bank 
credit to the private sector. 
The  current  assessment,  and  confirmation  of  the  previous  one,  that  upside  risks  to  price 
stability remain has implications for the stance of monetary policy. It implies that on the basis 
of the expected favourable medium-term outlook for real GDP growth, the monetary policy 
stance  is  still  on  the  accommodative  side  and  that  the  ECB  should  act  in  a  timely  and 
effective  manner  to  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not 
materialise.  At  the  same  time,  given  the  increase  in  uncertainty  surrounding  the  economic 
outlook, it is prudent and appropriate to wait and gather additional information before drawing 
any firm conclusions for monetary  policy. I should note that the uncertainty we face is not 
only related to the likelihood of some specific risks materialising that could affect the financial 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 5
and  product  markets,  but  it  also  pertains  to  the  ongoing  process  of  adjustment  of  the 
attitudes toward risk of financial institutions and other market participants, which could have 
a  bearing  on  financing  conditions.  So,  we  will  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  and 
continue to pay great attention to financial markets in the coming period. Having said that, I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  firmly  geared  towards  its  primary 
objective of preserving price stability. And especially during a period of increased uncertainty 
and market volatility, it is important that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored to price 
stability. 
The role of the European Central Bank 
IV.  
Having  presented  these  reflections  concerning  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the  current 
macroeconomic outlook and our monetary policy stance, allow me to conclude by touching 
upon some broader considerations regarding the role and policies of central banks and, in 
particular, of the European Central Bank. In this context, it is worth recalling that the ECB’s 
objective,  tasks  and  responsibilities  are  clearly  laid  down  in  the  EU  Treaty.  The  primary 
objective  of  the  ECB  –  and  the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole  –  is  to  maintain  price  stability. 
Furthermore,  the  ECB  is  to  support  the  general  economic  policies  of  the  Union,  aiming 
among  other  goals  at  sustainable  economic  growth,  provided  that  this  is  possible  without 
prejudice to the objective of price stability. There is, therefore, a clear hierarchy of objectives, 
and for good reason, as I will explain. The ECB and the Eurosystem are also called upon to 
“contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system” (Article 
105 of the EU Treaty). The objectives of price stability and financial stability are interrelated 
and mutually reinforcing, in that both serve to create conditions which are a prerequisite for 
economic growth and prosperity. 
Why  should  the  preservation  of  price  stability  be  the  primary,  overriding  objective  of 
monetary policy? Both theory and history provide strong arguments and evidence to support 
this  assignment.  First,  monetary  policy,  with  the  available  instruments  at  its  disposal,  can 
control  effectively  the  price  level  over  the  medium  and  longer  run.  Second,  by  contrast, 
monetary  policy  cannot  influence  the  level  or  rate  of  growth  of  aggregate  output  in  a 
permanent manner (or to any significant extent). Third, although in the short term a change in 
the monetary policy stance could affect economic activity under certain circumstances, such 
effects are uncertain, cannot be systematically exploited to stabilise the business cycle and 
there  is  a  risk  that  a  countercyclical  monetary  policy  could  be  counterproductive  and 
jeopardise  the  attainment  of  the  price  stability  goal.  Most  importantly,  by  establishing  an 
environment  of  price  stability,  a  central  bank  contributes  in  a  fundamental,  though  indirect 
way,  to  sustainable  economic  growth,  since  in  such  an  environment  reduced  inflation 
uncertainty,  inflation  expectations  anchored  to  price  stability  and  low  levels  of  long-term 
interest rates foster sustainable growth. For all these reasons, the mandates of most central 
banks in the advanced economies give primacy to the price stability objective. It is interesting 
to  note  that  a  major  central  bank  that  has  a  dual  mandate  has  emphasised  in  its 
communication some of the messages that I have stressed here, namely that price stability is 
a necessary precondition for growth. It is, therefore, appropriate not to ignore the conclusions 
of  theory  and  the  lessons  of  past  experience  when  discussing  the  objectives  of  monetary 
policy. 
I explained earlier at length the ECB’s monetary policy stance in order to fulfil its objective of 
preserving  price  stability.  How  does  the  ECB  perform  its  financial  stability  tasks?  First,  by 
monitoring  and  assessing  the  outlook  for  financial  stability,  and  notably  by  identifying  the 
main sources of risk and vulnerabilities across the three components of the financial system: 
markets,  institutions  and  infrastructures.  To  that  end,  the  ECB  produces  a  twice-yearly 
Financial Stability Review which aims to promote awareness in the financial industry and the 
public at large of financial stability issues, and, in this way, to play a role in the prevention of 
financial crises. The second strand of activities with which the ECB and the Eurosystem seek 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2007
to safeguard financial stability is by providing liquidity to financial markets or institutions in 
emergency situations, with a view to preventing the propagation of shocks across markets 
and institutions that might transform a single incident into a wide-spread crisis with systemic 
repercussions, as I explained earlier. 
For a central bank to attain its primary objective and perform its tasks effectively, a number of 
conditions  –  institutional,  operational,  and  analytical  –  must  be  in  place.  An  essential 
condition for the effective performance of the central bank’s functions is its independence, 
meaning that it can take decisions on the appropriate policy to achieve its objectives without 
being  subject  to  any  pressure  or  interference  by  the  government  and  any  other  political 
authorities.  There  are  strong  theoretical  arguments  why  the  central  bank  should  be 
independent.  But  the  most  convincing  reason,  which  has  led  many  governments  to 
depoliticise monetary policy and grant independence to the central bank, is past experience 
and the empirical evidence.  
Europe’s  “monetary  constitution”  enshrines  the independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  national 
central banks in the EU Treaty. But this is not only a case where the law has been made the 
“guardian  of  economic  wisdom”,  it  also  reflects  the  will  of  the  peoples  of  Europe,  and  the 
value  which  they  attach  to  price  stability.  Recent  public  opinion  surveys  demonstrate  that 
more than seven out of ten Europeans think that the ECB should be free from influence of 
politicians  in  order  to  pursue  its  task  to  preserve  price  stability.  If  we,  therefore,  publicly 
reiterate the Treaty provisions about central bank independence, we are also lending a voice 
to  this  overwhelming  majority  of  European  citizens  who  support  our  well-established  and 
tried-and-tested institutional framework.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 7
