Rakesh Mohan: India's financial sector reforms – fostering growth while 
containing risk 
Address  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  Yale 
University, New Haven, 3 December 2007. 
Assistance  of  Michael  Patra,  Muneesh  Kapur  and  Indranil  Bhattacharya  in  preparing  the  speech  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 I am honoured to be back at Yale where I got my basic economics grounding from James 
Tobin, Bill Nordhaus, and Robert Evenson, among others. In all these years, this is my first 
lecture at Yale, so I am particularly pleased to have this opportunity. Thank you Professor 
Srinivasan. 
The  turmoil  in  international  financial  markets  since  late  July  this  year  and  the  increased 
uncertainty that financial markets are currently experiencing have brought issues relating to 
financial  sector  stability  to  the  fore.  In  some  ways,  the  recent  developments  are 
unprecedented in their occurrence and in terms of the emerging magnitude of financial sector 
losses.  The  sudden  loss  of  confidence  among  traditional  counterparties  reflects  extreme 
information  asymmetry  arising  from  the  complex  layering  of  risk  diffusion  and  high 
leveraging; and the breakdown of risk assessment by reputed rating agencies and the like. 
The  speed  of  contagion  and  the  extensive  involvement  of  large,  reputed  and  regulated 
financial institutions are indicative of regulatory shortcomings, which has then necessitated 
unconventional responses of central banks. All this has raised serious concerns relating to 
the  ability  and  flexibility  of  national  financial  systems  to  withstand  shocks  emanating  from 
such unusual developments. It has also spurred some reconsideration on some aspects of 
monetary policy and of financial regulation, particularly as they relate to the maintenance of 
financial stability.  
India  has  so  far  remained  relatively  insulated  from  these  developments  and  our  impact 
analyses suggest that our exposure to troubled sub-prime assets and related derivatives is 
negligible in comparison to many other economies. Whereas this may be regarded by some 
as fortuitous, it is perhaps our nuanced approach to financial sector reform and development 
that has served us well; our approach has been marked by conscious gradualism with the 
implementation of coordinated and sequenced moves on several fronts that are predicated 
on the preparedness for change of the financial system in particular, and of the economy in 
general.  We  have  also  built  in  appropriate  safeguards  to  ensure  stability,  while  taking 
account  of  the  prevailing  governance  standards,  risk  management  systems  and  incentive 
frameworks  in  financial  institutions  in  the  country.  Overall,  these  progressive  but  cautious 
policies  have  contributed  to  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  while  sustaining  the  growth 
momentum in an environment of macroeconomic and financial stability. Nevertheless, we in 
the Reserve Bank are maintaining enhanced vigilance to be able to respond appropriately to 
the prevailing heightened uncertainties in global financial conditions. The policy challenge is 
to  continue  to  ensure  financial  stability  in  India  during  this  period  of  international  financial 
turbulence, while maintaining the momentum of high growth accompanied by price stability.  
Against this backdrop, I thought I would take this opportunity to review India's approach to 
financial  sector  reforms,  the  path  we  have  traversed  for  over  almost  two  decades  from  a 
restrictive,  even  repressed  past,  the  nuances  of  our  somewhat  unorthodox  approach  to 
instituting competition and efficiency in financial intermediation and the challenges we face in 
the development of our financial sector in the years ahead.  
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
Financial sector reforms and outcomes 
I.  
In retrospect, the key success of financial sector reforms in India since they were instituted in 
the early 1990s has been the maintenance of financial stability through a period marked by 
repeated financial crises across the world. The process of reforms is noteworthy not only for 
the turbulence around its path but also for the sheer dimensions of the change achieved from 
the position where we started.  
Until the beginning of the 1990s, the state of the financial sector in India could be described 
as  a  classic  example  of  “financial  repression”  (MacKinnon  1973;  Shaw  1973).  The  sector 
was characterised, inter alia, by administered interest rates, large pre-emption of resources 
by the authorities, extensive micro-regulations directing the major portion of the flow of funds 
to  and  from  financial  intermediaries,  relatively  opaque  accounting  norms  and  limited 
disclosure,  and  dominant  public  ownership.  Compartmentalisation  of  activities  of  different 
types of financial intermediaries and strong entry barriers thwarted competition resulting in 
low levels of efficiency and productivity and severe credit constraints on the private sector, 
especially in the absence of any access to external finance. Capitalisation levels were low 
due to lack of commercial considerations in credit planning and weak recovery culture which 
also  resulted  in  large  accumulation  of  non-performing  loans.  The  predominance  of 
Government  securities  in  the  fixed-income  securities  market  of  India  mainly  reflected  the 
captive  nature  of  this  market  as  most  financial  intermediaries  were  mandated  to  invest  a 
sizeable portion of funds mobilised by them in such securities to finance high Government 
borrowings  at  administered/concessional  interest  rates.  In  the  capital  market,  new  equity 
issues were governed by a plethora of complex  regulations and extensive restrictions with 
very  little  transparency  and  depth  in  the  secondary  market  trading  of  such  securities. 
Comprehensive exchange control resulted in little depth in the foreign exchange market with 
most external transactions governed by inflexible/low limits and prior approval requirements. 
Monetary policy was subservient to the fisc. The provision of fiscal accommodation through 
ad hoc treasury bills led to high levels of monetisation of fiscal deficit during the major part of 
the  1980s.  The  expansionary  effects  of  fiscal  spending  were  sought  to  be  curbed  through 
interest  rate  regulations,  credit  rationing  and  high  reserve  requirements,  effectively 
preventing the development of financial markets.  
Elsewhere,  I  have  attempted  to  document  the  various  facets  of  India’s  experience  with 
financial sector reforms – the guiding objectives and intellectual/analytical underpinnings; the 
choice of pace and sequencing; specific aspects of policy measures for the banking sector, 
non-bank  financial  companies,  term  lending  institutions  and  other  financial  intermediaries; 
development of financial markets; and changes in the monetary policy framework (Mohan, 
2004;  Mohan,  2006c).  Today,  I  propose  to  undertake  an  evaluation  of  the  financial  sector 
reforms in terms of actual outcomes.  
Monetary policy 
II.1  
While assessing monetary policy, it would be reasonable to assert that it has been largely 
successful  in  meeting  its  key  objectives  in  the  post-reforms  period  since  the  early  1990s. 
Inflation has averaged close to five per cent per annum in the decade gone by, notably lower 
than the average of 7-8 per cent in the previous four decades. Structural reforms from the 
early 1990s coupled with improved monetary-fiscal interface and reforms in the Government 
securities market enabled better monetary management from the second half of the 1990s 
onwards.  A  number  of  other  factors  such  as  increased  competition,  productivity  gains  and 
strong  corporate  balance  sheets  have  also  contributed  to  this  low  and  stable  inflation 
environment, but it appears that calibrated monetary measures had a substantial role to play 
as  well.  More  importantly,  the  regime  of  low  and  stable  inflation  has,  in  turn,  stabilised 
inflation expectations and the threshold level of inflation tolerance in the economy has come 
down significantly (Table 1).  
 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2007
  
It is encouraging to note that despite the high international crude oil prices, other commodity 
prices and elevated food prices, inflation remains low and inflation expectations appear to be 
consistent and stable. Consequently, both nominal and real interest rates have fallen. Due to 
both financial restructuring and low interest rates in recent years, the growth rate in interest 
expenses  of  the  corporates  has  declined  consistently  since  1995-96;  such  decline  has 
significant  implications  for  the  improvement  in  bottom  lines  of  the  corporates  sector  as  a 
whole and their resilience to financial shocks.  
In  terms  of  the  monetary  policy  framework,  India’s  approach  has  been  somewhat 
unorthodox.  Traditionally,  central  banks  have  pursued  the  twin  objectives  of  price  stability 
and  growth  or  employment,  while  in  recent  years,  greater  attention  has  been  given  to  the 
maintenance of price stability through inflation targeting regimes. Although there is no explicit 
mandate  for  price  stability  in  the  Indian  context,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India 
have  evolved  as  those  of  maintaining  a  judicious  balance  between  price  stability  and 
ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy. Considerations of 
financial  stability,  however,  have  ascended  the  hierarchy  of  monetary  policy  objectives  in 
recent years in view of the increasing openness of the Indian economy, financial integration 
and  the  possibility  of  cross  border  contagion.  Accordingly,  we  believe  that  regulation, 
supervision  and  development  of  the  financial  system  remain  within  the  legitimate  ambit  of 
overall monetary policy broadly interpreted.  
In  the  wake  of  financial  sector  reforms  and  opening  up  of  the  economy  in  the  1990s,  the 
Reserve  Bank  switched  over  in  1998-99  to  a  multiple  indicator  approach  whereby 
macroeconomic  and  financial  market  data  on  both  quantum  and  rate  variables  are  all 
examined,  along  with  output,  in  framing  monetary  policy.  We  believe  that  the  specific 
features  of  the  Indian  economy,  including  its  socio-economic  characteristics,  make  it 
necessary  for  the  monetary  authority  to  operate  with  multiple  objectives  and  indicators  for 
some  time  to  come.  A  single  objective  for  monetary  policy,  as  is  usually  advocated, 
particularly  in  an  inflation  targeting  (IT)  framework,  is  a  luxury  that  India  cannot  afford,  at 
least over the medium term. As regards IT, even though there has been an increase in the 
number  of  central  banks  adopting  IT  since  the  early  1990s,  a  number  of  central  banks, 
notably the Federal Reserve, retain multiple objectives. 
Internationally, there is no unique or even best way of monetary policy making and different 
approaches  or  frameworks  can  lead  to  successful  policies  by  adapting  appropriately  to 
diverse  institutional,  economic  and  social  environments  (Issing,  2004).  Moreover,  some 
evidence suggests that average inflation as well as its volatility in prominent non-IT industrial 
countries has, in fact, been somewhat lower than that in prominent IT industrial countries. IT 
is  not  found  to  have  any  beneficial  effect  on  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates  either 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 3
(Gramlich,  2003;  Ball  and  Sheridan,  2003).  Furthermore,  an  IT  framework  reduces  the 
flexibility available to a central bank in reacting to shocks (Kohn, 2003). EMEs face additional 
problems in an IT regime. These economies are typically more open and it exposes them to 
large exchange rate shocks which can have a significant influence on short-run inflation. A 
boom-bust  pattern  of  capital  flows  can  lead  to  substantial  movements  in  exchange  rates. 
EMEs may have to manage exchange rates more heavily since they are more commodity-
price sensitive than advanced economies and commodity price fluctuations can wreak havoc 
with  the  forecastability  of  consumer  price  inflation  (Eichengreen,  2002).  An  empirical 
evaluation  of  the  experience  of  EMEs  that  have  adopted  IT  confirms  that  IT  is  a  more 
challenging task in such economies compared to developed economies that have adopted 
IT. While inflation in EMEs was indeed lower after they adopted IT, their performance was 
not  as  good  as  that  experienced  in  developed  IT  countries.  Deviation  of  inflation  from  its 
targets is found to be larger and more common in EMEs (Fraga, Minella and Goldfaj, 2003). 
Inflation targeting by itself is not a sufficient condition for success. In view of the above, the 
characterization of inflation targeting as "the gold standard for stabilizing monetary policy" is 
misleading. Indeed, in the recent episode of financial market turmoil, even central banks with 
explicit inflation targeting or price stability as the predominant objective were forced to scale 
down the emphasis on price stability, notwithstanding continued inflationary pressures. Such 
central banks had to inject liquidity and reduce policy rates – in some cases, holding back the 
earlier expectations of tightening – as they had to lay greater emphasis on financial stability 
and growth.  
The overall macroeconomic record of the Indian economy since the early 1990s indicates an 
acceleration in growth and a significant reduction in inflation. Inflation has averaged below 5 
per cent in the current decade so far, substantially lower than that of around 8 per cent in the 
preceding two and a half decades. Pre-emptive monetary and prudential measures have led 
to this welcome situation of a reduction in inflation and acceleration in growth while ensuring 
financial stability. Indeed, a cross-country comparison of major EMEs that have adopted IT 
indicates that growth in India has been amongst the highest while inflation remains relatively 
low (Table 2). Amongst the sample of G-20 and major Asian countries, growth in India during 
2000-2007 was the second highest after China. Inflation in India during the current decade 
has  halved  from  that  prevailing  during  the  1990s  and  is,  at  present,  lower  than  many 
developing  economies.  A  recent  survey  by  McKinsey  and  Company  of  CEOs  across  the 
world,  in  both  developed  countries  and  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs),  found  that 
among  all  the  countries  surveyed,  India  had  the  highest  proportion  of  CEOs,  40  per  cent, 
who did not expect inflation to increase in coming years (McKinsey Quarterly, 2007). Thus, it 
would  appear  that,  at  least,  among  business  leaders,  inflation  expectations  are  well-
anchored  in  India.  Although  there  has  been  above  average  growth  in monetary  and  credit 
aggregates in the past 3-4 years, financial stability has been maintained through a judicious 
use  of  monetary  and  prudential  measures.  Thus,  the  recent  record  of  macroeconomic 
management  in  India  is  exemplary,  even  amongst  the  EMEs  that  target  inflation.  The 
challenge for monetary policy now is to reduce inflation further in the medium term towards 
international levels, while maintaining the momentum of high growth and preserving financial 
stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2007
 Banking sector 
II.2 
In  the  post-reform  period,  banks  have  experienced  strong  balance  sheet  growth  in  an 
environment  of  operational  flexibility.  Concomitantly,  the  financial  health  of  banks  has 
improved  significantly,  both  in  terms  of  capital  adequacy  and  asset  quality.  Moreover,  this 
progress  has  been  achieved  while  setting  the groundwork  for  the  adoption  of  international 
best  practices  in  prudential  and  accounting  norms.  Increased  competitiveness  and 
productivity gains have also been enabled by proactive technological deepening and flexible 
human  resource  management.  These  significant  gains  have  been  achieved  even  while 
renewing our commitment to social banking viz., maintaining the wide reach of the banking 
system  and  directing  credit  towards  important  but  disadvantaged  sectors  of  society.  The 
banking system's wide reach, judged in terms of expansion of branches and the growth of 
credit and deposits indicates continued financial deepening (Mohan, 2006a).  
On the liability side, deposits continue to account for about 80 per cent of the total liabilities 
while  on  the  asset  side,  the  shares  of  loans  and  advances  and  investments  have  seen 
marked  cycles,  reflecting  banks'  portfolio  preferences  as  well  as  growth  cycles  in  the 
economy. In this regard, while the share of loans and advances declined in the second half 
of  1990s  on  account  of  the  industrial  slowdown  as  well  as  tightening  of  prudential  norms, 
banks' credit portfolio has witnessed sharp growth in the period 2003-07.  
BIS Review 145/2007 
 5
The  overall  capital  position  of  commercial  banks  has  witnessed  a  marked  improvement 
during  the  reform  period  (Table  3).  Illustratively,  as  at  end-March  2007,  all  81  scheduled 
commercial banks operating in India maintained CRAR at or above 9 per cent relative to the 
Basel I norm of 8 per cent. For the Indian banking system, the ratio of capital to risk weighted 
assets  works  out  to  13  per  cent  currently.  While  improved  capitalisation  of  public  sector 
banks  was  initially  brought  through  infusion  of  funds  by  government  to  recapitalise  these 
banks,  subsequently,  public  sector  banks  were  allowed  to  raise  funds  from  the  market 
through equity issuance subject to the maintenance of 51 per cent public ownership. As a 
result, ownership in public sector banks is now well diversified.  
 
  
Despite tightening prudential norms in terms of classification of non-performing assets, the 
resulting measured asset quality of banks has improved considerably as the share of non-
performing  loans  (NPLs)  (as  ratios  of  both  total  advances  and  assets)  have  declined 
substantially  and  consistently  since  the  mid-1990s.  In  fact,  the  ratio  of  net  NPLs  to  net 
advances at 1.0 per cent in India is now comparable to that of several advanced economies 
(Table  4).  Improvement  in  the  credit  appraisal  process,  upturn  of  the  business  cycle,  new 
initiatives 
the  Securitisation  and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act), 
and  greater  provisioning  and  write-off  of  NPLs  enabled  by  greater  profitability,  have 
contributed to the reduction in incremental NPLs. 
for  resolution  of  NPLs  (including  promulgation  of 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2007
 
Efficiency gains are reflected in containment of the operating expenditure as a proportion of 
total  assets  (Table  5).  This  has  been  achieved  in  spite  of  large  expenditures  incurred  by 
Indian  banks  in  installation  and  upgradation  of  information  technology  and,  in  the  case  of 
public sector banks, large expenditures under voluntary pre-mature retirement of nearly 12 
per cent of their total staff strength. 
  
  BIS Review 145/2007 
  7
In consonance with the objective of enhancing efficiency and productivity of banks through 
greater competition, there has been a consistent decline in the share of public sector banks 
in  total  assets  of  commercial  banks.  Nevertheless,  public  sector  banks  appear  to  have 
responded to the new challenges of competition, as reflected in their increased share in the 
overall  profit  of  the  banking  sector.  This  suggests  that,  with  operational  flexibility,  public 
sector  banks  are  competing  relatively  effectively  with  private  sector  and  foreign  banks. 
Shares of Indian private sector banks, especially new private sector banks established in the 
1990s,  in  the  total  income  and  assets  of  the  banking  system  have  increased  considerably 
since the mid-1990s (Table 6).  
 
  
Indian private sector banks, particularly new private sector banks, have made rapid progress 
in terms of increasing their income and asset size since the mid-1990s. In terms of branch 
expansion, the compound growth rate of private sector banks over the period 2002-07 was 
almost three times that of all scheduled commercial banks and more than four times that of 
public  sector  banks  (Table  7).  Among  the  private  sector  banks,  the  four  big  banks  viz., 
Centurion  Bank  of  Punjab,  HDFC  Bank,  ICICI  Bank  and  UTI/Axis  bank  have  experienced 
rapid  branch  expansion  in  the  range  of  16-46  per  cent  per  annum  in  terms  of  compound 
growth rates. While private sector banks, as a group, have recorded a compound growth of 
24 per cent per annum in their staff, public sector banks have witnessed a decline in the staff 
strength over the same period reflecting, inter alia, restructuring facilitated by greater use of 
8 
 BIS Review 145/2007
technology and computerisation. In terms of growth of capital and reserves and surplus, the 
new private sector banks experienced annual growth in the range of 30-68 per cent, while 
deposits and advances have increased by 32-51 per cent and 39-71 per cent, respectively. 
Net  profits  recorded  a  compound  annual  growth  of  27-36  per  cent.  In  terms  of  all  these 
parameters, private sector banks grew much faster than the existing private sector banks, as 
might be expected. 
There has been some discussion in recent times on the policy of branch licensing of banks 
by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India:  that  it  could  have  restricted  competition  and  growth  of  new 
banks.  These  data  exhibit  the  very  high  growth  experienced  by  the  leading  private  sector 
banks  and  it  is  arguable  whether  there  could  have  been  much  faster  expansion  without 
impairing their prudential quality and integrity of their balance sheets.  
What is most encouraging is the very significant improvement in the productivity of the Indian 
banking  system  in  terms  of  various  productivity  indicators  (Mohan,  2006a).  These 
improvements could be driven by two factors: technological improvement, which expands the 
range of production possibilities and a catching up effect, as peer pressure amongst banks 
compels  them  to  raise  productivity  levels.  Here,  the  role  of  new  business  practices,  new 
approaches and expansion of the business introduced by the new private banks have been 
of the utmost importance. 
To  sum  up,  significant  improvement  in  the  performance  of  public  sector  banks  has  been 
witnessed over the past decade or so, facilitated by the phased introduction of wide-ranging 
financial  sector  reforms  since  the  early  1990s.  Gradual  introduction  of  best  international 
practices  and  norms,  refinements 
tightening  of  risk 
weights/provisioning norms in regard to sectors witnessing high credit growth, greater market 
discipline brought about by raising of capital from the capital markets and listing on the stock 
exchanges,  interest  rate  deregulation,  and  scaling  down  of  statutory  pre-emptions  are 
amongst  the  key  factors  that  have  led  to  better  performance.  Concomitantly,  greater 
competition has been induced in the domestic banking sector by successful introduction of 
new  generation  private  sector  banks.  Despite  strong  growth  in  balance  sheets  of  the  new 
banks, the banking system has exhibited remarkable stability. Although there have been a 
few instances of weaknesses in a few new private sector banks, pre-emptive measures in 
the form of the mergers of such banks with stronger banks, or infusion of new capital and 
change in ownership, on a voluntary or involuntary basis, have contributed to the strength of 
the  domestic  banking  system,  engendered  confidence  in  the  depositors  and  enabled 
maintenance  of  overall financial  stability.  Notwithstanding  the  substantial  improvement,  the 
domestic  banking  system  will  need  to  be  further  strengthened  to  face  greater  external 
competition and introduction of financial innovations and fuller capital account convertibility. 
the  supervisory  practices, 
in 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 9
  Financial markets 
II.3  
The most notable impact of financial sector reforms is clearly discernible in the development 
of various segments of financial markets in India. The reforms since the early 1990s have led 
to  a  regime  characterised  by  market-determined  interest  and  exchange  rates,  price-based 
10 
 BIS Review 145/2007
instruments  of  monetary  policy,  current  account  convertibility,  substantial  capital  account 
liberalisation and vibrant government securities and capital markets. Derivative instruments 
have been cautiously introduced in a phased manner, both for product diversity and, more 
importantly, as a risk management tool. All these developments have facilitated the process 
of price discovery in various financial market segments. 
There  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  trading  volumes  and  market  liquidity  (Table  8). 
Illustratively, average daily turnover in the money market has increased from Rs.427 billion in 
1997-98  to  over  Rs.888  billion  by  2006-07.  The  operations  under  the  liquidity  adjustment 
facility  (LAF)  have  largely  been  able  to  steer  overnight  rates  within  the  corridor  set  by  the 
policy  rates.  Under  the  LAF,  the  Reserve  Bank  absorbs  (reverse  repo)  as  well  as  injects 
(repo)  liquidity,  depending  upon  the  liquidity  conditions  and  consistent  with  the  overall 
monetary policy stance. Changes in fixed reverse repo/repo rates set by the RBI from time to 
time  for  the  conduct  of  LAF,  under  which  the  central  bank  conducts  daily  auctions  for  the 
banks,  have  emerged  as  the  main  instruments  for  interest  rate  signalling  in  the  Indian 
economy.  
  
Inter-bank turnover in the foreign exchange market has nearly quadrupled between 2000-01 
and 2006-07 to Rs. 840 billion. Average daily turnover in the foreign exchange market (inter-
bank as well as merchant) has increased from US $ 5 billion in 1997-98 to US $ 23 billion by 
2006-07.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  Indian  rupee  has  exhibited  significant  two-way 
movements in the recent years. Efficiency in the foreign exchange market has also improved 
as reflected in the decline in bid-ask spreads.  
In  the  government  securities  market,  the  issuance  of  long-term  securities  has  enabled  the 
development of yield curve across 30-year maturity. In the government securities market, the 
drop in turnover in 2004-05 and 2005-06 could be attributed to factors such as “buy and hold” 
tendency  of  the  participants  such  as  insurance  companies,  which  now  hold  a  substantial 
portion of government securities, particularly those of longer maturities. Furthermore, certain 
regulatory changes introduced in late 2004 allowing banks to hold a larger proportion of their 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 11
investment  portfolio  in  the  “held  to  maturity”  (HTM)  category  reduced  the  proportion  of 
portfolio used for trading, thereby affecting the magnitude of G-sec trading. The decline could 
also be attributed to the increase in interest rates over the period, which prompted banks and 
other players to hold rather than trade, so as to avoid trading losses. To keep the markets 
liquid  and  active,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  allowed  short  selling  in  government 
securities among eligible participants, and trading in the “when issued” segment, but these 
facilities have not seen much activity yet. Efforts are also on to increase liquidity through the 
active consolidation of existing securities.  
The derivatives market has also gained vibrancy during the last couple of years. The total 
notional principal amount outstanding has more than trebled between March 2005 and June 
2007 led by a significant jump in interest rate related contracts. Over this period, while the 
notional  amount  under  interest  rate  related  contracts  quadrupled,  that  in  foreign  exchange 
contracts nearly trebled (Table 9). Certain legislative changes in 2006 provided clear legal 
legitimacy to OTC derivative contracts, which was somewhat ambiguous earlier. 
 
  
The  Government  and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  along  with  the  Reserve 
Bank  are  taking  steps  to  activate  the  corporate  debt  market.  As  has  been  experienced 
elsewhere,  among  the  various  financial  markets,  the  corporate  debt  market  is  indeed  the 
most  difficult  to  develop  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  The  expansion  of  the  pension  fund  and 
insurance  industries  will  progressively  result  in  the  presence  of  a  larger  financial  investor 
base,  which  will  help  in  the  overall  expansion  of  financial  markets  and  in  particular  the 
corporate debt market. 
It is quite apparent that there exist well-functioning, deep, liquid, and well-integrated markets 
for bonds, currency and derivatives in India, contrary to what is often asserted. The trading 
volumes have generally witnessed significant growth in the various segments of the financial 
market.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  increase  in  foreign  exchange  market  turnover  in  India 
between April 2004 and April 2007 was the highest amongst the 54 countries covered in the 
latest  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and  Derivatives  Market  Activity 
conducted  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  According  to  the  survey,  daily 
average turnover in India jumped almost 5-fold from US $ 7 billion in April 2004 to US $ 34 
billion in April 2007; global turnover over the same period rose by only 66 per cent from US $ 
2.4  trillion  to  US  $  4.0  trillion.  Reflecting  these  trends,  the  share  of  India  in  global  foreign 
exchange  market  turnover  trebled  from  0.3  per  cent  in  April  2004  to  0.9  per  cent  in  April 
2007.  In  view  of  the  above,  comments  that  are  often  made  regarding  missing  financial 
markets are rather misleading. Moreover, empirical evidence points towards greater market 
12 
 BIS Review 145/2007
integration  (Mohan,  2007c).  A  good  deal  of  development  has  indeed  taken  place  in  the 
government securities market, the forex market, OTC interest rate derivatives and the like. 
The  corporate  bond  market  is  indeed  in  its  infancy;  and, more  efforts  have  to  be  made  to 
develop various exchange traded derivative markets. 
It,  however,  needs  to  be  recognised  that  financial  markets  are  often  governed  by  herd 
behaviour and contagion. Deregulation, liberalisation, emergence of financial conglomerates 
and globalisation of financial markets pose growing risks to financial stability. In this regard, it 
needs to be stressed that volatility in currency and bond markets can have significantly more 
adverse employment, output and distributional consequences compared to volatility in equity 
markets. Premature liberalisation of money and bond markets can lead to large and volatile 
capital  inflows,  which  could  potentially  exacerbate  complications  for  macroeconomic  and 
monetary  management.  Furthermore,  excessive  fluctuations  and  volatility  in  financial 
markets  can  mask  the  underlying  value  and  give  confusing  signals,  as  has  happened  in 
developed  markets,  thereby  hindering  efficient  price  discovery  (Mohan,  2006c).  As  large 
segments  of  economic  agents  in  India  may  not  have  adequate  resilience  to  withstand 
volatility in currency and money markets, the Reserve Bank’s policy approach has been to be 
increasingly vigilant and proactive to any incipient signs of volatility in financial markets.  
Notwithstanding the progress made since the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank recognises that 
domestic financial markets need to develop much further, especially in order to support the 
recent  acceleration  in  growth  momentum  of  the  Indian  economy  and  in  the  context  of  the 
envisaged  move  towards  fuller  capital  account  convertibility.  The  Indian  experience 
demonstrates  that  development  of  markets  is  an  arduous  and  time  consuming  task  that 
requires  conscious  policy  actions  and  effective  implementation.  Without  real  sector 
development  in  terms  of  the  physical  infrastructure  and  improvement  in  supply  elasticities, 
the  financial  sector  can  misallocate  resources,  potentially  generate  bubbles  and  possibly 
amplify the risks. Hence, financial sector reforms have complementarity with the pace and 
process of reforms in the real sector in India.  
Given  the  large  weight  on  stability,  especially  in  view  of  low  income  levels  for  a  large 
segment  of  the  population,  the  careful  and  cautious  approach  to  development  of  financial 
markets followed so far would need to be pursued in the coming years. The pace of further 
progress would depend upon the development of the necessary expertise in the public sector 
banks, further expansion of private sector banks and foreign banks. We recognise the need 
to  develop  further  various  segments  of  the  domestic  financial  market  to  help  in  better  risk 
management by various market participants. The demand for various risk management tools 
could be expected to increase, especially in the presence of potentially larger fluctuations in 
exchange rate and interest rates in the future. In recognition of the need to widen the range 
of instruments available to market participants, the Reserve Bank has placed draft guidelines 
on  introduction  of  credit  derivatives  in  the  country.  More  recently,  a  draft  report  on  the 
introduction of currency futures in India has also been put in the public domain for comments 
and feedback; and work is in progress on the introduction of interest rate futures.  
Summing up, it is widely recognised that the Indian financial sector over the last decade has 
been transformed into a reasonably sophisticated, diverse and resilient system delivering a 
wide variety of financial services efficiently and profitably, with a spectrum of financial market 
segments in which financial institutions are able to participate with operational and functional 
autonomy  in  an  environment  of  increasing  deregulation  and  international  competition.  The 
acceleration  of  growth  in  the  real  economy  suggests  that  the  financial  system  has  served 
well  the  overall  needs  of  the  economy.  During  this  period,  while  the  global  financial 
environment has become more risky in the wake of new instruments and participants and the 
rapid advance in communication technology integrating markets worldwide, a unique feature 
of  the  Indian  reform  process  is  that  it  has  been  instituted  and  carried  forward  with  the 
objective  of  sustaining  and  accelerating  the  growth  momentum  while  containing  risk  and 
entrenching financial stability. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 13
Indian reform outcomes in the international context  
III.  
Some  commentators  have  criticised  the  Indian  approach  to  financial  sector  reforms  as 
unclear,  timid  and  conservative  in  the  context  of  the  cross-country  experience  and  have 
advocated more bold and drastic measures so as to speed up the transition to higher growth. 
There  is  also  some  discomfort  with  our  approach  to  foreign  banks,  although  even  in  this 
regard, we are ahead of WTO norms and we have set up roadmaps and review deadlines 
conditional  upon  broader  consensus  on  international  commerce  in  financial  services. 
Admittedly, we have been cautious and somewhat conservative in our approach to financial 
sector reforms relative to some other EMEs. In this regard, it is important to note that not only 
has  there  been  a  steady  upward  shift  in  India’s  growth  path,  but  this  has  also  been 
accompanied  by  enduring  stability.  A  remarkable  feature  of  India's  growth  experience  has 
been  its  resilience  to  both  global  and  domestic  shocks.  In  this  regard,  while  the  broad 
objectives  of  financial  sector  reforms  were  to  enhance  efficiency  and  productivity,  the 
process of reforms was initiated in a gradual and properly sequenced manner so as to have 
a reinforcing effect. The approach has been to consistently upgrade the financial sector by 
adopting the international best practices through a consultative process. 
With  increased  deregulation  of  financial  markets  and  increased  integration  of  the  global 
economy, the 1990s were turbulent for global financial markets: 63 countries suffered from 
systemic  banking  crises  in  that  decade,  and  45  in  the  1980s.  Among  countries  that 
experienced such crises, the direct cost of reconstructing the financial system was typically 
very high: for example, recapitalisation of banks had cost 55 per cent of GDP in Argentina, 
42 per cent in Thailand, 35 per cent in Korea and 10 per cent in Turkey. There were high 
indirect costs of lost opportunities and slow economic growth in addition (McKinsey & Co., 
2005). It is therefore particularly noteworthy that India could pursue its process of financial 
deregulation  and  opening  of  the  economy  without  suffering  financial  crises  during  this 
turbulent period in world financial markets. The cost of recapitalisation of public sector banks 
at less than 1 per cent of GDP is therefore low in comparison. 
In  our  own  assessment,  the  gradualist  approach  has  been  appropriate,  particularly  in  the 
context  of  democratic  polity,  and  given  the  multi-ethnic  and  linguistic  composition  of  the 
country.  The  steady  pace  of  reforms  has  borne  fruit,  including  larger  sections  of  society 
within  the  reform  process.  What  is  remarkable  is  the  sheer  magnitude  and  quality  of  the 
reform  effort  as  evident  in  actual  outcomes.  The  banking  system  in  India  has  undergone 
significant  changes  during  the  last  16  years.  A  cross-country  survey  of  crucial  banking 
indicators reveals that the Indian banking system is now comparable to those of developed 
economies in terms of key indicators (Table 10). The capital adequacy ratio at 12.4 per cent 
for  the  system  as  a  whole  at  end  March  2006  is  comparable  to  that  of  most  advanced 
economies. Similarly, banks’ non-performing loans to total loans have steadily declined and 
are lower than many emerging economies. In terms of return on assets, the Indian banking 
system’s performance is comparable to that of advanced economies such as Germany and 
the U.K. 
 
14 
 BIS Review 145/2007
  
Cross-country  comparisons  indicate  that  many  other  countries  have  also  achieved 
considerable progress in strengthening their banking sector. However, a noteworthy aspect 
of the Indian experience is that we have been able to strengthen our banking system without 
any crisis and with negligible cost to the fisc, while simultaneously achieving acceleration in 
growth, price stability and consistent development of financial markets. Our banking sector 
reform  has  been  unique  in  the  world  in  that  it  combines  a  comprehensive  reorientation  of 
competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. Indeed, 
our banking reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the 
overhang problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign 
private sectors to compete and expand (Reddy, 2007).  
The overall stability that has been imparted to a system undergoing reforms has served us 
well  so  far  in  the  face  of  the  recent  financial  developments.  To  exemplify  the  argument,  I 
thought I would spend some time on the recent financial developments, possible causes and 
likely consequences so as to better appreciate the conduct of India’s financial sector reforms.  
IV. 
Recent international financial developers: issues in monetary policy and 
financial sector regulation 
In contrast to earlier crises, the cause-and-effect sequences are blurred in the current turmoil 
in view of the extreme information asymmetry. Some defining features of the global economy 
which could have a direct bearing on the current crises are: the “Great Moderation” – i.e., the 
sustained  decline  in  inflation/inflation  volatility  and  consequently,  a  secular  lowering  of 
nominal and real interest rates across the world which could have enhanced the appetite for 
risk; significant monetary accommodation by the major economies – the US, Euro area and 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 15
Japan  –  since  2000  reflected  in  abundant  liquidity  in  financial  markets,  macro  imbalances 
between the US and Asia, sizeable currency misalignments and carry trades, compression of 
risk spreads, mispricing of widely diffused risks and even real sector implications for several 
emerging  economies;  and  the  strong  macroeconomic  performance  of  Asia  which  has 
contributed  to  the  relentless  search  for  yields  and  the  increasing  appetite  for  risk  (Mohan, 
2007e).  
The combination of sustained low inflation accompanied by accommodative monetary policy 
worldwide  could  have  generated  excessive  confidence  in  the  ability  of  central  banks  and 
monetary  policy  to  keep  inflation  rates  and  interest  rates  low  indefinitely,  leading  to  under 
pricing  of  risk  and  hence  excessive  risk  taking.  This  result  is  analogous  to  the  excessive 
foreign borrowing undertaken by private sector borrowers and banks in East Asian countries 
in  the  1990s  when  exchange  rates  were  seen  as  relatively  fixed,  and  hence  their  risk 
perceptions were low, and hence risk was under priced. It may be ironic that the perceived 
success of central banks and increased credibility of monetary policy, giving rise to enhanced 
expectations with regard to stability in both inflation and interest rates, could have led to the 
mispricing  of  risk  and  hence  enhanced  risk  taking.  Yet  another  view  is  that  more  than 
success  or  failure  of  central  banks,  the  repeated  assurances  of  stability  and  guidance  to 
markets about the future path of interest rates, coupled with the availability of ample liquidity 
were an invitation to markets to underprice risks. This view, consequently, puts the blame on 
those  central  banks  that  failed  to  give  space  to  markets  to  assess  risks  by  eschewing 
surprise  elements  in  policy.  It  is  possible  that  with  increased  globalisation  resulting  in  the 
containment of prices of tradable goods during this period and hence of measured inflation, 
the excess liquidity has shown up in elevated asset prices worldwide, along with increased 
cross border capital flows in search of yields.  
As some withdrawal of monetary accommodation commenced in response to perceived or 
visible  inflationary  pressures,  the  sub-prime  crisis  revealed  these  vulnerabilities  starkly  as 
confidence  plunged,  markets  froze  and  triggered  off  panic  among  investors  and  lenders 
regarding  their  inability  to  value  complex  risky  assets  and  structured  derivative  products. 
According to some estimates, total losses related to sub-prime could exceed US $ 200 billion 
(The  Economist,  2007),  over  a  fifth  of  India’s  GDP  measured  at  market  exchange  rates. 
According  to  the  OECD  estimates,  losses  could  amount  to  US  $  300  billion.  With  the 
deterioration  in  credit  confidence,  banks  have  been  forced  to  advance  loans  to  their  off-
balance  sheet  “special  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)”  which  used  up  their  capital  thereby 
rendering other borrowers credit constrained. Thus, it can be argued that the sub-prime is a 
symptom rather than a cause. Arguably, the outcome could have been quite different if, for 
instance,  interest  rates  declined  on  the  back  of  ebbing  inflation  but  there  was  no 
accommodation  in  monetary  policy  and  therefore  no  excess  liquidity.  There  is  also  a 
persuasive opposite view, as best articulated by Alan Greenspan, that the great moderation 
in  inflation  could  be  attributed  to  real  economy  phenomena:  the  long  run  of  productivity 
growth  in  the  US;  and  the  impact  of  new  workers  in  China  and  India  in  dampening  wage 
growth worldwide and hence inflation.  
It  is  widely  understood  that  the  credit  market  is  characterized  by  information  asymmetry. 
First, the availability of information technology has reduced the cost of information collection 
and  maintenance  considerably.  Thus,  a  widespread  belief  has  arisen  that  information  on 
credit  quality  of  small  borrowers  who  may  be  widely  dispersed  across  jurisdictions  can  be 
made  impersonal,  packaged,  processed,  and  sold.  Second,  with  the  availability  of  such 
technology, and the belief that such information was available on a structured basis, a great 
deal  of  financial  innovation  could  take  place  which  essentially  enabled  the  investor  or  risk 
taker to become progressively remote from the ultimate borrowers where the actual risks lay. 
A  whole  host  of  intermediaries  in  the  form  of  mortgage  brokers,  mortgage  companies, 
societies  and  the  like  were  then  able  to  package  their  mortgage  assets  including  non 
conforming  loans  and  sell  down  to  different  categories  of  investors,  including  Special 
Investment Vehicles (SIVs), hedge funds and the like, most of whom were not regulated. The 
16 
 BIS Review 145/2007
guiding principle behind this activity was that it is feasible for credit rating agencies to have 
enough information on a continuous basis to rate the instruments that had been packaged. It 
can certainly be argued that this is not a new development since mortgage backed securities 
(MBS) and asset backed securities (ABS) have been with us for some time and have been 
successful  in  providing  liquidity  to  credit  markets  on  a  continuous  basis  without  any 
accidents.  The  difference  perhaps  is  that  MBS  packaged  by  the  government  sponsored 
entities  (GSEs)  were  subject  to  certain  relatively  well  enforced  norms  that  presumably 
reduced the potential risk embedded in these instruments. 
These considerations lead to the third set of issues that relate to the role of effective financial 
regulation and supervision. Has the recent crisis underscored the need for strengthening of 
oversight of financial markets in advanced countries? Traditionally, financial surveillance has 
placed  relatively  more  emphasis  on  banking  regulation.  Banks  are  leveraged  financial 
entities who are also effective trustees of public money by virtue of holding deposits. Hence, 
they have to be effectively regulated and supervised in order to maintain public confidence in 
the banking system and depositors have to be protected from excessive risk-taking by banks. 
On the other hand, investors in hedge funds are high net worth individuals who do not need 
such  protection.  They  are  informed  investors  who  are  able  to  exploit  the  information 
efficiency  of  markets  and,  therefore,  should  be  able  to  understand  the  risks  implied  by 
information  asymmetry.  The  current  crisis  was,  however,  triggered  by  the  difficulties 
encountered  by  these  investors  who  had  taken  large  exposures  to  sub-prime  mortgage 
investments without having accounted for the potential risks embedded in these instruments.  
What  has  been  our  approach  to  these  issues?  Although  there  is  a  current  move  in  some 
jurisdictions, particularly in the U.K., to move towards “principles-based” regulation, from the 
traditional  “rules-based”  regulation,  we  are  continuing  with  the  traditional  rules-based 
regulatory approach for now. While progressively providing greater flexibility to banks in their 
portfolio decisions, relative to the situation before the reforms, we have kept a close eye on 
the risk exposure of regulated financial institutions. We have therefore been cautious about 
derivatives  and  are  introducing  them  gradually,  based  on  our  perception  of  the  risk 
management  capabilities  of  the  various  regulated  institutions.  Admittedly,  this  does  cause 
impatience in those institutions that believe their risk management capacities to be of a high 
order.  However,  the  issue  that  we  have  to  consider  is  the  reality  of  the  large  variance 
between different institutions in such capabilities. It is true that financial markets cannot be 
held hostage to the most laggard institutions. So, we have adopted a measured approach to 
the introduction of modern financial innovations.  
Second,  we  do  monitor  the  exposures  of  banks  to  risky  sectors  and  seek  to  limit  their 
exposure to such sectors through prudential regulations. Banks exposure to capital markets 
in all forms (both fund based and non-fund based) cannot exceed 40 per cent of their net 
worth.  Similarly,  as  we  observed  very  high  credit  growth  in  certain  segments  such  as  real 
estate, housing, non banking finance companies (NBFCs) and other retail credit, risk weights 
were increased, along with provisioning norms for standard assets. 
Third, in terms of the evolving global prudential framework, the emphasis has generally been 
more  on  capital,  as  a  means  of  reducing  vulnerability  to  risks,  than  on  prudential 
requirements  for  liquidity  risk.  Aspects  relating  to  liquidity  have  been  largely  left  to  each 
regulator  to  assess  and  prescribe  a  suitable  framework  under  Pillar  II  of  Basel  II.  In  the 
Indian context, while banks have flexibility in devising their own risk management strategies 
as per Board approved policy, the Reserve Bank has taken steps to mitigate liquidity risks at 
the  very  short-end,  risks  at  the  systemic  level  and  at  the  institution  level  as  well  (Reddy, 
2007c). Some of the important measures in this regard are: 
• 
Overnight  unsecured  market  for  funds  is  restricted  only  to  banks  and  primary 
dealers (PD). Repo markets – both bilateral repos and collateralized borrowing and 
lending obligations (a form of tripartite repos) were developed. As a result, volumes 
have shifted from the overnight unsecured market to the collateralized market.  
BIS Review 145/2007 
 17
     As greater inter-linkages and excessive reliance on call money borrowings by banks 
could  cause  systemic  problems,  prudential  measures  have  been  introduced  to 
address the extent to which banks can borrow and lend in the call money market. 
On  a  fortnightly  average  basis,  call  market  borrowings  outstanding  should  not 
exceed 100 per cent of capital funds (i.e., sum of Tier I and Tier II capital) of latest 
audited balance sheet. However, banks are allowed to borrow a maximum of 125 
per  cent  of  their  capital  funds  on  any  day,  during  a  fortnight.  Similarly,  on  a 
fortnightly average basis, lending in the call market should not exceed 25 per cent of 
their capital funds; however, banks are allowed to lend a maximum of 50 per cent of 
their capital funds on any day, during a fortnight.  
Purchased inter-bank liabilities’ (IBL) of a bank should not exceed 200 per cent of its 
net worth (300 per cent for banks with CRAR more than 11.25 per cent).  
Like  other  supervisors,  RBI  has  issued  asset  liability  management  guidelines  for 
dealing  with  overall  asset-liability  mismatches  taking  into  account  both  on  and  off 
balance sheet items.  
The  RBI,  in  its  supervisory  oversight  of  banks’  activities,  also  monitors  the 
incremental  credit  deposit  ratio  of  banks.  Although  banks  may 
implement 
sophisticated  risk  management  strategies,  this  single  ratio  with  a  minimum  lag 
indicates  the  extent  to  which  banks  are  funding  credit  with  borrowings  from 
wholesale markets or what is now known as purchased funds.  
The  RBI  guidelines  on  securitization  of  standard  assets  have  laid  down  detailed 
policy  on  provision  of  liquidity  support  to  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  (SPVs).  The 
liquidity provision is subject to conditions to ensure that the liquidity support is only 
temporary and invoked to meet cash flow mismatches. Any commitment to provide 
such liquidity facility is to be treated as an off-balance sheet item and attracts 100 
per cent credit conversion factor as well as 100 per cent risk weight.  
Fourth, since the Reserve Bank also has regulatory responsibility for NBFCs, we have also 
acted to introduce various prudential norms in their activities where we believe there could be 
systemic effects. The regulatory interventions are graded: higher in deposit taking institutions 
and lower in non-deposit taking institutions. The recent crises in developed financial markets 
have also illustrated how thin these lines of separation are: difficulties experienced by non-
deposit intermediaries such as the SIVs are eventually falling on the deposit taking regulated 
institution such as banks. 
Thus, we do feel that judicious prudential regulation and supervision and heightened market 
surveillance and anticipation are necessary for the healthy governance of financial markets. 
We have, of course, to be careful to not stifle entrepreneurship and financial innovation. But 
we do need to constantly ask the question: “Financial innovation towards what objective?” As 
long  as  financial  innovation  is  seen  to  promote  price  discovery,  greater  intermediation 
efficiency,  and  hence,  overall  efficiency  and  growth,  it  must  be  encouraged,  but  with 
appropriate safeguards to maintain financial stability. 
The lessons from the current financial market crisis go both ways. On the one hand, market 
innovation has indeed helped in bringing financial markets closer to those who need credit 
and  did  not  have  access  to  it  earlier.  Despite  all  the  problems  associated  with  sub-prime 
borrowers, it must be recognized that almost 10 million borrowers benefited from this market 
and were enabled access to housing finance, which had not been deemed possible earlier. 
With about 20 per cent of these borrowers reported to be delinquent, and in difficulty, it still 
means that about 8 million people clearly benefited from this market. On the other hand, the 
difficulties encountered draw attention to the kind of issues that can arise when the speed of 
innovation  and  incentive  structures  are  flawed  such  that  malpractices  occur,  and  intrinsic 
difficulties  arise  in  capturing  and  commoditizing  information  that  is  perhaps  not  yet 
susceptible to such commoditization.  
18 
 BIS Review 145/2007
is 
[this]  view 
inflation.  But  while 
theoretically  rigorous,  reality 
A key question that has emerged from the current developments in financial markets relates 
to the role of monetary authorities in the context of such a crisis. This issue is of concern to 
all of us in central banking. Over the last decade or two, it would appear that the focus of 
central  banks  has  been  narrowing,  relative  to  the  more  complex  responsibilities  that  they 
have traditionally shouldered. A great deal has been written on this issue, a great deal has 
changed in terms of practices and, in some countries, the regulatory structure itself has been 
altered to move central banks to being relatively pure monetary authorities. According to this 
view, central banks should focus largely on keeping inflation low and stable, and in doing this 
also  contribute  to  financial  stability.  To  quote  Harvard  economist  Kenneth  Rogoff:  "Indeed 
many  economists  believe  that  central  bankers  could  perfectly  well  be  replaced  with  a 
computer programmed to implement a simple rule that adjusts interest rates in response to 
output  and 
is  not" 
(Businessworld, September 17, 2007). Although some central banks, such as the US Federal 
Reserve, have an explicit mandate to also promote growth, a good deal of thinking in recent 
times  tends  to  argue  that  inflation  control  by  itself  would  promote  growth  and  that  central 
banks would be better off to concentrate on this objective alone.  
It  is  instructive  to  examine  what  central  banks  have  done  in  the  current  context.  The 
responses  of  the  central  banks  to  the  recent  events  in  financial  markets  have  shown  that 
concerns  for  financial  stability  can  assume  overriding  importance,  irrespective  of  the 
legislative mandate handed down to central banks as part of ongoing reforms. This is evident 
in  the  fact  that  central  banks  initially  reacted  through  the  injection  of  liquidity,  including 
through special facilities and the expansion of list of eligible collateral. Discussions involving 
central bankers in various fora indicate their willingness to consider other courses of action in 
favour  of  protecting  growth.  As  we  all  know,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  has  gone  further  in 
cutting interest rates to promote both growth and in the interest of financial stability; the U.K. 
authorities  have  had  to  provide  liquidity  to  a  specific  institution,  while  giving  a  blanket 
guarantee to depositors on the safety of their deposits. Accordingly, it is becoming evident 
that  central  banks  do  have  a  role  beyond  inflation  targeting.  Evidently,  both  growth  and 
financial stability matter for central banks.  
When  it  comes  to  the  crunch,  in  their  roles  as  lenders  of  last  resort  (LOLR),  and  in 
discharging their responsibilities as the guardians of financial stability, central banks do need 
to perform functions that are more complex. Should central banks be lenders of last resort to 
the system as a whole by injecting systemic liquidity through open market operations only, or 
should  they  also  provide  liquidity  to  individual  financial  institutions  that  are  judged  to  be 
solvent  but  illiquid?  How  do  they  arrive  at  such  judgments  if  they  do  not  have  adequate 
information  on  individual  institutions?  Can  they  have  such  detailed  information  without 
ongoing responsibilities for regulation and supervision? This issue is not dissimilar, in terms 
of the existence of asymmetric information, to that of the problem of adequate transparency 
of information related to the value of collateral underlying asset backed securities.  
Banks and financial institutions are typically leveraged institutions: thus judgements related 
to their solvency depend on the valuation of their assets at the time when difficulties arise. In 
the current case, banks have invested through a chain of vehicles in securities whose values 
are in doubt. Banks also have commitments to vehicles whose liquidity and/or viability are in 
doubt. When providing LOLR liquidity support, how is the central bank to make a judgement 
on the solvency of institutions to whom it is providing liquidity? As a greater recognition and 
appreciation of the appropriate role of central banks gains ground, it is possible that this will 
result  in  further  rethinking  on  the  functioning  of  central  banks.  A  case  in  point  is  the 
separation  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision  from  monetary  policy  which  could  have 
contributed  to  ineffective  and  inadequate  surveillance  in  the  context  of  the  current  crisis. 
There is a view that problems of information asymmetry might have got further aggravated 
with  banks  reporting  both  to  the  monetary  authority  and  the  regulatory  body  in  charge  of 
banking supervision.  
BIS Review 145/2007 
 19
Since  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  also  the  banking  regulator  and  supervisor,  we  receive 
continuing  information  on  the  banking  activities;  moreover,  in  times  such  as  the  current 
turmoil,  we  can  also  obtain  information  quickly  from  leading  systematically  important 
institutions  on  exposures  of  relevance.  Thus,  there  is  a  high  scope  for  prompt  corrective 
action.  
Challenges for the future 
V.  
Let  me  conclude  by  turning  to  the emerging  challenges  facing  the  financial sector  in  India 
that could shape the path of the next generation of reforms. The sustained acceleration in 
growth, supported by a range of anecdotal indications, is resulting in the movement of large 
numbers  of  households  into  higher  income  and  consumption  categories,  with  enhanced 
demand  for  financial  services.  Alongside,  industrial  production  and  export  growth  have 
remained  buoyant  and  the  rising  prominence  of  services  in  the  economy  is  generating  a 
surge  in  demand  for  financial  intermediation.  A  lead  indicator  is  the  sizeable  expansion 
already underway in domestic bank lending to households and small and medium industrial 
and  service  enterprises  which  are  poised  to  emerge  as  the  new  growth  drives  of  financial 
sector activity. For the Indian financial system, the biggest challenge is how to extend itself 
and innovate to meet these new demands for financial inclusion and respond adequately to 
new opportunities and risks. Innovative channels for credit delivery for serving the new credit 
needs  have  to  be  developed,  perhaps  with  greater  use  of  information  technology  and 
intensified skills development in human capital. 
Acceleration  in  growth  over  the  past  few  years  has  brightened  medium-term  prospects  for 
growth of the Indian economy. As in the past, domestic savings are expected to finance the 
bulk of the investment requirements. In this context, the banking system will continue to be 
an important source of financing and there could be strong demand for bank credit. Although 
bank credit has witnessed sharp growth since 2003-04 onwards, it needs to be recognised 
that the credit-GDP ratio still remains relatively low. Moreover, a significant segment of the 
population remains excluded from banking services. As the growth process strengthens and 
becomes more inclusive, it is expected that demand for financial products could continue to 
witness  high  growth  in  the  coming  years.  Thus,  it  is  likely  that  growth  in  bank  credit  and 
monetary  aggregates  could  be  higher  than  what  might  be  expected  from  historical 
relationships  and  elasticities  in  view  of  ongoing  structural  changes.  This,  however,  raises 
critical  issues  for  the  central  bank  such  as  the  appropriate  order  of  monetary/credit 
expansion. In the absence of a yardstick, excessive growth in money supply could potentially 
show  up  in  inflationary  pressures  over  course  of  time,  given  the  monetary  lags.  Indeed, 
recent inflationary pressures across the globe are attributable, in part, to global liquidity glut. 
In the absence of inflationary pressures as conventionally measured, excessive money and 
credit growth could also lead to asset price bubbles, with adverse implications for banking 
sector stability and lagged conventional inflation. Thus, the Reserve Bank will have to face 
ongoing challenges to provide appropriate liquidity to the system so as to ensure growth in 
non-inflationary environment.  
Demand  for  housing  finance  has  emerged  as  a  key  driver  of  bank  credit  in  the  past  few 
years. As incomes grow further and the pace of urbanisation picks up, and, in view of the 
substantial  backlog,  demand  for  housing  and  housing  finance  can  be  expected  to  record 
continuous  high  growth  over  the  next  few  years.  In  view  of  the  expected  high  demand, 
pressure  on  real  estate  prices  may  continue.  Moreover,  real  estate  markets  are 
characterised  by  opacity  and  other  imperfections  in  developing  countries,  and  certainly  in 
India. Such developments can easily generate bubbles in the real estate market, because of 
problems  in  the  elasticity  of  supply,  and  information  asymmetries.  Strong  demand  for 
housing  and  buoyancy  in  real  estate  prices  in  an  environment  of  non-transparency,  thus, 
could potentially pose risks to the banking system. In conjunction with interest rate cycles, 
the banking system as well as the regulator would need to be vigilant to future NPAs and the 
US-like sub-prime woes.  
20 
 BIS Review 145/2007
Higher investment needs of the growing economy will depend heavily upon the ability of the 
financial  markets  to  raise  resources  from  savers  and  allocate  them  efficiently  for  the  most 
productive purposes. In view of the acceleration in growth as well as the focus on inclusive 
growth, financial markets will have to play a greater role in efficient allocation of resources. 
Further  development  of  financial  markets  will  also  be  needed  in  view  of  the  growing 
openness and the envisaged move towards fuller capital account convertibility. The Reserve 
Bank  will  therefore  continue  to  take  measures  to  further  deepen,  widen  and  integrate  the 
financial markets. While permitting a wider range of instruments and players in the financial 
markets, it will need to be ensured that development takes place in an orderly manner so as 
to  avoid  sub-prime  like  accidents  and  ensure  stability.  There  is  a  premium  on  ensuring 
stability  in  low-income  countries  like  India,  with  a  significant  share  of  population  not  in  a 
position  to  withstand  large  changes  in  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates.  Prudential 
exposure  norms  on  exposures  of  banks  and  NBFCs  will  need  to  be  fine-tuned  so  as  to 
protect  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  and  interests  of  depositors.  The  formation  of  credit 
information bureaus is expected to provide credit histories of borrowers and this could allow 
greater flow of bank credit to the relatively neglected sectors, while also imparting stability to 
the financial sector. 
So far, financial sector reforms have been calibrated with a progressive integration into the 
world  economy.  A  key  consideration  in  the  choice  of  pace  and  sequencing  has  been  the 
management  of  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary 
operations.  Fuller  capital  account  openness  will  inevitably  lead  up  to  the  challenge  of 
managing the impossible trinity of independent monetary policy, open capital account, and 
managed exchange rate. In the context of the ongoing financial sector reforms, it needs to be 
recognised  that  the  impact  of  financial  fluctuations  on  the  real  sector  in  developing 
economies  is  significantly  different  from  mature  economies  which  specialise  in  technology 
intensive  products  in  which  the  degree  of  exchange  rate  pass  through  is  low,  enabling 
exporters and importers to ignore temporary shocks and set stable product prices to maintain 
monopolistic  positions,  despite  large  currency  fluctuations.  Mature  and  well  developed 
financial  markets  in  these  countries  absorb  the  risks  associated  with  exchange  rate 
fluctuations  with  negligible  spillover  on  real  activity.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  majority  of 
developing  countries  which  specialise  in  labour-intensive  and  low  and  intermediate 
technology  products  vulnerable  to  pricing  power  by  large  retail  chains,  exchange  rate  and 
financial price volatility has significant employment, output and distributional consequences 
which in turn, have implications for financial sector stability and soundness.  
A  further  challenge  for  policy  in  the  context  of  fuller  capital  account  openness  will  be  to 
preserve the financial stability of different markets as greater deregulation of capital outflows 
and  debt  inflows  occurs.  The  vulnerability  of  financial  intermediaries  can  perhaps  be 
addressed  through  prudential  regulations  and  their  supervision;  risk  management  of  non-
financial  entities  will  have  to  be  through  further  developments  in  both  the  corporate  debt 
market and the forex market, which enable them to manage their risks through the use of 
newer market instruments. This will require market development, enhancement of regulatory 
capacity  in  these  areas,  as  well  as  human  resource  development  in  both  financial 
intermediaries and non-financial entities. Given the volatility of capital flows, it remains to be 
seen  whether  financial  market  development  in  a  country  like  India  can  be  such  that  this 
volatility  does  not  result  in  unacceptable  disruption  in  exchange  rate  determination  with 
inevitable real sector consequences, and in domestic monetary conditions. 
Going forward, there will be a continuous need to adapt the strategy of liquidity management 
as well as exchange rate management for effective monetary management and short-term 
interest rate smoothening. The key questions we continue to face with are what should be 
the instruments and modes of management of liquidity in the interest of growth and financial 
stability and how much should capital flows affect exchange rate. These issues become even 
more  relevant  under  a  freer  regime  of  capital  flows.  Global  developments  are  expected  to 
have an increasing role in determining the conduct of monetary and exchange rate policies in 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 21
our country. In an environment of global convergence, retaining independence of monetary 
policy  may  become  increasingly  difficult,  calling  for  hard  choices  in  terms  of  goals  and 
instruments.  
In  India,  we  have  not  favoured  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting,  while  keeping  the 
attainment of low inflation as a central objective of monetary policy, along with that of high 
and  sustained  growth  that  is  so  important  for  a  developing  economy.  Apart  from  the 
legitimate concern regarding growth as a key objective, there are other factors that suggest 
that inflation targeting may not be appropriate for India. First, unlike many other developing 
countries  we  have  had  a  record  of  moderate  inflation,  with  double  digit  inflation  being  the 
exception, and which is largely socially unacceptable. Second, adoption of inflation targeting 
requires  the  existence  of  an  efficient  monetary  transmission  mechanism  through  the 
operation  of  efficient  financial  markets  and  absence  of  interest  rate  distortions.  Third, 
inflationary pressures still often emanate from significant supply shocks related to the effect 
of the monsoon on agriculture, where monetary policy action may have little role. Finally, in 
an  economy  as  large  as  that  of  India,  with  various  regional  differences,  and  continued 
existence of market imperfections in factor and product markets between regions, the choice 
of a universally acceptable measure of inflation is also difficult.  
As regards banking regulation and supervision, there is no unique theoretical model or just 
one  practical  approach  to  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  a  financial  system.  India  has 
traditionally followed an institution-based system of regulation. In India, the current model of 
regulation with the Reserve Bank exchanging relevant information with other regulators in a 
synchronised  manner  is  functioning  effectively.  The  supervisory  activities  of  the  Reserve 
Bank  have  benefited  from  its  price  stability  objective,  and  it  is  recognised  that  safety  and 
soundness of banks must be evaluated jointly with its responsibility to ensuring stability and 
growth  in  the  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  Reserve  Bank  with  joint  responsibilities  for 
monetary policy and supervision has both the insight and the authority to use techniques that 
are less blunt and more precisely calibrated to the problem at hand. Such tools improve its 
ability  to  manage  crises  and,  more  importantly,  to  avoid  them.  In  this  backdrop,  the 
recommendations  of  separating  banking  sector  regulation  from  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy by some observers appear to be independent of the history, legacy and efficiency of 
the current regulatory system in India. Such recommendations are essentially based on the 
UK  experience  –  which  itself  has  now  been  subject  to  severe  criticism  in  the  episode 
involving  the  Northern  Rock  –  and  completely  ignore  the  huge  diversity  of  the  regulatory 
system  in  other  countries  including  those  prevailing  in  successful  international  financial 
centres such as the US.  
As noted in several policy statements in the Indian context, the principal challenge for public 
policy is to ensure a smooth transition to higher growth path, accompanied by low and stable 
inflation  and  well  anchored  inflation  expectations.  From  a  central  banking  perspective,  the 
new  challenges  facing  us  are  many.  First,  if  the  Indian  banking  system  is  to  attain 
international  excellence,  it  will  require  action  on  several  fronts  like  introduction  of  greater 
competition; convergence of activities and supervision of financial conglomerates; induction 
of  new  technology;  improvement  in  credit  risk  appraisal;  encouragement  of  financial 
innovations;  improvement  in  internal  controls;  and  establishment  of  an  appropriate  legal 
framework. The role of the Reserve Bank in this context amounts to promoting safety and 
soundness while allowing the banking system to compete and innovate. Second, as a central 
bank, the Reserve Bank would further need to develop the financial markets, especially the 
money, government securities and foreign exchange markets to enhance the efficiency of the 
transmission  mechanism,  along  with  the  corporate  debt  market.  Third,  price  stability  and 
financial stability would continue to be of concern with expected increase in credit expansion 
and global integration. 
Thank you. 
22 
 BIS Review 145/2007
References 
Ball, L and N. Sheridan (2003), “Does inflation Targeting Matter?”, NBER Working Paper No 
9577. 
Economist (2007), “Banks: Capital Punishment”, November 8. 
Eichengreen, Barry  (2002), “Can Emerging Markets Float? Should They Inflation Target?”, 
Working Paper Series 36, Banco Central do Brasil, February. 
Fraga,  A.;  Minella,  A.  and  Goldfajn,  I  (2003),  “Inflation  Targeting  in  Emerging  Market 
Economies”, NBER Working Paper 10019, October. 
Gramlich, Edward (2003), “Maintaining Price Stability”, Remarks before the Economic Club 
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, October. 
Issing,  O  (2004),  “Inflation  targeting:  A  View  from  the  ECB”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St. 
Louis Review, Vol. 86, No.4, July/August. 
Jalan, B (2002), “Monetary Policy: Is a Single Target Relevant?”, In India’s Economy in the 
New Millennium: Selected Essays (ed.). B. Jalan, Mumbai: UBS Publishers Distributors. 
Kohn, Donald L (2004), “Panel Discussion: Inflation Targeting”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. 
Louis, July-August 
McKinnon, Ronald I. 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. Washington, D.C.: 
Brookings Institution. 
McKinsey  Quarterly  (2007),  “India’s  Executives:  Confident  in  their  Economy  and  Eager  to 
Hire”. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2004), “Challenges to Monetary Policy in a Globalising Context”, Reserve 
Bank of India Bulletin, January. 
----  (2006a),  “Reforms,  Productivity  and  Efficiency  in  Banking:  The  Indian  Experience”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, March. 
---- (2006b), “Evolution of Central Banking in India”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June. 
----  (2006c),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Exchange  Rate  Frameworks:  The  Indian  Experience”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June. 
---- (2007a), “Current Challenges to Monetary Policy Making in India”, Reserve Bank of India 
Bulletin, March. 
---- (2007b), “Monetary Policy Transmission in India”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, April. 
---- (2007c), Development of Financial Markets in India, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June. 
----  (2007d),  “Capital  Account  Liberalisation  and  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy:  The  Indian 
Experience”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, July. 
---- (2007e), “Recent Financial Market Developments and Implications for Monetary Policy”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, October. 
Reddy, Y.V. (2004), “Financial Stability: Indian Experience”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, 
July. 
---- (2007a), “Globalisation and Monetary Policy: Some Emerging Issues”, Reserve Bank of 
India Bulletin, April. 
---- (2007b), “Some Perspectives on the Indian Economy”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, 
November. 
----  (2007b),  “Global  Developments  and  Indian  Perspectives:  Some  Random  Thoughts”, 
Valedictory address at the Bankers’ Conference 2007 on November 27, 2007 at Mumbai. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 23
Shaw, Edward S. 1973. Financial Deepening in Economic Development. New York: Oxford 
University Press.  
24 
 BIS Review 145/2007
