Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysian financial sector developments 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Malaysia Financial Exhibition 2007, Kuala Lumpur, 30 October 2007. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon  at  the  Opening  Ceremony  for  the  Malaysia 
Financial Exhibition 2007 or MYFex2007, organised by PIDM, Perbadanan Insurans Deposit 
Malaysia  .  PIDM  was  established  two  years  ago  to  reinforce  the  role  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia in ensuring the soundness and stability of the financial system. PIDM forms part of 
the  financial  safety  net  and  plays  a  crucial  role  in  administering  an  effective  deposit 
insurance system that promotes public confidence in the soundness of the banking system. 
Public Confidence is key to financial stability and to the efficient functioning of the financial 
system. In this context, PIDM is actively raising awareness about deposit insurance and this 
exhibition  is  an  effort  to  frame  deposit  insurance  within  the  larger  scope  of  the  financial 
landscape.  
A financial system that is not firmly rooted in the public belief that it is safe and sound cannot 
hope  to  expand  and  evolve  successfully.  This  confidence  is  enhanced  with  having  an 
effective  deposit  insurance  whose  role  is  to  act  in  the  best  interest  of  depositors.  With  an 
explicit deposit insurance system, depositors can have further certainty of the safety of their 
money  at  the  banking  institution  as  well  as  knowing  that  banking  system  has  a  strong 
element of protection that can be count upon.  
The Malaysian financial sector has undergone significant transformation and progress since 
we launched the Financial Sector Masterplan in 2001. This is particularly most evident in the 
banking  sector  which  has  undergone  restructuring,  consolidation,  and  rationalisation. 
Gradual deregulation and liberalization has also altered the financial landscape bringing with 
it  improved  performance  and  enhanced  resilience.  This  has  further  matured  the  banking 
sector and paved the way for new areas of growth. Besides these tangible results, structural 
changes have also taken place in the form of the emergence of new entities, the increased 
presence of new international players and more diversified and developed financial markets. 
The advancement of deregulation and liberalization have also increased competition which 
has  in  turn  resulted  in  further  new  business  opportunities.  Within  the  context  of  these 
developments,  the  banking  sector  has  become  an  important  pillar  of  strength  of  our 
economy.  
One  dimension  that  is  growing  rapidly  in  the  context  of  these  developments  is  the  rise  of 
consumerism. The improvement in the quality of life, the rising affluence and better education 
has resulted in a new generation of consumers whose financial requirements are becoming 
increasingly  more  sophisticated.  This  has  resulted  in  a  major  reorientation  of  the  banking 
industry  to  become  consumer  driven  and  to  become  more  focussed  on  consumer  needs. 
This  has  brought  new  financial  products  and  services  for  consumers.  The  rise  of 
consumerism demands that products and services can no longer be just generic but must 
now be tailored to meet consumers' evolving needs.  
With  the  rise  of  consumerism,  the  need  to  create  informed  consumers  is  even  more 
important. As the financial sector continues to rapidly evolve, offering sophisticated products 
and services to cater for greater and more diverse needs, consumers need to become even 
more financially savvy. While the consumer has an important responsibility to become more 
informed,  financial  service  providers,  the  regulators  and  the  authorities  have  an  important 
role 
that  nurtures  consumer 
empowerment.  Indeed,  consumer  empowerment  begins  with  financial  awareness  and 
consumer  education.  This  in  part  can  be  achieved  through  greater  disclosure  and  by 
the  enabling  and  conducive  environment 
to  provide 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
increasing  the  education  outreach  to  consumers  thereby  enhancing  their  ability  to  make 
informed financial decisions.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
This  exhibition  aims  to  provide  an  enabling  platform  for  consumer  empowerment. 
MYFex2007  is  a  conscious  effort  to  raise  financial  awareness  by  bringing  together  the 
various  entities  in  the  financial  system  that  includes  the  industry,  regulators  and  other 
agencies that provide information, the avenues for redress and financial advice with the aim 
of  creating  financially  informed  consumers.  In  essence,  this  one  stop  centre  creates  a 
comprehensive  opportunity  for  consumers  to  improve  their  financial  literacy  and  for  the 
financial players to engage the consumers.  
An important thrust of our policies at the Central Bank is financial inclusion. This is to ensure 
that every economic activity, geographical region and segments of society have access to 
financial  services  thereby  promoting  a  more  balanced  growth.  Financial  inclusion  is 
supported  through  a  number  of  strategies  amongst  which  includes  increased  access  to 
financial  services,  access  to  financial  information  and  advisory  services  and  consumer 
education. Currently, 98% of the adult population in Malaysia have a savings account. Given 
this  greater  financial  inclusion,  banks  need  to  recognise  their  role  and  their  special 
relationship  with  their  customers.  Customers  expect  banks  to  provide  relevant  financial 
information to them to ensure that they will be able make informed judgments.  
Avenues for the public to seek redress is also an important part of the financial safety net. 
The  Financial  Mediation  Bureau  provides  an  alternative  redress  mechanism  between  the 
service  providers  and  consumers  on  financial  disputes.  In  addition,  with  the  objective  of 
promoting  prudent  financial  management,  the  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management 
Agency offers free advisory services. This is to ensure the sustainability and resilience of the 
household sector. In addition, there is also the BNMLINK and BNMTELELINK at the Central 
Bank to provide a further interface with the public.  
The objectives of financial inclusion can also be met with the support of banking institutions 
as the benefits would justify the effort. Banks and other financial institutions that approach 
their  business  strategies  responsibly  and  with  the  consumer  interest  in  mind  will  stand  to 
reap  long-term  gains  from  enhanced  franchise  value,  a  strong  reputation  and  positive 
association with socially responsible values that will engender public trust and confidence.  
Public  confidence  is  an  important  pre-condition  for  financial  stability.  Public  confidence  is 
however, not one that is created and expected to remain constant without making conscious 
efforts  to  enhance  it.  Public  confidence  must  be  created,  nurtured  and  continuously 
enhanced  by  all  the  players  in  the  financial  sector  working  together  through  a  range  of 
approaches and strategies. This mandate requires a holistic and a collaborative effort of the 
authorities, financial service providers, private sector, educators and related associations that 
are here today.  
I am delighted to note that MYFex2007 is one such effort. In the short 26 months it has been 
in  existence,  PIDM  has  gone  beyond  its  statutory  duty  to  create  public  awareness  about 
deposit  insurance  and  promoting  public  confidence  in  the  resilience  of  the  Malaysian 
financial  system.  They  have  embarked  on  a  noteworthy  initiative  to  contribute  to  financial 
system stability by organising a comprehensive financial awareness exhibition that seeks to 
create  informed  consumers  with  a  view  to  contribute  to  financial  system  stability.  I  am 
pleased to see various Government agencies, the market players and related associations 
and professional bodies participating in this important financial awareness initiative.  
The vision for an effective, efficient and resilient financial sector requires the unified efforts of 
all  the  stakeholders  in  the  financial  system.  The  financial  players,  the  regulators,  the 
Government and the consumers all have a meaningful role in achieving this vision. With this 
let me conclude my remarks. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
