Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Going the extra mile to be ready for SEPA 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the 10th Euro Finance Week-SEPA Summit: “Ready for SEPA?”, Frankfurt 
am Main, 19 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great honour for me to open this conference, the SEPA Summit, which is organised for 
the  second  time  in  Frankfurt  as  part  of  the  Euro  Finance  Week.  Special  attention  in  this 
year’s  Euro  Finance  Week  is  given  to  the  integration  of  European  financial  markets  in  a 
common  regulatory  framework.  Indeed,  the  title  of  this  Week  “European  Finance  and 
Insurance  between  Regulation  and  Innovation”  is  directly  related  to  the  SEPA  project  as 
SEPA is all about harmonisation, modernisation and innovation. 
It is also a great pleasure to welcome you to Frankfurt, the city of the euro. Frankfurt is often 
characterised as the smallest metropolis in the world, in which there is a lot to discover at 
close hand. Indeed, Frankfurt is a European meeting place and an intersection for trade and 
finance.  A  perhaps  lesser-known  fact  is  that  Frankfurt  is  also  an  important  intersection  for 
telecommunication and internet providers, as major data networks cross here. Indeed, 90% 
of  German  and  35%  of  European  internet  traffic  is  channelled  through  Frankfurt.  We  are, 
therefore,  at  the  right  location  to  discuss  SEPA  and  the  development  of  the  European 
payment markets in the years to come. 
I  would  like  today  to  express  the  views  and  expectations  of  the  Eurosystem  on  the  SEPA 
project.  But  let  me  first  take  a  brief  look  at  past  achievements.  The  2006  SEPA  Summit 
focused mainly on building up all relevant stakeholders’ commitment to SEPA. Last year, the 
President of the ECB and myself underlined the opportunities which financial integration in 
general and SEPA in particular could bring to the economy. We also concluded that much 
more had to be done to reap these benefits. I specifically called for a closer involvement and 
dialogue with all stakeholders.  
Since then a lot of progress has been made and I am glad to see that, in general, the SEPA 
project  is  well  on  track.  The  basic  SEPA  components  for  euro  payments  have  been 
developed,  such  as  the  SEPA  credit  transfer  and  the  SEPA  direct  debit,  as  has  the 
regulatory framework under the Payment Services Directive. Each national community has 
set up a forum for stakeholders to discuss the upcoming changes related to SEPA, and a 
European forum has been established.  
It is also impressive to see that many banks have made substantial preparations in order to 
launch  the  SEPA  credit  transfer  in  January  2008.  It  is  expected  that  over  80%  of  banks 
representing  the  majority  of  credit  transfer  transactions  (over  90%)  will  be  operationally 
ready. The banks will demonstrate their commitment to SEPA at a signing event at the end of 
today. 
Financial integration is also progressing well in other fields. It is a particular coincidence that 
TARGET2,  the  next  generation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  large  value  payment  system,  will  be 
launched  today.  TARGET2  is  an  important  milestone.  It  will  offer  Europe  a  more  uniform 
wholesale  payment  infrastructure,  with  a  harmonised  service  level  and  a  single  price 
structure. Thus, TARGET2 is another good example of progress in the creation of a common 
payments area.  
Let’s now turn to this year’s SEPA Summit, which is called “Ready for SEPA?”, and rightly 
so. In my view, this question is not limited to the mere operational readiness of the industry to 
offer  SEPA  payments.  I  consider  the  topic  of  this  conference  to  be  broader.  The  question 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
should perhaps be understood as, is the industry ready to create a “truly integrated” Single 
Euro Payments Area?  
The ECB sees SEPA as a major catalyst for more financial integration in Europe. SEPA will 
influence the payment landscape in Europe for many years to come and this will involve a re-
think by all the parties involved. Indeed, it is not enough to defend current market positions or 
current  practices.  Rather,  the  point  is  that  SEPA  will  benefit  those  who  bring  innovative 
services to their customers. SEPA will benefit those who are future oriented. 
Today I would like to focus in particular on two issues, both of which are much discussed by 
banks and which are needed to create a truly integrated SEPA. The two main questions are, 
first, what about the readiness of customers? And second, what about the readiness of other 
payment instruments, in particular payment cards?  
Let me first give you my views on the readiness of the customer.  
Readiness of customers?  
A parallel can be drawn with another major project, namely the changeover to the euro notes 
and coins in 2002. Indeed, as with SEPA, many of the preparations for the euro changeover 
were not visible to the citizens, as they were carried out by technical experts. Furthermore, 
the banknotes’ security features were disclosed only four months before the launch. As with 
SEPA, it was difficult to predict how the customer would react.  
On  the  other  hand,  well  before  the  euro  changeover  took  place,  the  central  banking 
community discussed customer readiness in depth with the aim to ensure acceptance of the 
euro  notes  and  coins.  Well  in  advance  of  2002,  the  Eurosystem  started  organising  a 
“partnership  programme”  that  involved  the  main  bodies  in  the  various  sectors.  This 
partnership  programme  emerged  from  the  “megaphone  idea”  and  the  understanding  that 
communication  on  the  changeover  to  the  euro  had  to  be  at  national  level  by  the  national 
public  authorities,  banking  communities  and  end-user  associations.  Each  sector  was 
encouraged to inform their target groups. Indeed, as if with a “megaphone”, the Eurosystem 
passed on a common set of key messages to target groups, and they in turn passed on the 
information to others. Applying the principle of subsidiarity in this context proved itself as the 
correct way to deal with differences in culture, language and institutional setting.  
Another  characteristic  of  the  changeover  was  related  to  the  timetable.  All  countries  set  an 
end  date  for  the  euro  changeover,  the  dates  were  not  harmonised.  In  some  participating 
Member  States  the  official  changeover  period  was  kept  very  short;  in  others  it  covered  a 
maximum period of two months. Despite the absence of a harmonised timetable, the euro 
changeover in 2002 was a major success, and the whole changeover process was almost 
completed after only two weeks.1 This clearly shows that the clarity of the information on the 
end date given in the information campaigns had been key, and customers in fact did not 
want to wait until that final date to begin using the euro.  
The  experiences  of  the  euro  changeover  are  very  relevant  for  the  SEPA  project,  which  is 
comparable in size, complexity and political relevance. I see, in particular, two main lessons 
to be learned from the changeover.  
First, more communication on SEPA is needed. I am not implying that the industry should 
carry  out  a  similar  launch  campaign,  but  the  industry  should  step  up  its  efforts  to  foster 
customer readiness. To be as successful as the euro changeover, the  SEPA project must 
build up a closer “partnership” with stakeholders.  
                                                 
1   After two weeks, over 90% of all cash transactions were being made in euro. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
Some national communities have already closely involved the end-users, and have published 
reports on the developments of the different stakeholders. In Germany, for example, I have 
noticed  that  some  of  the  larger  banks  have  begun  an  advertising  campaign  on  SEPA.  I 
encourage other communities to follow these examples.  
Let  me  also  be  clear  on  one  related  point:  Banks  should  not  try  “misusing”  SEPA,  and 
blaming  SEPA  for  any  unpleasant  changes.  In  that  case,  we  could  end  up  with  a  similar 
debate on perceived price increases as we did after the introduction of the euro. This would 
help nobody – neither the industry nor the customers.  
Second, the industry should be clearer on the timetable for the “dual circulation” period of its 
instruments. The request for clarity on the end date also comes from end-user associations. 
Interesting in this respect is the ECB’s recent study in cooperation with the banking industry 
analysing the economic impact of SEPA.2 The study confirms that two main forces will come 
to play. On the one hand, cross-border competition and new market participants could affect 
the  revenue  side  of  banks.  On  the  other,  automation  and  electronic  processes  will  enable 
banks  to  achieve  efficiency  gains  and  cost  reductions.  The  study  concludes  that  the  dual 
implementation  phase  of  SEPA  should  be  as  short  as  possible.  As  initial  investments  and 
higher adaptation costs are necessary in the short run, it is for the banks to decide how they 
will adapt to the new environment in the medium to long term. Indeed, a shorter changeover 
to SEPA will allow banks to focus more on their offering of innovative products in the medium 
to long term.  
One of the more active SEPA communities, France, has already indicated an expected end 
date.  This  is  a  positive  example,  and  other  communities  should  follow.  Should,  however, 
banks need more preparation when they move to the new SEPA framework, the ECB and 
the  European  Commission  stand  ready  to  consider  supporting  measures,  including 
regulation, if required.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  readiness  of  the  industry  for  SEPA  card  payments.  I  will  briefly 
present some of the ECB’s views on cards. Later today the panel will provide their views on 
the new cards landscape in SEPA and I am looking forward to an interesting discussion.  
Readiness of SEPA card payments?  
Card  payments  are  closely  monitored  by  the  Eurosystem  because  they  are  now  the  most 
popular non-cash payment instrument in the euro area. According to our Blue Book statistics, 
more than 15 billion card payments were made in the euro area in 2006.3 Between 2000 and 
2006,  we  also  noticed  that  the  use  of  cards  increased  more  quickly  than  the  use  of  other 
instruments. The use of cards increased at an impressive rate of 15% per annum.  
The impact of any changes in the card market is significant for all stakeholders. Given that 
the overall cost of payments at a point of sale ranges between 0.4% and 0.65% of GDP4, it is 
clear that any development in the card market also has major implications for the economy. 
An increased use of cards will reduce some of the costs related to other payments, such as 
cash.  
On several occasions, the Eurosystem has voiced its expectations regarding SEPA for cards. 
In particular, the card schemes should offer consumer choice, operate in competitive markets 
                                                 
2   “The economic impact of the Single Euro Payments Area”, by Heiko Schmiedel, ECB Occasional Paper No 
71, August 2007. 
3   Payment and securities settlement systems in the European Union, Blue Book, fourth edition. 
4   “The  Costs  of  Paying  –  Private  and  Social  Costs  of  Cash  and  Card  Payments”,  Mats  Bergman,  Gabriela 
Guibourg and Björn Segendorf, Working Paper No 212, Sveriges Riksbank (September 2007). 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
and avoid geographical segmentation. In doing so, the Eurosystem expects that the SEPA 
for cards offers high efficiency and low prices derived from current best practices. 
In  my  view,  a  clear  long  term  strategy  of  a  SEPA  for  cards  is  not  yet  developed.  The 
Eurosystem expects at least one new European card scheme which can compete with the 
international schemes in the SEPA environment. I’ll address this issue more in depth in the 
following panel. 
What I would like to stress, however, is that the Eurosystem welcomes the progress that has 
been  made  towards  standardisation  for  cards,  which,  when  implemented,  will  lead  to  the 
creation of a European market for terminals and for cards acquiring. The Eurosystem also 
welcomes the efforts of the international card schemes in preparing for SEPA and the SEPA 
changes they have already announced. I also hope that the European Commission will soon 
formulate its view on interchange fees, so that uncertainties in this field are removed.  
Before I conclude, I would like to concentrate on an important additional issue: innovation.  
innovation 
is  needed.  The 
Innovation 
As I stressed at the beginning of my speech, SEPA is all about harmonisation, modernisation 
and innovation. The SEPA project has come a long way, but the process is far from being 
completed.  More  modernisation  and 
information  and 
communication  technology  is  continuously  evolving  and  we  cannot  lean  back  and  watch. 
SEPA  must  evolve,  and  the  SEPA  products  should  be  complemented  with  value-added 
services allowing customers to make payments, fast, easy and secure and, most importantly, 
as much as possible paper-free. I am here talking about initiation and confirmation services. 
Combining  these  services  with  the  SEPA  payments  will  make  the  payment  process  fully 
electronic.  End-users  will  spend  less  time  on  payments  –  and  less  time  also  means  less 
money! We refer to this perspective as the next stage of the SEPA project: eSEPA. 
eSEPA promises significant financial benefits for banks and customers via: 
• 
• 
• 
Let me quickly run through three examples: 
Cost savings 
Added revenue 
Customer retention through value-added differentiation. 
1.   SEPA online payments  
The  European  Payments  Council  (EPC)  has  worked  on  a  project  that  enables  online 
merchants  to  offer  their  customers  a  convenient,  well-know  payment  solution.  It  could 
become  one  of  the  convincing  responses  of  the  European  banking  industry  to  the 
competitive challenge posed by PayPal and similar new types of payment service providers. I 
would explicitly like to encourage the banking industry, and especially the EPC, to step up 
the work on the new payment methods.  
Mobile payments 
2.  
This is a market segment where the development in Europe is still in its infancy – although 
high expectations had been raised a few years ago. On a global level, m-payment initiatives 
have now gained strong new momentum.  
The  GSM  Association  has  announced  the  next  steps  of  its  Pay-Buy-Mobile  initiative.  This 
initiative builds on the infrastructure of the major credit card companies and aims at enabling 
global interoperability between contactless chip cards and point of sale terminals. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
At the same time the EPC is looking for viable models of m-payment solutions for the SEPA 
market.  Potential  benefits  could  be  for  example  an  even  higher  level  of  payment 
convenience, speed and security experienced by the users. These types of benefits are the 
reason why I think that the EPC’s official dialogue with the mobile industry should start soon, 
to define viable cooperative models and standards for this area.  
E-invoicing 
3. 
I mention e-invoicing in the context of eSEPA because it offers a vast potential of benefits to 
users and providers alike. For the private consumers, the most significant advantage may be 
convenience:  just  imagine  that  you  receive  your  invoices  electronically  and  can  directly 
initiate  their  payments  with  one  tick  or  click.  This  is  already  reality  in  some  countries,  but 
should become available across SEPA.  
Even more benefits are possible for corporates, since settling paper invoices is usually a very 
cost-intensive process. Just imagine that 97.5% of all invoices worldwide are estimated to be 
paper-based! 
Let’s think about the average unit cost for a biller per invoice and the average unit cost for a 
payer. Incoming invoices need to be copied, forwarded, entered into different systems and 
stored – i.e. touched and managed by a large number of hands and transported physically 
between all of them. These procedures – and also potential mistakes happening along the 
handling  chain  –  can  be  significantly  changed  by  introducing  electronic  invoices  that  allow 
seamless automated handling, including direct links e.g. to payment functions. Approximately 
27 billion invoices per annum are being produced in the EU. It is obvious that any change 
leading to their more efficient handling quickly results in billions of possible savings per year 
for the European economy.  
How to foster the development of European E-Invoicing has become an important topic for 
the European Commission, who is currently setting up an official working group to coordinate 
the standardisation approaches, to address the legal barriers as well as issues of trust and 
operational risk..  
Let me now briefly conclude. 
Conclusion  
With just a few months before the launch of SEPA, banks are making preparations in order to 
be ready. I have been closely enough involved to see the tremendous efforts made by the 
banking industry, and I expect that the vast majority of banks will be operationally ready for 
SEPA.  
Operational readiness is, however, not enough. Indeed, SEPA is the next step of the euro. 
January  2008  will  only  be  the  start  of  this  process.  SEPA  will  enhance  pan-European 
competition and foster integration, consolidation and innovation. SEPA requires us to take a 
broad view that goes beyond operational readiness. 
In the coming months, we need to go the extra mile and make an additional effort to ensure 
the readiness of customers and the card payments market. We also need to think about the 
next steps. And there are, indeed, important further steps in this process. Creative solutions 
will pay off!  
Some years ago SEPA was an idea. In 70 days, SEPA will be reality. 
I wish you an open and fruitful conference.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 134/2007 
 5
