Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Legal system and financial markets 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  “Legal  issues  related  to  the  financial  markets”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 26 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen1: 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  open  this  conference  on  a  topic  which  is  of  fundamental 
importance and also of some additional interest in the most recent times in the light of the 
market turmoil, as I will explain in a moment. 
Legal systems and economic growth 
1.  
The economics literature has emphasised that institutions in general, and the legal system in 
particular, represent a fundamental determinant of economic growth, especially in connection 
to financial development.2 By the “legal system” I mean not only legislation and rule books, 
but also the infrastructure of the civil courts and the market regulators. 
In  cross  country  analyses,  the  quality  of  institutions  and  the  efficiency  of  the  legal  system 
often overshadow other classical determinants of growth such as the availability of national 
resources (which in itself tends to be more a curse than a blessing3), country size, physical 
capital,  and  so  on.  This  is  a  consideration  that  we,  as  economists,  perhaps  need  to  take 
more seriously into account than we currently do.  
The  link  between  law  and  finance  is  inextricable.  It  would  be  unconceivable  to  think  of  a 
financial system and indeed of any financial instrument without a legal system to support it. 
The  keyword  for  economists  in  this  context  is  “asymmetric  information”:  the  lender,  in 
particular,  does  not  know  if  the  borrower  is  trustworthy  or  not,  or  whether  the  investment 
project  the  latter  is  undertaking  is worthwhile.  A  financial asset  is  ultimately  a  claim  in  the 
form  of  piece  of  paper  or  even,  and  increasingly  so,  an  account  entry.  In  any  credit 
relationship – and this includes almost any economic transaction beyond simple barter – the 
possibility  of  default  is  always  looming  and  this  inherent  complication  cannot  be  solved 
without a precise system of norms that protects both the creditors and the debtors.  
For  the  creditor  to  consider  entering  in  a  financial  relationship,  the  legal  system  must  not 
make it too easy for the debtor to walk away from his obligations. At the same time, the legal 
system cannot be too taxing for the debtor, as Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice reminds 
us. The legal system has thus to develop along a fine line between protecting the rights of 
the  borrowers  as  well  as  those  of  the  lenders.  No  wonder  that  developing  a  sound  legal 
system  to  support  financial  markets  is  a  very  complicated  matter  and  we  hope  to  learn 
something from today’s conference.  
Legal systems and competitiveness of financial centres 
2.  
Fundamentally,  the  legal  system  should  ensure  that  contract  and  property  rights  are 
sufficiently clear and predictable; if there is a dispute, participants in the contract do not feel 
I wish to thank L. Stracca, M. Svoboda, S. Kerjean, F. Recine and C. Zilioli for their contribution. 
                                                 
1  
2   Mishkin (2005). 
3   Precisely through its negative impact on the quality of institutions and law enforcement. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 1
the need to take legal action unless as a last resort. Moreover, if there is litigation, the court 
is  independent  and  able  to  resolve  the  claim  effectively  and  in  a  reasonable  time. 
Furthermore, the judgment, once delivered, has to be quickly enforced.  
To underline the importance of this aspect let me give the example my own country. There is 
a  growing  literature  suggesting  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  relatively  slow  pace  of 
financial  development  in  Italy  is  the  slowness  of  the  civil  courts,  with  the  result  that,  for 
example, mortgage debt is still a fraction of what it is typically in other advanced countries.4  
At  this  point  it  should  be  clear  that  an  efficient  legal  system  is  a  key  ingredient  of 
competitiveness  among  financial  centres.  One  of  the  reasons  of  the  traditional  lead  of  US 
financial markets over Europe (and the rest of the world) is greater standardisation of legal 
norms  and  systems,  while  the  European  financial  system  is  still  characterised  by 
considerable fragmentation of legislation, regulation and enforcement.  
Without a proper legal system, it becomes harder to trade in almost any financial instrument. 
Two distinct effects may be considered. On the one hand, yields may rise and consequently 
asset  prices  fall.  In  other  words,  asset  yields  may  incorporate  a  “legal  risk  premium”.  It  is 
interesting to note that under the Basel II system legal risk is a part of operational risk, which 
implies  that  it  is  taken  seriously  by  the  regulators.  On  the  other  hand,  an  inefficient  legal 
system may simply lead business to move elsewhere, namely influence the quantities rather 
than prices. 
The importance of the legal environment was recognised most notably in the January 2007 
Bloomberg-Schumer  report,  “Sustaining  New  York’s  and 
financial 
leadership”, which reported that “a  firm and predictable legal environment was the second 
most important criterion determining a financial center’s competiveness.” 
An efficient legal system does not, of course, always imply more (and more restrictive) rules. 
A balance needs to be struck between restrictive rules and a lighter approach, which may be 
important for the overall competitiveness of financial centres. The current debate about the 
competitiveness  of  the  US  marketplace  (in  particular  in  relation  to  its  British  competitor) 
emphasises that this balance is not always easy to find.  
the  US’s  global 
Financial globalisation and innovation 
3.  
Let me now turn to some issues related to the impact of financial globalisation and innovation 
on legal systems. In my opinion the protection of the rights of debtors and creditors becomes 
more  –  and  not  less  –  difficult  with  the  development  of  financial  markets,  both  in  a 
geographical sense as well as in the range of available products (financial globalisation and 
innovation). The challenges posed by financial globalisation are not difficult to understand: a 
financial instrument  originated  in  country  A,  traded  in  country  B  by  an  intermediary  whose 
headquarters are in country C and purchased by an investor who is resident in country D, to 
what legal system will it be subject to? How will the citizen of country D be able to enforce his 
rights, which courts will be responsible for any dispute, what kind of legal redress will it be 
available on citizens of country A and B? These are questions that lie at the very heart of 
financial globalisation. From the simple observation that the bulk of cross border capital flows 
still  takes  place  among  advanced  countries,  one  may  easily  surmise  that  such  legal 
uncertainties (arguably more important in emerging economies) play a fundamental role in 
the allocation of financial flows and financial capital worldwide. 
Over  the  last  years,  quite  a  number  of  initiatives  dedicated  at  enhancing  legal  certainty 
regarding such cross-border financial transactions have been undertaken on a global as well 
as on a European level. International bodies dedicated to the harmonisation of laws [such as 
                                                 
4   Muellbauer et al. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2007
UNIDROIT or UNCITRAL] have turned the focus of their activities on financial market issues, 
such as secured transactions or cross-border holdings and transfers of securities. This focus 
is mirrored by a multitude of complementary initiatives on the European level, where I would 
just like to mention the various legislative projects aimed to enhance the integration of the EU 
financial markets that were combined in the so-called Financial Services Action Plan as well 
as  the  more  recent  attempts  to  enhance  efficiency  and  integration  in  the  EU  post-trading 
industry, that is the clearing and settlement of cross-border securities transactions. 
Lessons of the recent market turmoil 
4.  
Turning to more recent events, the emergence of structured products, where the creditor is 
separated  from  the  debtor  by  a  complex  financial  infrastructure  that  transforms  and  re-
packages  the  underlying  asset,  might  create  significant  legal  challenges  and  this  might 
become an important concern in the light of the recent market turmoil. Who pays if debtor A 
defaults, in case his debt has been repackaged by bank B, sold to the non-bank intermediary 
C  and  finally  to  investor  D?  These  are  legitimate  questions  that  need  to  be  addressed 
carefully.  But  answers  have  to  be  given  if  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  current 
environment are to vanish.  
As you know, a number of policy initiatives have been launched at the global level since the 
summer, for instance by Financial Stability Forum5 or by the Porto informal ECOFIN6 and it 
is  still  difficult  to  anticipate  precisely  the  legal  aspects  which  will  be  examined  more 
particularly  by  the  various  international  and  European  fora  and  bodies  involved  in  this 
discussion. However, these initiatives provide an indication of possible legal considerations 
which might emerge, in particular in the European context. 
Legal certainty should go hand in hand with transparency. The focus on the transparency of 
complex financial instruments, of institutions and vehicles and on the appropriate disclosure 
of information on securitised debt and other structured financial products indicates that there 
is  a  need  for  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  to  have  a  closer  look  on  the  legal 
frameworks applicable to securitisation transactions and market standards and how special 
purpose vehicles are currently regulated and supervised in the various EU Member States 
and at also at the international level. The report of the European Financial Markets Lawyers 
Group (EFMLG) of May 2007 on legal obstacles to cross-border securitisations in the EU7 
contains  recommendations  for  further  convergence  of  securitisation  laws  in  the  EU  and 
invites the Commission to consider the adoption of a EU directive on specific legal aspects of 
securitisations which would enable Member States to adopt a certain number of principles 
common  to  all  jurisdictions  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  transparency,  efficiency  and  legal 
certainty with regard to securitisation transactions.8
                                                 
5   See Financial Stability Forum, FSF Working Group on Market and Institutional Resilience, Preliminary Report 
the  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors,  15  October  2007,  available  at: 
to 
http://www.fsforum.org/publications/publication_24_88.html. 
6   The informal ECOFIN of Porto considered that,  while enhancing market efficiency, financial innovation also 
raises  obvious  challenges  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities.  In  this  context,  the  Economic  and 
Financial Committee (EFC) was invited (i) to review how to further improve transparency of complex financial 
instruments, of institutions and vehicles, as well as how to improve valuation processes, risk management and 
liquidity stress testing. The EFC is also invited to consider the role of rating agencies in structured finance. 
7   Available at www.efmlg.org. In its Report on Financial Integration in Europe (March 2007), the ECB indicates 
that it has been active in various initiatives of the EFMLG to overcome legal barriers to financial integration, 
such as through the closer harmonisation of securitisation laws in the EU and contributed in particular to the 
EFMLG report on cross-border legal obstacles to securitisation. 
In two opinions concerning draft laws on securitisation in Luxembourg and France, the ECB indicated that it 
stressed that, looking beyond the Commission’s Financial Services Action Plan, it saw merit in a strategy of 
increased  harmonisation  in  the  area  of  securitisation  at  the  EU  level  (See  in  this  respect  ECB  Opinion 
8  
BIS Review 122/2007 
 3
In the context of the current financial turbulence, another issue which is often mentioned is 
the methodologies followed by rating agencies in the field of structured finance and the need 
to benefit from legal opinions assessing in an appropriate manner the legal risks related to 
the securitisation deal’s core components and identifying properly the rights of investors.  
At this point, let me not abuse of your time any longer. I hope that I have effectively conveyed 
the message that we, as policy-makers, care that the global financial system is put on a solid 
legal footing. I wish you all the best for this conference in contributing to this endeavour. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                                                                                                                      
CON/2004/30 of 14 September 2004 at the request of the French Ministry of Economic Affairs, Finance and 
Industry on a draft decree concerning fonds communs de créances (securitisation funds) and ECB Opinion 
CON/2004/3 of 4 February 2004 at the request of the Ministry of Finance of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 
on a draft law on securitisation). 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2007
