Su Ning: Online verification of citizens’ identity information in China 
Remarks  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  press 
conference  on  the  inauguration  of  the  Online  Verification  of  Citizens’  Identity  Information, 
Beijing, 26 July 2007. 
 Journalists, friends, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good afternoon! 
To  carry  out  the  State  Councils’ instruction  on  further  implementing  the  regulations  on  the 
use of real names for personal bank accounts, the People’s Bank of China (the PBC) and the 
Ministry of Public Security (the MPS) jointly launched a pilot program for online verification of 
citizens’ identity information (thereafter referred to as the online verification system) in Tianjin 
at the beginning of 2007. Based on the successful experience of the Tianjing pilot program, 
the online verification system has been developed and introduced nationwide. On 29 June 
2007,  it  was  finally  completed  and  widely  used  by  various  banking  institutions  across  the 
country  (thereafter  referred  to  as  banks).  Banks  can  now gain  access  to  the system  more 
quickly and conveniently to verify the identity of citizens before approving the opening of a 
bank account and providing payment and settlement services, lending services and others 
services through bank accounts. The system provides banks a more authoritative and handy 
technology  tool  to  enable  customer  identification,  which  marks  a  breakthrough  progress  in 
the area of implementing the use of real names for bank accounts, particularly for personal 
accounts.  
I would hereby like to introduce to you the development of the online verification system and 
the comprehensive implementation of the use of real names for bank accounts.  
I. 
The great significance of developing the online verification system and 
comprehensively implementing the use of real names for bank accounts. 
Bank  accounts  are  the  starting  point  and  end  of  fund  flows,  as  well  as  the  basis  of  giro 
settlement, cash deposit and cash withdrawal, which record the tracks of social funds flow. 
As  a  component  of  financial  infrastructure,  the  online  verification  system  has  a  great 
significance in and a far-reaching impact on the implementation of the use of real names for 
bank accounts.  
First, it contributes to restraining such crimes from their sources as embezzlement and bribe-
taking, tax dodge, evasion and fraud, financial fraud and money laundering, which improves 
social  credit  system,  facilitates  anti-money  laundering  and  safeguards  a  normal  economic 
and financial order. Corruption and financial fraud are always associated with anonymous or 
fictitious accounts. Short text message fraud, which saw a great rise recently, was a case in 
point.  Criminal  suspects  cheated  bankcard  owners  to  transfer  funds  into  designated  bank 
accounts mostly anonymously or in fictitious names. Such accounts are also used to affect 
such other crimes as blackmails, bill frauds, underground money centers, embezzlement and 
bribe  taking.  Thus,  using  real  names  for  bank  accounts  is  an  essential  condition  for 
effectively preventing and cracking down on illegal and crime activities.  
Secondly,  it  is  beneficial  for  banks  to  achieve  a  sustainable  and  sound  development  by 
improving fundamental management system, perfecting internal control system, decreasing 
operational  risks  and  fulfilling  social  responsibility.  One  of  the  basic  premises  for  repaying 
loans on time is that borrower should be genuine firms or individuals. If it is possible for a firm 
or individual to open an anonymous or fictitious account, it is very likely for the bank to face 
default because it could not find a genuine economic entity to be responsible for repaying the 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 1
loans. At the same time, banks must perform anti-money laundering obligations spelled out 
in national laws and regulations by verifying customer’s identity with the aim of preventing 
money laundering crime and safeguarding financial security.  
Finally, it is conducive to protecting public interests. Many financial frauds are targeted at the 
general  public  .  Using  real  names  for  bank  accounts  will  contribute  to  deterring  financial 
fraud, thus to the greatest extent to protect public interests. Meanwhile, it is essential to apply 
real name policy to some special financial services provided by banks, like loss reporting of 
deposit  certificate  and  advance  withdrawal  of  term  deposit,  which  require  customers  to 
produce  identity  cards  or  other  identification  document  in  compliance  with  relevant  rules, 
because  it  can  not  only  decrease  economic  disputes  arising  from  anonymous  or  fictitious 
accounts,  but  also  facilitate  the  production  and  living  of  the  masses  and  protect  the  fund 
security of the public and legitimate rights and interests of banks.  
Using  real  names  for  bank  accounts  is  a  legal  obligation  for  banks,  enterprises  and 
institutions  and  the  public.  In  2000,  the  State  Council  promulgated  an  administrative 
regulation, entitled Regulations on the Use of Real Names for Personal Savings Accounts. In 
2003,  the  PBC  decreed  a  ministry  regulation,  called  Administrative  Rules  for  RMB  Bank 
Settlement  Accounts,  which  expanded  the  use  of  real  names  from  personal  accounts  to 
corporate  accounts.  In  2006,  the  National  People's  Congress  enacted  the  Law  on  Anti-
money  laundering,  a  state  law  which  established  officially  real  name  policy  for  bank 
accounts. The law specified that financial institutions shall establish customer identification 
systems in accordance with relative provisions, and they may not provide any service to or 
trade with an unidentified customer, nor establish any anonymous or fictitious account. At the 
same  time,  when  any  enterprise  and  institution  or  individual  first  establishes  business 
relationship with a financial institution or requires it to provide any one-off financial service, 
they  should  produce  genuine  and  valid  identity  cards  or  other  identification  documents. 
However, ever since a long time ago, because banks have no effective measures to verify 
identification documents, in particular personal identity certificates, and also because some 
banks  purposely  relax  real  name  requirement  to  gain  competition  advantage,  criminal 
suspects are likely to open fictitious accounts by using fake certificates.  
The Party and state leaders have attached great importance to using real names for bank 
accounts.  The  issues  has  been  raised  explicitly  in  the  Enforcement  Outline  of  Completely 
Implementing  the  Corruption  Punishment  and  Prevention  System  Which  Attach  Equal 
Importance to Education, Institution and Supervision, printed and distributed by the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in January 2005. It has also been given 
high priority in the recent two-year work plan of the Central Discipline Inspection Committee 
of the CPC. The legal affairs office of the State Council inspected the effects of Regulations 
on the use of real names for bank accounts in the first half of this year. State leaders made 
important indications on several occasions to establish a mechanism to share fundamental 
database  of  population  and  expedite  the  online  verification  system  under  which  MPS 
database  are  accessible  to  banks  so  as  to  implement  the  use  of  real  names  for  bank 
accounts.  Now,  the  MPS  database  has  collected  1.3billion  pieces  of  identity  information, 
each  including  citizen's  name,  ID  number,  photograph,  issuing  authority  and  other 
fundamental data of population. Supported by a rigid system and a technical arrangement, 
banks are able to access to these information and verify the identity of individuals. The online 
verification system offers an authoritative and handy means for customers' identification so 
as  to  implement  the  use  of  real  names  for  bank  accounts,  in  particular  personal  bank 
accounts. 
The online verification system is developed to provide an authoritative and handy means to 
block criminals off the banking system who intend to open bank accounts by using fake ID 
card,  as  well  as  to  clean  up  all  the  existing  anonymous  and  fictitious accounts  so that  we 
could  see  good  evidence  of  implementing  the  use  of  real  names  for  bank  accounts. 
Therefore, launching the online verification system will make it easier to implement the use of 
real  names  for  bank  accounts,  which  has  an  active  and  far-reaching  effect  on  protecting 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2007
consumers' interests, improving moral standards of the society and promoting economic and 
social  harmonious  development.  In  this  sense,  the  system  itself  is  also  a  fundamental 
expression  of  implementing  scientific  approach  to  development  and  building  a  socialist 
harmonious society.  
The operation of the online verification system 
II.  
The  online  verification  system  is  an  important  joint  measure  of  the  PBC  and  the  MPS  to 
implement the use of real names for bank accounts, which welcomed by commercial banks. 
With close cooperation with and wide support of banks, the PBC and the MPS succeeded to 
introduce the system nationwide by 29 June 2007.  
The  system  consists  of  two  core  parts,  namely  systems  of  information  transmitting  and 
sharing,  run  respectively  by  the  PBC  and  the  MPS.  The  system  provide  such  services  as 
single verification, batch verification, log inquiry, statistics and analysis, which are available 
for use 12 hours a day 7 days a week. At present, about 155,300 banking outlets connect to 
the system, while the rural credit union in remote areas could not gain access to the system 
because of technical problems.  
Online verification refers to a process in which a bank uses the online verification system to 
verify  a  customer’s  identity,  including  name,  ID  number,  photograph,  issuing  authority  and 
other information as noted in the citizen’s ID card. The basic method is that banks submit the 
name and ID number of the customer to the system for verification. If the information is true, 
banks will obtain the remaining identity information such as photograph and issuing -authority 
from the system. However, if the ID number does exist, but is not consistent with the name or 
the ID number does not exist, the system will correspondingly respond. According to relative 
provisions  of  laws  and  regulations,  banks  will  determine  whether  to  proceed  with  relative 
banking business on the basis of different verification results.  
In compliance with the provisions of laws and regulations, as well as executive regulations, 
banks  shall  verify  customer’s  identity  when  offering  the  following  products  or  services:  (1) 
account  opening  or  changing,  including  personal  savings  account,  personal  settlement 
account  and  corporate  settlement  account;(2)  payment  and  settlement  business,  including 
bill  clearing,  bankcard  settlement,  remittance  and  cash  services;(3)  lending  services, 
including  personal  loans  and  corporate  loans;  and  (4)  others  (e.g.,  cash  deposit  or 
withdrawal with the amount exceeding RMB 50000 yuan or foreign exchange equivalent to 
10000 U.S. dollar).  
To  ensure  the  system  to  function  smoothly,  to  facilitate  the  masses  and  to  safeguard  the 
public’s  legitimate  rights  and  interests,  we  have  formulated  measures  for  handling  online 
verification and trained bank staff at basic level so as to make a thoughtful arrangement in 
area of operational rules.  
First,  banks  should  give  different  treatment  to  different  verification  results.  If  the  system 
verifies the true identity of the customer, banks are entitled to proceed to conducting relative 
banking  business.  Otherwise,  banks  shall  address  the  following  two  circumstances:(1)  If 
banks can form a reasonable belief that the citizen’s identity card is not true, they shall refuse 
to provide products or services to the customer; (2) If not, banks shall not randomly decline 
to  serve  the  customer.  It  is  recommended  that  banks  shall  use  the  verifier  for  second 
generation of identity card to conduct further verification after handling relative business. If 
customer  has  any  complaints,  banks  shall  patiently  explain  the  relative  problems.  Such 
arrangements  are  conducive  not  only  to  effectively  preventing  risks  but  also  to  preventing 
certain unidentified factors from impeding customer’s handling of normal banking business.  
Secondly,  banks  should  establish  a  mechanism  to  verify  the  feedback  toward  suspicious 
information.  If  customers  are  doubtful  of  the  feedback  from  the  system,  they  have  two 
options: (1) Ask banks to verify. Banks can either apply to the information center of the MPS 
through  the  system  or  take  other  appropriate  measures  for  verification.  At  the  same  time, 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 3
customers can also assist banks in further verification by producing other valid identification 
documents  like  residence  permit.  (2)  Ask  banks  to  issue  a  letter  that  specify  the  identity 
information inconsistent with the database and then go to the local agency of the MPS for 
verification  in  which  his  or  her  permanent  residence  is  registered.  Such  arrangements  are 
conducive  not  only  to  authenticate  the  identification  document  rightly  and  timely  so  as  to 
avoid  disputes  between  banks  and  customers  but  also  to  help  the  MPS  either  rectify  the 
mistakes  in  the  identification  documents  of  citizens’  or  update  database  so  as  to  facilitate 
citizen’s economic and social activities in the future.  
Thirdly, banks should not leak out the identity information of citizens’ which are obtained from 
the  online  verification  system.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  law,  banks  should  not 
provide such information to any individual or unit. Meanwhile, banks should not apply such 
information for purposes other than banking business.  
At  the  same  time,  banks  are  also  required  to  strengthen  service  conscience,  optimize 
operation  procedures,  normalize  operation,  improve  service  quality,  as  well  as  promote 
publicity and explanation work so as to achieve online verification associated with efficient 
and better banking services.  
According  to  the  statistics,  since  the  implementation  of  the  online  verification  system,  the 
number of cases of online verification reached about 32 million. More than 2500 cases were 
found nationwide that the identity cards produced by customers were spurious, among which 
more  than  230  suspected  unlawful  and  criminal  cases  have  been  transferred  to  the  MPS. 
Besides, approximately 100,000 individuals voluntarily gave up conducting banking business 
when the verification result indicated inconsistency. The online verification has brought about 
primary  social  effect.  It  is  anticipated  that  the  development  and  operation  of  the  online 
verification system will have a great role in deterring crimes. At present, the cases of online 
verification stand at more than 1,200,000. The operations of the system remains stable while 
responding to verification with a relatively fast speed, as well as various businesses are well 
dealt with. The online verification is promoted in a stable and orderly way.  
III. 
Taking effective measures to comprehensively implement the use of real 
names for bank accounts.  
The State Council leaders have always paid great attention to developing and promoting the 
online verification system. They have required the PBC to closely cooperate with the MPS to 
improve this important infrastructure work. Next, we will take effective measures to promote 
the  implementation  of  the  real  name  system  in  every  respect  by  applying  the  online 
verification system.  
(1) 
Improve  the  relative  rules  and  regulations,  as  well  as  working  mechanism  of  the 
online verification so as to give gull play to the role of the system. We should perfect 
the relative rules and regulations on online verification based on the experience we 
have drawn on in order to give more practical instruction to banks with which they 
are  able  to  execute  the  online  verification  more  efficiently  and  conduct  relative 
banking business. We will establish and perfect a mechanism to verify the feedback 
toward  suspicious  information,  shorten  the  cycle  of  feedback  verification,  and 
normalize  the  required  procedures  so  as  to  keep  open  a  channel  to  verify  the 
feedback from the system toward suspicious identity information. At the same time, 
we will strengthen publicity to improve the awareness of the public in terms of the 
online verification system and the use of real names for bank accounts, and deepen 
the online verification work so as to give full play to the role of the system in areas of 
implementing  the  use  of  real  names  for  bank  accounts,  normalizing  the  order  of 
economy and finance and protecting the legitimate rights and interests of the public.  
Strengthen supervision on the promotion of the online verification system to ensure 
that  every  banking  outlet  has  the  capacity  to  execute  online  verification.  Now,  a 
BIS Review 121/2007
(2) 
4 
 (3) 
(4) 
small  number  of  banks,  particularly  rural  credit  unions  could  not  connect  to  the 
system  because  they  do  not  have  enough  technical  resources.  Moreover,  some 
banking outlets that connect to the system could not recognize photograph as noted 
in ID Card because their terminals could only recognize characters. Next, the PBC 
will continue to make greater efforts, by coordinating with provincial credit unions, to 
encourage  rural  credit  unions  to  construct  and  restructure  their  network  and 
operation  system  in  order  that  all  banks  are  able  to  connect  to  the  verification 
system. During the transformation stage, those bank outlets that could not connect 
to the system can link to its superior offices or branch offices of the PBC to execute 
online  verification.  At  the  same  time,  the  PBC  will  encourage  banks  to  make 
practical program to replace character terminal and improve the number of personal 
computers in every banking outlet aiming at least one PC in every outlet.  
Actively  and  steadily  verify  the  existing  bank  accounts  with  the  help  of  the  online 
verification  system.  Due  to  some  reasons  involving  history  and  management, 
particularly because of having no effective measures to verify individual identification 
document,  there  are  a  small  number  of  anonymous  or  fictitious  accounts  among 
existing  personal  accounts.  For  corporate  bank  accounts,  a  small  number  of 
corporate entities do not provide true information of their legal representatives. With 
a view to implementing the use of real names for bank accounts, the PBC will strictly 
observe  relative  policies  and  regulations  and  organize  banks  to  carry  out  a 
comprehensive  clean-up  and  verification  to  all  corporate  and  personal  bank 
accounts opened before the inauguration of the online verification system. The PBC 
will take steady and active steps to push forward such a program. Stock corporate 
bank  accounts  will  be  cleaned  up  and  verified  first,  followed  by  verification  of  the 
stock personal accounts based on relevant experiences obtained  
Further  implement  the  use  of  real  names  for  bank  accounts  by  taking  effective 
measures. It is a long-term job and requires all related parties to make concerted 
efforts. Recently, the PBC will improve the relative regulations on real name policy 
including  defining  types  of  valid  documents  that  individuals  could  use  to  conduct 
banking  business  as  well  as  the  order  of  priority  in  presenting  these  documents, 
normalizing  application  procedures  for  opening  a  corporate  bank  account  and  its 
management agreement so as to clarify the basis of implementing the use of real 
names  for  corporate  bank  accounts,  which  provide  policy  basis  covering  a  wider 
range of issues. At the same time, based on the cooperation with the MPS, the PBC 
will  strengthen  cooperation  with  other  Ministries  so  that  banks  are  able  to  verify 
Enterprise  Code  Certificate  or  other  credentials  and  provide  more  authority  and 
effective  measures  to  enable  institutional  customer’s  identification  in  order  to 
promote the comprehensive implementation of using real names for bank accounts.  
BIS Review 121/2007 
 5
