José Darío Uribe Escobar: Globalization and Colombia’s policy 
framework 
Speech by Mr José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank of Colombia, at the 
LACEA-LAMES 2007 Meeting, Bogotá, 4 October 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
The  rapid  expansion  of  the  world  economy  in  recent  years  has  contributed  to  the  positive 
performance  of  the  Colombian  economy,  but  has  also  created  new  and  diverse  economic 
policy challenges. I would like to highlight the following challenges: 
• 
• 
To continue reducing inflation and to keep economic growth at a sustainable level. 
To  help  the  economy  adjust  to  a  sharp  real  peso  appreciation  and  to  worldwide 
changes in relative prices. 
All these phenomena are connected. They are also associated with a period of rapid growth 
in the world economy and with the entry of China, India and the Eastern European countries 
into the global economy. A good share of policy challenges arises from the uncertainty about 
how  long  the  world  economy  will  continue  to  expand  and  from  the  difficulties  in  particular 
sectors  or  with  groups  of  individuals  associated  with  sharp  and  rapid  changes  in  some 
relative prices. 
I will now briefly describe the main effects of globalization on the Colombian economy, before 
analyzing how, in the past, favorable changes in terms of trade and capital flows have been 
the  impulses  for  large  swings  in  economic  growth  in  Colombia.  Lastly,  I  will  identify  the 
principal elements of an economic policy framework that helps to smooth economic cycles, 
placing special emphasis on the role monetary policy plays in that process. 
Some economic effects of increased globalization 
II.  
As is well known, over the last four years the world economy has been expanding as pace 
not seen since several decades ago. In addition, this expansion, has (at least) two elements 
that make it different from previous experiences. First, the strong contribution that China and 
– to a lesser degree – India have made to global economic growth. These countries have an 
abundant labor force but are scarce in natural resources. 
Second, this economic growth phase has been almost even across countries and regions, 
and unlike what happened at the beginning of the seventies, it has not been accompanied by 
strong inflationary pressures, up until now. This could mean that the current growth phase of 
the world economy will last longer than the growth spurt of the seventies (Krueger, 2007). 
Colombia,  like  many  other  countries,  has  benefited  greatly  from  the  rapid  world  economic 
growth  and  the  greater  commercial  and  financial  interdependence  between  countries.  The 
scale of growth in the world economy, coupled with the rapid rise in output in China, India 
and the Eastern European economies have led to a substantial increase in the demand for 
oil, coal and ferronickel, which are Colombia’s three leading export products. 
Also as we shifted to import more from countries such as China, where wage and production 
costs are low, the prices of our manufactured imported goods have dropped or increased at 
relatively  low  rates  for  several  years  on  a  row.  That  is  the  case  for  instance,  of  prices  for 
clothing, household electrical appliances, automobiles and computers, but also many other 
items. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 1
Consequently, prices for imported goods have declined compared to those for exports. Thus 
the terms of trade have improved and the Colombian economy has received a positive boost 
to  its  income  and  real  wealth.  The  latter  has  facilitated  the  growth  in  consumer,  corporate 
and government spending. 
In  addition,  with  high  oil  prices,  the  economy  of  Venezuela,  Colombia’s  second  most 
important trading partner, has been growing at a high rate and has imported large quantities 
of  food  products  and  manufactured  goods  from  Colombia.  Similarly,  the  larger  world 
economic growth has led to an increase in exports from Colombia to countries other than the 
United States and Venezuela of about 60% over the last 4 years. 
On its own, foreign net direct investment has increased from annual average levels of US 
$2873 million in 2004 to more than US$ 5365 million in 2006. This extra investment has been 
used to expand the production of basic commodities, and more generally exports. It has even 
been  used  to  take  advantage  of  business  opportunities  created  by  domestic  growth  itself. 
This is the case, for example, with foreign investment in commerce and the financial services 
sector, both of which have experienced an important increases in productivity. 
The combination of high international prices for our main export products, the strong demand 
for exports and the increase in confidence levels and security, has meant that the growth of 
both  investment  and  household  consumption  have  accelerated,  raising  real  economic 
growth. Following two consecutive years when the economy grew at annual rates close to 
5%, in 2006 it expanded 6.8%, and during the first semester of this year at a rate of 7.6%. 
The  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  together  with  capital  inflows  in  the  form  of  foreign 
direct  investment  has  induced  a  sharp  peso  appreciation  against  the  dollar  and  against  a 
basket of currencies. I will return to talk about this later. 
Turning now to inflation, the expansion of demand arising from the improvement of terms of 
trade placed moderate pressure on production capacity. There have also been rises in the 
price of fuel. And more recently, a strong demand for food exports to Venezuela has pushed 
up the domestic price of certain foodstuffs. These latter two factors are changes in relative 
prices, and what happens in the future with the general price level will depend on monetary 
policy decisions. 
On  a  more  structural  level,  the  increased  competition  from  economies  with  an  abundant 
supply of cheap labor has made it more difficult for domestic producers to raise prices, even 
in an environment characterized by strong growth in demand. Likewise, more competition in 
some  productive  sectors  has  curbed  wage  increases,  exerted  downward  pressure  on  the 
costs  of  other  inputs,  and  encouraged  gains  in  productive  efficiency.  All  of  these  could 
eventually imply that inflation in Colombia becomes less sensitive to changes in the domestic 
output gap, but more responsive to changes in the world output gap. 
In  short,  the  combination  of  an  improvement  in  the  terms of  trade  and  capital  flows  in  the 
form  of  foreign  direct  investment  has  contributed  to  a  strong  economic  expansion.  Similar 
episodes, however, have occurred in the past, even before the deepening of the globalization 
process. In each case the years of high growth have been followed by years of low growth 
and  often  crisis.  That  is  why  one  of  the  fundamental  challenges  of  the  current  economic 
policy  must  be  to  prevent  cycles  of  boom  and  bust  from  building  up  and,  in  doing  this,  to 
ensure that the Colombian economy makes the most of the globalization process. With this 
in mind, in the next section I will spend some time on the causes of our past business cycles. 
Terms of trade, capital flows and business cycles 
III.  
Chart 1 plots the four Colombian business cycles since the 1970s in terms of growth rates. It 
seems that very high growth rates where in all cases followed by a slowdown to much lower 
rates a few years later. GDP per capita fell for at least one year during the slowdown. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2007
When we look into the source of these cycles what is interesting is that we see that either 
favorable  terms  of  trade  movements  or  inflows  of  capital  and  sometimes  both  acted  as 
impulses for each cycle. 
Chart 2 plots the Colombian terms of trade against the GDP growth. Before the 1990s, coffee 
was  the  main  export  of  Colombia.  Rises  in  the  world  coffee  price  in  1976-7  and  1986 
stimulated demand in Colombia almost a year later. Recent estimates within the Banco de la 
República confirms that the correlation of the terms of trade cycle of three quarters ago with 
the GDP cycle now is 0.6 for data since 1994 (Parra, 2007). 
 BIS Review 113/2007 
   3
Chart  3  plots  the  financial  account  and  FDI  net  inflows  against  growth  in  Colombia. 
Fluctuations in international lending precede or coincide with fluctuations in GDP growth in 
the 1980s. In the late 1990s, just as recently, FDI inflows were attracted especially by the 
petroleum  and  communication  sectors.  Capital  flows  were  another  source  of  impulses  for 
some of these cycles, again just as now. 
 
The charts also illustrate that terms of trade and international lending flows to Colombia are 
volatile and can reverse. They have acted first as impulses to these booms and then often 
reversed to act as detonators to expose the vulnerability built up in the intervening years. For 
example in 1998 a sharp rise in international market spreads associated with the Asian crisis 
triggered a recession here. 
The literature confirms that this pattern of impulse and detonation is common to developing 
countries. The consensus is that terms of trade shocks are an important source of shocks to 
growth  in  emerging  market  countries  (Mendoza,  1995).  Others  have  found  evidence  that 
capital inflows are procyclical (Reinhart, Végh and Kaminsky, 2004). 
The question relevant to then and now is: If terms of trade fluctuations and capital inflows are 
so volatile, why do we not save during the sunny days for the rainy days? 
To understand this, Lavan Mahadeva, at the Banco de la República, has offered me a simple 
scheme to differentiate roles in the drama of the business cycle. He classifies variables into 
impulses,  amplifiers,  symptoms  and  detonators.  See  Chart  4.  Impulses  start  the  cycle. 
Amplifiers  are  those  factors  that  generate  unsustainable  outcomes  from  what  should  be 
favorable impulses. The symptoms are data that reveal the growing vulnerability. Detonators 
trigger crises by exposing those vulnerabilities. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2007
 The point is that impulse and detonators, which as we have seen are typically international 
factors, are inevitable. A developing country like Colombia cannot shut itself off from them. 
On the other hand, symptoms of ill health such as an unsustainable current account deficit, 
or  an  appreciating  exchange  rate,  can  be  treated,  but  sometimes  that  treatment  is  worse 
than the disease. 
Our focus is therefore on amplifiers where we think there is a clear responsibility for domestic 
policy. 
What could be an amplifier? Intertemporal consumption theory provides a simple answer. An 
amplifier  is  any  factor  that  prevents  consumption  smoothing  in  response  to  a  favorable 
income  impulse.  Chart  5  plots  real  private  consumption  against  real  private  disposable 
income  for  when  we  have  data.  Clearly  there  is  a  failure  of  consumption  smoothing:  both 
follow each other closely. If consumption smoothing worked in Colombia, we would save in 
the  sunny  days  for  the  rainy  days  that  will  surely  follow.  Only  then  could  we  make  full 
advantage  of  international  developments.  Other  amplifiers  may  exacerbate  bursts  in  fixed 
investment or durable consumption that are triggered by external events. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 5
One reason why consumption smoothing fails in Colombia is that businesses here face much 
uncertainty and cannot guarantee a steady flow of repayments to lenders. We can see that in 
the  high  risk  premia  and  credit  frictions  on  domestic  lending.  High  risk  premia  and  high 
discount rates tilt consumers away from smoothing temporary income flows. 
The  pro-cyclical  behavior  of  financial  credit  also  amplifies  the  cycles  of  investment  and 
durable consumption goods. This naturally matches with evidence that asset prices (mostly 
house prices in Colombia) are pro-cyclical. See Chart 6 also from recent research with the 
Banco de la República (Tenjo, Charry, López, Ramírez, 2007). 
 Another  reason  why  consumption  smoothing  could  be  failing  in  Colombia  is  that  a  higher 
proportion  of  shocks  to  income  here  are  permanent  rather  than  temporary.  Aguiar  and 
Gopinath  recently  (Aguiar  y  Gopinath,  2007)  report  that  this  is  typical  of  emerging  market 
 6 
 BIS Review 113/2007
economies and suggest that this in turn may be due to policy regime switches and volatile 
interest rates. 
It  is  more  difficult  to  prove,  but  still  it  seems  likely  that  consumption  has  been  pro-cyclical 
because policy, be that monetary policy, fiscal policy or financial stability policy, has been too 
pro-cyclical.  If  consumers  or  firms  face  low  real  rates  and  easy  credit  during  the  booms 
caused by favorable terms of trade and inflows, they will naturally recycle those gains into 
consumer demand and into risky forms of investment and not into more sustainable savings 
and investments. 
Adjusting to economic change and the role of macro policies 
IV.  
The  Colombian  experience  thus  suggests  that  the  difficulty  in  smoothing  out  consumption 
following external shocks is important in creating our economic cycles. Moreover, it is quite 
likely  that  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial  policies  were  key  factors  in  explaining  the  pro-
cyclical  expansion  of  expenditure.  How  could  these  policies  instead  contribute  to  smooth 
economic cycles so that Colombia can obtain the maximum benefit from globalization? 
Let  us  begin  with  monetary  policy.  The  objective  of  the  Banco  de  la  República  Board  of 
Directors  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  a  low  and  stable  rate  of  inflation.  For  this  purpose, 
monetary policy acts symmetrically. The monetary authority is prepared to induce reductions 
in  the  rate  of  growth  of  aggregate  demand  whenever  the  inflation  forecast  indicates  that 
inflation could exceed the target, while it would allow a greater expenditure expansion – by 
lowering interest rates – when the inflation forecast undershoots the target. 
In the long run, low and stable inflation means that both individuals and firms have a better 
understanding  of  the  signals  provided  by  prices,  acting  against  the  build  up  of  large 
imbalances  between  aggregate  supply  and  demand.  This  helps  to  prevent  an  excess  of 
unproductive investments during boom periods, associated with favourable external factors. 
It  also  helps  to  stop  the  formation  of  asset  bubbles  that  increase  the  financial  risks  of  the 
economy and compromise the sustainability of its growth. 
In addition, with targets of inflation that are met and that are close to the medium and long 
term objective (3 +/- 1 percentage point), the credibility of monetary policy is strengthened 
and inflation expectations are anchored. This has several positive effects. Let me highlight 
the following: 
• 
Low  and  stable  inflation  rates  reduce  the  uncertainty  associated  with  long  term 
investment decisions, which in turn restrain the risk premium asked by investors. As 
a result, both the level and volatility of long term nominal interest rates diminish, and 
also  the  volatility  of  inflation  and  economic  growth  are  reduced.  Diminished 
macroeconomic volatility and lower interest rates in the long run support the good 
quality  investment  that  the  economy  needs  to  adapt  to  changes  in  external 
conditions. 
Credible  central  banks  and  economies  with  inflation  expectations  anchored  to 
inflation targets reduce the pass through from exchange rates to prices. This implies 
that monetary policy should not be pro-cyclical when the economy is hit by shocks 
that depreciate the local currency and slow down economic activity. On the contrary, 
with anchored expectations and credible inflation targets, monetary policy should be 
rather more counter-cyclical. 
 The other central element of the inflation targeting scheme is exchange rate flexibility. The 
Board of Directors of the Banco de la República does not have a target or a preferred level 
for the exchange rate. When the Banco de la República intervened in the foreign exchange 
market between September 2004 and May 2007, it always sterilized those interventions. The 
short-term interest rate was maintained most of the time at a level that was considered to be 
coherent with the achievement of the inflation target. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 7
The strong real appreciation of the peso over the last four years has taken place through a 
nominal appreciation. The exchange rate reached almost $3,000 during the first quarter of 
2003  and  is  now  at  about  $2,020.  In  a  context  of  favorable  terms  of  trade  shifts,  growing 
foreign direct investment, rising remittances from Colombians abroad, and a dollar that tends 
to  depreciate  with  respect  to  other  world  currencies,  a  fixed  exchange  rate  would  have 
prevented  these  price  signals  from  working.  With  a  fixed  exchange  rate  the  burden  of 
necessary economic adjustment would have fallen on domestic prices and wages, imposing 
large costs on the economy, and creating unnecessary variability of output and employment. 
Similarly, the significant rise in investment in machinery and equipment in diverse sectors of 
the economy that we are seeing currently suggests that companies in Colombia are making 
the  most  of  the  peso  appreciation  (which  lowers  the  peso  price  of  capital  goods  imports). 
They are doing so in order to increase their productivity and to become more competitive. In 
the  industrial  sector,  some  companies  are  taking  advantage  of  the  low  cost  of  imported 
intermediate goods, and some are concentrating on the production of goods with a higher 
value  added.  Employment  and  production  have  improved  in  sectors  such  as  industry, 
construction and commerce, which have benefited from the rise in income and the strength 
of domestic demand. 
From a sectoral point of view, the peso appreciation and the changes in relative prices reflect 
a  need  to  adjust  to  the  changes  in  the  world  economy.  These  factors  have  intensified 
pressure in some sectors that produce agricultural and manufactured goods, either because 
the appreciation has been accompanied by low international prices for their products or by 
trade  barriers,  or  because  they  face  strong  competition  from  producers  in  other  emerging 
economies. In some sectors, all of this has reduced income from exports and lowered the 
price of imports that compete with domestic output. There are cases, such as the production 
of flowers, footwear and specific types of wearing apparel, where plants have closed or cut 
back drastically on the number of jobs. 
Exchange  rate  flexibility  does  not  mean  however,  that  exchange  rate  movements  are  not 
taken into account for devising monetary policy. On the contrary, these movements play a 
key role on discussions of monetary policy. Variations of the exchange rate affect aggregate 
demand  by  changing  relative  prices,  which  modifies  the  demand  for  goods  and  services 
tradables and nontradables. In this way, movements of the exchange rate have an incidence 
on inflation and growth forecasts, which are the basis for decision making on interest rates. 
A sound fiscal policy, focused on reducing the level of public debt as a proportion of GDP 
would also contribute to stabilize the economy, and to increase its capacity for withstanding 
external shocks. This task can be accomplished through three channels (Uribe, 2006): 
• 
Reducing the debt/GDP ratio increases the economy’s robustness and enables it to 
respond to negative external shocks such as changes in liquidity and foreign interest 
rate. This ratio is one of the main factors that rating agencies take into account when 
assessing the economies resilience to shocks. 
A  low  debt/GDP  ratio  enables  the  governments  to  operate  counter-cyclical  fiscal 
policy. 
A low debt/GDP ratio reduces the exposure of the public sector to foreign exchange 
risk  and  the  exposure  of  the  financial  system  to  domestic  market  risk.  Hence,  it 
enhances financial stability. 
  Finally,  the  flexibility  of  the  economy  is  also  enhanced  by  a  sound  and  efficient  financial 
system. As is well known, domestic financial systems amplify and propagate external shocks 
to  emerging  markets  economies,  rather  than  helping  smooth  their  effects.  The  build  up  of 
internal  and  external  imbalances  and  the  subsequent  recession  and  financial  crisis  of  the 
nineties in Colombia attest to the perils of a pro-cyclical behaviour of the financial system. 
8 
 BIS Review 113/2007
Concluding remarks 
V.  
Let me conclude with four key points: 
• 
   Colombia  has  benefited  greatly  from  the  strong  global  economic  growth  of  recent 
years. 
In  the  past,  positive  terms  of  trade  shocks  and  capital  inflows  to  Colombian  have 
ended in periods of boom and busts. 
Sound  macroeconomic  policies  are  central 
globalization, while minimizing the risks. 
Our  monetary  policy  framework  –  the  inflation  target  in  concert  with  a  relatively 
flexible exchange rate – has mitigated the effects of shocks and facilitated economic 
adjustment to new external circumstances. 
the  benefits  of 
to  maximizing 
References 
Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2007), “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the. 
Trend”, Journal of Political Economy 115, 2007. 
Krueger, A (2007) “How to keep Chile´s export orientation”. Mimeo. August 2007. 
Mendoza E (1995) “The terms of trade, the real exchange rate, and economic. Fluctuations” 
International Economic Review 36, 1995. 
Parra, J (2007) “Stylized facts and the Colombian business cycle”, Banco de la República 
forthcoming. 
Tenjo,  F,  L.  Charry,  M.  López  and  J.  Ramírez  (2007),  “Acelerador  Financiero  y  Ciclos 
Económicos en Colombia: Un. Ejercicio Exploratorio”, Banco de la República, Borrador No. 
431 
Uribe J.D. (2006), “Remarks at the Bear Stearns 2006 Colombia Conference”. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 9
