Nigel Jenkinson: New markets and new demands – challenges for central 
banks in the wholesale market infrastructure 
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at a 
joint Bank of England/European Central Bank Conference on “Payments and Monetary and 
Financial Stability”, Frankfurt am Main, 12 November 2007. 
I am very grateful to Mark Manning for his help in preparing this speech and to John Gieve, Victoria Cleland and 
Ben Norman for helpful comments. 
 Introduction 
1. 
1  
Central  banks  sit  at  the  heart  of  the  monetary  economy  providing  the  ultimate 
settlement  asset  and  typically  operating  the  large-value  payment  systems  that  underpin 
financial  activity.  The  modern  central  bank’s  twin  objectives  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability emerged from their early role in settling claims between banks. 
2  
But this traditional payments function is subject to the same forces for change that are 
transforming the rest of the economy. In particular, developments in technology, the financial 
innovation they allow, and the globalisation of finance are reshaping the landscape, exposing 
new sources of risk and posing fresh challenges for regulators and central banks. 
3  
As markets become more interconnected and international, national authorities have to 
work  more  closely  together,  cooperating  in  their  oversight  and  operational  activities  and 
coordinating their risk assessments. As new products and players emerge in the commercial 
sector, they may also need to adapt the scope of their oversight and regulatory response. 
4  
which will resurface over the course of this two-day conference. 
I would like to take some time this afternoon to explore some of these issues, many of 
Early demands: the historical context 
First  some  history.  How  did  central  banks  come  to  assume  their  “central”  role  in  the 
2.  
5  
financial infrastructure? 
6  
Internationally,  Venice  claims  a  key  role  in  the  story,  but  I  will  start  later  with  the 
activities  of  goldsmiths  in  17th  century  London.  Starting  from  their  custody  business, 
goldsmiths  began  to  settle  transactions  between  merchants,  across  their  books  or  via  the 
transfer  of  deposit  receipts  –  the  early  bank  notes.  Merchants  were  thereby  able  to  settle 
obligations with one another without having to carry, count out and value coins: a welcome 
development, considering that a £100 sterling bag of silver coins – a commonly used value 
for  notes  –  weighed  over  30  pounds  (14kg  for  those  in  the  audience  baffled  by  imperial 
measures)! 
7   Over time, so as to accommodate transfers between customers of different “banks”, the 
banks  started  accepting  claims  on  each  other  and,  once  they  found  ways  to  settle  these 
claims, established the first British interbank payment systems. 
8  
So  what  were  these  early  settlement  mechanisms?  At  first,  banks  started  settling 
interbank  claims  using  gold  and  silver  coins.  But  these  were  in  short  supply  and,  again, 
costly to transport and exchange. 
9  
Banks thus eventually innovated by switching to settlement in assets convertible into 
gold  and  silver.  For  example,  by  the  1770s,  London  bankers  had  begun  to  settle  in  notes 
issued by the Bank of England, a highly-regarded, but at that time, private bank.  
BIS Review 130/2007 
 1
10   A low-risk settlement asset was particularly important in the unregulated world of the 
goldsmiths,  in  which  credit  risk  was  acute  and  liquidity  shocks  –  like  the  one  we  have 
experienced of late − were common and dangerous. In a sorry letter to an associate1, one 
goldsmith  wrote  to  another  in  the  1660s:  “I  have  beene  by  many  accidents  much 
postpon’d…ye money due to mee is soe farre off that I can not make it useful to mee. All 
Credit in London is much Shortened of late.” 
11  Showing all the optimism which continues to characterise bankers today, he added: “ I 
am  attempting  a  way  to  enlarge  my  owne  (credit)  and  doubt  not  to  effect  it  to  his 
Maties.[Majesties] advantage as well as my owne, if I am (like ye lame dogg) but helpt over 
this style.” 
12   Further efficiency gains were then obtained by settling interbank obligations over the 
accounts  of  a  single  institution.  This  innovation  was  sometimes  put  in  place  by  the  public 
authorities; in other cases it developed naturally, such as when the London bankers adopted 
Bank of England deposits as the ultimate settlement asset in 1854. 
Payments and monetary and financial stability 
3.  
13   To ensure that its liabilities continue to be perceived of higher quality than those of any 
other issuer, the institution at the apex of the payment system – typically the central bank – 
has an incentive to exercise close control over the terms on which they are made available to 
the banking system. 
14   That translates into the traditional monetary stability objective: preservation of the role 
of  the  ultimate  settlement  asset  as  a  store  of  value  and  unit  of  account.  It  also  gives  the 
central bank a strong interest in the stability of the financial system. And within that a reliable 
and resilient infrastructure for distributing the ultimate settlement asset is a key condition of 
stability (and of implementing monetary policy effectively). 
15 
In  an  advanced  monetary  economy,  of  course,  bank  deposits  constitute  by  far  the 
largest component of “money”; in the UK they make up some 96% of the broad monetary 
aggregate, M4. Agents rely on interbank payment systems to facilitate the direct transfer of 
deposits between banks and thereby also preserve their role as a medium of exchange. And 
as the sophistication of securities and other markets has grown, the core payment systems 
have  become  intertwined  with  the  settlement  and  clearing  systems  for  the  key  markets. 
Together  they  have  become  a  critical  part  of  the  infrastructure  not  just  for  the  financial 
system but  for the economy  more  widely. And in the wake of 9/11, all central banks have 
been  giving  more  attention  to  the  physical  and  financial  resilience  of  these  systems.  For 
example, in our regular Financial Stability Report, the Bank of England has included the risk 
of infrastructure disruption in the list of the top six vulnerabilities facing the financial system 
over the last two years. 
16   As Alan Greenspan notes in his memoirs: “We’d always thought that if you wanted to 
cripple the US economy, you’d take out the payment systems. Banks would be forced to fall 
back on inefficient physical transfers of money. Businesses would resort to barter and IOUs; 
the level of economic activity across the country could drop like a rock.” 
17  
In  a  paper  to  be  presented  at  this  conference  tomorrow,  Andrea  Gerali  and  Franco 
Passacantando  consider  this  in  the  context  of  the  Great  Depression. As  confidence  in  the 
banking  system  evaporated,  bank  deposits  ceased  to  function  as  a  medium  of  exchange. 
“Scrip”, or substitute money, emerged, typically taking the form of vouchers or coupon books. 
Such  monies  had  otherwise  only  been  commonly  used  in  isolated  lumber  or  coal-mining 
                                                 
1   Quoted  in  Quinn  (1997),  “Goldsmith-Banking:  Mutual  Acceptance  and  Interbanker  Clearing  in  Restoration 
London”, Explorations in Economic History 34, pp411-432. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2007
communities  in  the  United  States  –  communities  lacking  banks  or  financial  intermediaries. 
But while adequate for the purchase of provisions at the local general store, such forms of 
money  were  clearly  an  imperfect  medium  of  exchange  and  created  otherwise  unintended 
credit exposures between agents. 
18   The  recent  market  turbulence  offers  a  further  reminder  of  the  importance  of  resilient 
infrastructure for conditions in financial markets. When markets are fragile, any interruption to 
normal service could have particularly serious implications: further clouding judgements as to 
individual  participants’  solvency;  undermining  agents’  risk  management;  or  affecting  asset 
prices in dependent markets. With volumes and values in several markets having hit record 
levels  during  the  market  turmoil  and  remaining  high  for  a  sustained  period,  infrastructure 
providers have experienced a severe stress test and, by and large, have passed with flying 
colours. CLS, for instance, processed nearly 860,000 transactions (more than $8trn in value) 
on 19th September, 2½ times the daily average in June. 
4.  
Current trends in the wholesale market infrastructure: new markets and new 
demands. 
19   Today,  central  banks  around  the  world  still  typically  provide  the  ultimate  settlement 
asset and sometimes operate, and also own, key components of the payment and settlement 
infrastructure.  For  key  elements  of  the  infrastructure  central  banks  have  assumed  an 
oversight role. Depending on the particular regulatory architecture in place, this is sometimes 
shared with the financial regulator, as in the UK. 
20   But this is a dynamic environment: the landscape is broadening and deepening, with 
niche  market-specific  facilities,  cross-border  systems,  new  entrants  and  commercial  bank 
providers  becoming  more  important.  New  sources  of  risk  are  emerging,  presenting  new 
challenges for central banks in their pursuit of monetary and financial stability. 
Financial innovation and technological advancement 
21   The  way  technology  is  transforming  markets  and  therefore  payment  systems  is 
illustrated in the rapid growth in OTC derivatives markets; and the increased penetration of 
electronic trading platforms – and automated trading strategies – across a range of markets. 
22   According to data released by the Bank for International Settlements, notional amounts 
outstanding in global OTC derivatives markets rose by almost 40% in 2006 – up more than 
260% over the past five years. The outstanding value of the credit segment of the market 
doubled  in  value  in  2006  alone  and  trading  activity  has  remained  high  through  2007, 
especially during the recent market turmoil. 
23   These markets have traditionally been cleared and settled via bilateral arrangements 
between  the  counterparties  to  the  trade,  but  new  automated  infrastructure  services  have 
emerged,  partly  in  response  to  an  international  regulatory  initiative  led  by  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (FRBNY).  Major  dealers  now  confirm  almost  90%  of  credit 
derivatives trades electronically, as against less than 50% two years ago. 
24   An  important  recent  addition  to  the  landscape  is  DTCC  Deriv/SERV’s  Trade 
Information Warehouse, which maintains a so-called “golden copy” of each credit derivatives 
trade. With appropriate interoperability between systems, these data can support a range of 
ancillary  services:  calculating  and  settling  payment  obligations,  managing  collateral, 
terminating trades and reconciling portfolios. The Warehouse is likely ultimately to be rolled 
out for other products. 
25   The  declining  cost  of  technology  has  also  been  a  key  driver  of  the  rise  of  electronic 
trading  in  recent  years.  Almost  60%  of  trade  in  foreign  exchange  is  now  executed 
electronically and close to 50% in repo. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 3
26   Automated  and  algorithmic  trading  strategies  are  becoming  more  widespread  across 
asset  classes.  The  London  Stock  Exchange  (LSE)  reports  that  the  proportion  of  the  order 
flow on the exchange that is automated has risen from negligible amounts just four or five 
years ago to approaching half today. This not only has implications for the scale of trading 
activity – volumes have tripled on the LSE’s SETS system over the past five years – but also 
the design and location of the trading infrastructure. For many algorithmic trading strategies, 
processing  speed  is  critical.  The  faster  systems  can  process  trades  in  just  one  or  two 
milliseconds: a tiny fraction of the blink of an eye. But ultimately speed and thus the ability to 
gain  a  competitive  advantage  depends  on  proximity  to  the  platform;  hence,  the  old 
geographical  pull  of  markets  has begun  to  re7 emerge  with  exchanges  selling  space  near 
their trading platforms to those who want to be first in the queue. 
27   Many  new  entrants  to  the  trading  arena  are  therefore  competing  with  incumbent 
exchanges on the basis of processing speed. These new platforms are also looking for lower 
cost post-trade solutions. As such, those emerging in Europe have looked beyond incumbent 
providers: new entrants and commercial bank providers of clearing and settlement services 
have featured strongly in their plans. Such providers not only aim to meet demands in terms 
of flexibility and cost, but also to offer sufficient breadth to deliver a multicurrency clearing 
and settlement service. 
Globalisation, regulatory change and the market structure of infrastructure 
28   This is part of a general reshaping of the infrastructural landscape in a global market 
place.  Market  participants  are  becoming  increasingly  international,  operating  in  multiple 
markets and facing obligations in multiple currencies. Latest international banking data from 
the Bank for International Settlements revealed growth in excess of 20% in reporting banks’ 
total cross-border claims in the year to end-Q1 2007, taking the total to $28.5trn. 
29   Banks, therefore, seek infrastructural solutions that will accommodate the international 
organisation of their businesses. So, while, historically, financial infrastructure has typically 
evolved  along  national  lines,  cross-border  alliances  and  mergers  are  now  more  common, 
both  in  trading  and  post-trade:  e.g.,  NYSE  Euronext;  LCH.Clearnet;  Euroclear  Group.  And 
alliances  in  the  form  of  cross-border  clearing  and  settlement  links  are  also  widespread, 
enabling, for instance, securities traded in Italy to be settled and held in an account in the 
securities settlement system in Germany. 
30   Commercial  bank  providers  –  namely,  correspondent  banks  and  global  custodians  – 
may  be  best  placed  to  meet  the  demand  for  multicurrency  settlement,  leveraging  their 
extensive international connections. This could then reinforce their important position in the 
infrastructural landscape. Indeed, the major global custodians each posted growth in assets 
held in custody in excess of 20% in just the past year. 
31   And  differences  between 
incumbent  providers  of 
infrastructure and those for either commercial bank providers or smaller new entrants could 
tilt the playing field. For example, CLS is subject to close central bank scrutiny, operates as a 
narrow  bank,  and  has  to  meet  exacting  –  and  costly  –  resilience  standards.  New  clearing 
arrangements  and  bilateral  netting  schemes  are  now  penetrating  the  foreign  exchange 
markets, threatening the volumes passing through CLS. In messaging, too, SWIFT – which 
submits  voluntarily  to  central  bank  oversight  –  is  beginning  to  face  competition  in  certain 
markets  from  new  entrants  not  subject  to  oversight.  Authorities  must  be  alert  to  the 
challenges these competitive developments provide. 
32   Other regulatory initiatives are contributing to a reshaping of the landscape. MiFID, in 
the EU, and RegNMS, in the US, have sought to encourage increased competition in trading; 
and the Code of Conduct, recently signed in the European Union, establishes terms under 
which  infrastructures  operating  in  one  member  state  can  clear  and  settle  (initially  equity) 
trades in another. More than 20 applications have now been made under the terms of the 
Code. 
the  regulatory  regimes 
for 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2007
33   Whether  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  markets  can  support  a  wide 
range of providers in the long-term remains an open question. There is generally a tendency 
towards concentration in infrastructure provision because of increasing returns to scale in a 
fixed cost business and often powerful network effects. This applies equally in the case of 
commercial  bank  provision  of  infrastructure:  ECB  survey  evidence  reveals  that  the  ten 
largest  correspondent  banks  in  euro  account  for  around  80%  of  correspondent  banking 
payment  values;  and  the  top-4  global  custodians  now  account  for  three-quarters  of  total 
assets in custody. Indeed, regulators have been giving increasing attention to the potential 
systemic spillovers from operational or business failures at major commercial bank providers 
of infrastructural services. That has led, for example, to the initiative in the US to implement 
“New Bank”, a dormant shell company to take over the functions should one of the two major 
clearers in the US Treasury market cease operations. 
34  
It may be that a competitive environment can be sustained, particularly as the cost of 
technology  falls,  lowering  barriers  to  entry,  and  liquidity  bridges  and  other  forms  of 
interoperability are established between systems. But, the jury is still out. Recent evidence 
on  the  trading  side,  particularly  in  the  US,  is  mixed:  some  trading  platforms,  such  as 
Archipelago and INET, have been swallowed up by the incumbent exchanges; others, such 
as  BATS  Trading  are  thriving,  keeping  the  pressure  on  the  exchanges  to  cut  costs  and 
upgrade their services. 
35  
I suspect what we are seeing is a redefinition of the market on an international scale. In 
the process, national incumbents are being challenged by a combination of ambitious foreign 
incumbents  eager  to  exploit  economies  of  scale  and  nimble,  unencumbered  new  entrants 
sometimes specialising in niche products. A process that is likely to lead in time to greater 
consolidation at international level is currently manifesting itself in terms of fragmentation at 
the national level as local incumbents are challenged. 
36   The  end-game  may  well  be  lower  transaction  costs  at  both  the  trade  and  post-trade 
level and more concentrated (if not monopoly) cross-border infrastructure in each. But it may 
take some time to reach a new equilibrium. Central banks and regulators need not only to 
prepare  for  and  perhaps  help  shape  the  end-game,  but  also  address  challenges  arising 
during the transition. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 5
Issues and challenges for central banks and regulators going forward 
5. 
37   Two key challenges, in particular, will need to be met: 
(i) 
Preserve enough influence to protect the collective interest while maintaining 
a level regulatory playing field 
38   The resilience and efficiency of the core infrastructure is an important public good and, 
given the tendency to monopoly, the authorities need to ensure that they maintain sufficient 
influence  to  ensure  resilience  in  this  increasingly  complex  landscape.  That  requires 
consistent and objective criteria to be applied to new as well as established systems. Such 
criteria might include: size – the volume and value of flows; type of flow – the extent to which 
interdependencies  are  generated  with  other  systems  or  underlying  financial  markets;  and 
substitutability – the potential for rerouting flows to other systems. 
39   A changing market structure may also alter the nature of risks posed by the systems 
themselves. For instance, to the extent that we are entering a phase of competing provision 
of  services  at  the  national  level,  issues  might  arise  around  the  potential  fragmentation  of 
system liquidity. Equally, we are also seeing pressures for greater consolidation of systems 
at an international level, where the challenges of lowering single point of failure risks remain 
at the top of the agenda. 
40   Where new services are offered by commercial bank providers, central banks need to 
cooperate  closely  with  banking  supervisors  to  ensure  that  potential  sources  of  financial 
stability  risk  in  their  infrastructure  roles  are  embedded  within  regulatory  assessments. 
Indeed, to the extent that new services are multicurrency in nature an international dialogue 
may be necessary. I am pleased that the Basel Committees on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
and  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  have  agreed  to  strengthen  communication 
between  the  committees,  for  example  by  holding  joint  meetings  of  sub-groups,  which  will 
help to support this dialogue. 
41   As  recent  events  have  underlined,  regulation  and  public  intervention  can  not  only 
change  market  incentives  for  the  better  but  can  also  have  unintended  side  effects.  For 
instance,  the  creation  of  the  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  at  the  centre  of  the  recent  market 
turbulence  may  be  seen  in  part  as  a  response  to  the  crude  regime  for  capital  charges 
established under the original Basel Accord, under which liquidity facilities under a year in 
maturity were exempt. That is being remedied under Basel II. But it is a reminder that we 
need  to  be  very  careful  to  watch  for  these  distortions  in  the  regulation  and  oversight  of 
payment systems and other infrastructures, so as to ensure that we do not inadvertently alter 
incentives in a way that may hamper the future development of the landscape. 
42   This  issue  arises  for  example  in  the  context  of  the  establishment  of  ESCB-CESR 
standards for securities settlement systems. The Bank of England supports the principle of 
risk-based functional regulation, which implies that regulatory standards should be applied to 
a  function  –  such  as  settlement  –  regardless  of  the  status  of  the  institution  providing  that 
function.  We  hope  that  further  moves  towards  implementation  will  adhere  to  this  principle, 
thereby establishing a level regulatory playing field at least between CSDs and ICSDs, but 
ideally also between traditional infrastructures and commercial banks offering infrastructural 
services. 
43   Finally,  with  a  wider  spectrum  of  participants,  issues  arise  around  the  way  in  which 
members  interface  with  infrastructures.  It  is  important  to  ensure  that  individual  member 
behaviour cannot threaten the smooth-functioning of the system. Some incidents during the 
recent market turbulence revealed issues around members’ processing capacity, underlining 
the value in member-level testing to ensure that participants can always support the delivery 
of the network benefits from the smooth operation of the infrastructure. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2007
(ii)  
Ensure effective international cooperation in oversight and operations, and 
coordination in risk assessment activities 
44   The  second  main  challenge  is  to  allow  market  participants  to  reap  the  benefits  of 
globalisation, while ensuring that the risks are adequately controlled. An extended and highly 
connected network can simultaneously be both robust and fragile: robust, because risks may 
be more effectively shared and dispersed across the system; fragile in that major risks can 
flow more rapidly through the system. 
45   Naturally, market participants have been pushing hard for the removal of obstacles to 
efficient cross-border settlement and barriers to the seamless cross-currency management of 
liquidity.  Central  banks  have  been  urged  to  consider  accepting  foreign  collateral  or 
implementing  other  arrangements  to  facilitate  cross-currency  liquidity  management.  Some 
already  do  so  –  the  Bank  of  England,  for  instance,  routinely  accepts  euro-denominated 
collateral  in  its  operations  –  and  a  recent  report  from  the  CPSS  encouraged  other  central 
banks  to  consider  accepting  foreign  collateral,  at  least  in  emergency  circumstances.  The 
Eurosystem has recently begun to explore new options. 
46   Provision  of  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  may  entail  a  high  degree  of 
coordination and cooperation between central banks internationally, for instance in opening 
custody  and  correspondent  accounts,  and  sharing  information  on  local  infrastructures  and 
market practices. 
47   More generally, strong international cooperation in the sphere of risk assessment and 
crisis  management  responses  is  also  clearly  important.  With  increased  links  between 
infrastructure  providers  in  different  centres  and  the  emergence  of  new  cross13  border 
infrastructures, greater cooperation is also required in the conduct of oversight: not only in 
terms of assessment of particular overseen cross-border infrastructures against international 
standards,  but  also 
interdependencies  between  national 
infrastructures.  While  existing  cooperative  arrangements  work  well,  the  model  needs  to 
expand and continue to evolve. 
identifying  potential 
in 
Concluding remarks 
6.  
48   The  resilience  of  the  infrastructure  of  wholesale  payment,  clearing  and  settlement 
systems to both operational and financial shocks remains a key requirement of financial and 
monetary stability. But the landscape is changing fast in response to technological change 
and the financial innovation and globalisation it allows. Cross border and global networks are 
squeezing  our  national  monopolies  and  commercial  banks  are  playing  an  increasing  role. 
These changes present several challenges for central banks and regulators: 
• 
We  need  to  establish  and  apply  consistent  criteria  for  the  scope  of  oversight,  in 
order to maintain a level regulatory playing field; 
We  need  to  take  full  account  of  new  interdependencies  between  systems  when 
assessing financial stability risks at a national and international level; 
We  need  to  work  more  closely  together  in  risk  assessment  and  oversight  and 
ensure that cross-border operational arrangements are robust ; 
We need to ensure that financial stability risks posed by financial firms operating key 
infrastructure functions are adequately captured in their regulation. 
   49  Meeting  these  challenges  will  deliver  a  robust,  resilient financial  infrastructure,  which 
the global financial system and the global economy depend upon. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 7
