Ignazio Visco: Financial deepening and the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism1  
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  IV  Joint 
High-Level Eurosystem – Bank of Russia Seminar, Moscow, 10-12 October 2007. 
 1.  
Changes in the financial landscape in the euro area and other industrial 
countries 
Since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  impressive  changes  have  occurred  in  the  financial 
landscape of industrial countries. The euro area has been no exception: in some regards the 
pace of change has been even faster than in countries such as the United Kingdom and the 
United States, traditionally characterised by more developed financial markets.  
We may define financial deepening as an increase in the size of the financial system and in 
its role and pervasiveness in the economy. From a monetary policy perspective, the growing 
diversification  of  firms’  and  households’  portfolios  is  especially  relevant,  as  they  are  more 
and more affected by the developments in financial markets. At least five major changes are 
worth noticing: 
• 
In the last decade gross financial assets have increased very rapidly. Between 1996 
and  2006  in  the  euro  area  they  have  risen  as  a  ratio  to  GDP  from  6.6  to  10.5 
(compared  to  9.8  in  the  United  States  and  17.6  in  the  United  Kingdom).  As  an 
indication of the funds collected by the private sector, the sum of bank credit to this 
sector,  debt  securities  outstanding  and  stock  market  capitalisation  has  risen  from 
about 150 per cent to around 240 per cent of GDP in the euro-area (compared to 
over 300 per cent in the United States and in the United Kingdom; Fig. 1).  
Fig. 1 - Size of capital markets
(ratios to GDP)
Domestic debt securities issued by the private sector
Stock market capitalisation
Bank credit to the private sector
4
United States
Euro area
Japan
United Kingdom
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1996
2006
1996
2006
1996
2006
1996
2006
Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics, BIS, Datastream. 
   The  use  of  derivatives  –  futures,  options,  interest  rate  swaps  and,  more  recently, 
credit  default  swaps  together  with  structured  products  such  as  collateralized  debt 
obligations and asset backed securities – has dramatically changed the functioning 
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank Pietro Catte and Paolo Del Giovane for assistance and comments. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 1
of financial markets. They open to market participants the possibility of unbundling 
various risk components and allocating them among a multitude of investors; in turn, 
investors  have  more  scope  to  hedge  against  future  market  movements  or, 
alternatively, to increase portfolio leverage and the volume of risks assumed. The 
use  of  derivative  instruments  has  sharply  increased  in  recent  years:  the  total 
outstanding  notional  amount  of  over-the-counter  and  exchange-traded  derivatives 
has risen from about 94 trillion U.S. dollars at the end of 1998 to around 486 trillions 
at the end of 2006 (Fig. 2). 
Fig. 2 - Notional value of over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivatives 
(outstanding amounts in billions of US dollars; end of year data)
Exchange-traded 
OTC(1)
Total
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
1998
1999
2001
Source: BIS Quarterly Review, September 2007.
(1) OTC derivatives include credit default swaps.
2000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
    2 
 As a consequence of the new opportunities opened by financial innovation, the role 
of  banks  has  been  changing.  Commercial  banks  have  exploited  credit  transfer 
techniques to add to their traditional business a new role of originating, pooling and 
distributing credit risks outside the banking system. This has allowed them to free 
capital  and  enlarge  their  lending  capabilities.  In  the  euro  area  securitization  has 
developed later than in the United States and the United Kingdom, accelerating only 
in  the  more  recent  years.  Between  2000  and  2005  the  annual  flow  of  securitized 
loans has increased from 0.6 to 2.0 per cent of GDP; in the same period it has risen 
from 2.1 to 8.2 per cent in the United Kingdom and from 4.9 to 14.0 per cent  in the 
United States (Fig. 3). 
15
10
5
0
Fig. 3 - Securitized loans (1)
(annual flows by country of collateral; percentages of GDP)
2000
2005
Euro Area
UK
USA
Sources: European Securitization Forum, Bond Market Association, Eurostat. 
(1) Euro area figures do not include Pfandbriefe; U.S. data exclude Federal Agency Securities.
 BIS Review 124/2007
 New financial market players, such as hedge funds and private equity funds, have 
emerged;  in  recent  years  they  have  become  key  drivers  of  innovation  in  a  broad 
range  of  markets  and  transactions.  The  hedge  fund  industry  provides  a  good 
example of this expansion: according to estimates by Hedge Fund Research it grew 
from  3,873  funds  managing  490  billion  U.S.  dollars  in  2000  to  9,228  funds  with 
around 1.4 trillion U.S. dollars in 2006, corresponding to about 1.2 per cent of global 
debt and equity outstanding (Fig. 4). Other estimates (by HedgeFund Intelligence) 
set the assets in global hedge funds at about 2.0 trillion U.S. dollars by the end of 
2006,  of  which  nearly  1.5  trillions  in  U.S.  funds,  roughly  450  billions  in  European 
funds and 150 billions in Asian funds. 
Fig. 4 - Global hedge fund assets
(billions of U.S. dollars)
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06
Sources: Hedge Fund Research, World Federation of Exchanges (FIBV), Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS) and Swiss Re Economic Research & Consulting.
  An important dimension of the greater diversification of risk has been the increased 
international  financial  integration.  In  the  last  decade  industrial  countries’  gross 
external  financial  assets  and  liabilities  more  than  doubled  in  proportion  to  GDP, 
reaching 320 per cent (Fig. 5).  
 Fig. 5 - Gross stocks of foreign financial assets and liabilities (1)
(sum of financial assets and liabilities in percent of GDP) 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1980
Industrial countries
Emerging countries
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Source: IMF (Lane – Milesi-Ferretti database). 
(1) For each group, weighted average calculated using GDP weights.
  
As  a  consequence,  the  range  of  financing  and  investment  opportunities  available  to 
economic agents widened, as reflected in the composition of the balance sheets of firms and 
households. In particular: 
• 
The set of corporate finance instruments used by euro-area firms has broadened. In 
the first three years after the introduction of the single currency, the net issuance of 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 3
corporate bonds accelerated dramatically (Fig. 6). The marked deceleration that has 
been  observed  in  the  most  recent  years  reflects,  on  one  side,  the  impact  of 
corporate scandals, but also, on the other side, the greater availability of bank credit 
resulting from credit market innovations. 
Fig. 6 - External financing of euro-area non-financial corporations
(net issuance; annual growth rates)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1999
Source:ECB.
Total external financing
Quoted shares
Bank loans
Debt securities
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 The market has also broadened, not only in terms of the instruments available but 
also  with  respect  to  the  increasing  access  of  a  larger  number  of  firms,  including 
those  with  lower  ratings.  This  increased  availability  of  funds  has  been  extensively 
used to finance M&A activities.  
Between 1995 and 2006 the composition of euro-area households’ financial assets 
has progressively shifted away from traditional instruments, such as banknotes and 
deposits, to more sophisticated financial assets whose prices are more sensitive to 
market movements and credit risk. The share of bonds, equities, insurance products 
and pension funds has grown from 56 to 67 per cent of total assets, a share that is 
now closer to those of the United Kingdom and the United States (71 and 83 per 
cent respectively; Fig. 7).  
Fig. 7 - Household financial assets, composition by instrument
(percentage of total assets; year-end figures)
Banknotes and deposits
Combined shares of bonds, equities, insurance products and pension funds 
Other assets
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1995 2006
Euro area
Japan
Sources: Eurostat, Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Central Statistical Office - UK national 
accounts, Bank of Japan.
US
UK
1995 2006
1995 2006
1995 2006
 Households have also made an increasing recourse to debt. The increase in euro-
area households’ liabilities has been large (from 45 to 62 per cent of GDP) but it has 
been  outpaced  by  the  increase  recorded  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States  (from  about  two  thirds  to  around  100  per  cent  of  GDP;  Fig.  8).  To  a  large 
BIS Review 124/2007
   4 
 extent, this reflects the rise in mortgage debt, which has been matched by an even 
larger rise in housing wealth. 
Fig. 8 - Household financial liabilities
(ratios to GDP)
1995
2006
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Euro Area
US
UK
Japan
Sources: Eurostat, Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Central Statistical Office - UK 
national accounts, Bank of Japan.
 Financial market developments and monetary policy transmission  
2.  
The  developments  described  above  affect  the  speed  and  strength  of  the  channels  of 
monetary  policy  transmission  to  the  economy.  In  a  nutshell,  one  may  argue  that  the 
traditional “interest rate channel”, as well as the transmission via asset prices, have become 
stronger, while the “credit channel” has become weaker. At a closer look, however, things 
are less simple. 
• 
As financial markets are more liquid and complete, changes in official interest rates 
are  more  readily  transmitted  to  the  whole  term  structure  and,  more  generally,  to 
financial  asset  prices,  affecting  the  economy  through  the  cost  of  investment 
financing and the return on saving (as firms can exploit a wider range of financing 
opportunities and households’ portfolios are more diversified).   
As  a  consequence,  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  through  financial  market 
expectations is also more relevant. Central banks can now affect a whole range of 
asset  prices  not  just  by  means  of  their  actual  decisions  on  the  very  short-term 
interest rates but also by providing signals on their intentions.2 However, since asset 
prices  also  reflect  expectations  regarding  other  economic  variables,  it  may  be 
difficult,  at  times,  to  identify  the  specific  impact  of  monetary  policy  actions  and 
announcements. 
A major implication of the increasing weight of financial and non-financial assets in 
firms and households’ balance sheets is that the effects of monetary policy through 
changes  in  asset  prices  and  related  wealth  effects  are  likely  becoming  larger. 
Indeed,  available  evidence  across  OECD  countries  points  to  increasing  wealth 
effects  over  time  and  to  an  impact  of  financial  deregulation  on  these  effects.  The 
available  empirical  studies  for  the  United  States  estimate  long-run  propensities  to 
consume in a range of 3 to 7 cents out of each dollar of total wealth increase. The 
                                                   
2   M.  Woodford,  “Central  bank  communication  and  policy  effectiveness”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  11898, 
December 2005. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 5
   propensity in the euro area is somewhat lower (3 to 4 cents per dollar of increase in 
total wealth) according to recent ECB estimates.3  
The results on the relative importance of changes in financial and housing wealth 
are  not  univocal.  Importantly,  in  assessing  the  relevance  of  the  effects  of  capital 
gains  and  losses  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  the  relative  weights  of  housing  and 
financial  wealth,  and  the  composition  of  the  latter,  in  the  various  economies.  The 
volatility of financial and real asset prices also matters, as does the heterogeneity 
across different categories of households. For example, as rising house values have 
in general opposite effects on home owners and on tenants who are often saving to 
buy  a  house,  changes  in  house  prices  may  have  smaller  effects.4  Finally,  as 
international integration of financial portfolios progresses, wealth effects connected 
to exchange rate movements may take on greater relevance.  
Easier  access  of  households  to  credit  has  important  consequences.  Recent 
research suggests that this is in itself one of the reasons why the effect of house 
price changes on consumption may have become larger, in particular in the United 
Kingdom  and  the  United  States.  Households’  increasing  ability  to  access  credit 
against  housing  collateral  may  reinforce  the  effect  of  monetary  policy  through 
“balance sheet effects”, i.e., through the movements in the price of collateral assets. 
The growing variety of  financial products which became available in recent years, 
such as home equity loans and mortgage refinancing, allow households to borrow 
more freely against house collateral; if monetary policy affects house values, this is 
reflected in consumer spending through the cost and availability of credit.5  
While speeding up the transmission of policy decisions through the term structure 
and asset prices, financial innovation weakens the so-called “bank lending channel”. 
Traditionally, interest rate increases were thought to decrease banks’ credit supply 
(through  a  reduced  availability  of  core  deposits),  which  in  turn  would  affect  those 
borrowers  that  mostly  depend  on  bank  credit  for  external  financing.  Asset 
securitisation increases banks’ liquidity and reduces their funding needs in the event 
of a monetary tightening, while also allowing them to transfer part of credit risk to the 
markets, thereby easing regulatory capital requirements when needed.6 Moreover, a 
wider  range  of  borrowers  is  now  able  to  make  recourse  to  financial  markets  as  a 
substitute for banking sources of financing.  
There are still, however, a number of open questions:  
• 
First,  is  the  broad  credit  channel  really  weaker?  True,  the  relevance  of  the  “bank 
lending channel” is affected negatively by loan securitisation and the emergence of 
non-bank lenders. However, as I have mentioned, the effects that work through the 
value of collateral and the balance sheets of firms and households (the so-called “ 
financial  accelerator”)  are  changing,  but  certainly  not  losing  importance.  The 
conditions at which bank and non-bank lenders are able to attract external funds or 
                                                 
3   F.  Altissimo,  E.  Georgiou,  T.  Sastre,  M.T.  Valderrama,  G.  Sterne,  M.  Stocker,  M.  Weth,  K.  Whelan  and  A. 
Willman, “Wealth and asset price effects on economic activity”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 29, June 2005. 
4   L. Guiso, M. Paiella  and I. Visco (2006), “Do capital  gains affect consumption? Estimates of  wealth effects 
from Italian households’ behavior”, in L. R. Klein (ed.), Long run growth and short-run stabilization. Essays in 
memory of Albert Ando, Edward Elgar, London, 2006. 
5   J.  Muellbauer,  “Housing,  credit  and  consumer  expenditure”,  paper  presented  to  the  Kansas  City  Federal 
Reserve’s  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  31st  August  –  1st  September  2007;  C.  Carroll,  M.  Otsuka  and  J. 
Slacalek,  “How  large  is  the  housing  wealth  effect?  A  new  approach”,  Johns  Hopkins  University  Economics 
Working Paper 535, 2006. 
6   Y.  Altunbas,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marqués,  “Securitisation  and  the  bank  lending  channel”,  ECB  Working 
Papers Series, forthcoming. 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2007
  to  securitize  existing  loans  ultimately  depend  on  their  perceived  creditworthiness, 
which  is  influenced  by  cyclical  developments  and  also,  through  the  price  of 
collateral, by monetary policy changes.7 Funding conditions, in turn, will be reflected 
in the cost and availability of credit to final borrowers. The recent sharp tightening of 
lending  standards  to  a  broad  range  of  U.S.  mortgage  borrowers  is  a  serious 
reminder of this possibility.  
Second, and more fundamentally, the recent financial turmoil indicates that we need 
a  better  understanding  of  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model  of  financial 
intermediation  and  its  implications  for  monetary  policy  transmission.  This  model 
allows greater risk diversification and helps ease credit constraints in normal times. 
However, it may also induce agents to take on more debt and greater exposure – 
direct or indirect – to highly complex financial instruments. Furthermore, there is a 
lack  of  market-determined  prices  for  certain  structured  finance  products,  and  the 
evaluation  models  used  by  rating  agencies  have  shown  limited  reliability  in  taking 
into  account  tail  risk.  These  changes  can  make  the  system  more  vulnerable  to 
sudden increases in uncertainty or shifts in market sentiment, that may result in a 
widening of credit spreads and possibly in credit rationing. In these circumstances, 
the effects of monetary policy via the value of collateral can be amplified or become 
less predictable.  
Third, it is important to assess whether household balance sheets in the euro-area 
are really becoming more similar to those in the United States, where households’ 
portfolios are traditionally more oriented to risky instruments, mortgage markets are 
more sophisticated and the recourse to consumer credit and credit cards is much 
more  widespread.  The  more  this  were  the  case,  the  more  the  euro-area 
transmission  mechanism  would  start  resembling  that  of  the  United  States,  where 
monetary  policy  effects  via  consumption  (and  residential  construction)  have 
traditionally played a more prominent role than in continental Europe.  
How is the conduct of monetary policy affected? 
3.  
The above mentioned trends may have important consequences for the way monetary policy 
is conducted in practice: 
• 
Monetary policy is conducted in a world characterised – even more than in the past 
–  by  a  high  degree  of  financial  complexity  and  widespread  non-linearities:  while 
overall risk may be on average lower in normal times, due to greater diversification, 
it can increase sharply when large systemic shocks occur, that determine a sudden 
rise in the correlation of asset price movements. An implication is that we should be 
cautious  in  using  macro-econometric  models  in  circumstances  of  financial  unrest, 
since  they  may  not  adequately  capture  the  role  played  by  large  asset  price 
movements.  Large  price  corrections  and  credit  crunches  are,  in  fact,  rare  and 
extreme  events,  and  macro-econometric  estimates  over  (relatively)  short  samples 
are dominated by “normal time” observations. 
The interaction between monetary policy and financial stability issues may become 
more complex. Indeed, while there is no obvious systematic trade-off between the 
objectives of price stability and those of financial stability, there might be cases in 
                                                  
7   B. Bernanke, “The financial accelerator and the credit channel”, speech at the Conference “The credit channel 
of monetary policy in the twenty-first century”, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, 15 June 2007. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 7
which a short-term conflict arises.8 This is particularly the case when financial and 
credit  market  turmoil  determines  systemic  tensions  in  money  markets.  In  these 
circumstances the distinction between the aims of liquidity provision and the aims of 
interest rates setting – an easy task under normal circumstances – is more difficult. 
On  the  one  hand,  actions  needed  to  ensure  an  orderly  functioning  of  the  money 
market may blur monetary policy signals. On the other hand, decisions on interest 
rates could be interpreted as revealing major information unknown to the market and 
hinder its normal functioning.  
In  pursuing  price  stability,  we  also  need  to  monitor  more  closely  developments  in 
asset prices that can eventually have an impact on inflation and growth. There are 
well-known  arguments  why  this  is  not  easy  to  do:  the  interactions  between  asset 
prices and financial stability are complex, while telling the difference between asset 
price  misalignments  and  changes 
inherently  difficult. 
Nonetheless,  there  have  been  cases  in  the  past  when  asset  price  developments 
were  clearly  hardly  related  to  fundamentals.  The  assessment  of  asset  price 
developments  is  a  hard  task,  but  these  difficulties  do  not,  in  my  view,  justify  an 
attitude of “benign neglect”. 
More generally, this points to the need, for the central bank, to monitor (and respond 
to)  a  wider  set  of  indicators,  without  uniquely  focusing  on  inflation  forecasts,  as  it 
would be implied by a strict (or even a flexible) inflation targeting approach. There is 
a large, although not undisputed, body of evidence which suggests that persistently 
high growth of money and credit aggregates may provide useful “early warnings” of 
emerging financial imbalances that indeed may also matter for the overall underlying 
price stability.  
fundamentals 
in 
is 
  The  greater  importance  of  monetary  policy  transmission  via  expectations  and  asset  prices 
also poses pressing challenges for communication: 
• 
If  monetary  policy  communication  is  effective,  market  reactions,  by  affecting  the 
whole yield curve and other asset prices, may partly “do the job” for central banks. 
However,  and  for  the  same  reason,  communication  mistakes  can  be  more  costly 
than  in  the  past,  as  they  may  easily  destabilise  financial  markets.  Central  banks 
need  to  insist  in  their  effort  to  provide  proper  communication  on  their  objectives, 
strategies and decisions. 
The  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  issues  also  has 
implications  for  communication,  particularly  at  times  of  market  stress.  In  these 
cases,  monetary  authorities  should  not  overlook  the  potential  impact,  not  only  of 
their  actions,  but  also  of  their  communication  on  the  resolution  of  the  financial 
stability  problems.  Even  advocates  of  full  transparency  in  the  disclosure  of  future 
monetary  policy  intentions  agree  on  the  fact  that  some  degree  of  “constructive 
ambiguity” may be needed when central banks deal with financial stability issues, to 
avoid the spreading of fears or, worse, panics.9 
The importance of an effective policy communication clearly emerged this summer, 
when a heightened preference for precautionary liquidity by banks following the U.S. 
sub-prime  mortgage  market  crisis  led  to  strains  in  the  interbank  market.  The 
Eurosystem made it clear to market participants that it would intervene to ensure the 
                                                   
8   O.  Issing,  “Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability:  is  there  a  Trade-off?”,  speech  at  the  Conference  on 
“Monetary  Stability,  Financial  Stability  and  the  Business  Cycle”,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel, 
March 2003. 
9   A. Cukierman, “The limits of transparency”, paper presented at the Third Banca d’Italia/CEPR Conference on 
“Money, Banking and Finance: Monetary policy design and communication”, Rome, 27-28 September 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 124/2007
orderly  functioning  of  the  money  market,  providing  liquidity  when  needed.  It 
acknowledged the greater uncertainty surrounding its assessment of the outlook for 
economic  activity,  while,  at  the  same  time,  provided  guidance  to  medium  term 
expectations  by  clearly  stating  that  its  monetary  policy  stance  would  continue  to 
respond to the evolution of the macroeconomic outlook and to risks to price stability 
in the medium term. As it was observed by the ECB’s Governing Council, providing 
an  anchor  for  price  stability  is  all  the  more  important  in  times  of  financial  market 
volatility and heightened uncertainty.  
to 
the  main  earlier  obstacles 
Some implications for emerging market economies  
4.  
I will now turn briefly to discuss to what extent these trends and the resulting challenges are 
also shared by emerging market economies. 
The  pace  of  change  in  EMEs  financial  markets  and  instruments  has  been  even  more 
dramatic than in advanced economies. This has reflected in part a “catch-up” effect following 
the  removal  of 
financial  development  –  above  all, 
macroeconomic  instability,  vulnerable  external  positions  and  inefficient  institutional  and 
regulatory  setups.  The  process  has  also  been  supported  by  a  favourable  global  financial 
environment.  
The effects include:  
• 
financial  system  deepening,  with  strong  credit  growth  and  rapid  development  of 
bond and equity markets (Fig. 9); 
a  shift  toward  more  market-based  financial  systems:  local-currency  bond  markets 
have been developed, and both investors’ portfolios and sources of financing have 
become more diversified; 
greater  international  integration,  with  foreign  banks  and  international  investors 
playing a greater role in domestic financial markets. 
  All in all, EMEs are proceeding faster in these directions than advanced economies did when 
they were at a comparable stage of development.  
Fig. 9 - Size of capital markets in advanced and emerging market economies
(ratios to GDP)
Bank credit to the private sector
Domestic debt securities issued by the private sector
Stock market capitalisation
Advanced 
economies 1
Brazil
China
India
Russia
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1996 2006
1996 2006
Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics, BIS, Datastream.  
(1) Weighted average of United States, Euro area, Japan and United Kingdom, with 2000 GDP weights at PPP 
exchange rates.
1996 2006
1996 2006
1996 2006
 These changes in the financial system – together with the fundamental improvement in the 
macroeconomic and institutional environment – may have important implications for the way 
monetary policy is transmitted to the economy: (i) as in industrialised countries, transmission 
may increasingly occur via market prices rather than changes in quantities and the interest 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 9
rate channel may become more important; (ii) the transmission of monetary policy may be 
more  predictable,  thanks  largely  to  the  improvement  of  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and 
the  stabilisation  of  inflation  expectations;  (iii)  but  financial  liberalisation  may  now  make  it 
more difficult to pursue dual objectives in terms of inflation and exchange rates. 
If  EMEs  are  becoming  more  similar  to  industrialised  countries,  do  their  central  banks  face 
broadly similar challenges? In part, I think they do, in the ways I have just outlined. But they 
also face other, more specific challenges.  
Probably the most difficult challenge arises from the need to pursue monetary stability and 
financial stability in a context characterised by rapid structural change in the real economy 
and  in  the  financial  system.  This  rapid  change  is  desirable,  as  it  brings  with  it  the 
modernisation  of  economic  and  financial  infrastructures.  However,  it  may  also  show  up  in 
very strong credit growth, asset price booms and large capital inflows. For the central bank, it 
is  difficult  to  tell  whether  these  phenomena  are  simply  the  result  of  a  rapid  catch-up  with 
more developed economies and stronger fundamentals or, on the contrary, they still reflect 
underlying  distortions,  such  as  unsound  lending  practices,  inadequate  regulation  and 
supervision  or  unrealistic  expectations  on  the  part  of  economic  agents.  In  the  latter  case, 
they  may  be  the  seeds  of  future  instability.  For  central  banks  in  emerging  economies, 
developing a sound approach to financial stability and adopting appropriate supervisory tools 
is  at  least  as  essential  as  a  complement  to  good  monetary  policy  as  it  is  for  advanced 
economies. 
10 
 BIS Review 124/2007
