European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Vienna, 
4 October 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press  conference  here  in  Vienna.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Liebscher  for  his  kind 
hospitality and to express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of 
today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  our  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by 
Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since our previous meeting has confirmed that the outlook for price stability over the medium 
term is subject to upside risks. Against this background, and with money and credit growth 
vigorous in the euro area, our monetary policy stands ready to counter upside risks to price 
stability, as required by our primary objective. The fundamentals of the euro area economy 
support  a  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity.  In  particular,  corporate 
earnings  and  profitability  have  been  sustained,  employment  growth  has  been  robust  and 
unemployment has fallen. However, given the financial market volatility and the reappraisal 
of risk seen in recent weeks, this assessment is surrounded by heightened uncertainty. In 
view of the only limited range of new economic data that have become available since our 
meeting in early September, particular caution needs to be exercised when assessing any 
potential  impact  of  the  financial  market  developments  on  the  real  economy.  Hence,  it 
remains  necessary  to  gather  additional  information  and  examine  new  data  before  drawing 
further conclusions for monetary policy in the context of our medium-term-oriented monetary 
policy strategy focused on maintaining price stability. Accordingly, the Governing Council will 
monitor very closely all developments. On the basis of our assessment, and by acting in a 
firm and timely manner, we will ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do 
not materialise and that medium and long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored 
in line with price stability, thereby favouring an environment conducive to sustained economic 
growth, well-functioning markets and job creation. Providing such an anchor for medium and 
long-term inflation expectations is all the more important at times of financial market volatility 
and  increased  uncertainty.  As  regards  the  financial  markets,  we  will  continue  to  pay  great 
attention to developments over the period to come. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
On  the  basis  of  the  available  data,  it  appears  that  the  sustained  real  economic  growth 
experienced in the euro area in the first half of 2007 has continued through the summer. This 
is also reflected in available forecasts for real GDP growth for the third and fourth quarters of 
2007. While financial market volatility appears to have contributed to a decline in euro area 
consumer and business confidence indicators in September, these indicators remain above 
their historical averages and continue to point to ongoing sustained growth during the second 
half of 2007.  
Looking further ahead, available forecasts for 2008 continue to confirm our main scenario of 
real GDP growing at around trend potential. This scenario is based on the expectation that 
global economic activity will remain robust, with the moderation of economic growth in the 
United States largely offset by the continued strength of emerging market economies. This 
will provide ongoing support to euro area exports and investment. Consumption growth in the 
euro  area  should  also  contribute  to  economic  growth,  in  line  with  developments  in  real 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 1
disposable income, as employment conditions remain supportive. That said, in view of the 
potential impact of increased financial market volatility and the re-pricing of risk on the real 
economy, the uncertainties surrounding this broadly favourable outlook for economic activity 
have increased.  
On  balance,  risks  to  the  outlook  for  growth  are  judged  to  lie  on  the  downside.  These 
downside  risks  relate  mainly  to  the  potential  for  a  broader  impact  from  the  ongoing 
reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial  markets  on  confidence  and  financing  conditions,  concerns 
about  protectionist  pressures  and  possible  disorderly  developments  owing  to  global 
imbalances, as well as further oil and commodity price rises. 
As  regards  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  the  annual  HICP 
inflation  rate  increased  strongly  to  2.1%  in  September  2007,  from  1.7%  in  August.  As  we 
have already indicated on previous occasions, we are now entering a period during which 
unfavourable effects from energy prices will have a strong impact on annual HICP inflation 
rates. Owing mainly to such effects, as a result of the marked decline in energy prices a year 
ago combined with the recent substantial increase in oil prices, we expect the inflation rate to 
remain  significantly  above  2%  in  the  remaining  months  of  2007  and  in  early  2008,  before 
moderating  again.  Largely  as  a  consequence  of  capacity  constraints  and  relatively  tight 
labour market conditions, inflation is expected to be around 2% on average in 2008.  
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside. They continue to include 
the  possibility  of  further  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  agricultural  products  as  well  as 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus 
far. Taking into account the existence of capacity constraints, the favourable momentum of 
real  GDP  growth  observed  over  the  past  few  quarters  and  the  positive  signs  from  labour 
markets, stronger than currently expected wage developments may occur, and an increase 
in  the  pricing  power  in  market  segments  with  low  competition  could  materialise.  Such 
developments would pose upward risks to price stability. It is therefore crucial that all parties 
concerned meet their responsibilities.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term horizons. A broad assessment of the monetary data supports the view that the 
underlying  rate  of  money  and  credit  growth  remains  strong.  However,  the  August  annual 
growth rate of close to 12% in the monetary aggregate M3 as well as the annual growth rate 
of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations,  which  reached  a  record  level  of  more  than  14%  in 
August, may have been influenced by a number of temporary or special factors, such as the 
flattening  of  the  yield  curve  and  the  recent  financial  market  volatility,  and  may  therefore 
overstate the underlying rate of money and credit expansion.  
A broad assessment of underlying trends in money and credit growth is particularly important 
during the current period of financial market volatility, as the latter may influence the short-
term behaviour of private agents and thereby affect monetary developments. Thus, monetary 
and credit data can offer an important insight into how financial institutions, households and 
firms  have  responded  to  the  financial  market  volatility.  Indeed,  previous  episodes  of 
heightened financial market uncertainty have been associated with large portfolio shifts into 
safe and liquid monetary assets. For the time being, however, there is still little evidence in 
the monetary data for such shifts since the rise in financial market volatility in early August, 
while it cannot be excluded that the flow of bank loans to the non-financial corporate sector in 
August  partly  reflects  the  re-intermediation  of  some  financing  onto  bank  balance  sheets. 
Further data will be required to develop a more complete view of the impact of the financial 
market volatility on bank balance sheets, financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
Overall, the continued vigour of underlying monetary and credit expansion points to upside 
risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments  therefore 
continue to require very careful monitoring so as to detect underlying trends on the one hand 
and  to  better  understand  shorter-term  dynamics  on  the  other.  This  will  provide  a  more 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2007
complete picture of the response of the private sector to the increased volatility in financial 
markets. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the information identified under the economic analysis with the 
outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  has  confirmed  the  existence  of  upside  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term, against the background of good economic fundamentals in 
the euro area. Accordingly, and with money and credit growth vigorous in the euro area, our 
monetary  policy  stands  ready  to  counter  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  as  required  by  our 
primary  objective.  At  the  same  time,  given  the  heightened  level  of  uncertainty,  additional 
information  is  needed  before  further  conclusions  for  monetary  policy  can  be  drawn. 
Consequently,  the  Governing  Council  will  monitor  very  closely  all  developments.  On  the 
basis of our assessment, and by acting in a firm and timely manner, we will ensure that risks 
to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise  and  that  medium  and  long-term 
inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability, which is all the more 
important  in  the  current  context.  As  regards  the  financial  markets,  we  will  continue  to  pay 
great attention to developments over the period to come. 
Turning to fiscal policy, the Governing Council is increasingly concerned about a weakening 
in structural fiscal consolidation efforts and the delaying of decisive action to address fiscal 
imbalances. Against this background, all euro area countries concerned are urged to meet 
the commitments made in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact to structurally improve 
their  fiscal  balances.  The  commitment  made  in  the  Eurogroup  to  reach  medium-term 
budgetary objectives in 2008 or 2009, and by 2010 at the latest, must also be respected by 
all  euro  area  countries.  Those  countries  that  have  already  achieved  sound  fiscal positions 
need  to  abstain  from  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies.  Sound  fiscal  policies  will  also  make  an 
important  contribution  to  maintaining  confidence  at  a  time  of  heightened  uncertainty  in 
financial markets.  
With regard to structural reforms, the Governing Council fully supports efforts to enhance 
competition, increase productivity and foster market flexibility. While the services sector is a 
particularly  important  area  for  reform,  further  efforts  are  also  needed  to  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  agricultural  markets.  Against  the  background  of  a  marked  increase  in 
international food commodity prices, further liberalisation and reforms in the EU agricultural 
markets  would  help  to  enhance  their  efficiency  and  benefit  European  consumers  through 
lower prices. The successful conclusion of the Doha round of world trade negotiations should 
also help to improve the functioning of global trade in general and of agricultural markets in 
Europe and worldwide in particular.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 3
