Lucas Papademos: The adoption of the euro and economic performance 
in Monetary Union 
Public lecture by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Central Bank of Cyprus, Nicosia, 26 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
“A day will come when all the nations of this continent, without losing their distinct qualities or 
their  glorious  individuality,  will  fuse  together  in  a  higher  unity  and  form  the  European 
brotherhood.  A  day  will  come  when  the  only  fields  of  battle  will  be  markets  opening  up  to 
trade and minds opening up to ideas.” It was the French writer Victor Hugo who proclaimed 
these almost prophetic words back in 1849. It is also said that Hugo planted a tree in the 
grounds of his residence and predicted that by the time this tree matured a united Europe 
would have come into being. The tree has grown impressively. And it is about to get another 
solid branch and fresh leaves, as the introduction of the euro in Cyprus in just over a month’s 
time will mark a further significant step on the path towards the integration of our continent. 
On  such  a  historic  occasion,  I  am  honoured  to  be  addressing  this  distinguished  audience 
from  the  Central  Bank  of  Cyprus,  public  institutions,  academia  and  the  financial  sector  in 
Cyprus. I would like to thank Governor Orphanides for his invitation and warm welcome, as 
well as the Central Bank of Cyprus, which has organised this event in close cooperation with 
the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the School of Economics and Management of the 
University of Cyprus, and the Association for Social Reforms (OPEK). 
The  euro  will  be  a  tangible  part  of  life  for  the  people  of  Cyprus  as  of  1  January  2008.  Its 
introduction crowns a broad-based reform process and a successful convergence effort, as 
well as thorough preparations for the changeover. By adopting the euro, Cyprus will take an 
irreversible  step  towards  deeper  economic  and  monetary  integration  within  the  euro  area. 
One way of looking at this milestone in Cyprus’ history is to think of its entry into Monetary 
Union  as  being  similar  to  a  marriage.  The  partners  should  first  think  carefully  about  it, 
consider the likely consequences and be aware that a marriage implies not only privileges, 
but also commitments and responsibilities. The partners need to be prepared and ready to 
live  together  in  good  times  and  in  bad  times.  In  fact,  entering  Monetary  Union  is  like  a 
marriage without the option of separation or divorce. A country that joins Europe’s Monetary 
Union and those already in it becomes part of a “community with a common destiny”. In this 
sense,  the  dynamism  of  the  Cypriot  economy,  and  the  welfare  of  its  people,  will  be  of 
relevance to all countries sharing the single currency; and equally, the stability and prosperity 
of the euro area will be of importance to the people of Cyprus. Thus, the well-being of the 
family as a whole should be in the minds of all of its members. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  address  three  interrelated  issues  concerning  the 
implications  of  Cyprus’  joining  the  euro  area  family.  I  will  start  by  briefly  recalling  Cyprus’ 
economic achievements in the run-up to its accession first to the European Union (EU) and 
then to the euro area. I will then look at what is needed in order for the euro area economy to 
function  efficiently,  focusing  on  the  appropriate  conditions  and  policies  that  will  allow 
individual countries to fully reap the benefits of euro adoption. Finally , I will comment on the 
state of preparations for the introduction of the euro, indicating the elements essential to a 
successful changeover to the euro in this country. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
II.  
What are the major economic achievements and current policy challenges in 
Cyprus? 
On  its  road  to  the  euro,  Cyprus  has  made  remarkable  progress  in  improving  the  living 
standards  of  its  people,  thanks  to  an  extended  period  of  stability-oriented  macroeconomic 
policies. Income per capita has gradually been approaching that of the euro area, increasing 
from 74% of the euro area average in 1997 to 85% ten years later, while the unemployment 
rate  has  remained  fairly  low,  standing  at  between  3.5%  and  5%  over  the  past  decade. 
Moreover, inflation in Cyprus has for a long time been fairly well contained, standing at levels 
between  2%  and  3%  since  1997,  with  the  exception  of  2000  and  2003,  when  strong 
increases were observed in energy and food prices. This satisfactory and improved inflation 
performance over the past few years largely reflects a prudent and effective monetary policy, 
based  on  exchange  rate  stability,  supported  by  efforts  to  liberalise  product  markets  and 
network industries. It is, therefore, not a surprise that Cyprus is among the first of the new EU 
Member States to adopt the euro. And in many respects, Cyprus can serve as an example 
for other countries as regards the question of how to successfully pursue economic reforms 
and convergence. 
A key feature of the policy framework in Cyprus has been its tradition of pegged exchange 
rate  regimes,  which  dates  back  to  the  country’s  independence  in  1960.  Exchange  rate 
stability,  which  has  been  effectively  supported  by  consistent  macroeconomic  policies,  has 
been instrumental in the expansion of trade, especially with the EU and the euro area, which 
is of particular value for a small and open economy like Cyprus.1 In the area of fiscal policy, 
progress has been made. The public debt-to-GDP ratio in Cyprus, which peaked at 70.3% in 
2004, has gradually been declining towards the 60% reference value laid down in the Treaty. 
That said, further steps will be necessary, not least in view of future challenges, such as an 
ageing population, and Cyprus’ remaining fiscal imbalances. 
In conclusion, the key factors in Cyprus’ economic success have been the fact that inflation 
has  remained  contained  and  the  favourable  conditions  for  both  real  and  nominal 
convergence.  It  is,  therefore,  fair  to  say  –  and  I  am  pleased  to  say  –  that  Cyprus  is  well 
prepared for its accession to the euro area. Congratulations! However, a strong commitment 
to both fiscal consolidation and further structural reform remains essential in order to reap the 
full  benefits  of  being  part  of  Europe’s  Monetary  Union.  After  all,  the  purpose  of  achieving 
sustainable convergence is not only the fulfilment of the Treaty requirements for the adoption 
of the euro. It is equally important to achieve sustainable convergence in order to establish 
the  necessary  conditions  for  enhancing  market  efficiency,  preserving  price  stability  and 
improving  economic  welfare  within  Monetary  Union.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  just  about 
making  the  grade,  it  is  about  being  prepared  for  life.  Non  scholae,  sed  vitae  discimus, 
Seneca reminds us, and life within Monetary Union is the topic to which I would now like to 
turn. 
III.  
What are the necessary conditions for the successful economic performance 
of the euro area as a whole and the individual member countries? 
The first point to stress is that the adoption of the euro does not mark the end of the process 
of convergence to stability. Of course, a high degree of convergence has been achieved in 
order  to  join  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  a  new  life  starts  inside  Monetary  Union, 
implying new opportunities and challenges for sustainable growth and stability. So what kind 
                                                 
1  
In 2006 export and import ratios stood at around 50%. In the same year exports of goods to the euro area and 
the EU accounted for 51% and 69% of total exports respectively, compared with figures of 17% and 28% in 
1997.  The  corresponding  figures  for  imports  as  a  percentage  of  total  imports  were  55%  and  67%  in  2006, 
compared with 34% and 48% in 1997. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2007
of family is Cyprus joining? What are the key features of the soon-to-be-enlarged euro area 
economy?  
Economic performance of the euro area 
III.i  
Cyprus will enter a large economic area representing a zone of monetary stability with low 
inflation  and  low  interest  rates.  Despite  the  large  –  almost  unprecedented  –  number  of 
substantial and prolonged adverse price shocks that have hit the euro area economy over 
the past few years, notably strong and persistent increases in oil prices, the ECB’s monetary 
policy has succeeded in keeping inflation under control. Annual inflation rates have remained 
in the vicinity of our quantitative definition of price stability as embodied in our objective of 
keeping  price  increases  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  volatility  has, 
overall, declined considerably. As a result of this favourable track record and the credibility of 
the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area,  for  example 
those derived from long-term bond yields, have remained solidly anchored in line with price 
stability. This demonstrates that market participants have confidence in the ECB’s ability to 
credibly deliver price stability over the medium and long term, in line with its Treaty mandate.  
As a result of the ECB’s credible commitment to price stability and the effectiveness of its 
monetary policy, the euro area has benefited from favourable financing conditions, with low 
inflation risk premia and low and less volatile interest rates, both in nominal and real terms, 
across the maturity spectrum. The elimination of exchange rate variability between euro area 
countries has reduced the volatility of the prices of internationally traded goods. Overall, the 
degree of macroeconomic stability enjoyed by the euro area over the eight years since the 
launch of the single currency has been remarkable, both by historical standards and when 
compared with that of other major economies, such as the United States.  
Another  important  feature  of  the  euro  area  economy  is  its  significant  ongoing  structural 
adjustment  as  a  result  of  the  completion  of  the  internal  market,  including  the  increasing 
integration of financial markets, and the implementation of reforms in most Member States 
aimed at strengthening competition, increasing market flexibility and efficiency, and raising 
labour  utilisation.  The  integration  of  markets  and  the  creation  of  the  single  European 
currency have had mutually reinforcing positive effects.  
More specifically, greater price transparency across the euro area and reduced transaction 
and  information  costs  foster  competition  and  promote  trade,  with  favourable  effects  on 
prices,  investment  and  employment.  As  a  result  of  these  effects  and  the  impact  of  labour 
market  reforms,  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  has  reached  low  levels  not  seen  for  25 
years, with the unemployment rate having declined sharply to stand at 7.3% in September 
2007. Monetary Union has also fostered financial integration within the euro area, which – 
together  with  the  use  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  –  has  contributed  to  a 
significant  increase  in  savings,  investment  and  funding  opportunities  for  euro  area 
households and firms. Finally, the euro area has been more resilient with regard to external 
developments and less vulnerable to exchange rate movements than its individual member 
countries  were  before  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The  financial  market  turmoil  has  also 
demonstrated  that  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem,  as  a  collegial  team,  have  the  capacity, 
when  necessary,  to  act  in  a  decisive,  swift  and  effective  manner  to  ensure  that  orderly 
conditions are preserved in money markets and that the potential impact of financial shocks 
on the economy is mitigated.  
Economic divergence in the euro area 
III.ii  
So far, I have looked only at the euro area as whole. As a representative of a supranational 
institution, this is in fact my privilege and duty. However, looking only at the aggregate data 
for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  also  has  its  limitations,  and  average  figures  can  conceal 
significant differences in performance. There is some degree of divergence in the economic 
performance  of  individual  euro  area  countries,  especially  as  regards  their  inflation,  growth 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
and competitiveness performance, and it is important to understand the causes and potential 
consequences of that divergence.  
The  level  of  dispersion  seen  in  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  has  declined  substantially 
since  1999,  standing  at  a  level  much  lower  than  that  of  the  previous  decade,  and  is  now 
broadly similar to that observed in the United States.2 However, differences in growth rates 
among  euro  area  countries  have  diminished  only  marginally  over  the  past  few  decades, 
fluctuating, on average, around 2 percentage points, with no apparent upward or downward 
trend.  Again,  the  growth  differentials  observed  across  the  various  regions  of  the  United 
States  are  similar.  With  regard  to  unit  labour  costs,  which  are  a  key  determinant  of  price 
competitiveness  across  countries,  dispersion  among  euro  area  economies  has  declined 
markedly over the past few decades, and its magnitude is broadly in line with what we are 
seeing  in  the  United  States.  However,  in  recent  years  we  have  observed  some  worrying 
developments. 
Although inflation and growth differentials across the euro area are not unusually large, we 
should  nevertheless  seek  to  understand  their  causes  and  nature  given  their  potential 
implications for future economic performance. A first significant finding of empirical analysis 
is  that  the  dispersion  of  growth  rates  across  the  euro  area  can  largely  be  explained  by 
differences in trend output growth – reflecting structural factors such as the effects of reforms 
recently implemented – rather than different cyclical developments. To the extent that such 
differences in trend output growth are related to normal and positive catching-up processes 
in  the  economies  of  some  countries  or  are  the  consequence  of  persistent  idiosyncratic 
shocks, they are not a cause for concern per se and need not have longer-term detrimental 
effects on inflation, economic activity and job creation. On the contrary, they may be seen as 
a  manifestation  of  a  desirable  equilibrating  mechanism,  contributing  to  sustainable 
convergence among euro area countries.  
A  second  salient  feature  of  the  divergence  observed  in  economic  performance  across  the 
euro area countries is its persistence. Very often the same set of countries are characterised 
by developments in key economic variables that are systematically either above or below the 
euro area average. This may suggest that the underlying adjustment mechanisms in the euro 
area economies are not functioning as smoothly or swiftly as they should. If the persistence 
of higher than average inflation and stronger than average unit labour cost growth reflects 
structural rigidities in a country’s economy and the implementation of inappropriate policies, 
this is a matter of concern because of the likely adverse effects on competitiveness, long-
term growth and employment creation. 
III.iii   Necessary conditions and appropriate policies for the efficient functioning of 
Monetary Union  
To optimise the economic performance of Monetary Union, to fully reap its potential benefits 
in terms of economic dynamism and welfare, job creation and increased per capita income, it 
is  crucial  to  improve  the  functioning  of  product,  labour  and  financial  markets.  To  this  end, 
well-designed  and  effectively  implemented  structural  reforms  and  sound  fiscal  policies  are 
essential  in  all  euro  area  countries.  Since  monetary  policy  and  the  exchange  rate  are  no 
longer  available  at  the  national  level  as  policy  instruments  and  a  means  of  adjusting  to 
specific  shocks  and  the  challenges  posed  by  globalisation,  other  adjustment  mechanisms 
become even more important.  
                                                 
2   At the beginning of the 1990s the level of dispersion of inflation rates across the euro area countries was, on 
average,  around  6  percentage  points  (standard  deviation  measured  in  unweighted  terms).  In  2006  inflation 
dispersion was only 0.7 percentage point. This implies that dispersion in the euro area is currently broadly in 
line  with  inflation  dispersion  among  the  key  14  US  Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas,  where  it  has  fluctuated 
around 1% in the last two decades. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2007
In this context, wage and price flexibility plays a pivotal role. The smooth functioning of the 
price  mechanism  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  across  different 
sectors and over time. In the same vein, the mobility of capital and labour across countries 
and regions and between different sectors is of particular importance in a monetary union. It 
is therefore essential that governments establish an institutional framework which allows the 
economic adjustment processes to function efficiently and effectively, and which helps to set 
appropriate  incentives  for  economic  agents  and  thus  enhances  the  overall  growth 
performance of the economy. 
In this respect, I am pleased to say that substantial progress has been made over the past 
few  years.  Previous  labour  market  reforms,  for  example,  have  contributed  to  robust 
employment growth and lower unemployment rates in the euro area. In Cyprus, the labour 
market  is  already  relatively  flexible,  with  significant  flows  of  foreign  and  seasonal workers, 
which  exert  a  favourable  influence  on  economic  activity  and  domestic  unemployment  and 
contain inflationary pressures. 
However,  further  progress  is  needed.  In  Cyprus,  too,  additional  structural  reforms  are 
essential.  For  instance,  the  indexation  mechanism  for  salaries  should  be  overhauled  and 
ultimately eliminated in order to reduce the risk of inflation inertia, which will eventually have 
adverse effects on real income. Such reforms will, therefore, not only make the economy less 
vulnerable to shocks, but also improve the conditions for sustainable economic growth and 
job creation. Of course, the implementation of reforms is greatly facilitated if there is public 
acceptance of them. This is a formidable challenge which should be effectively addressed. 
President Woodrow Wilson observed that “the most ardent reformers have had to learn that 
too far to outrun the […] masses was to render themselves powerless”. It is, therefore, crucial 
to  explain  clearly  and  convincingly  to  the  public  that  any  short-term  adjustment  costs 
associated with structural reforms will be more than outweighed by their long-term benefits in 
terms of stronger income and employment growth.  
The  other  essential  condition  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  Monetary  Union  is  the 
implementation  of  sound  fiscal  policies.  These  contribute  to  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment, they provide room for manoeuvre in order to cushion the effects of the business 
cycle and, by reducing debt-servicing costs, and they allow governments greater scope for 
pursuing economic and social objectives. In recognition of these benefits, and in view of the 
observed propensity of governments to spend more than they receive in revenue, Monetary 
Union has been complemented by a set of fiscal rules to ensure fiscal discipline, notably the 
Stability and Growth Pact. Within a monetary union, budgetary developments in one country 
are a matter of common concern for all, because all countries have to deal with the negative 
consequences of inappropriate fiscal policies. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  allows  for  the  effective  surveillance  and  coordination  of 
Member States’ budgetary policies. The Pact is based on a system of “peer support” which 
should  be  positively  embraced  by  national  governments  in  the  planning  and  execution  of 
their  budgets.  For  countries  with  fiscal  imbalances,  this  implies,  for  example,  the  use  of 
windfall tax revenues for fiscal consolidation rather than for additional spending or tax cuts. 
Most importantly, the Pact provides the appropriate policy framework for addressing country-
specific fiscal challenges.  
In the case of Cyprus, the fiscal deficit has declined, but the government has yet to reach its 
medium-term  budgetary  objective.  To  this  end,  an  annual  improvement  in  the  structural 
balance of 0.5 percentage point of GDP is necessary and required by the provisions of the 
Pact. Budgetary plans for 2008 are difficult to reconcile with this consolidation benchmark. 
The  current  favourable  macroeconomic  environment  provides  a  window  of  opportunity  for 
progress  towards  achieving  a  sound  medium-term  fiscal  position  sooner  rather  than  later. 
After all, as has been said before, the best time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining! 
Therefore, it would not be appropriate to succumb to any siren songs urging the use of the 
current strong revenues to finance increases in expenditure. A structural weakening of the 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 5
budgetary  position  will  sow  the  seeds  of  a  rapid  deterioration  in  public  finances  when 
economic developments turn out to be less favourable than expected.  
Beyond this, there are further fiscal challenges which should be kept in mind, for instance 
those  related  to  the  projected  substantial  increases  in  public  expenditure  pertaining  to 
population  ageing,  which  is  in  fact  already  among  the  highest  in  the  EU.  It  is,  therefore, 
essential  that  sufficient  room  for  manoeuvre  be  created  in  public  finances  before  the 
demographic  situation  worsens.  Moreover,  depending  on  the  specific  economic  and  fiscal 
arrangements, a possible reunification of Cyprus could impose substantial budgetary costs.  
Another pertinent issue is the need to improve the quality of public finances, which can help 
enhance  business  and  growth  conditions  and  allow  for  a  reduction  in  the  overall  level  of 
public spending. In Cyprus, as in many other euro area countries, public expenditure is still 
high  by  international  standards.  A  leaner  public  sector  could  be  more  efficient  and,  at  the 
same  time,  more  effective.  In  this  context,  moderate  wage  developments  that  take  into 
account labour productivity growth, labour market conditions and developments in competitor 
countries can make an important contribution to fiscal consolidation and employment growth.  
To  sum  up,  experience  has  shown  that  the  economic  well-being  of  individual  countries 
participating  in  Monetary  Union  depends  on  their  ability  and  willingness  to  effectively 
implement sound fiscal policies and structural reforms. As we know, there are a number of 
countries  that  have  managed  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  stemming  from  membership  of  the 
euro  area,  while  other  countries  have  performed  in  a  less  satisfactory  manner  than  could 
legitimately have been expected by their citizens. But this undesirable outcome and policy 
failure is certainly not the fault of the euro. 
Finally, membership of the euro area also brings with it the privileges and responsibilities of 
participation  in  joint  decision-making.  As  a  member  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council, 
Governor  Orphanides  will  also  contribute  to  decisions  on  the  monetary  policy  stance. 
Likewise, the staff of the Central Bank of Cyprus will be fully integrated into the work of the 
Eurosystem committees, working groups, task forces, etc. that play an important role in the 
Eurosystem’s functioning. Naturally, we at the ECB and in the Eurosystem are very pleased 
to have Governor Orphanides as a new member of the Governing Council and to welcome 
the Central Bank of Cyprus into the “Eurosystem team”. Last, but by no means least, Cyprus, 
as a euro area member country, will also be involved in the decision-making as regards all 
other issues pertaining to Monetary Union. 
What is needed for a successful changeover to the euro? 
IV. 
Will the euro be a success story in Cyprus, too? I am confident that it will be. But the extent 
of  the  success  will  depend,  as  I  have  argued  and  as  the  experience  of  other  countries 
suggests, on several factors. It will depend on whether the people in this country using the 
new currency believe in its stability. In this respect, the ability of the ECB to credibly deliver 
price stability for the euro area as a whole should be reassuring. It will, furthermore, depend 
on the implementation of appropriate policies. And it will also depend on whether the people 
of  Cyprus  have  confidence  in  the  safety  and  integrity  of  their  new  currency.  An  important 
aspect  in  this  context  is  a  smooth  cash  changeover  to  the  euro  –  logistically,  in  terms  of 
public information and as regards the conversion of prices.  
I am pleased to say that with regard to the technical aspects of the changeover, Cyprus is on 
the right track. Numerous tasks involving many different areas of expertise have either been 
completed or are being completed: the selection of the designs for Cypriot euro coins, the 
printing  and  distribution  of  notes,  and  the  preparation  and  translation  of  comprehensive 
campaign  material  to  make  the  people  of  Cyprus  familiar  with  the  visual  appearance  and 
security features of the euro banknotes and coins, as well as with the modalities of the cash 
changeover. 
6 
 BIS Review 138/2007
Unquestionably, a well-informed public is crucial for the successful introduction of the new 
currency.  Drawing  on  the  positive  experience  of  previous  changeovers,  such  as  that  of 
Slovenia  at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  various  communication  channels  are  being  used. 
There  are  ten  different  publications  in  Greek,  Turkish  and  English;  350,000  information 
leaflets are currently being distributed to all Cypriot households; media seminars have been 
organised. In all of this, we have paid particular attention to vulnerable groups. I personally 
was particularly impressed by the “talking cards”. Following consultations with associations 
for the blind, we developed an audio file which allows visually impaired people to receive the 
relevant information on the cash changeover and the euro.  
The information campaign has been very intensive, not only in terms of financial and human 
resources, but also in terms of coordination efforts among all relevant parties, including the 
Central  Bank  of  Cyprus,  the  ECB,  the  Cypriot  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  European 
Commission.  After  the  changeover,  we  will  evaluate  the  campaign,  and  I  expect  that  the 
countries  seeking  to  join  the  euro  area  at  a  later  stage  will  be  keen  to  learn  from  Cyprus’ 
experience. 
In  the  remainder  of  this  year,  some  final  preparations  are  still  necessary.  The  delivery  of 
coins, minted by the Bank of Finland, and the delivery of banknotes, provided by the Bank of 
Greece  from  the  Eurosystem  stock,  has  started.  And  in  a  week’s  time  starter  kits  for  the 
public will be distributed. The dual circulation of the Cyprus pound and the euro will last one 
month. Afterwards the euro will be the sole legal tender in Cyprus, but Cyprus pound coins 
can be exchanged for two more years and banknotes for ten more years at the Central Bank 
of Cyprus. 
Finally, let me reassure you that we are taking the concerns of the people of Cyprus very 
seriously  as  regards  possible  unwarranted  price  increases  in  the  context  of  the  euro 
changeover. We have to monitor the situation carefully to ensure that prices are converted 
properly  and  the  euro  changeover  does  not  provide  an  opportunity  to  raise  prices  in  an 
unjustified manner. Having seen the positive outcome of price-watching in this country, it is 
clear to me that Cypriots are vigilant consumers. We are aware that food and oil prices have 
been  rising  noticeably  in  recent  weeks,  and  some  people  may  come  to  attribute  these 
increases to the changeover to the euro. But let me emphasise that this is not a phenomenon 
affecting  only  Cyprus.  All  of  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area  are,  regrettably,  confronted  with 
these price increases, which are mainly due to supply constraints in international markets. It 
might be easy to blame the euro. But it would not be right! If anything, the euro has actually 
helped to dampen the rise in oil prices, given its recent appreciation on the foreign exchange 
markets. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
In  just  over  one  month’s  time,  Cyprus  will  be  part  of  the  euro  area.  It  will  join  a  large 
economic  area  that  last  year  accounted  for  around  15%  of  world  GDP  and  is  a  zone  of 
monetary stability characterised by sound economic fundamentals. The euro area economy 
is  expected  to  continue  to  grow  at  rates  close  to  trend  potential.  However,  this  positive 
outlook is currently surrounded by heightened uncertainty and is subject to downside risks. 
The  ongoing  process  of  risk  reappraisal  and  repricing  in  financial  markets  could  be  more 
protracted  than  previously  expected  and  may  have  a  broader  impact  on  financial  markets 
and the economy. This process can be seen as a correction of the underpricing of risks seen 
in recent years, especially those risks associated with particular segments of the markets for 
credit  and  structured  finance  products.  At  the  same  time,  the  tensions  and  volatility 
experienced  in  some  financial  markets  underline  the  importance  of  effective  methods  and 
prudent  practices  in  the  assessment  and  management  of  risk  by  financial  institutions  and 
investors.  This  is  essential  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  financial  innovation  for 
market  efficiency  and  economic  growth  are  safeguarded  by  means  of  adequate  risk 
management and sufficient market discipline. The ECB will continue to pay great attention to 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 7
financial market developments in the coming period and will take the necessary measures to 
ensure the orderly functioning of the money markets. 
The outlook for price stability is also subject to a number of upside risks. Inflation in the euro 
area, which accelerated to 2.6% in October from 2.1% in September, is expected to remain 
at an elevated level significantly above 2% in the coming months, before moderating again in 
the course of 2008. The acceleration of inflation in the euro area is due to the unfavourable 
impact of developments in energy and agricultural prices, which could persist for some time. 
Moreover, there is a risk of wage developments being stronger than has been seen to date 
and  stronger  than  currently  expected,  given  the  existence  of  capacity  constraints  in  some 
markets and the improved labour market conditions. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance 
that the increase in inflation does not affect medium to long-term inflation expectations and 
second-round effects are avoided.  
The ECB is prepared to act in an effective and timely manner to ensure that risks to price 
stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise  and  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with price stability. This is all the more important at times of financial market 
volatility  and  heightened  uncertainty.  At  the  same  time,  given  this  uncertainty,  continuous 
and very close monitoring of all developments is necessary and a thorough examination of 
additional  information  is  warranted  before  further  conclusions  are  drawn  regarding  the 
monetary policy stance needed to preserve price stability over the medium term. 
The current conjuncture seems to point to an uncomfortable, though temporary, combination 
of  higher  inflation  and  somewhat  slower  economic  growth  in  the  coming  months.  Inflation 
risks and financial market volatility confront us with significant challenges. It should be clear, 
however,  that  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  is  the  primary 
objective  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  It  should  also  be  apparent  that  being  inside  a 
monetary union provides an economy with a shield that can help to weather a potential storm 
that could adversely affect economic activity and inflation. That said, the privilege of enjoying 
this protection and its effectiveness are intertwined with the responsibility of each country to 
keep its own house in order and make its own contribution to the prosperity of the monetary 
union as a whole. In other words, and to come back to my initial metaphor, it is just like a real 
family,  where  the  joys  and  comfort  of  togetherness  are  complemented  by  mutual 
commitments  and  shared 
let  me  conclude: 
Congratulations again, and welcome to the euro area family!  
Κύπρο, καλωσόρισες!  
responsibilities.  With 
these  words, 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2007
