Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
8 November 2007. 
 Chairman Schumer, Vice Chairman Maloney, Representative Saxton, and other members of 
the  Committee,  thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  this  morning  to  present  an  update  on  the 
economic situation and outlook.  
Developments in financial markets 
Since  I  last  appeared  before  this  Committee  in  March,  the  U.S.  economy  has  performed 
reasonably  well.  On  preliminary  estimates,  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  grew  at  an 
average  pace  of  nearly  4  percent  over  the  second  and  third  quarters  despite  the  ongoing 
correction  in  the  housing  market.  Core  inflation  has  improved  modestly,  although  recent 
increases in energy prices will likely lead overall inflation to rise for a time. 
However,  the  economic  outlook  has  been  importantly  affected  by  recent  developments  in 
financial markets, which have come under significant pressure in the past few months. The 
financial  turmoil  was  triggered  by  investor  concerns  about  the  credit  quality  of  mortgages, 
especially subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates. The continuing increase in the 
rate  of  serious  delinquencies  for  such  mortgages  reflects  in  part  a  decline  in  underwriting 
standards  in  recent  years  as  well  as  softening  house  prices.  Delinquencies  on  these 
mortgages are likely to rise further in coming quarters as a sizable number of recent-vintage 
subprime loans experience their first interest rate resets. I will have more to say about this 
problem and its implications for homeowners later in my testimony. 
At  one  time,  most  mortgages  were  originated  and  held  by  depository  institutions.  Today, 
however,  mortgages  are  commonly  bundled  together  into  mortgage-backed  securities  or 
structured  credit  products,  rated  by  credit-rating  agencies,  and  then  sold  to  investors.  As 
mortgage  losses  have  mounted,  investors  have  questioned  the  reliability  of  credit  ratings, 
especially  those  of  structured  products.  Because  many  investors  had  not  developed  the 
capacity to perform independent evaluations of these often-complex instruments, the loss of 
confidence in the credit ratings, together with uncertainty about developments in the housing 
market,  led  to  a  sharp  decline  in  demand  for  these  products.  Since  July,  few  securities 
backed by subprime mortgages have been issued. 
Although  the  problems  with  subprime  mortgages  initiated  the  financial  turmoil,  credit 
concerns  quickly  spilled  over  into  a  number  of  other  areas.  Importantly,  the  secondary 
market for securities backed by prime jumbo mortgages also contracted, and the issuance of 
such  securities  has  declined  significantly.  Prime  jumbo  loans  are  still  being  made  to 
prospective  home  purchasers,  but  they  are  at  higher  spreads  and  have  more-restrictive 
terms.  Concerns  about  mortgage-backed  securities  and  structured  credit  products  (even 
those  unrelated  to  mortgages)  also  greatly  reduced  investor  appetite  for  asset-backed 
commercial  paper,  although  that  market  has  improved  somewhat  recently.  In  the  area  of 
business credit, investors shied away from financing leveraged buyouts and from purchasing 
speculative-grade  corporate  bonds.  And  some  larger  banks,  concerned  about  potentially 
large and difficult-to-predict draws on their liquidity and balance sheet capacity, became less 
willing to provide funding to their customers or to each other.  
To  be  sure,  the  recent  developments  may  well  lead  to  a  healthier  financial  system  in  the 
medium to long term: Increased investor scrutiny of structured credit products is likely to lead 
ultimately  to  greater  transparency  in  these  products  and  to  better  differentiation  among 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
assets  of  varying  quality.  Investors  have  also  become  more  cautious  and  are  demanding 
greater compensation for bearing risk. In the short term, however, these events do imply a 
greater  measure  of  financial  restraint  on  economic  growth  as  credit  becomes  more 
expensive and difficult to obtain.  
Federal Reserve policy actions 
At the height of the recent financial turmoil, the Federal Reserve took a number of steps to 
help  markets  return  to  more  orderly  functioning.  The  Fed  increased  liquidity  in  short-term 
money markets in early August through larger-than-normal open market operations. And on 
August  17,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  cut  the  discount  rate  –  the  rate  at  which  it  lends 
directly to banks – 50 basis points, or 1/2 percentage point, and subsequently took several 
additional  measures.  These  efforts  to  provide  liquidity  appear  to  have  been  helpful  on  the 
whole, but the functioning of a number of important markets remained impaired. 
The turmoil in financial markets significantly affected the Federal Reserve's outlook for the 
broader economy. Indeed, in a statement issued simultaneously with the Board's August 17 
announcement of the cut in the discount rate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
noted that the downside risks to economic growth had increased appreciably. 
The Committee took further action at its next scheduled meeting, on September 18, when it 
cut  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  50  basis  points.  This  action  was  intended  as  a 
counterbalance to the tightening of credit conditions and to address in a preemptive fashion 
some of the risks that financial developments posed to the broader economy. 
The  Committee  met  most  recently  on  October  30-31.  The  data  reviewed  at  that  meeting 
suggested that growth in the third quarter had been solid – at a 3.9 percent rate, according to 
the  initial  estimate  by  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  Residential  construction  declined 
sharply during the quarter, as expected, subtracting about 1 percentage point from overall 
growth. However, the GDP report provided scant evidence of spillovers from housing to other 
components of final demand: Strong growth in consumer spending was supported by gains 
in employment and income, and businesses increased their capital spending at a solid pace. 
A strong global economy stimulated foreign demand for U.S.-produced goods and services, 
as  foreign  trade  contributed  nearly  1  percentage  point  to  the  growth  of  real  output  last 
quarter. 
Looking  forward,  however,  the  Committee  did  not  see  the  recent  growth  performance  as 
likely to be sustained in the near term. Financial conditions had improved somewhat after the 
September  FOMC  action,  but 
for  nonconforming  mortgages  remained 
significantly impaired, and survey information suggested that banks had tightened terms and 
standards for a range of credit products over recent months. In part because of the reduced 
availability  of  mortgage  credit,  the  contraction  in  housing-related  activity  seemed  likely  to 
intensify. Indicators of overall consumer sentiment suggested that household spending would 
grow  more  slowly,  a  reading  consistent  with  the  expected  effects  of  higher  energy  prices, 
tighter  credit,  and  continuing  weakness  in  housing.  Most  businesses  appeared  to  enjoy 
relatively good access to credit, but heightened uncertainty about economic prospects could 
lead  business  spending  to  decelerate  as  well.  Overall,  the  Committee  expected  that  the 
growth of economic activity would slow noticeably in the fourth quarter from its third-quarter 
rate.  Growth  was  seen  as  remaining  sluggish  during  the  first  part  of  next  year,  then 
strengthening as the effects of tighter credit and the housing correction began to wane.  
The Committee also saw downside risks to this projection: One such risk was that financial 
market conditions would fail to improve or even worsen, causing credit conditions to become 
even  more  restrictive  than  expected.  Another  risk  was  that,  in  light  of  the  problems  in 
mortgage  markets  and  the  large  inventories  of  unsold  homes,  house  prices  might  weaken 
more  than  expected,  which  could  further  reduce  consumers'  willingness  to  spend  and 
increase investors' concerns about mortgage credit. 
the  market 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
The  Committee  projected  overall  and  core  inflation  to  be  in  a  range  consistent  with  price 
stability next year. Supporting this view were modest improvements in core inflation over the 
course  of  the  year,  inflation  expectations  that  appeared  reasonably  well  anchored,  and 
futures quotes suggesting that investors saw food and energy prices coming off their recent 
peaks next year. But the inflation outlook was also seen as subject to important upside risks. 
In  particular,  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other  commodities  had  increased  sharply  in  recent 
weeks, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar had weakened. These factors were likely 
to  increase  overall  inflation  in  the  short  run  and,  should  inflation  expectations  become 
unmoored, had the potential to boost inflation in the longer run as well.  
Weighing its projections for growth and inflation, as well as the risks to those projections, the 
FOMC  on  October  31  reduced  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  an  additional  25  basis 
points, to 4-1/2 percent. In the Committee's judgment, the cumulative easing of policy over 
the  past  two  months  should  help  forestall  some  of  the  adverse  effects  on  the  broader 
economy  that  might  otherwise  arise  from  the  disruptions  in  financial  markets  and  promote 
moderate growth over time. Nonetheless, the Committee recognized that risks remained to 
both of its statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. All told, it was the 
judgment  of  the  FOMC  that,  after  its  action  on  October  31,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy 
roughly balanced the upside risks to inflation and the downside risks to growth.  
In  the  days  since  the  October  FOMC  meeting,  the  few  data  releases  that  have  become 
available  have  continued  to  suggest  that  the  overall  economy  remained  resilient  in  recent 
months. However, financial market volatility and strains have persisted. Incoming information 
on  the  performance  of  mortgage-related  assets  has  intensified  investors'  concerns  about 
credit market developments and the implications of the downturn in the housing market for 
economic growth. In addition, further sharp increases in crude oil prices have put renewed 
upward  pressure  on  inflation  and  may  impose  further  restraint  on  economic  activity.  The 
FOMC  will  continue  to  carefully  assess  the  implications  for  the  outlook  of  the  incoming 
economic  data  and  financial  market  developments  and  will  act  as  needed  to  foster  price 
stability and sustainable economic growth.  
Helping distressed subprime borrowers 
I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  actions being  taken  to  help  homeowners  who  have 
fallen  behind  on  their  mortgage  payments  or  seem  likely  to  do  so.  As  I  mentioned, 
delinquencies will probably rise further for borrowers who have a subprime mortgage with an 
adjustable  interest  rate,  as  many  of  these  mortgages  will  soon  see  their  rates  reset  at 
significantly  higher  levels.  Indeed,  on  average  from  now  until  the  end  of  next  year,  nearly 
450,000  subprime  mortgages  per  quarter  are  scheduled  to  undergo  their  first  interest  rate 
reset.  Relative  to  past  years,  avoiding  the  payment  shock  of  an  interest  rate  reset  by 
refinancing the mortgage will be much more difficult, as home prices have flattened out or 
declined,  thereby  reducing  homeowners'  equity,  and  lending  terms  have  tightened.  Should 
the  rate  of  foreclosure  rise  proportionately,  communities  as  well  as  individual  borrowers 
would  be  hurt  because  concentrations  of  foreclosures  tend  to  reduce  property  values  in 
surrounding areas. A sharp increase in foreclosed properties for sale could also weaken the 
already struggling housing market and thus, potentially, the broader economy. 
Home losses through foreclosure can be reduced if financial institutions work with borrowers 
who are having difficulty meeting their mortgage payment obligations. In recent months, the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking  agencies  have  issued statements calling  on mortgage 
lenders  and  mortgage  servicers  to  pursue  prudent  loan  workouts.1  Our  contacts  with  the 
                                                 
1   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Working with Mortgage Borrowers," Division of 
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-6 (April 17); and "Statement 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
mortgage industry suggest that servicers recently have stepped up their efforts to work with 
borrowers facing financial difficulties or an imminent rate reset. Some servicers have been 
proactive  about  contacting  borrowers  who  have  missed  payments  or  face  resets,  as 
experience  shows  that  addressing  the  problem  early  increases  the  odds  of  a  successful 
outcome.  Foreclosure  cannot  always  be  avoided,  but  in  many  cases  loss-mitigation 
techniques  that  preserve  homeownership  are  less  costly  than  foreclosure.  To  help  keep 
borrowers  in  their  homes,  servicers  have  been  offering  assistance  with  repayment  plans, 
temporary forbearance, and loan modifications. Comprehensive data on the success of these 
efforts  to  avert  foreclosures  are  not  available,  but  my  sense  is  that  there  is  scope  for 
servicers  to  further  increase  their  loss-mitigation  efforts.  The  development  of  standardized 
approaches to workouts and the sharing of best practices can help increase the scale of the 
effort, even if, ultimately, workouts must be undertaken loan by loan. Although workouts are 
to be encouraged, regulators must be alert to ensure that they are done in ways that protect 
consumers' interests and do not disguise lenders' losses or impair safety and soundness. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  participating  in  efforts  by  community  groups  to  help 
homeowners  avoid  foreclosure.  For  example,  Governor  Kroszner  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board  serves  as  a  director  of  NeighborWorks  America,  a  nonprofit  organization  that  has 
been helping thousands of borrowers facing current or potential distress to obtain assistance 
from  their  lenders,  their  servicers,  or  trusted  counselors  through  a  hotline.  The  Federal 
Reserve  Board's  staff  has  been  working  with  consumer  and  community  affairs  groups 
throughout the Federal Reserve System to help identify localities that are most at risk of high 
foreclosures,  with  the  intent  to  help  local  groups  better  focus  their  outreach  efforts  to 
borrowers. Other contributions include foreclosure prevention programs, such as the Home 
Ownership  Preservation  Initiative,  which  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  helped  to 
initiate,  and  efforts  by  Reserve  Banks  to  convene  workshops  for  stakeholders  to  develop 
community-based solutions to mortgage delinquencies in their areas. The Federal Reserve 
System is also engaged in research and analysis that should help inform policy responses to 
these issues. 
The  Congress  is  also  focused  on  reducing  homeowners'  risk  of  foreclosure.  One  statutory 
change  that  could  help  is  the  modernization  of  programs  administered  by  the  Federal 
Housing  Administration  (FHA).  The  FHA  has  considerable  experience  helping  low-  and 
moderate-income households obtain home financing, but it has lost market share in recent 
years,  partly  because  borrowers  have  moved  toward  nontraditional  products  with  more-
flexible  and  quicker  underwriting  and  processing  and  partly  because  of  a  cap  on  the 
maximum  loan  value  that  can  be  insured.  In  modernizing  the  FHA,  the  Congress  might 
encourage joint efforts with the private sector that expedite the refinancing of subprime loans 
held by creditworthy borrowers facing resets. It might also consider granting the agency the 
flexibility  to  design  products  that  improve  affordability  through  such  features  as  variable 
maturities or shared appreciation. Also, the FHA could provide more refinancing options for 
riskier households if it could tailor the premiums it charges for mortgage insurance to the risk 
profile of the borrower.  
As  I  have  discussed  in  earlier  testimony,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  taking  steps  to  avoid 
subprime lending problems from recurring while preserving responsible subprime lending. In 
coordination  with  other  federal  supervisory  agencies  and  the  Conference  of  State Banking 
Supervisors  (CSBS),  we  have  issued  principles-based  underwriting  guidance  on  subprime 
mortgages to help ensure that borrowers obtain loans that they can afford to repay and have 
the opportunity to refinance without prepayment penalty for a reasonable period before the 
first interest rate reset. In addition, together with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal 
Trade  Commission,  the  CSBS,  and  the  American  Association  of  Residential  Mortgage 
                                                                                                                                                      
on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 
07-16 (September 5). 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2007
Regulators, we have launched a pilot program aimed at strengthening reviews of consumer 
protection compliance at selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime mortgage 
operations.  
Finally,  using  the  authority  granted  us  by  the  Congress  under  the  Home  Ownership  and 
Equity Protection Act, we are on schedule to propose rules by the end of this year to address 
unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices. These rules would apply to subprime loans 
offered  by  any  mortgage  lender.  We  are  looking  closely  at  practices  such  as  prepayment 
penalties, failure to escrow for taxes and insurance, stated-income and low-documentation 
lending, and failure to give adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay. Using our 
authority under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), we expect that we will soon propose rules to 
curtail  abuses  in  mortgage  advertising  and  to  ensure  that  consumers  receive  mortgage 
disclosures at a time when the information is likely to be the most useful to them. We are 
also engaged in a rigorous, broader review of the TILA rules for mortgage loans, which will 
make use of extensive consumer testing of disclosures.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 5
