Michael C Bonello: Growing the economy in the Euro area – a policy 
prescription  
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  annual 
dinner of the Malta Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 30 November 2007. 
 I would first of all like to thank the President and the Council of the IFS for inviting me once 
again to this annual dinner and also to commend the Institute for the valuable contribution it 
continues to make to the development of the financial services industry in Malta. 
This  is  the  ninth  consecutive  time  that  I  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to  share  my 
thoughts with the members of the Institute and their guests. It is also the last time I do so as 
my term of office expires in September next year. As this will, therefore, be my valedictory 
address, I propose to cast a look back to the prospects for the Maltese economy as I saw 
them in November 1999 upon taking up my post with a view to assessing how the economy 
has evolved since then and suggesting what remains to be done. 
On that occasion, I dwelt upon the challenges of globalization arising from three emerging 
trends. First, it was becoming increasingly difficult for countries to insulate their economies 
from processes and decisions originating elsewhere. Globalization, moreover, was producing 
an environment in which success would only be achieved by countries that had the ability to 
anticipate change and the capacity to adapt their productive structures fast enough to seize 
the  new  market  opportunities  ahead  of  their  competitors.  Finally,  the  increasingly  free 
movement of the factors of production entailed a relative loss of policy autonomy, even for 
large  and  relatively  self-reliant  economies.  I  suggested  that  these  trends  were  especially 
relevant for a small, open economy like Malta’s, and one that was clearly living beyond its 
means at the time. 
As you might recall, less than two years later the vulnerability of our economy was clearly 
exposed  by  two  external  events:  the  collapse  of  the  technology  stocks  bubble  and  the 
ensuing sharp decline in demand for electronic components; and the increased aversion to 
flying  following  the  9/11  terrorist  attack  in  New  York.  The  impact  of  these  shocks  on  the 
electronics  and  tourism  sectors  combined  with  some  long-standing  domestic  factors  to 
produce  a  stagnation  in  economic  activity  in  the  period  2002–2004.  This  was  a  stark 
reminder that there is no escape from the realities of a globalized world, and that the only 
valid  response  to  international  competition  is  to  make  the  economy  more  efficient  and 
flexible. 
From stagnation to sustainable convergence 
Today, some six years  after those destabilizing events, the Maltese economy has  come a 
long way. Most importantly, it has achieved a high degree of sustainable convergence with 
the euro area and is about to adopt the euro, a feat many believed unachievable in such a 
short time span. Here I would like to express my gratitude to the entire banking community, 
including  the  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  for  their  hard  work  and  commitment  in 
preparing for a smooth currency changeover. 
How did this marked change in fortunes come about? Three factors at least played a role. 
Like other small countries which leveraged their participation in regional economic groupings 
to overcome size and resource limitations, Malta has adapted its institutions and policies to 
the requirements of EU membership and is starting to derive the expected benefits. At the 
same  time,  under  the  pressure  of  globalization,  polices  have  been  implemented  to  start 
correcting endemic weaknesses. And finally, advantage has been taken of the cyclical upturn 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
in external demand. As a result, the economy has grown by more than 3% in each year since 
2005. 
Recent measures have included the restructuring of the public and public-enterprise sectors, 
a  wide-ranging  privatization  programme,  the  first  stage  of  a  pension  reform,  and  the 
complete  liberalisation  of  the  trade  and  capital  accounts.  As  a  result,  the  public  sector’s 
profile in both product and resource markets has been reduced, and the price mechanism 
now plays a more prominent role in the allocation of resources.  
Perhaps the most striking change has occurred in the fiscal situation. Having peaked at 48% 
of  GDP  in  2003,  government  expenditure  declined  to  42%  of  GDP  in  2007.  Similarly  the 
fiscal deficit contracted from almost 8% of GDP in 1999 to below 2% this year, and the public 
debt/GDP ratio has gone from a peak of 73% in 2004 to 63% today. At the same time, the 
share of the public sector in total employment has shed five percentage points to 30%. 
The private sector, meanwhile, has adjusted well to the changing composition of domestic 
and external demand. Between 2000 and 2006 the contribution of service providers to total 
employment  rose  from  65%  to  70%,  thanks  largely  to  growth  in  financial  and  ICT-related 
services, while a leaner but more capital intensive manufacturing sector now employs 17% of 
all working persons, down from 23% in 2000. FDI has been instrumental in the development 
of this more diversified economy. As a proportion of GDP, in fact, net FDI inflows increased 
from 16% to 28% in the six years to 2006. 
Progress has also been registered in other areas. Particularly significant was the narrowing 
of the inequality of income distribution ratio from 4.6 in 2000 to 4.1 five years later, well below 
the euro area average of 4.8. In education, the proportion of students having completed at 
least an upper secondary education increased from 41% of the relevant age group to 50% 
over the same period, and the proportion of students in tertiary education rose from 11% to 
16%. There was also some improvement in the female participation rate, from 35% to 38%. 
New challenges lie ahead 
A  sense  of  satisfaction  is,  therefore,  justified.  Complacency,  however,  is  not,  for  much 
remains  to  be  done.  And  any  further  progress  will  have  to  be  pursued  in  an  external 
environment that has become even more challenging. In the first place, competition, mainly 
from  Asia,  has  eliminated  any  residual  advantage  in  our  labour  intensive  industries,  and 
represents a growing threat even in more capital and knowledge intensive activities. Another 
worrying development is the increasing prospect of a slowdown in global economic activity, 
reflected in the recent downward revisions to GDP growth forecasts by leading central banks 
and multilateral institutions. The full impact of the chain of events set off by the sub-prime 
mortgage crisis in the United States has yet to be felt, and risks being compounded by the 
mounting  inflationary  pressures  in  commodity  markets,  especially  for  oil  and  agricultural 
products, with as yet unpredictable consequences. 
Given  the  circumstances,  while  the  adoption  of  the  euro  will  undoubtedly  enable  Malta  to 
face  these  challenges  from  a  stronger  position  than  if  the  convergence  process  had  been 
slower, the euro alone will not be enough.  
Against  this  background,  I  would  be  failing  in  my  duty  if  I  did  not  express  concern  at  the 
insufficient recognition by public opinion of the risks that the evolving external scenario poses 
for  the  Maltese  economy  and  of  the  need  to  improve  the  country’s  international 
competitiveness. The reaction to the budget for 2008 is a case in point. Attention has been 
focussed  primarily  on  the  perceived  adequacy  or  otherwise  of  the  proposed  increases  in 
incomes  and  benefits.  The  media  regularly  carry  suggestions  for  still  more  handouts  and 
other  measures  that  would  result  in  even  higher  consumption  rather  than  investment.  In 
contrast, little is said about where the “more” would come from. Neither has there been any 
serious discussion as to whether current levels of combined private and public consumption, 
at 87% of GDP in 2006, and of gross fixed capital formation, which was barely 20% of GDP 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
last  year,  are  appropriate.  This  imbalance  is  reflected  in  the  persistent,  if  reduced,  current 
account deficit, which suggests that consumption levels are indeed too high. 
Mr.  President,  the  members  of  the  financial  community,  and  the  credit  institutions  in 
particular through their lending policies, can play a useful role in seeking to correct this bias 
towards  consumption,  which  occurs  at  the  expense  of  improving  the  economy’s  long-term 
growth potential and, therefore, weakens its ability to narrow the income gap with the more 
advanced  members  of  the  euro  area.  In  this  regard,  we  should  be  aware  that  despite  the 
recent economic recovery, Malta’s per capita GDP measured in purchasing power standards 
is still just below 70% of the euro area average.  
Lessons from euro area country experiences 
Policy  prescriptions  for  bridging  the  remaining  income  gap  are  readily  available.  In  this 
regard,  the  recent,  widely  different  experiences  of  Ireland  and  Portugal  are  highly 
instructive.1  Thus,  whereas  real  per  capita  income  in  these  two  countries  was  not  very 
different in the early 1990s, it had roughly doubled in Ireland by 2006 to 131% of the euro 
area average, but had only improved slightly in Portugal to 68%. 
How can such divergent performances be explained? Before joining the euro area Portugal 
pursued a pro-cyclical fiscal policy, which reinforced domestic demand, while in Ireland the 
fiscal  stance  was  more  disciplined.  Whereas  unit  labour  costs  and  inflation  rose  fast  in 
Portugal,  cost  and  price  pressures  were  more  contained  in  Ireland.  As  a  result, 
competitiveness declined in Portugal, reflected in a growing current account deficit, whereas 
Ireland remained competitive and enjoyed a roughly balanced current account. 
These  different  policy  approaches  left  their  mark  in  the  post-euro  period.  In  Ireland,  real 
output growth in the years 1999-2006 continued at a strong pace, 6.5% per year on average, 
and  the  fiscal  balance  was  in  slight  surplus.  In  contrast,  Portugal  experienced  an  average 
growth  rate  of  1.7%,  continued  weak  competitiveness  and  a  substantial  current  account 
deficit. A major factor behind Ireland’s success was a 3% average annual increase in labour 
productivity growth, compared to less than 1% in Portugal. 
Another  lesson  that  has  emerged  from  the  experience  of  these  two  countries,  and  is  also 
widely  documented  in  the  literature,  is  that  cost  levels  are  not  the  only  determinant  of 
competitiveness. Constantly upgrading human and physical capital and freeing markets are 
as  important  as  keeping  unit  labour  costs  under  control.  Portugal’s  apparent  inability  to 
compete  as  successfully  as  Ireland  is  indeed  largely  attributable  to  relatively  rigid  product 
and  market  regulation;  insufficiently  market-friendly  policies;  relatively  low  levels  of 
educational  attainment,  of  R&D  expenditure  and  of  information  technology  use;  and  not 
enough wage and price flexibility. 
These contrasting outcomes clearly demonstrate that joining the euro area does not on its 
own provide a guarantee of sustainable growth and that the full benefits of monetary union 
can only be enjoyed if a country adopts appropriate economic structures and policies. 
Bridging the income gap with the euro area 
In a Maltese context the pursuit of excellence implicit in the Irish model requires in the first 
place a change in mindsets and behaviour that would allow us to arrive first at a common 
diagnosis of the obstacles to faster growth, and then at an equally consensual identification 
                                                 
1   L.  Bini-Smaghi,  Real  and  nominal  convergence:  policy  challenges,  speech  delivered  at  the  Conference  on 
European  Economic  Integration  2007  –  Currency  and  Competitiveness,  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank, 
Vienna, 20 November 2007. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
inefficiencies 
incentives  and 
of  the  means  to  overcome  them.  The  ability  to  achieve  a  social  compact  was  incidentally 
another no less vital ingredient of the Irish success story. In the absence of a consensus, 
however, strong leadership would be required in order to explain the need for hard measures 
to the population and to isolate vested interests standing in the way of the needed reforms. 
Whatever the approach adopted, maximizing the benefits of Malta’s participation in monetary 
union will require the removal of the remaining impediments to growth. In the public sector, 
fiscal  consolidation  must  henceforth  involve  a  greater  emphasis  on  expenditure  reduction, 
particularly in view of rising pressures caused by aging-related factors such as pension and 
health care costs, and on securing more “value for money” and greater accountability in the 
use  of  public  funds.  The  provision  of  free  public  goods  and  services  regardless  of  the 
beneficiary’s ability to pay needs to be reassessed as it leads to waste and to a higher tax 
burden, besides being inequitable. The same applies to subsidies, whether implicit or explicit. 
The  resulting  distortion  of 
is  both  unsustainable  and 
incompatible with the fiscal discipline required in a monetary union.  
An important contribution to enhancing the economy’s competitiveness can also be made by 
new forms of employment security and by further improvements in labour market flexibility. 
With regard to the former, there remains scope for more innovation in terms of employment-
friendly labour laws, labour market practices and social protection systems. As for the cost of 
labour,  while  it  is  true  that  since  2004  wages  have  been  growing  more  in  line  with 
productivity, it also the case that not all the loss in competitiveness experienced before 2004 
has been reversed. In 2006, in fact, unit labour costs were still 18% higher than in 2000. And 
although  wage  growth  has  been  moderate  in  recent  years,  it  has  been  even  more  so 
elsewhere.  Indeed,  when  compared  to  those  in  the  euro  area,  Malta’s  relative  unit  labour 
costs  have  risen  since  2000.  There  is  little  doubt  that  external  competitiveness  has 
deteriorated and that continued wage restraint, therefore, remains an essential ingredient in 
the recipe for achieving faster export-led growth.  
Productivity can also be boosted by making education and training systems better attuned to 
the needs of a competitive economy, by further reducing compliance costs and simplifying 
administrative  procedures,  and  by  improving  the  quality  of  the  business  infrastructure. 
Together with those suggested above, these measures can make a substantial contribution 
to strengthening the economy’s capacity to deal successfully with globalization. 
Lastly but no less importantly, it also needs to be realized that action on all these fronts is 
essential for preserving a social model that has reduced income inequality and secured wide 
access to education, health and pensions. 
Conclusion 
Mr. President, at this critical juncture in the country’s economic development on the eve of 
joining  the  euro  area,  the  national  interest  calls  for  a  strong  sense  of  realism.  Failure  to 
understand under which conditions an economy works best in today’s world to make possible 
concrete improvements in welfare can be very costly. There is, therefore, a need to foster a 
greater  public  awareness  of  developments  in  our  external  environment  and  of  the 
appropriate  policy  responses.  There  is  also  a  need  for  a  wider  acceptance  of  some  basic 
truths, for example that it is an illusion to believe that something can be had for nothing, or 
that  governments  can  fix  any  problem  or  grievance.  On  the  contrary,  policy  makers  and 
opinion shapers alike have a responsibility to explain that the expectation of ever increasing 
entitlements  and  higher  living  standards  must  be  balanced  with  the  recognition  that  these 
expectations cannot be satisfied sustainably through the redistribution of national income. In 
the long run, the expected improvements can only be financed through productivity gains and 
economic growth. And since nobody owes Malta a living, the responsibility for shaking off our 
ambivalent attitude to change and for turning globalization from a threat into an opportunity is 
ours and ours alone. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2007
