Hans Reckers: Interaction of market and credit risk 
Welcome  address  by  Dr  Hans  Reckers,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Conference  on  the  Interaction  of  Market  and  Credit  Risk,  Berlin, 
6 December 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to warmly welcome you to our conference on the interaction of market and credit 
risk,  which  is  being  held  jointly  by  the  Research  Task  Force  of  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Journal of Banking and Finance. 
As a board member of the Deutsche Bundesbank, I am proud that our institution is hosting 
this  conference  of  distinguished  researchers,  bank  practitioners,  regulators,  and  central 
bankers. 
I am especially proud that the Deutsche Bundesbank offered to host this conference more 
than one year ago when it was not at all clear that the interaction of market and credit risk 
would  be  receiving  as  much  attention  as  it  is  today.  Given  recent  events  in  the  financial 
markets, the interaction of different risk types has become quite topical.  
The conference topic was not chosen as a result of outstanding forecasting power. Rather, 
the main motivation of the Research Task Force to form a working group on the interaction of 
market and credit risk was the diversification benefits between market and credit risk – which 
have  not  really  made  it  into  the  headlines.  Instead,  another  aspect  of  the  interaction  of 
market  and  credit  risk  has  become  newsworthy.  It  is  the  question  of  how  an  economy  is 
affected if credit risk starts to be traded or, in other words, if credit risk transforms into market 
risk. The uncertainty of who finally bears the risk can have more severe effects than market 
participants would have expected, say, one year ago. 
I  will  not  talk  too  much  about  the  ongoing  turbulence  in  detail  because  I  am  sure  that  the 
reasons behind it deserve a rigorous analysis. Instead, let me give you some information on 
how this conference came into being. At the risk of boring the members of the working group 
on the interaction of market and credit risk, I think it may help participants from academia, the 
industry  and  regulatory  authorities  to  relate  the  topic  of  the  conference  to  the  interests  of 
these three groups. 
Traders in the front office have considered market and credit risk jointly for a long time, not 
only regarding counterparty risk but also for the purpose of capital arbitrage, for instance. By 
contrast, ten years ago this was hardly the case for the banking book, for which credit risk 
was mostly the only risk type considered.  
About a decade ago, the trading of credit risk – either by securitisation or credit derivatives – 
started to grow rapidly. The chance to sell or buy credit risk, instead of holding loans until 
maturity, placed banks under increased pressure to know the present values of their assets 
well before maturity. This posed a challenge to risk modeling as present values depend in a 
complex  way  on  market  factors  like  interest  rates  or  exchange  rates.  Therefore,  it  is  not 
surprising that the growth of credit trade was accompanied by rapid technological progress, 
for  instance,  by  the  development  of  new  credit  portfolio  models.  It  is  difficult  to  say  which 
came first or – in other words – whether these new risk measurement techniques were the 
egg and the increased credit trade the hen or vice versa. 
Technological progress has continued up to the present day. The interaction of market and 
credit risk is being taken into account by more and more sophisticated models. 
The increased trade of credit on the one hand offers an opportunity to further diversification 
of credit risk over the whole financial system and to contribute to financial stability. On the 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
other hand, it can also be seen as a development incurring new risks, be it by an inadequate 
recognition of risks inside a single bank, be it by new adverse risk-taking incentives or by the 
imperfection  of  hedges,  be  it,  finally,  by  new  effects  that  no  one  had  discovered  before. 
These developments are a first reason for bank managers, regulators and central bankers to 
improve their understanding of the interaction of market and credit risk.  
In  addition  to  these  developments,  some  industry  representatives  were  concerned  that 
diversification effects between market risk and credit risk were being ignored by regulators, 
which  could  lead  to  too  high  minimum  capital  requirements.  A  deeper  understanding  of 
diversification effects and their relevance for risk aggregation in banks is a second reason to 
have a conference on the interaction of market and credit risk.  
At the end of 2005, the Research Task Force project group on the interaction of market and 
credit risk received the mandate, first, to collect and summarise information on the state of 
the art of measuring the interaction of market and credit risk, and second, to set up and to 
conduct  its  own  research  projects  in  a  rather  broad  field.  As  this  was  a  vastly  unexplored 
research area, the new working group has become one of the most research-oriented groups 
of the Research Task Force. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  conference  contributes  to  bringing  together  three  groups 
involved  with  the  interaction  of  market  and  credit  risk:  bank  practitioners,  regulators,  and 
researchers. The need to make them exchange their ideas and knowledge is obvious. The 
interaction of market and credit risk is simply too complex to be recognised without a proper 
methodological framework. Both bank practitioners and regulators therefore need input from 
researchers. Researchers, in turn, need to learn from regulators’ and bankers’ experiences. 
Finally, bank practitioners and regulators are in close contact either way, and should be so. 
Thus, it comes as no surprise that hosting this conference ties in very well with several of the 
Bundesbank’s activities that aim at bringing industry, regulators and research together. Such 
events  are,  for  instance,  the  RTF  conference  on  concentration  risk  in autumn  2005  or  the 
annual series of Bundesbank Spring Conferences and Autumn Conferences, all on science-
related topics. This series now enjoy a fairly high reputation. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  my  time  is  almost  over,  let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  thank 
Philipp  Hartmann  from  the  ECB  and  Klaus  Düllmann  from  the  Bundesbank  who  have 
assumed the burden of being main organisers of this conference. I would also like to thank 
the  scientific  committee  who  did  a  great  job  of  selecting  13  papers  out  of  more  than  80 
submissions, and Hiroaki Kuwahara from the Basel Secretariat for his support in preparing 
this workshop. Last but not least, my thanks go to Ms Bothe and her team and all the other 
people who have contributed to this workshop in one way or another. 
Once again, I would like to extend a warm welcome to you at the workshop and hope you 
have two days of lively and enriching discussion. 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
