Jürgen Stark: Delivering price stability – benefits and challenges 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  conference  “Defining  Price  Stability:  Theoretical  Options  and  Practical  Experience”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 26 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at this conference reflecting on themes that are 
close  to  my  heart.  This  conference  will  explore,  in  a  nutshell,  firstly  the  benefits  of  price 
stability or, to put it differently, the steady state costs of inflation, and, secondly, the relative 
merits of institutional arrangements by which a central bank can be mandated to its primary 
task of preserving the purchasing power of the currency through time.  
These are the two main themes on which I have being reflecting myself for some time, and I 
welcome the opportunity offered by this conference to straight up my own thinking and cross-
check my opinions with the most recent findings of the academic and central bank research. 
Overall, I believe much is known now that was subject to dispute only ten years ago. Where I 
think  that  our  knowledge  has  not  progressed  enough  in  areas  that  are  critical  to  practical 
policymaking – which is always the perspective that I want to bring to this conference – I will 
ask  the  audience  and  the  prominent  scholars  present  here  today  to  do  more  work  in  the 
future.  
The two themes I have just referred to pertain to two logically distinct stages of institutional 
design.  The  first  stage  deals  with  the  definition  of  price  stability.  For  the  Euro  Area,  the 
Governing Council has defined price stability as “a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below but close to 2%”. It was also 
specified that “Price stability is to be maintained over the medium term”. The announcement 
of  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  is  an  essential  element  of  the  ECB’s  stability-
orientated monetary policy strategy. It provides a clear compass for price and wage setters 
seeking guidance over an uncertain future and a measurable benchmark against which the 
public  can  hold  the  ECB  accountable,  thus  enhancing  the  transparency  of  the  overall 
monetary policy framework. I view the results presented during this conference as providing 
solid support to the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability. 
The  second  stage  of  institutional  design  takes  the  first  as  its  starting  point  and  asks  the 
following  question:  how  can  a  central  bank  ensure  that,  over  the  medium  term,  policy 
consistently  delivers  on  the  promises  that  are  implicit  in  the  system  and,  in  so  doing,  it 
validates expectations and preserves the viability of the regime in place? This second stage 
complicates 
imperfect 
knowledge.  Shocks  can  produce  occasional  departures  from  price  stability.  How  should  a 
central bank view past  slippages? Should the central bank always look forward and never 
pause to reflect on its past record? 
the  analytical  setting  by  adding  economic  disturbances  and 
The quantitative definition of price stability as a medium term objective 
1.  
Let  me  start  now  with  the  first  part  of  my  intervention.  Historical  experience,  empirical 
regularities and common practice in modern central banking clearly advocate the primacy of 
price stability as the ultimate objective for monetary policy. Price stability has indeed proved 
to  be  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  give  to  sound  macroeconomic 
management. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
Long term inflation and economic performance  
Empirically, the relationship between inflation and economic performance in the long run has 
been  extensively  studied.  Simplifying,  one  could  argue  that  the  famous  Phillips  curve  has 
been rotating in the minds (and charts) of macroeconomists in the last 35 years or so.  
It  was  positively  sloped  when  I  studied  macroeconomics:  a  little  bit  more  of  inflation  was 
supposed  to  bring  a  little  bit  more  of  real  income  as  a  permanent  effect.  Then,  it  became 
vertical, as rational expectations advocates belied the Samuelson-Solow consensus model 
and drew attention onto a principle that had long been discovered and forgotten: monetary 
neutrality. It is futile for a central bank to manoeuvre inflation in the hope of systematically 
stimulating growth, as this policy is doomed to failure in the end, and produces inflation as 
the only certain outcome.  
In  more  recent  years  the  measured  slope  has  bent  to  negative.  Many  of  the  papers 
presented at this conference give indications that a negative Phillips curve in the long run not 
only conforms to evidence, but is born out of general equilibrium micro-foundations. 
To  be  sure,  at  lower  rates  of  inflation,  the  empirical  long-term  link  between  growth  and 
inflation  seems  difficult  to  ascertain,  at  least  on  the  basis  of  reduced-form,  non-structural 
analysis.  This  might  motivate  the  fact  that  for  years  –  in  the  absence  of  data-congruent 
structural models – the slope issue was considered unsettled. I should note here, to qualify, 
that  –  despite  these  shortcomings  –  ECB  research  using  sophisticated  time  series 
techniques has been successful at extracting more conclusive results from an analysis of the 
statistical  connection  between  permanent  inflation  trends  and  growth.  It  unambiguously 
shows that permanent increases in inflation do have a permanent, negative, effect on long 
term macroeconomic performance.1  
But, structural analysis is certainly best placed to bring more evidence to the issue. And this 
conference offers a representative menu of last-generation results on the extent to which the 
Phillips curve is tilted in the “wrong direction” – more inflation being associated with less, not 
more, growth – and on the welfare implication of inflation in the long run.  
Analyses point to potentially sizeable costs of sustained inflation, in terms of lost output and 
diminished consumption opportunities, even when inflation proceeds at moderate rates. This 
conference articulates the scope of welfare analysis at least in three directions. The first is 
most  established.  A  vast  research  agenda  has  been  locating  the  costs  of  inflation  in  the 
productive  sector  and  has  identified  the  primary  source  of  welfare  erosion  in  the  inflation-
generated dispersion of wages and prices. This conference documents how the interactions 
between  nominal  rigidities,  imperfect  competition  and  real  rigidities  can  potentially  have 
complex and sometime ambiguous implications when it comes to measuring the welfare cost 
of inflation.  
The  second  direction,  re-distributive  considerations,  investigates  an  aspect  that  was  often 
neglected in welfare studies of inflation in the past. A positive inflation rate implies a transfer 
of  wealth  that  may  have  important  real  effects,  a  fact  that  we  have  observed  in  infamous 
episodes of the past – the Great Inflation, for example – and which squares with our intuition. 
In an environment of high inflation, the reduction in the real value of nominal debt obligations 
may very well act as a deterrent for lenders to supply credit as a matter of regularity.  
The  third  direction  adds  money  and  financial  choices  to  the  set  of  variables  that  are 
considered in the optimising analysis. Models used to quantify the costs of inflation tend to 
be  cash-less.  An  interesting  paper  in  this  conference  shows  that  when  money  is 
appropriately brought into the picture, the result of a negative slope in the long-run Phillips 
curve – more inflation bringing less activity – is even reinforced.  
                                                 
1   See Benati (2007) 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
Overall, recent academic research in general and the papers to be presented and discussed 
today  and  tomorrow  in  particular  contribute  in  important  respects  to  advance  our 
understanding  of  the  mechanisms  by  which  inflation  erodes  welfare  and  compresses 
consumption opportunities over extended horizons. These costs are sizeable and increasing 
with positive rates of inflation.  
Why should central banks tolerate small positive rates of inflation? 
This insight brings me to my first question to experts. Inflation is a tax on nominal wealth, so 
if asked individually about whether that tax  should be positive or zero  – or even negative, 
thus becoming a subsidy – agents in the economy would tend to choose the lowest possible 
tax. But assuming that the economy faces various frictions, and that those frictions interact 
with  zero  or  negative  inflation  in  ways  that  might  be  costly  for  the  economy  as  a  whole, 
theory  argues  that  a  “benign  optimizer”  would  not  necessarily  opt  for  a  zero  or  negative 
inflation tax. How are we to weigh inflation costs to individual agents against the benefits of 
price stability – defined as low but positive inflation – as an insurance mechanism against 
various macroeconomic pathologies? This conference makes some progress on two families 
of such pathologies, those associated with the so-called lower bound to the nominal interest 
rate, and those possibly arising from downward nominal wage rigidities.  
The lower limit to the nominal interest rate is an area of investigation in which research is 
advanced  and,  I  note  in  passing,  converging  to  a  consensus  view.  Here,  the  argument  in 
favour of a low but positive long term inflation rate is well known: it relates to the risk that the 
zero-floor to the setting of nominal interest rates might at times interfere with the ability of the 
central bank to stabilise inflation in the face of expectations that prices might start spiralling 
down. Maintaining a small positive inflation rate on average over the business cycle rather 
than aiming for literal price stability – that is, a zero inflation rate over the business cycle – 
would, from this perspective, reduce the probability of approaching very low levels of nominal 
interest  rates,  thus  preserving  some  room  for  stabilising  action  on  the  side  of  monetary 
policy. Such considerations, I submit, played an influential role in our reflections about the 
overall  design  of  our  strategy  and,  specifically,  the  appropriateness  of  our  numerical 
objective  of  price  stability  in  the  early  months  of  2003.  Extensive  internal  research  at  the 
time, suggested that building a buffer – within the range of rates of inflation to be considered 
consistent with our objective of price stability – would reduce the likelihood of hitting the zero 
lower bound of nominal interest rates to insignificant levels.2  
A  second  line  of  argument  in  favour  of  positive  rates  of  inflation  has  to  do  with  limited 
downward  flexibility  in  prices  and  nominal  wages.  Notably,  if  wages  are  rigid  to  downside 
movements  economic  adjustment  to  shocks  could  become  exceedingly  sluggish  and  a 
smooth response to economic shocks might be difficult to achieve. In this context, it is also 
often mentioned that the presence of sizeable and persistent differences in average inflation 
across  euro  area  countries  could  exacerbate  the  cost  of  downward  nominal  rigidities  in 
countries with lower inflation. Against the background of these considerations, some positive 
inflation rate is thought to “grease” the wheels of real adjustment in the macro-economy to 
various shocks, allowing real wages to moderate in response to, say, unfavourable supply 
shocks  even  in  the  absence  of  conspicuous  –  and  possibly  politically  infeasible  –  nominal 
cuts.  
                                                 
2   Coenen  (2003)  analyses  the  implications  of  the  zero  lower  bound  on  macroeconomic  performance  under 
different assumptions regarding the characteristics of the euro area inflation process, notably the degree of its 
persistence. His results suggest that the performance of the euro area economy could deteriorate somewhat 
for  inflation  targets  set  below  1  percent.  Klaeffling  and  Lopez  Perez  (2003)  study  the  level  of  inflation  that 
maximises the welfare of a representative agent within the framework of a non-linear Neo-Keynesian rational 
expectations  model.  They  find  that  the  probability  of hitting  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates 
increases rapidly as the inflation target drops below 1 percent. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
This  conference  adds  evidence  and  modelling  discipline  to  this  issue.  The  scant  data 
observations that we possess indicates that nominal wage cuts appear feasible and in fact all 
but  rare  if  one  tries  to  measure  the  skeweness  of  the  frequencies  of  wage  adjustments. 
Provided  the  monetary  regime  in  place  is  properly  communicated  by  monetary  authorities 
and  solidly  internalised  by  social  partners,  the  economy  appears  capable  of  sectoral  and 
macro-wage adjustments if macroeconomic circumstances so require, even at very low rates 
of expected and realised inflation. So, do wage rigidities build a valid case against very low 
inflation for modern economies where means of communication and economic literacy have 
progressed  as  never  in  the  past?  Is  the  case  for  positive  inflation  predicated  on  wage 
rigidities  perhaps  over-stated  and  based  on  a  macroeconomic  and  institutional  landscape 
that have long ceased to exist? I sense that we do not know enough to venture an answer 
and  I  maintain  great  expectations  about  the  results  of  an  ECB-Eurosystem  research 
undertaking – the Wage Dynamics Network – which, I am sure, will shed some light on this 
key aspect of monetary policy and macroeconomic governance.  
All in all, a wide consensus has solidified around the fact that the costs involved in sustained 
inflation – even at relatively low rates – are sizeable and that maintaining inflation at rates 
relatively  far  from  zero  entails  asymmetric  trade-offs.  One  has  to  forgo  benefits  that  are 
certain – those associated with literal price stability – as a price for defusing risks that are – 
by their very nature – of an uncertain nature and magnitude.  
Implementing price stability 
2.  
The  implementation  of  a  stability-orientated  monetary  policy  in  the  medium  term  is  my 
second  theme.  As  I  said,  this  takes  the  medium  term  objective  as  given,  and  tackles  the 
problem of designing the conduct of a price-stability oriented monetary policy in a complex 
and stochastic economic environment. The first and foremost complication in this setting is 
credibility.  The  credibility  problem  has  to  do  with  the  way  a  central  bank  can  establish  a 
mutual  understanding  with  its  public  in  which  policy  actions  –  when  they  are  taken  –  are 
correctly interpreted. Ultimately, the credibility problem for a central bank entails identifying 
the  framework  and  procedures  by  which  the  public  observes  and  keeps  record  of  the 
consistency of policy decisions over time. 
Credible commitment to price-stability and the associated gains from a rule-like 
behaviour  
There are two guiding principles to the successful implementation of price stability. The first 
is  that  a  commitment  to  a  monetary  policy  strategy,  if  perceived  as  credible  by  economic 
agents, is superior to unfettered, discretionary policy. The second principle is that, to build 
and  maintain  a  high  level  of  credibility,  a  central  bank  cannot  ignore  the  past,  and  the 
promises – implicit or explicit – made in the past, when designing present policy. I will offer 
some thoughts on both principles in turn. 
The first principle is uncontroversial. A broad strand of literature on optimal monetary policy 
under rational expectations has found that it is crucial to take account of the effects of the 
systematic and predictable component of monetary policy on expectations for future policy. A 
clear monetary policy strategy, made of a broad analysis and assessment of the state of the 
economy  and  of  a  disciplined  framework  for  consistent  decision-making,  delivers  a  better 
outcome  than  a  fully  discretionary  setting,  whereby  decisions  are  taken  sequentially 
pursuing,  at  each  point  in  time,  objectives  that  policymakers  occasionally  select  in  a  fully 
discretionary  and  possibly  inconsistent  fashion.  If  the  central  bank  is  able  to  convince 
economic agents and markets participants of its analysis and assessment of the outlook, and 
about the policy decisions that it is going to take in response to it, expectations of the short-
term interest rates will adjust in an equilibrating direction. Such a leverage of central bank 
pronouncements and actions over private economic behaviour is an asset that can turn out 
to be very beneficial in cases of major shocks and risks.  
4 
 BIS Review 142/2007
As regards the ECB, our commitment to fulfil our mandate by implementing consistent and 
systematic policy actions is deeply rooted in the institutional framework of EMU on the one 
hand and in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy on the other hand. Briefly, let me just recall 
in particular that this credible commitment is enshrined in the Treaty, which guarantees for 
the independence of the ECB and thereby ensure that the ECB will have no impediment in 
pursuing  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  Turning  to  the  elements  of  the  strategy,  I 
would  like  to  highlight  the  clarity  of  the  ECB’s  objective,  the  comprehensiveness  of  the 
analysis leading up to the Governing Council’s policy decisions as well as the medium term 
orientation of our strategy.  
Maintaining credibility for the conduct of monetary policy 
A second guiding principle for monetary policy conduct is that a central bank cannot ignore 
the  promises  –  implicit or  explicit  –  made  in  the  past,  when  designing  present  policy.  In  a 
world of imperfect knowledge and bounded rationality, the track record of a central bank is 
the only guide for the public to build a view on the true objectives guiding monetary policy, 
the  authentic  motives  that  direct  its  actions,  over  and  beyond  the  official  purposes  that  it 
openly  professes.  This  conference  assigns  such  practical  principle  of  policymaking  the 
theoretical dignity that it deserves. 
The central question here is how a monetary authority profoundly committed to the objective 
to  which  it  is  mandated,  should  incorporate  in  its  rule-based  behaviour  past  deviations  of 
inflation  from  levels  that  it  considers  consistent  with  price  stability.  A  critical  aspect  to 
answering  this  question  is  the  degree  to  which  the  economy  learns  about  the  economic 
landscape, including the central bank’s own inclinations. It is clear that a scenario in which 
central banks’ inclinations and market views are perfectly aligned is unlikely to match reality. 
In fact, survey evidence about private sector expectations as well as the forecasting practice 
at central banks suggests that a considerable amount of learning takes place in the economy 
and that expectations seem to be quite heterogeneous among agents. Under learning, the 
transmission  of  economic  disturbances  is  amplified  and  prolonged.  Learning  may  be  a 
source of excess sensitivity of the economy to shocks compared to a situation where agents 
form model-consistent rational expectations. Moreover, long-term inflation expectations may 
over-react to shocks and drift endogenously, when disturbances can lead to a re-assessment 
by  private  agents  of  the  functioning  of  the  economy  in  general  and  the  central  bank’s 
behaviour in particular.  
In  these  circumstances,  the  credibility  issue  becomes  critical  to  controlling  expectations. 
From an operational perspective, a world characterized by imperfect information and learning 
increases the value of transparent communication about the objectives of policy, reinforced 
by  a  precise  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  as  well  as  clarity  about  the  way  those 
objectives  are  systematically  pursued.  However,  there  is  no  better  way  to  establish  a 
reputation than letting the public itself infer and recognise the true monetary policy objectives 
from the central bank’s repeated behaviour.  
A  central  bank  systematically  looking  forward  –  and  never  pausing  to  reflect  on  its  past 
record and the way this might be perceived by its public – might expose itself to the risk that 
past deviations of inflation from the medium term objective, by compounding over time, might 
endanger credibility and thus undermine the very foundations of the monetary institutions in 
place.  
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy, with the primacy that it assigns to price stability, forces 
policymakers to systematically pause and reflect, not only on the future design of policy, but 
also on past achievements. As I said, the past is a standing guide to orient expectations and 
is an instrument to maintain credibility. For example, our strategy directs us to the following 
prescription: repeated and one-sided adverse shocks which directly affect the inflation rate 
and  may  not  require,  if  taken  individually,  any  specific  policy  adjustment,  could  very-well 
become  destabilising,  should  private  agents  start  doubting  on  the  commitment  of  the 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 5
monetary  authority  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation  and  should  expectations  become 
disoriented.  
However, this encouragement to look in both directions, which we receive from our mandate, 
has  to  be  reconciled  with  a  further  principle,  our  medium-term  orientation,  which  advises 
against  excessive  fine-tuning  of  macroeconomic  variables,  including  inflation.  We  consider 
fine-tuning an extremely risky strategy for a central bank. Whether it might be predicated on 
present or past shocks makes, in the end, little difference.  
This  conference  suggests  that,  overall,  a  regime  incorporating  some  degree  of  “history 
dependence” – as the literature labels central banks’ concern for their past track records – 
can  be  associated  with  sizeable  gains  in  terms  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  These 
findings are interesting and stimulating. But the risks of fine-tuning which might be implicit in 
a dogmatic approach to “history dependence” should not be understated.  
How best to combine and temper the bidirectional perspective – “look at the future, do not 
loose sight of the past” – with the need to maintain a high level of credibility, appropriately 
manage  expectations  and  avoid  fine-tuning  decisions  is  of  course  a  challenging  line  of 
investigation. I can only encourage this distinguished audience to recognize and accept the 
challenge.  
Concluding remarks 
6.  
Present-day dynamic general equilibrium analysis is extremely stylised and, in many respect, 
still in its infancy. This being said, I consider that this analysis can have important messages 
for  “real-life”  policymakers.  I  tried  to  underscore  in  my  intervention  today  the  central 
importance of the price stability objective in the design of monetary policy, a result that the 
optimising analysis presented at this conference underpins and reinforces. I emphasised in 
particular  the  role  of  credible  commitment  and  the  efficient  management  of  private 
expectations in the conduct of monetary policy. A successful monetary policy regime should 
build and preserve a high level of credibility. Solidly anchored long-term inflation expectations 
contribute to macroeconomic stability and smooth conduct of monetary policy.  
The  excellent  track  record  of  modern  central  banking  in  this  respect  should  not  lead  to 
complacency. We still know too little about the way expectations determine macroeconomic 
outcomes,  and  there  are  wide  research  avenues  which  I  am  convinced  you  will  staunchly 
continue to explore. While in a learning mode, we need to be vigilant. Any temptation on the 
side  of  central  banks  to  relax  their  determination  in  responding  to  potentially  inflationary 
developments would be a threat to their credibility and could undermine the progress made 
on the control of inflation over the past two decades. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2007
