Jürgen Stark: Productivity, structural reforms and globalisation 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
delivered at the Unternehmerforum, Brussels, 11 October 2007. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  and  talk  to  you  about  the  economic  situation  and 
outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy.  Nowadays  the  two  big  questions  which  many  people 
have  in  mind  when  they  think  about  this  topic  are:  is  the  euro  area  economy  at  a  turning 
point?  And:  what  can  we  do  to  move  to  a  path  of  high,  sustainable  growth?  In  my 
presentation, I will share some thoughts with you and provide some tentative answers. I will 
look at these issues from a particular angle. 
First, I would like to discuss the recent economic developments and the uncertainty we face 
regarding the economic outlook. Part of the uncertainty relates to the assessment of labour 
productivity  developments,  which  will  be  the  main  topic  of  the  second  part  of  my  speech. 
Labour productivity is a, or even the, driving force behind economic growth. Assessing trends 
in  labour  productivity  is  therefore  important,  but  it  remains  also  a  complicated  task  in  real 
time.  I  will  provide  you  with  some  evidence  which  shapes  our  assessment  of  recent 
productivity developments and put it into the context of the long-term slowdown that can be 
observed  for  the  euro  area.  Future  productivity  performance  will  depend  on  the  ability  of 
governments  to  put  into  place  the  right  policies  and  the  ability  of  euro  area  economies  to 
cope with the challenges of globalisation. This topic will conclude my talk today. 
Euro area economic performance since 2006 and outlook 
1 
Growth in economic activity in the euro area accelerated during 2006 and remained strong in 
the  first  half  of  2007  after  a  prolonged  period  of  subdued  growth,  which  began  in  2001. 
Global  economic  growth  was  very  dynamic,  in  particular  in  emerging  Asia  and  with  high 
growth  rates  in  the  new  EU  Member  States.  Moreover,  different  domestic  demand 
components gained momentum. Investment dynamics benefited from an extended period of 
favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring, strong corporate earnings and 
gains  in  business  efficiency.  Consumption  also  strengthened  further,  in  line  with  the 
developments in real disposable income, which was increasingly supported by employment 
growth and improving labour market conditions. 
Employment in the euro area increased by more than two million in 2006, an increase which 
was  in  line  with  the  pattern  of  economic  growth  and  contained  real  wages  reflecting  the 
impact  of  recent  labour  market  policy  measures.  Employment  growth  was  fairly  evenly 
spread  across  age,  gender  and  skill  groups.  It  was  marked  by  a  significant  rise  in  both 
permanent  and  full-time  jobs  and  stopped  the  decline  in  employment  among  low-skilled 
workers. Thus it went beyond the increase in the employment rate among female and older 
workers  as  well  as  temporary  and  part-time  job  ratios  observable  in  previous  years.  The 
strength of employment growth also translated into a sizeable reduction in the unemployment 
rate. 
Turning  to  more  recent  developments,  much  of  the  information  that  has  become  available 
confirms the good fundamentals of the euro area economy as well as the sustained pace of 
economic growth, although it has moderated slightly from the rates observed in the second 
half of 2006.  
However, preliminary data for the third quarter show strong industrial production and growth 
in  the  services  sector  remains  solid.  Also,  labour  market  dynamics  continue  to  be  robust, 
thereby  supporting  private  consumption  growth.  Corporate  earnings  and  profitability  have 
also been sustained. Data on activity from various confidence indicators and indicator-based 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 1
estimates have declined but remain favourable. Survey indicators for the euro area services 
sector  deteriorated  on  account  of  disappointing  recent  demand  and  the  EC  survey  on 
consumer and business confidence dropped in September. The decline in confidence was 
reflected  in  all  sectors  apart  from  construction.  While  financial  market  volatility  appears  to 
have contributed to this decline, these indicators remain above their historical averages and 
therefore continue to point to sustained growth during the second half of 2007.  
The recent financial turmoil has generally raised the degree of uncertainty about the outlook 
for  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  Particular  caution  needs  to  be  exercised  when 
assessing any impact of financial market developments on the real economy. It thus remains 
necessary  to  gather  additional  information  and  examine  new  data  before  drawing  further 
conclusions. The overall impact will depend on spillovers from the effects of financial market 
turbulence on the US economy and on global demand. In the euro area, it will largely depend 
on how the upheaval affects financing conditions and domestic demand. Regarding demand 
in the euro area, I already mentioned that, at this stage, there is little evidence of an impact 
beyond the decline in confidence indicators. 
As for financing conditions, in our view the higher risk premia now embedded in stock prices 
and corporate bond prices largely reflect a correction of the past under-appreciation of risk. 
Debt and equity financing costs in markets and via monetary and financial institutions have 
increased in recent months, although corporate bond spreads are still not exceptionally high 
by historical standards. Moreover, heightened financial uncertainty seems, so far, to have led 
only  to  a  limited  ‘flight  to  safety’.  Credit  growth  to  households  and  especially  corporations 
remains strong, although this may reflect, in part, the re-intermediation of financing onto bank 
balance  sheets.  The  results  of  the  October  2007  Bank  Lending  Survey  suggest  that  euro 
area banks tightened somewhat credit standards applied to loans to households and firms in 
the third quarter of 2007 and expect to tighten them further in this quarter. However, more 
data are required to obtain a more comprehensive view of the impact of the financial market 
turbulence on financing conditions and money as well as credit growth. 
The  uncertainty  about  financial  institutions’  potential  exposure  to  US  sub-prime-related 
losses and to the valuation techniques of complicated structured credit products, however, 
does  appear  to  have  led  to  a  lack  of  confidence  among  banks  and  thus  tensions  in  the 
interbank money market. The ECB immediately reacted to the market tensions and continues 
to contribute to the smooth operation of money markets.  
Turning  to  global  demand  factors,  global  economic  activity  remains  resilient  so  far  despite 
the  turmoil.  The  impact  of  the  US  economic  slowdown  on  world  demand  (and  euro  area 
foreign demand) has been largely offset by robust economic growth in emerging economies. 
But  the  financial  turmoil  has  increased  downside  risks  to  the  global  economic  outlook, 
intensifying  those  already  stemming  from  possible  further  increases  in  oil  and  commodity 
prices, rising protectionist pressures and broader concerns about global imbalances. Against 
this  background,  international  organisations  and  private  forecasters  have  in  fact  been 
recently revising their projections for economic growth slightly downwards. 
Let me now turn briefly to recent price developments and the outlook for inflation. According 
to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  the  annual  HICP  inflation  rate  increased  strongly  to  2.1%  in 
September 2007, from 1.7% in August, having been below 2% for 12 consecutive months. A 
particularly  strong  effect  from  the  decline  of  energy  prices  a  year  ago,  combined  with  the 
recent substantial increase in oil prices, contributed significantly to this increase. Owing to 
this effect, we are now entering a period during which we expect the inflation rate to remain 
significantly above 2% in the remaining months of 2007 and in early 2008, before moderating 
again. 
Looking at the performance of different HICP components shows that inflation remains high 
in unprocessed food – although it declined slightly to 2.4% in August – and in services prices. 
The acceleration of services prices since the start of the year, now standing at an elevated 
level of 2.6% for the fourth consecutive month, is partly explained by the impact of the rise in 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2007
German  VAT,  but  is  also  linked  to  the  better  ability  of  firms  to  pass  higher  costs  on  to 
customers.  Capacity  utilisation  has  risen  over  the  past  two  years  for  manufacturing  and 
services.  Indicators  suggest  that  it  is  still  increasing  in  the  services  sector,  and  that  price 
pressures along the production chain have strengthened further. 
On  food  prices,  I  would  like  to  make  a  small  incidental  remark.  Food  prices  appear  to  be 
among the most important factors affecting the inflation perception of people. In Germany, as 
in other countries, the strong attention paid to food prices was certainly also supported by the 
press  coverage  of  the  issue.  The  overall  contribution  of  food  prices  to  actual  inflation, 
however, is limited by their weight in the overall euro area HICP, which is approximately 12% 
for processed food and 8% for unprocessed food. This is one of the reasons why, at times, 
some discrepancies between the perceived inflation rate and actual inflation may emerge.1 
Of course in our economic analysis, we have to take actual price developments and people’s 
expectations affecting their spending and savings behaviour into account. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside. They continue to include 
the  possibility  of  further  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  agricultural  products  as  well  as 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus 
far.  Moreover,  taking  into  account  the  existence  of  capacity  constraints,  the  favourable 
momentum  of  real  GDP  growth  observed  over  the  past  few  quarters  and  the  signs  of  a 
further tightening of labour markets, with labour shortages increasingly being mentioned in 
surveys as a source of concern in the industry and services sectors, suggests that stronger 
than  currently  expected  wage  developments  may  occur.  This  may  be  coupled  with  an 
increase in the pricing power in market segments with low competition. Such developments 
would  pose  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned 
meet their responsibilities.  
The ECB always cross-checks its assessment of price stability emerging from the economic 
analysis with the indications about medium to longer-term risks apparent from our monetary 
analysis.  Without  going  into  the  details  –  because  some  of  the  elements  were  already 
mentioned before, when I discussed financial market and credit conditions – let me just say 
that our current monetary analysis identifies continued strong underlying rates of money and 
credit expansion and thus confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  The  current  experience  indeed  confirms  again  the  usefulness  of  the 
ECB’s  approach.  A  broad  assessment  of  underlying  trends  in  money  and  credit  growth  is 
particularly important during the current period of financial market volatility, as the latter may 
increase  the  focus  on  short-term  behaviour  and  developments  at  the  expense  of  the 
necessarily  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  and 
credit data can offer an important insight into how financial institutions, households and firms 
have  responded  to  the  financial  market  volatility.  In  this  respect,  monetary  analysis  adds 
significantly to the robustness of the assessment underlying our monetary policy decisions.  
In  sum,  available  data  suggests  that  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  may  continue  to 
expand at rates close to potential output growth in the second half of 2007 and 2008. The 
sound fundamentals of the euro area economy – notably the healthy financial situation of the 
corporate  sector  and  the  strong  labour  market  –  bode  well  for  a  smooth  absorption  of  the 
recent financial market turbulence. Global economic activity is expected to remain robust and 
to  provide  support  for  euro  area  exports  and  investment.  Consumption  in  the  euro  area 
should  contribute  to  growth  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as 
employment conditions remain supportive. At the same time, risks to price stability remain on 
the upside. There is, nevertheless, a high margin of uncertainty surrounding this outlook and 
risks for the economy are on the downside. They relate mainly to a potentially broader impact 
                                                 
1   For a further discussion see the article entitled “Measured inflation and inflation perception in the euro area” in 
the May 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin as well as the box on “Recent food price developments in world 
markets and the euro area” in the September 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 3
of  the  reappraisal  of  risk  currently  occurring  in  financial  markets,  possible  disorderly 
developments related to global imbalances and protectionist pressures, as well as potential 
further oil and commodity price rises. 
in 
labour  productivity  growth 
Labour productivity developments in the euro area 
2 
One  piece  of  the  information  jigsaw  that  the  ECB  puts  together  in  its  assessment  of  the 
economic situation and the outlook is the development of labour productivity. When we look 
at  recent  developments,  data  released  by  Eurostat  in  spring  2007  showed  a  clear 
acceleration  in  labour  productivity  growth  (per  person)  in  2006,  reaching  1.4%  growth 
compared  with  0.7%  in  2005.  In  year-on-year  terms,  labour  productivity  growth  peaked  at 
1.7%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2006.  At  sectoral  level,  positive  developments  in  labour 
productivity  were  mainly  driven  by  developments  in  industry  (excluding  construction). 
However, 
the  services  sector  also  showed  signs  of 
improvement,  recording  an  increase  of  0.8%  year  on  year.  These  positive  developments 
were welcomed by some economists as a reversal of previous trends and were regarded as 
the  outcome  of  the  successful  implementation  of  recent  market  reforms.  At  the  ECB,  we 
were  of  the  view  that  it  was  advisable  to  remain  cautious  as  these  developments  may  be 
cyclical.  Unfortunately,  the  latest  available  national  account  data  released  by  Eurostat  in 
autumn 2007 have corroborated our concerns. The latest available data (see Table 1) show 
that labour productivity growth declined in the second quarter of 2007 and currently stands 
well below its peak at the end of 2006. 
What makes this development complicated, as I said before, is the fact that the assessment 
requires the short-term, cyclical element to be disentangled from the longer-term trends or 
structural changes. Labour productivity – that is the output per unit of labour (either in terms 
of persons or hours worked) – may change due to the amount of capital or machinery put at 
the service of workers, technological progress or managerial efficiency gains, or the current 
economic situation leading to higher or lower capacity utilisation. Disentangling the short and 
longer-term nature of changes in all these factors in real time is probably difficult at company 
level,  but  even  more  complex  at  an  aggregate  level  for  sectors  and  the  economy  at  the 
whole. 
In practice, we use a wide range of indicators, including some time-series techniques, for our 
assessment. Simple trend estimates extracted from macroeconomic time series tend to be 
unreliable. Therefore, rather than focusing on one or more of these summary indicators, a 
real-time  economic  analysis  of  the  degree  of  permanent  changes  in  productivity  (or 
productivity trend) incorporates a broader set of indicators.  
From  this  perspective,  several  available  indicators  corroborate  our  view  that  the  recent 
developments  have  to  be  seen  rather  as  a  cyclical  phenomenon  and  not  necessarily  as  a 
change in the underlying trend. First, our own estimates of trend labour productivity suggest 
that  the  trend  has  not  shifted  upwards  by  a  big  margin,  if  at  all.  Second,  from  a  historical 
perspective, the pace of improvements in the services sector remains modest compared with 
that of the early 1990s. Third, although there has been a pick-up in the contribution made by 
innovation and other efficiency gains to labour productivity growth, this remains subdued by 
historical standards. Furthermore, the contribution from capital deepening, namely the growth 
in  capital  used  per  unit  of  labour,  further  suggests  that  recent  developments  in  labour 
productivity may very well be associated with a cyclical pick-up in investment activity. 
What makes the development important is the fact that productivity is a prime determinant of 
the speed of output growth per capita in the long run. As long as economies cannot expand 
their workforce and the amount of people employed indefinitely, growth has to come mainly 
from  higher  productivity  through  technological  progress.  A  trend  increase  in  productivity 
should therefore be factored into our assessment of potential output and the current cyclical 
position of the economy. Labour productivity growth has also direct implications for people’s 
wealth. Higher levels of long-term productivity growth through technological advances imply 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2007
better  investment  opportunities  in  the  future.  All  else  being  equal,  it  should  lead  to  lower 
prices and allow for higher wages, since workers are more productive. This would increase 
people’s expected income and affect their patterns of consumption. 
From this perspective, the assessment that recent productivity figures do not clearly point to 
a major ‘break’ with past developments is somewhat disenchanting since the euro area has 
been  characterised  by  a  sustained  decline  in  labour  productivity  growth  since  the  early 
1960s.  Measured  per  hour,  labour  productivity  growth  averaged  4.7%  in  the  1960s  and 
1970s, 2.2% in the 1980s and 1990s and around 1.3% at the beginning of this century. The 
slowdown in labour productivity growth in the euro area is a reflection of both lower growth in 
innovation and other efficiency gains (as proxied by the concept of total factor productivity, 
TFP) and lower growth in capital (i.e. machinery) used per unit of labour. From 1996 to 2004 
the contribution to growth from capital deepening in the euro area was 0.9 percentage point, 
while it was 1.3 between 1980 and 1995. 
When  assessing  the  long-term  slowdown,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the 
reduction in the growth rate of capital deepening can probably be seen as the flip side of the 
employment-rich  growth  which  we  experienced  over  recent  years.  This  reflects  an 
environment of wage moderation and progress with labour market reforms which may have 
partly reversed the earlier trend to substitute labour, which had become more expensive due 
to wage increases outpacing productivity gains, in favour of capital, in the 1980s and early 
1990s. 
The slowdown appears more disappointing in view of the fact that it contrasts sharply with 
the  very  positive  developments  in  labour  productivity  in  other  major  economies,  most 
noticeably  the  United  States.  The  second  half  of  the  1990s  saw  a  period  of  sharp 
acceleration in productivity growth in the US (see Table 2). In the eyes of many observers, 
this  was  caused  primarily  by  the  innovations  in  the  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) sector. Together with the rapid pace of growth in the 1995-2000 period, it 
prompted  some  economists  to  suggest  that  the  US  economy  was  ready  to  pursue  a  new 
path of rapid growth. You will remember when the idea of a ‘new economy’ emerged. 
The rate of growth of GDP in the euro area in the second half of the 1990s was significantly 
lower  than  in  the  US.  Nonetheless,  advocates  of  the  new  economy,  i.e.  believers  in  the 
radical  implications  that  the  new  technologies  have  for  potential  growth,  suggested  that 
similar developments on this side of the Atlantic were likely to take place. The question is 
why this did not materialise. 
The  contributions  from  ICT  technologies  (e.g.  computers  and  the  internet)  to  labour 
productivity growth come from three main sources: a direct contribution from the production 
of ICT capital, a direct contribution from the use of ICT capital in the production of goods and 
services,  and  indirectly  from  possible  ‘spillover’  effects  from  the  use  of  ICT  capital.  These 
‘spillover’ effects amount, among other things, to the possibility of introducing more advanced 
management techniques in the production process.2
When comparing the euro area with other major industrialised economies, we see (Table 2 in 
the  Annex)  that  the  direct  contribution  from  ICT  capital increased  in  both  periods  between 
1980  and  1995  and  between  1995  and  2004  in  the  euro  area,  the  United  States  and  the 
United Kingdom, but remains at a higher level in the United States and the United Kingdom. 
In addition, it is commonly acknowledged that the higher TFP growth, in particular in the US, 
                                                 
2   An early report from the OECD pointed to the potential consequences of the internet on TFP and expanded on 
the benefits that ICT brings in terms of new organisation of production and sales. See OECD (2000): A New 
Economy? The Changing Role of Innovation and Information Technology in Growth. Paris. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 5
reflects at least partly the spillovers from the development and adoption of ICT technologies 
as a so-called “general purpose technology” that affects the entire production sector.3
When  looking  at  euro  area  productivity  at  sectoral  level,  we  do  not  find  any  immediate 
evidence for such spillover effects in the non-high-tech ICT producing sectors  4 (see Table 
3): First, the performance of traditional non-high-tech manufacturing industries deteriorated 
significantly.  This  is  responsible  for  most  of  the  labour  productivity  slowdown  in  the  euro 
area.  Second,  the  performance  of  non-high-tech  services  remained  weak.  While  its 
contribution  in  relative  terms  is  not  as  sizeable  as  that  from  the  traditional  manufacturing 
industries,  this,  however,  should  come  as  little  consolation,  as  in  absolute  terms,  labour 
productivity growth in these services industries has remained subdued. This is the more so 
when compared with developments in the US, which saw a large acceleration in productivity, 
especially in these industries, over the same period.5
Overall, there may be various forces underlying the slowdown, and I do not claim that my 
presentation  provides  a  fully  comprehensive  picture.  From  the  pattern  of  slowdown  in  the 
euro  area,  we  can  nevertheless  conclude,  when  comparing  with  other  industrialised 
economies, that one major reason lies in the failure of major euro area countries to take full 
advantage of new technologies or, at least, their lagged adjustment to the situation.  
3 
Productivity growth, market structure and globalisation 
Market structure and productivity growth 
3.1 
Why  might  Europe  have  been  less  able  to  participate  in  the  productivity  pick-up  and  is  it 
doomed  to  follow  a  continued  slowdown?  The  performance  of  European  countries  can  be 
traced  back  to  existing  policies  and  market  rigidities.  Policies  have  changed  over  the  last 
decade  and  the  impact  of  these  policy  reforms  is  partly  visible,  but  the  structural  reforms 
identified  in  the  Lisbon  agenda  still  have  the  potential  to  further  increase  both  labour 
productivity growth and therefore the long-term growth potential of the European economy. 
Major  structural  reforms  are  obviously  not  easy  to  achieve  and  require  a  high  degree  of 
‘national  ownership’  and  commitment  to  the  reform  objectives  agreed  under  the  Lisbon 
process. The initiative of entrepreneurs has often been essential – certainly in Germany – in 
putting  reform  proposals  on  the  agenda  and  keeping  up  the  pressure  to  get  them 
implemented.  
The role played by research and development and education is key for innovation. Promoting 
R&D  investment  includes  a  better  use  of  public  procurement,  more  innovation-friendly 
regulation  and  stepping  up  the  provision  of  targeted  fiscal  incentives  to  the  private  sector. 
Finland is currently the only country in the euro area which complies with the Lisbon target of 
3%  spending  on  R&D.  Adequate  systems  to  support  R&D  are  of  course  not  only  a 
quantitative issue; increasing the efficiency of research at the same time is essential.  
                                                 
3   See Stiroh, K. J. (2002): ‘Are ICT Spillovers driving the new economy?’ Review of Income and Wealth, Series 
48, No 1, March. 
4   Unfortunately, standard correlation analysis between aggregate TFP and ICT capital growth does not suffice 
to confirm the existence of spillover effects. Other factors apart from possible spillovers could also explain a 
possible correlation between ICT capital growth and changes in TFP. These other factors are: i) mismeasured 
production inputs, ii) omitted variables that are correlated with ICT capital, and iii) the possibility of increasing 
returns to scale or imperfect competition. 
5   The  primary  sector  contributed  negatively  to  the  slowdown  despite  its  strong  performance.  However,  its 
negative  contribution  is  simply  the  outcome  of  the  reallocation  of  labour  to  other  industries  in  response  to 
changes in domestic demand resulting from the completion of the modernisation process. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2007
A highly educated labour force fosters prospects for innovation and facilitates the adoption of 
new technologies from abroad.6
In  my  view,  a  healthy  economic  environment  consists  of  well-functioning  product  markets. 
This  means  an  environment  where  competitive  forces  will  reduce  price  margins,  and 
therefore  entrepreneurs  have  a  strong  incentive  to  allocate  their  resources  in  the  most 
efficient  way.  An  additional  channel  through  which  competition  has  an  impact  on  labour 
productivity is via enhanced innovation, for when competitive pressures are strong there are 
more incentives to innovate so as to gain an advantage over rivals. 
Numerous  economic  studies  have  documented  the  positive  link  between  competition  and 
innovation.7  Against  this  background,  it  can  be  said  that  the  removal  of  barriers  to 
competition should be a policy priority of the European Commission. Some steps have been 
taken and their fruits are already visible. For example, the recent reforms implemented in the 
telecommunications  sector  show  up  in  their  high  levels  of  labour  productivity  growth  (see 
Table 3). It is also reassuring to know that most euro area countries have passed competition 
laws which are comparable in depth with the best legal frameworks available to other major 
OECD countries. With the exception of agricultural products, these countries score equally 
well in reducing trade restrictions and in not imposing excessive restrictions on foreign direct 
investment.  However,  more  remains  to  be  done  as  regards  the  pursuit  of  effective 
competition in the energy market and the implementation of the Services Directive. 
Increasing competition, of course, also means that innovation needs appropriate protection. 
Incentives to invest in innovation would completely vanish if rewards were to be fully shared 
with competitors due to spillover effects and if the rights associated with the investment were 
left  unprotected.  Laws  to  protect  property  rights  and  the  strict  international  enforcement  of 
these laws remain indispensable. 
A  competitive  and  well-developed  financial  system  is  also  a  key  to  enhancing  growth 
prospects.8 A modern financial system boosts economic efficiency by channelling resources 
to  the  most  profitable  activities.  A  process  of  European  financial  integration  is  gradually 
taking place and considerable progress has been made, for instance, in capital markets and 
wholesale banking. However, the retail banking sector does not appear to have reached its 
potential yet, and competition seems insufficient in this area; it leaves European consumers 
and small and medium-sized enterprises unable to take full advantage of the benefits of EMU 
and the Single Market. 
Inflexible labour markets have also been blamed for the labour productivity slowdown in the 
euro  area.  Labour  market  rigidities  discourage  the  effective  reallocation  of  labour.  For 
example, it has been argued that American workers tend to invest more in general human 
capital,  while  European  workers  favour  specific  human  capital  investments.  This  may  be 
partly linked to the fact that workers in the US have little unemployment protection and low 
unemployment  benefits.  On  this  score,  employment  protection  legislation  may  have  a 
particularly strong negative impact on industries subject to rapid technological change since 
it  may  preclude  efficient  matching  of  workers  to  jobs  in  view  of  new  job  requirements. 
Unfortunately,  progress  in  increasing  contractual  flexibility,  in  particular  for  permanent 
workers, has been disappointingly slow in several euro area countries. 
                                                 
6   See  J.  Temple  (2001):  “Growth  effects  of  education  and  social  capital  in  the  OECD  countries”.  OECD 
Economic Studies, No 33, pp. 57-101. 
7   For  a  further  extension  of  this  topic  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market 
reforms and productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. Further evidence is also 
to  be  found  in  Griffith,  R.,  R.  Harrison  and  H.  Simpson  (2006):  “The  link  between  product  market  reform, 
innovation and EU macroeconomic performance”, DG-ECFIN Economic Papers No 243, February 2006. 
8   See,  for  example,  S.  Claessens  and  L.  Laeven  (2005),  “Financial  sector  competition,  financial  dependence 
and growth”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3, pp. 179-207. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 7
Labour market flexibility is not an issue of productivity growth only. Flexible labour markets in 
terms  of  wage  and  employment  adjustment  benefit  both  firms  and  workers.  Contractual 
flexibility is essential in a world of technological change and globalisation – about which I will 
talk more in a minute – where workers can no longer count on job security. It enhances the 
opportunity to get into a new position and leads to higher employment security. Education 
and training systems need to help workers master transitions between jobs and keep up with 
technological  developments.  Flexible  labour  markets  and  efficient  activation  measures 
contribute  to  shorter  periods  of  unemployment,  which  could  otherwise  lead  to  a  decline  in 
worker’s skills and productivity.  
in 
it  also 
includes 
recent  decades.  However, 
Globalisation and productivity growth 
3.2 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  link  between  globalisation  and  productivity  growth.  In  essence, 
globalisation  means  the  increased  international  economic  interdependence  and  the  rapid 
integration of several emerging economies into global trade and production networks that we 
have  experienced 
the  growing 
internationalisation  of  financial  markets  and  capital  movements,  a  phenomenon  which  has 
intensified since the mid-1990s. Globalisation brings clear benefits to the economy, but at the 
same time poses significant challenges. 
Let’s look at the benefits: first, trade liberalisation and globalisation enables an economy to 
obtain  the  cheapest  products  on  the  world  market,  and  may,  in  turn,  exert  downward 
pressure on domestic prices through lower import prices, thereby increasing the real wealth 
of the importing economy. Globalisation implies welfare gains by having a dampening effect 
on  consumer  prices,  while  allowing  producers  to  substitute  cheaper  intermediate  goods, 
thereby increasing profit margins or improving their price competitiveness.  
Second, globalisation has certainly helped to stimulate competition in domestic markets and 
to  increase  and  diversify  euro  area  trade  linkages.  In  1995,  two-thirds  of  extra-euro  area 
manufacturing imports came from industrialised, high-cost countries, whereas in 2005 their 
share had declined to around 50%. The decrease is distributed among the traditional major 
euro  area  trade  partners  (the  United  Kingdom,  Japan,  the  United  States),  while  the  shift 
towards  emerging,  low-cost  economies  is  mainly  accounted  for  by  increased  imports  from 
China and, to a lesser extent, the new EU Member States.  
Third, and most importantly in the context of my presentation today, globalisation impacts on 
productivity  through  trade,  capital  mobility  and  the  internationalisation  of  technology  and 
R&D, which can lead to a reallocation of production processes. Trade increases incentives to 
specialise  in  higher-  productivity  sectors,  produce  economies  of  scale  and  encourages 
innovation. Inward and outward foreign direct investment implies opportunities to learn and 
adopt technologies and productivity-enhancing practices from abroad. At the same time, the 
internationalisation  of  R&D  supports  domestic  innovation  and  technological  progress. 
Immigration may also help to increase the matching efficiency of labour markets. 
However, it is also true that globalisation presents challenges. In order to reap its potential 
gains,  globalisation  requires  economies  to  adjust  to  the  reallocation  of  production  and  the 
new  competition  from  emerging  markets  in  certain  sectors.  The  tremendously  increased 
supply of products from emerging markets may induce a reorganisation of production in euro 
area countries. This strengthens the need for occupational mobility and the capacity to also 
absorb low-skilled labour in new sectors. The restructuring of the economy may lead to an at 
least  temporary  decrease  in  productivity,  which  would  be  more  protracted  the  ‘stickier’  the 
economy  and  less  able  to  overhaul  traditional  production  structures.  This  may  imply  that 
those  countries  where  the  pace  of  reforms  has  been  slow  may  find  themselves, 
paradoxically,  in  a  worse  position  than  in  the  past.  Economies  with  uncompetitive  product 
markets and rigid labour markets not only fail to adjust to technological change, but are also 
more vulnerable to shocks associated with the globalisation process. 
8 
 BIS Review 115/2007
Concluding remarks 
I would like to conclude by saying that Europe is reforming its economy so as to adapt to the 
challenges  of  globalisation,  technological  change  and  ageing.  Considerable  progress  has 
been achieved, as reflected in the significant rise in employment growth. Now the challenge 
is to also raise the level of productivity growth in all euro area countries. If this challenge is 
not met, it is hard to imagine that Europe will be able to achieve a higher growth path and to 
keep the wealth of its citizens. Monetary Union has been effective – and very successful – in 
supporting growth through a credible monetary policy which creates a stable macroeconomic 
environment and has lowered financing costs for a number of euro area countries through a 
reduction of risk premia. 
EMU, moreover, gives impetus to European integration, particularly in financial markets, and 
to  a  further  reduction  of  the  barriers  to  competition.  The  Lisbon  process  now  provides  the 
tools  to  address  the  challenge  of  fully  reversing  the  previous  slowdown  through  further 
structural  reforms.  It  will  require  the  firm  commitment  of  governments,  entrepreneurs  and 
workers  to  be  successful  and  meet  this  challenge.  I  am  still  highly  optimistic  that  we  will 
succeed. 
Annex 
Table 1. Euro area labour productivity growth (annual % changes unless otherwise 
stated) 
Note: Labour productivity is measured as value added over total employment. Source: Eurostat. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
  9
Table 2. Contributions to labour productivity growth 
Notes: LP growth stands for labour productivity growth per hour worked; TFP stands for total factor productivity. 
Sources: ECB calculations using EUKLEMS data. 
 10 
 BIS Review 115/2007
Table 3. Euro area labour productivity growth and contributions (annual average rates, 
in %) 
 11
BIS Review 115/2007 
 