L Wilson Kamit: Papua New Guinea’s new banknote series 
Speech by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor and Chairman of the Board of the Bank of 
Papua  New  Guinea,  on  the  release  of  the  new  series  K20  banknote,  Port  Moresby, 
8 November 2007.  
 I wish to extend a warm welcome to all of you attending this evening’s launching of the new 
series K20 banknote. 
The Bank of Papua New Guinea has timed the release of the new K20 banknote to coincide 
with  our  34th  birthday,  which  is  today.  On  02  November  1973,  a  young  Michael  Somare, 
Chief  Minister  unveiled  a  plaque  at  our  Douglas  Street  building  and  the  country’s  central 
bank - the Bank of Papua New Guinea was opened for business. Over the years we have 
sought  to  celebrate  important  events  on  our  birthday.  We  opened  our  new  office,  the 
ToRobert  Haus  on  1  November  1991  and  we  released  the  new  K100  banknote  on  02 
November 2005. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Papua New Guinea first introduced its own currency, the Kina and 
toea, thirty-two (32) years ago on 19 April 1975, our ‘Kina & Toea Day’. The first issue of our 
banknotes  were  in  the  2  Kina,  5  Kina  and  K10,  a  little  later  K20  banknote  all  in  paper 
substrate.  The  banknotes  designs depicted  the  national  crest  on  the front  and  our  various 
traditional  forms  of  money  on  the  back.  The  design  of  the  National  Parliament  was  later 
added  to  the  K10  banknote.  Prior  to  1991,  all  our  banknotes  were  in  paper  substrate.  In 
keeping  with  developments  in  the  banknote  security  printing  world,  Papua  New  Guinea 
became  the  second  country  outside  of  Australia  to  move  into  using  polymer  (plastic)  for 
banknotes,  through  the  introduction  of  the  Commemorative  South  Pacific  Games  K2.00 
banknote in 1991. 
This was the first major shift in our quest to identify a cost efficient solution to cash handling. 
We found that the polymer notes were more durable and they lasted longer. 
Our economy is predominantly a cash-based one where the majority of our people continue 
to use cash (coins and banknotes) as the main form of payment in settling their transactions. 
There  is  the  need  to  ensure  we  issue  an  acceptable  quality  of  banknotes  with  longevity, 
given our humid/tropical conditions and the frequent and rough handling of currency by the 
public.  We  also  need  to  provide  currency  that  enhances  modern  security  features  against 
counterfeiting. With continuous technological advances, we must continuously upgrade our 
currency to adapt to the new standards. For instance, our banknotes must be of the quality 
and  specifications  for  use  in  Automated  Tellers  Machines  (ATMs).  Our  banknotes  must 
therefore be able to be used by humans and machines alike. 
The  on-going  design  changes  to  our  currency  are  not  only  in  accordance  with  one  of  our 
legislative  objectives  of  promoting  an  efficient  payments  system  but  is  also  recommended 
and acceptable practice for currency issuers (usually Central Banks) at certain intervals over 
time  to  introduce  new  designs  and  features  into  their  banknotes  to  combat  and  prevent 
counterfeiting and to keep abreast of technological advances. 
The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  ensuring  our  currency  is  of  the  highest  standards  and 
quality, is safe and secure and is widely acceptable and convenient to use. We are in the 
process  of  introducing  an  automated  currency  processing  system  to  improve  on  our 
counting,  sorting  and  online  destruction  of  soiled  banknotes  initially  in  Port  Moresby  and 
eventually  to  our  Currency  Distribution  Centres  in  Mt  Hagen,  Lae  and  Kokopo.  This  will 
ensure that under our Clean Banknote Policy we will maintain the standards and quality of 
our banknotes in the hands of the public. I wish to appeal to the general public and business 
houses to assist us improve the quality of our banknotes in circulation by returning old and 
torn banknotes to any of the commercial banks in exchange for new notes and coins. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
The  next  major  shift  in  our  banknote  history  was  the  introduction  of  the  “Parliamentary” 
theme on the front of the notes. The Parliament already appeared on the K10 and K50 also 
has  the  portrait  of  Sir  Michael  Somare  who  brought  a  united  Papua  New  Guinea  to  Self 
Government in 1973 and eventually Independence in 1975. 
In 2005, The Bank of Papua New Guinea undertook a review and modification of the design 
and  upgrade  the  security  features  while  retaining  the  traditional  flavour  of  the  original 
banknote  designs.  In  re-designing  our  currency,  we  re-emphasized  Nation  building  and 
Nationhood  and  hence  the  family  of  banknotes  depicting  the  national  crest  which  is  the 
stylized bird of paradise sitting on a kundu drum and the ceremonial spear and the National 
Parliament which already appears on the front of the K2, K10, K50 and K100. The designs 
on the back of the notes remain unchanged. 
I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  role  of  the  security/banknote  printers  we  have  been  associated 
with. We deal with De La Rue for paper banknotes and Note Printing Australia Limited for 
polymer (plastic) banknotes. Their advise on technical matters and have assisted us on the 
technical specification, security and design requirements for our new banknotes which has 
enabled  the  Bank  to  make  informed  decisions  in  designed  layout,  printing,  distribution, 
withdrawal and eventual destruction. In the case of polymer banknotes, they are actually re-
cycled into pot plants, wheel barrows, car bumpers/fenders. 
With these few remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure to introduce the 
new series K20 banknote in commemoration of the 34th anniversary of Bank of Papua New 
Guinea, and to join the family of banknotes depicting the Parliament theme. The new K20 
becomes legal tender on Monday, 5 November 2007 and they will be used side by side with 
the existing K20 notes until they are phased out over time. 
Thank you and God bless. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
