Savenaca Narube: Overview of economic and financial developments in 
Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official opening of Rooster Poultry’s renovated facilities, at Rooster Poultry, Ba, 1 November 
2007. 
 Mr. John Duncan, Chairman, Colonial Fiji Group Board 
Ms. Linley Wood, Director of Colonial Fiji Group 
Mr. Laurie Mellsop, Managing Director, Colonial Fiji Group 
Mr. Hank Arts, General Manager, Rooster Poultry 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good Afternoon: 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  at  Navau  Farm  in  Ba  for  the  official  opening  of  Rooster 
Poultry’s renovated facilities. My wife and I have spent a pleasant afternoon on site viewing 
the  operations  of  the  company.  I  tell  you,  I  have  learnt  a  lot  today  about  the  process  of 
getting the chicken to the customer. 
I commend Colonial Fiji Life Limited – the owners of Rooster Poultry – on this investment. It 
is  good  to  see  an  insurance  company  in  Fiji  diversify  its  investment  outside  the  financial 
sector. I believe it is a win-win combination. 
Investment 
We tend to talk a lot about investment and its important role of lifting our economic growth 
rate which has been historically low at less than 3 percent. Even when we look ahead to the 
next two to three years, the same low growth scenario remains. We all know that for us to lift 
this growth rate to say 5 percent requires, amongst other things, more investment. We have 
thrown in an investment figure of 25 percent of GDP as a possible target. We are estimating 
investment however to fall back to around 15 percent of GDP this year. So we have a lot of 
space to cover. 
How do we bridge this investment gap? There is a host of factors that is required for this to 
happen. Obviously, political stability is important. We also need to maintain strong economic 
fundamentals. We need to raise productivity to keep unit cost competitive. Predictability and 
certainty in government polices and their implementation is also important. We also need a 
sound and efficient financial system. 
Economic fundamentals 
First, let’s look at our economic fundamentals and here I am referring to inflation, the balance 
of  payments  and  government  debt.  Our  inflation  has  started  to  come  down  again  and  we 
project it at around 3.5 percent at the end of the year. So, there is no major problem here. 
Government debt has grown to over 54 percent of GDP. The interim government has made a 
firm commitment that it would bring that down to below 50 percent of GDP and we wish them 
well in that endeavour. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 1
Balance of payments 
However,  the  balance  of  payments  remains  a  concern  basically  because  of  the  poor 
performance of our tradition exports. Collectively, exports of sugar, garments and gold are 
lower by $400 million from their peak year. And that is a lot of money to loose! This has been 
made worse by the rise in oil prices which broke above 90 US dollars per barrel recently. Our 
major policy challenge is clearly to address our widening trade deficit. 
I am glad to say that we have seen some encouraging signs recently of stability in our level 
of  foreign  reserves.  Due  to  this  improvement,  the  Reserve  Bank  yesterday  announced 
relaxation on the payment of credit cards for expenditure abroad from $5,000 to $10,000 per 
month for overseas transactions. In addition, cash drawings from credit cards were increased 
from $200 to $1,000 per month. Delegated limits on advance imports payments were also 
raised from $15,000 to $50,000 per invoice. 
Exports 
Our policies of dampening import demand seem to be taking effect. However, the key is not 
so  much  to  discourage  imports  but  rather  to  grow  our  exports  and  we  should  continue  to 
work hard at achieving this. 
To help exporters, the Reserve Bank has made changes to the Export Finance Facility. This 
facility was designed to assist the export sector access credit at relatively lower interest rate. 
Under the facility, the Reserve Bank will provide funds to the commercial banks and the Fiji 
Development Bank at an interest rate that is aligned to the 182 day treasury bill market rate 
with a cap of 2 percent. This rate is currently below 1 percent. The commercial banks and 
FDB can then on-lend these funds to exporters with a maximum added margin of 4 percent 
which  currently  translates  to  about  5  percent.  Furthermore,  the  local  value  added  content 
previously set at 40 percent has been removed. The loan eligibility amount under the pre-
shipment lump sum facility has been increased from 20 to 50 percent and is now based on 
local  value  added  content  rather  than  total  exports.  The  list  of  ineligible  exports  has  now 
been extended to include re-exports. We hope that these changes will make the facility more 
attractive  to  commercial  banks  and  exporters.  Details  of  this  facility  are  available  from  the 
Reserve Bank, FDB and your commercial bank. 
2008 economic growth 
A mild economic recovery of about 2 percent is expected in 2008. The major impetus is a 
rebound in visitor arrivals which is expected to contribute to growth in wholesale & retail trade 
and  hotels  &  restaurants  and  transport  &  communication  sectors.  In  addition,  better 
performances are expected from agriculture, forestry and fishing and manufacturing sectors. 
The re-opening of the Vatukoula gold mine will also contribute to economic growth in 2008. 
Government policies 
I said that predictability and certainty in government policies and their implementation is also 
important. As you know, the government budget will be delivered in two weeks time. We look 
forward to the announcement of economic policies that will take us forward in the next two 
years. In my view, a key foundation of such a policy framework is to allow the private sector 
to be the growth locomotion. For the private sector to better play this role, it needs certainty 
and predictability. Another important component of the framework would be reforms to allow 
us to use our scarce resources as effectively as possible. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2007
Financial system 
Let me now say something on the financial system. I would like to start by emphasizing that 
the financial system remains sound. With the credit ceiling in place and the slowdown in the 
economy, the rate of credit growth has declined to around 8 percent compared to the highs 
of  close  to  25  percent  eighteen  months  ago.  I  consider  this  rate  of  growth  commensurate 
with our current economic conditions. 
I  wish  to  clarify  that  the  Reserve  Bank  does  allow  banks  to  exceed  their  credit  ceiling  for 
lending  to  priority  sectors,  for  investment  and  to  the  micro,  small  and  medium  sized 
enterprises. At the same time, the Bank has allowed liquidity in the financial system to rise 
which has led to lower interest rates. We intend to review the credit ceiling at the end of the 
year. 
The efficiency of the financial system is important to everyone particularly businesses and 
investors.  We  launched  “FIJICLEAR”  –  Fiji’s  electronic  payment  system  on  16  October. 
FIJICLEAR is an important component of the Bank’s overall plan to modernise the financial 
system in Fiji – it will improve efficiency in making and receiving payments as well as help 
safeguard financial stability. The system is secure and its key elements are speed, certainty, 
reliability  and  convenience.  Payments  using  this  system  will  deliver  funds  the  same  day 
compared  to  3  to  6  days  required  to  clear  cheques.  I  invite  businesses  to  start  taking 
advantage  of  the  new  system.  We  worked  very  closely  with  Laurie  in  his  role  as  the 
Chairman  of  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Fiji  on  this  project  and  I  must  thank  him  and  his 
Association for their support and cooperation. 
Rooster Poultry 
It  is  with  this  investment  and  economic  backdrop  that  makes  such  a  venture  that  we  are 
celebrating today extremely encouraging. We certainly need more investment such as this. I 
recall discussing this investment with Colonial in 2005 and I was pleased that in September 
that  year,  Colonial  went  ahead  and  invested  considerably  to  re-establish  the  business  of 
Padarath Poultry Enterprises Limited (PPEL). 
Colonial has gained full control of Rooster Poultry. Reflecting its confidence in the business, 
between September 2006 and today, Colonial has invested additional funds in the project. 
One  of  the  major  parts  of  this  investment  has  been  the  re-establishment  of  breeder  and 
rearing farms to produce local fertile eggs rather than importing such eggs. These farms are 
now  on  stream  and  the  business is  experiencing  a  progressive  reduction  in  the  volume  of 
imported eggs. This would certainly help our balance of payments. 
I found the partnership with grower program very interesting. I understand that the growing of 
broiler chickens combines well with cane farming and virtually all of the growers contracted 
are also cane growers. I have been informed that already 12 contract growers have taken up 
the  opportunity  to  join  Poultry  Rooster’s  developments  and  more  are  in  the  process  of 
building sheds. At least 6 more are planned for placement prior to end of December 2007. 
This is an excellent model in small and micro finance that works. 
The resurrection and further capacity building has resulted in the direct employment of over 
180 people in the Ba area, and that does not include the additional employment available 
through contract growers. 
I found the details of this investment very interesting. The Rearing Farm in Tavarau is where 
the new facilities are capable of producing 4 flocks per annum in 4 sheds. After 18 weeks, 
the birds are transferred to the Breeding Farm at Qalitu where they lay fertile eggs that are 
transferred  to  the  Hatchery  in  Lautoka.  The  Ba  farm  has  18  sheds  and  the  general 
processing plant. One of the largest projects undertaken was the building of a large 250 ton 
holding  freezer,  and  a  six  months  road  and  drainage  upgrade.  A  new  rendering  plant  has 
been commissioned as well as an environmentally appropriate water waste system. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 3
At the Suva depot in Vatuwaqa, a new holding freezer to facilitate daily delivery to Poultry 
Rooster’s customers in Suva and surrounding areas. I am told that the sales team now enjoy 
the use of updated freezer trucks.  
This investment has come with new IT infrastructure, capacity building, development of OHS 
requirement and commencement of international accreditation. 
The  outcome  of  this  investment  program  is  that  Fiji  once  again  has  a  credible  and 
sustainable second broiler chicken producer that will reduce the requirement for Fiji to import 
frozen chicken product. We hope that production will increase to cater for our South Pacific 
Island markets so that Fiji’s foreign reserves position will be strengthened. 
Concluding remarks 
Colonial  therefore  deserves  our  collective  commendation  today.  The  Colonial  Group  has 
contributed  well  to  the  development  of  the  Fiji  economy.  It  has  a  diversified  portfolio  with 
Poultry Rooster. I take this opportunity to wish Mr. Duncan, Ms Wood and Mr. Mellsop as 
well as the Colonial Team all the best in their future endeavours. 
Official opening 
I  have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  new  Poultry  Rooster  open  and  wish  it  well  in  its 
operations. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2007
