Jürgen Stark: Monetary policy and the money market – key principles 
and recent experience 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Bayerischer Bankenverband, Munich, 15 November 2007. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak today here, in Munich. This gathering provides an excellent 
opportunity to share with practitioners my views on the interaction between the conduct of 
the ECB’s monetary policy and the developments in the money market. This is an issue that 
has become very topical of late due to the recent financial turmoil. 
In  general,  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  and  its  interaction  with  monetary  policy 
receives  little  attention.  The  relationship  between  the  policy  rates  determined  by  the 
Governing Council of the ECB and money market interest rates is typically close, stable and 
predictable. This is testimony to the design of the tools and procedures used to implement 
monetary policy decisions, and to the effectiveness of the liquidity policy conducted by the 
ECB and its communication. 
However,  while  the  stability  of  these  relationships  in  normal  times  means  that  they  are 
accorded  little  prominence  in  the  analysis  and  discussion  of  monetary  policy,  the  money 
market plays a unique role in signalling the stance of the monetary policy and in transmitting 
monetary  policy  decisions  to  financial  markets  more  generally,  to  private  spending  and 
saving  decisions,  and  ultimately  to  monetary  dynamics  and  the  determination  of  the  price 
level. It is only when the normal, stable relationships in the money market break down – as 
was  the  case,  at  least  temporarily,  during  the  summer  –  that  the  centrality  of  their  role 
becomes fully apparent. 
Today I seek to cast some light on these issues by addressing four practical questions: 1.) 
What are the roots of the financial turmoil we have observed over the past few months? 2.) 
Why  did  the  ECB  respond  to  this  turmoil  and,  in  particular,  its  impact  on  money  market 
developments? 3.) What form did this response take? 4.) How effective has it been? 
But  before  turning  to  these  concrete  questions,  allow  me  first  to  establish  those  principles 
that have guided our decisions in recent months. 
Principles governing the conduct and implementation of monetary policy 
2.  
At  the  ECB,  the  Governing  Council  determines  the  monetary  policy  stance  that  will  best 
serve  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  made  concrete  in  the 
Governing Council’s decision with regard to the appropriate level of key ECB interest rates, 
which is taken at the beginning of each month.  
More specifically, the Governing Council makes an assessment of risks to price stability on 
the  basis  of  both  an  economic  analysis  and  a  monetary  analysis.  The  economic  analysis 
focuses mainly on the assessment of current economic and financial developments from the 
perspective of the interplay between supply and demand in the goods, services and factor 
markets. The monetary analysis serves as a means of cross-checking, from a medium to a 
long-term  perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term  indications  coming  from  the  economic 
analysis. Using the information derived from these analyses, the Governing Council decides 
on a level of key ECB interest rates that will serve the maintenance of price stability over the 
medium term. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 1
The ECB Executive Board is charged with the responsibility of implementing these decisions. 
To do so, it has at its disposal a set of instruments and procedures that are used to achieve 
the interest level set by the Governing Council at the very short end of the money market 
yield  curve.  A  key  element  of  this  process  is  the  conduct  of  the  so-called  liquidity  policy. 
Through managing liquidity, the ECB can, as the monopoly supplier of central bank money, 
determine the amount of funds supplied to the banking system.  
More  precisely,  the  Governing  Council  sets  the  minimum  bid  rate  for  the  most  important 
refinancing  operations,  the  Eurosystem’s  main  refinancing  operations  (MROs)  that  are 
executed through tenders. This is the most familiar of the ECB key rates. It represents a floor 
for  the  price  of  central  bank  liquidity  at  the  tenders  and  constitutes  the  main  signal  of  the 
ECB’s monetary policy stance. The MROs provide the bulk of liquidity to the financial sector 
– against collateral, on a reverse basis and for a maturity of one week. There are also longer-
term refinancing operations (LTROs) that have a maturity of three months, although the ECB 
acts as a price taker in these operations, consciously avoiding sending any monetary policy 
signal. In addition to these regular operations, the Eurosystem also provides the opportunity 
to  have  recourse  to  the  standing  facilities  with  an  overnight  maturity  on  a  daily  basis, 
although at lower/higher rates than the minimum bid rate, in order to restrict volatility in the 
money market.1  
The orderly functioning of the money market is of the utmost importance for the transmission 
of  the  key  policy  rates  to  the  economy  in  general  and  the  price  level  in  particular.  Market 
participants form  expectations  about  the  future path  of  the very  short-term  rates  based  on 
anticipated  monetary  policy  decisions.  These  expectations  are 
the 
determination of longer maturity interest rates and yields that are relevant for spending and 
saving decisions and which ultimately influence economic and monetary developments and 
the price level. 
However,  experience  of  the  recent  financial  turmoil  demonstrates  that  disturbances  in  the 
money market may interfere with policy transmission. In addressing the challenges created 
by  such  periods  of  stress  and  turmoil,  monetary  policy  makers  need  principles  that  guide 
their  decisions,  which  often  have  to  be  made  in  conditions  of  high  uncertainty  and  time 
pressure.  Only  by  adhering  to  such  principles  can  a  coherent  and  consistent  approach  to 
such decisions be maintained, both in normal times and at times of stress.  
Three  principles  are  of  particular  relevance  for  managing  the  relationship  between  money 
market tensions and monetary policy decisions. 
First,  monetary  policy  should  always  remain  resolutely  focused  on  achieving  and 
maintaining price stability. 
Milton  Friedman  famously  remarked  that  “inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary 
phenomenon”.  In  other  words,  the  conduct  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  is  the 
means by which, over the medium term, price stability is established and maintained. 
History  –  perhaps  especially  German  history  –  proves  beyond  doubt  that  the  cost  of 
deviations from price stability, in economic and social terms, is considerable and potentially 
catastrophic.  At  a  minimum,  providing  an  environment  of  price  stability  creates  favourable 
conditions for sustainable economic growth. 
The Maastricht Treaty created an independent ECB with an unambiguous mandate to pursue 
its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  This  provides  the  best  possible  institutional 
environment for a successful monetary policy. I can reassure you that my colleagues on the 
the  basis 
for 
                                                 
1   The interest rates on the marginal lending facility and deposit facility are also set by the Governing Council. 
They define an interest rate “corridor” around the minimum bid rate within which the market overnight interest 
rate fluctuates. The minimum bid rate and the rates on the so-called standing facilities represent the three key 
ECB interest rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2007
Governing  Council  and  I  are  well  aware  of  our  onerous  responsibilities  and  are  firmly 
committed  to  meeting  this  objective.  Notwithstanding  volatility  in  specific  segments  of  the 
financial markets, the pursuit of price stability is, and will remain, our over-riding goal – as 
has been reflected in our decisions over the past few months, as well as our policy choices in 
the preceding years.  
Second,  central  banks  should  contribute  to  maintaining  well-functioning  financial 
markets  in  general,  and  to  well-functioning  money  markets  in  particular,  while 
recognising the limitations of their ability to ensure that any market – which after all is 
constituted by the private sector – acts in a particular manner. 
As I said earlier, it is essential that monetary policy decisions be transmitted effectively to the 
economy  in  general  and  to  private  sector  price-setting  decisions  in  particular.  Given  its 
crucial role at the start of the transmission mechanism, the transmission of such decisions 
requires a well-functioning money market. Therefore, the ECB has an interest in the orderly 
functioning of the money market and should contribute to ensuring that the money market 
works as well as possible. 
Nevertheless,  I  recognise  that  limits  exist  to  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  ensure  that  the 
money market works in a certain way. Any market ultimately consists of free trading between 
market participants: in the money  market, investors and banks have to decide themselves 
whether or not to agree to exchange cash and other short-term financial instruments. In the 
end, a market is a way of coordinating private sector behaviour. If the ECB were to seek to 
control or determine all exchanges, then it would simply cease to be a market.  
By  the  same  token,  the  private  sector  –  in  the  case  of  the  money  market,  the  banks  and 
investors that participate – should recognise their own responsibilities for making the market 
work. They cannot and should not rely on the authorities to ensure the efficiency of trading. 
Rather they have to create the appropriate conditions – transparency, honesty, trust – among 
themselves. 
Third, a clear distinction is to be maintained between interest rate decisions taken to 
maintain  price  stability  (i.e.  the  determination  of  the  monetary  policy  stance)  and 
liquidity decisions taken in the course of implementing this stance, which may also 
support the functioning of the money market. This distinction is helpful both in normal 
conditions and in periods of turbulence (albeit for somewhat different reasons). 
It  is  important  to  maintain  a  distinction  between  the  determination  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance  and  its  implementation  through  the  conduct  of  liquidity  policy.  In  normal  times, 
ensuring  that  this  distinction  is  maintained  avoids  that  the  intentions  of  monetary  policy 
makers are confused by the (sometimes inevitable) noise that is introduced by liquidity policy 
decisions. The operational framework for the implementation of monetary policy introduced 
by the Eurosystem in 1999 has proved very successful in this respect.  
Maintaining this distinction may become even more important at times of stress, especially in 
the  money  market.  Liquidity  policy  may  need  to  be  more  active  to  contribute  to  the 
functioning of the money market, which exacerbates the scope for misunderstanding about 
monetary policy intentions.  
In  the  absence  of  a  clear  distinction,  the  danger  exists  that  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
come to be seen as substitutes for one another, rather than having the latter subordinated to 
the former. Necessary monetary policy decisions may therefore be delayed if liquidity policy 
is seen as an adequate palliative. Alternatively, monetary policy may be distracted from its 
medium-term  objective  of  price  stability  if  it  is  seen  as  a  mechanism  to  support  market 
functioning. In either case, the credibility of monetary policy – which is crucial for stabilising 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  and  thus  for  maintaining  price  stability  –  could  be  put  at 
risk. 
Respecting these simple principles helps to focus monetary policy on its primary objective of 
price stability, and hence bolsters the credibility of the central bank. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 3
However, as a policy maker myself, I recognise the need to act in a practical and pragmatic 
manner,  particularly  in  periods  of  stress.  Adherence  to  these  general  principles  must  be 
complemented by effective and prompt responses in the face of unanticipated events with 
uncertain consequences. No principle can provide concrete guidance for how to deal with all 
the  contingencies  we  may  face  in  a  complex  and  uncertain  world,  in  particular  with  those 
uncertainties  labelled  “unknown  unknowns”  –  a  phrase  that  has  no  doubt  resonated  with 
economic policy makers in recent months. 
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  clearly  distinguish  between,  on  the  one  hand,  acting  in  a 
pragmatic  manner  to  support  the  functioning  of  the  market  as  a  whole  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  bailing  out  individual  institutions  and  thus  generating  moral  hazard  by  creating  the 
impression  that  such  institutions  will  not  be  held  responsible  for  their  earlier  actions.  The 
former is clearly desirable, whereas the latter only sows the seeds of later and more costly 
crises. 
Nonetheless,  my  clarification  of  these  principles  should  aid  understanding  of  the  ECB’s 
response to financial turmoil in recent months. But before coming to this issue, allow me to 
reflect  on the  roots  of  the  recent  financial  turmoil.  After  all,  it  is  only  by  understanding  the 
causes of the turmoil that we can develop and calibrate the appropriate response. 
for 
What are the roots of the recent financial turmoil? 
3.  
The  current  money  market  turbulence  observed  around  the  world  has  its  roots  in  the 
disintermediation of credit that has taken place since the 1980s. In other words, loans made 
by  banks  to  their  customers  (or,  in  many  cases,  elements  of  these  loans,  such  as  the 
underlying credit risk) have increasingly been removed from bank balance sheets and sold to 
third  parties.  These  financial  innovations  –  notably  the  acceleration  of  asset  securitisation 
and credit derivatives markets – created an environment where credit was cheaper and more 
readily available, but at the same time a situation where the structure of the credit system 
became more complex.  
Moreover, the extended period of favourable economic conditions and market participants’ 
perception  of  a  rather  benign  outlook 
financial  markets  and  macroeconomic 
developments  in  more  recent  years  may  have  served  to  create  complacency  and  some 
under-pricing of risk. 
Against this background, the recent turmoil appears closely related to the complex nature of 
certain securities which have been issued in significant amounts during the rapid expansion 
of asset securitisation. These involve instruments such as asset-backed securities (ABS) and 
various so-called structured finance products, such as collateralised debt obligations (CDO). 
Through such instruments, banks and so-called “special vehicles” associated with them have 
packaged  loans  with  various  credit  qualities  and  sold  them,  structured  into  different  risk 
classes, to investors based on their specific appetite for risk and return.  
In  addition,  banks  have  increasingly  used  so-called  conduits  and  structured  investment 
vehicles  (SIVs)  to  transfer  a  portion  of  their  investments  in  structured  products  off  their 
balance  sheet.  Starting  initially  with  the  mortgage  markets,  these  securitisation  operations 
have been extended to many other types of credit. Needless to say, such financial innovation 
has greatly increased the complexity – some  would say opacity – of financial instruments, 
which serves to explain, at least in part, the current uncertainties that banks face about the 
quality of the product they have purchased and, by implication, the quality of their balance 
sheet and those of their counterparts.  
The current turmoil began in mid-June when investors became increasingly concerned about 
the  state  of  the  US  mortgage  markets,  in  particular  the  so-called  sub-prime  segment. 
Growing  concern  among  investors,  reinforced  by  further  negative  news  about  the  US  real 
estate market, initially affected the capital markets rather than the money markets. However, 
tensions were soon to surface in the money market as problems emerged in the refinancing 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2007
investment  programs 
in  asset-backed  securities.  These 
of  US-dollar  denominated 
programmes  operated  via  the  off-balance  sheet  conduits.  Such  conduits  typically  invest  in 
longer-term  asset-backed  securities  or  CDOs  (some  with  exposures  to  US  sub-prime 
mortgages).  These  investments  are  refinanced  on  a  revolving  basis  through  short-term 
borrowing by means of the issuance of so-called asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP).  
With the emergence of problems in the sub-prime sector, investors suddenly refrained from 
buying such ABCP, treating it as too risky, especially as the quality of the underlying loans 
behind  the  securities  purchased  by  the  conduit  was  often  uncertain.  Given  the  maturity 
mismatch between their assets and liabilities, conduits therefore started to draw on the credit 
lines they had originally been granted by their sponsoring banks, in particular banks resident 
in the euro area.  
This ultimately gave rise to liquidity shortages in the inter-bank money markets around the 
world, including in the euro area. Between the end of June and early August, it became clear 
that  a  number  of  European  financial  institutions  needed  liquidity  to  provide  credit  to  their 
conduits that had invested in the US sub-prime market. In the end, the demand for liquidity, 
in combination with a loss in confidence among banks, resulted in a hoarding of cash and the 
interest  rate  in  the  overnight  segment  of  the  money  market  in  the  euro  area  increased 
significantly, trading up to 70 basis points above its normal level. 
• 
Recognising these tensions, the ECB reacted immediately. Specifically, it undertook 
a special liquidity providing operation (a so-called fine tuning operation) on 9 August 
in  an  attempt  to  reduce  the  overnight  interest  rate  to  more  normal  levels  more 
consistent with key ECB interest rates and thus the monetary policy stance decided 
by the Governing Council.  
Before describing in greater detail the nature of the ECB’s response, it is useful to 
explain why a response was needed. 
Why did the ECB respond? 
Consistent with the principle that monetary policy decisions should be kept separate 
from  liquidity  policy  decisions,  a  distinction  needs  to  be  drawn  between  two 
elements of the ECB’s response. 
As regards monetary policy, the ECB response was governed by the likelihood that 
the  turmoil  in  financial  markets  would  have  probably  some  implications  for  the 
outlook  for  price  developments  and  thus  for  the  course  of  a  monetary  policy 
resolutely focused on the maintenance of price stability. Consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy, the Governing Council conducted a comprehensive assessment of 
all factors that impinge upon the prospects for price stability and acted in a manner 
that  best  serves  its  primary  objective.  Since  a  major  financial  event  such  as  the 
August  money  market  turmoil  has  the  potential  to  change  the  assessment  of  the 
prospects for price stability, monetary policy had to respond.  
Explaining  the  need  for  a  liquidity  policy  response  is  more  complex.  As  we  have 
seen, the ECB has a clear interest in contributing to the functioning of the euro area 
money market. It was apparent that the tensions in the money market that emerged 
on  9  August  represented  significant  dislocations  to  the  functioning  of  the  money 
market, which were likely to interfere with the transmission of monetary policy. 
By  providing  a  well-designed  and  transparent  operational  framework  within  which 
liquidity against adequate collateral could be provided to the market in a clear and 
transparent  way,  the  ECB  had  from  the  outset  made  an  important  contribution  to 
maintaining confidence and market trading. 
 4. 
• 
   BIS Review 133/2007 
 5
 However, at the same time, the ECB recognised – again in line with the principles 
sketched  earlier  –  that  its  ability  to  re-establish  the  pre-9  August  situation  in  the 
money  market  by  its  own  actions  alone  was  limited.  By  its  nature,  trading  in  the 
money  market  relies  on  the  existence  of  confidence  among  market  participants. 
Such confidence between banks was apparently eroded by the concerns regarding 
exposures to US sub-prime mortgages and the implications of the resulting liquidity 
squeeze on banks’ ability to meet their short-term obligations.  
Through  its  liquidity  policy,  the  ECB  attempted  to  support  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
money markets by bolstering the confidence of market participants in the system as a whole. 
The  ECB  eschewed  providing  support  to  individual  institutions  that  had  run  into  specific 
problems as a result of their own actions, for fear of creating moral hazard.  
5.  
• 
     6 
 How did the ECB respond? 
As regards the monetary policy response to the recent turmoil, the key element was 
the  uncertainty  introduced  by  the  turmoil’s  emergence  with  respect  to  the 
assessment of the outlook for price developments (and the economic situation more 
generally). 
Monetary policy decisions made since early August can only be understood against 
the backdrop of the progressive increase in key ECB interest rates since December 
2005, in the face of the emergence of upside risks to price stability, in a context of 
strong  money  and  credit  growth,  a  recovery  in  economic  activity  and,  latterly,  a 
tightening  of  capacity  constraints.  The  progressive  withdrawal  of  monetary  policy 
accommodation  over  the  past  two  years  thus  reflects  the  ECB’s  resolute 
commitment to the maintenance of price stability. 
In the middle of 2007, the Governing Council considered that upside risks to price 
stability  continued  to  prevail.  In  the  absence  of  financial  turmoil,  this  would  have 
pointed  to  a  need  for  further  increases  in  key  ECB  interest  rates,  as  was  then 
anticipated  by  the  financial  markets.  However,  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  increased  with  the  emergence  of  the 
turbulence  in  the  money  market.  Moreover,  the  implications  of  the  –  possibly 
temporarily  –  high  market  interest  rates  (as  spreads  between  market  and  policy 
rates emerged) on spending and pricing decisions was unclear. Characterising the 
monetary policy stance in this context was particularly complicated and caution was 
needed when assessing the potential impact of the financial market developments 
on the real economy and the outlook for price stability. 
Overall,  this  uncertain  situation  called  for  prudence  when  assessing  the  monetary 
policy stance on the basis of the available data. In face of such uncertainties, the 
Governing Council therefore adopted an “information gathering” stance.  
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  this  approach  did  not  imply  a  fundamental 
reassessment  of  the  prospects  for  the  euro  area  economy  or  the  outlook  price 
developments.  Indeed,  the  Governing  Council  re-emphasised  the  soundness  of 
underlying  economic  fundamentals  in  the  euro  area,  at  the  same  times  as 
highlighting the continued prevalence of upside risks to price stability. 
Rather  the  Governing  Council  recognised  that  the  uncertainties  created  by  the 
emergence of financial turmoil increased the value of collecting and analysing new 
information before taking monetary policy actions. This stance has been maintained 
through to mid-November, although the accumulation of information thus far points 
to  a  relatively  limited  impact  of  the  turmoil  on  the  real  economy,  no  significant 
impairment  in  the  supply  of  credit  by  banks  and,  if  anything,  intensifying  risks  to 
price stability as commodity prices rise. 
BIS Review 133/2007
With  regard  to  the  ECB’s  response  with  regard  to  liquidity  policy,  a  richer  description  is 
required. On 9 August, in view of the strong demand for liquidity in the overnight market that 
had caused the substantial rise in very short-term market interest rates, the ECB provided a 
significant  injection  of  liquidity  for  that  day  through  an  overnight  refinancing  operation.  In 
other  words,  through  a  so-called  fine-tuning  operation  (FTO),  the  ECB  lent  to  the  market 
EUR 94.8 billion for one day, which helped to reduce the tensions in the overnight interest 
rate.  
In the days that followed, tensions in the money markets remained intense. This seemed to 
reflect a persistent distortion in the distribution of liquidity within the money market, caused 
by the lack of confidence among market participants. Moreover, given the persistence of the 
market  tensions,  interest  rates  in  the  term  segments  of  the  unsecured  money  market  (i.e. 
loans  between  two  private  banks  that  are  not  guaranteed  by  an  exchange  of  collateral) 
increased, leading to spreads against the secured segments up to five times their historical 
average.  
In  order  to  facilitate  a  better  distribution  of  liquidity,  the  ECB  launched  further  liquidity 
providing  fine-tuning  operations  as  well  as  provided  additional  liquidity  through  its  main 
refinancing operations. The ECB also launched two supplementary longer-term refinancing 
operations  (LTRO,  with  a  maturity  of  three  months),  respectively  on  27  August  and  12 
September, for a total amount of EUR 115 billion.  
The purpose of all these operations should be made clear. First, these operations did not add 
to the overall stock of liquidity provided by the ECB over the maintenance period within which 
banks have to meet their reserve requirements. Second, the additional allotments at the main 
refinancing  operations  simply  altered  the  timing  of  the  provision  of  the  usual  amount  of 
liquidity  within  the  maintenance  period,  by  accommodating  a  preference  of  banks  for  so-
called “frontloading” (i.e. holding a higher level of reserves at the start of the maintenance 
period rather than at the end). Third, the longer term operations were not intended to directly 
steer interest rates at longer maturities, such as three months.  
Rather,  by  changing  the  timing  of  liquidity  provision  within  the  maintenance  period  and 
increasing  its  average  maturity,  the  ECB  aimed  to  bolster  the  confidence  of  market 
participants  that  they  would  not  be  subject  to  shortages  of  liquidity  at  the  end  of  the 
maintenance  period  when  reserve  requirements  became  binding  and/or  at  times  when 
outstanding obligations had to be rolled over in an uncertain market environment. 
Largely  on  account  of  these  measures,  the  situation  in  the  overnight  money  market  has 
improved, with the overnight interest rate being both more stable and closer to the minimum 
bid  rate  determined  by  the  Governing  Council  in  recent  weeks.  Improvements  in  the  term 
unsecured  money  market  have  been  more  modest,  although  conditions  have  improved 
throughout October.  
• 
The pragmatic reaction of the ECB regarding the liquidity policy decisions at early 
stage  of  the  turbulences  had  the  goal  to  reassure  the  market,  to  reduce  the 
deviation  of  the  overnight  interest  rate  from  the  minimum  bid  rate  and  to  build  up 
confidence  of  market  participants.  There  was  a  need  to  contribute  to  the 
continuation of the trading in the money market, which is the kernel of the banking 
system through which financial institutions find in first instance their liquidity needs. 
While it is premature to form a final judgement, in the context of recent experience, 
the operational framework of the Eurosystem has proved to be resilient and effective 
in these exceptional circumstances. From this perspective, no innovation seems to 
be needed at this stage given the broad range of instruments already existing in the 
operational framework.  
In particular, we have seen the benefit of having a large set of financial institutions 
(i.e.  the  so-called  counterparties)  that  may  participate  to  the  regular  Eurosystem 
refinancing  operations.  At  a  time  when  banks  were  reluctant  to  trade  with  each 
  BIS Review 133/2007 
 7
other, providing many banks access to the ECB operations and facilities has given 
them a reliable source of liquidity to meet their needs. 
In  the  same  vein,  the  wide  definition  of  financial  assets  that  can  be  pledged  as 
security  for  borrowing  in  such  operations  (i.e.  eligible  collateral)  has  proved  to  be 
useful. Banks have not suffered from a shortage of collateral that has hindered their 
ability to bid at the ECB operations. 
Finally,  the  option  to  have  supplementary  longer-term  refinancing  operations  was 
available as part of the regular operational framework. Launching such operations 
was therefore straightforward and apparently helped to support market confidence. 
What is the outlook? 
Money market conditions in the euro area have improved. We should nonetheless 
guard against complacency and recognise that the process of normalisation is likely 
to be drawn out. Further action on the part of the private sector is necessary to build 
confidence and improve transparency. 
The  end  of  the  year,  which  is  typically  a  period  of  some  tension  in  the  money 
market, is set to be an important test of the resilience of the gradual improvement in 
money  market  conditions  we  have  seen  in  recent  weeks.  As  President  Trichet 
announced  on  8  November,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  roll-over  the 
supplementary  LTROs,  such  that  this  longer  maturity  liquidity  extends  across  the 
end-year  period,  in  the  interests  of  providing  continuity  and  reassurance  to  the 
markets that should support confidence. 
Looking further ahead, the lessons of the recent turmoil for the conduct of liquidity 
policy and the design of the operational framework have to be identified and their 
implications  digested.  Nonetheless,  I  remain  confident  that  our  current  framework 
and practice have performed well in the face of considerable challenges in recent 
months. 
From  the  macroeconomic  and  monetary  policy  perspective  the  current  financial 
turmoil has had a limited impact on the expansion of economic activity in the euro 
area, at least so far. However, the turmoil is not yet over. Through time, a higher 
degree  of  transparency  in  financial  markets  will  both  contribute  to  a  better 
functioning  of  the  money  market  and  provide  a  richer  picture  of  the  impact  of  the 
turmoil on credit conditions and the real economy.  
Thus  far,  the  dynamism  of  the  world  economy  has  also  proved  to  be  resilient. 
However, regional patterns of growth have changed. The moderation of economic 
growth  in  the  US  economy  has  been  at  least  partly  compensated  by  sustained 
growth 
financial 
developments in the US will spill over to other regions in the world depends on the 
significance of the various potential transmission channels. The months to come will 
show whether the so called “decoupling hypothesis” will prove to be correct. In the 
US,  concerns  about  housing  market  developments,  and 
their  potential 
consequences  for  consumer  and  investor  confidence  as  well  as  for  private 
consumption  (inter  alia)  weigh  heavily  on  growth  prospects.  From 
today’s 
perspective a temporary dampening effect for the growth perspectives in the euro 
area cannot be excluded. 
At the same, risks to price stability in the euro area continue to be on the upside and 
appear to have increased and intensified recently. Earlier this year, we had already 
expected that inflation would rise further towards the end of 2007 and early 2008, 
reflecting base effects stemming from the third and the fourth quarter of 2006. We 
communicated to the public along these lines. However, the annual HICP inflation 
in  emerging  market  economies.  Whether  economic  and 
BIS Review 133/2007
  6. 
• 
     8 
      rate for October was a surprisingly high 2.6 %, mainly driven by a sharp rise in oil 
and non-oil commodities including agricultural prices, which led to renewed upward 
pressures  on  energy  and  food  price  developments.  Moreover,  domestic  price 
pressures remain strong in the euro area.  
Against this background it is very likely that headline inflation will remain elevated in 
the months to come. Although HICP inflation is expected to moderate in the second 
half of 2008, the inflation rate is likely to remain above 2 % for most of next year. In 
the context of continued capacity constraints, in particular in the labour market, there 
is a high risk that this might trigger high wage growth in the months to come. It is 
crucial that all parties concerned meet their responsibilities to avoid second-round 
effects.  The  Governing  Council  has  explicitly  clarified  that  it  will  monitor  all 
developments very closely and stands ready to prevent any second-round effects in 
response to these pressures.  
While  recognising  that  the  interpretation  of  the  monetary  data  is  to  some  extent 
clouded by the possible impact of financial turmoil, the monetary analysis continues 
to  support  the  view  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons.  The  need  for  a  careful  interpretation  of  the  incoming  data  places  a 
premium  on  the  assessment  of  a  broad  range  of  monetary  and  financial  data  in 
coming to an overall assessment. Such a broad-based analysis supports the view 
that  the  underlying  rate  of  money  and  credit  growth  remains  strong,  even  if  M3 
growth  somewhat  overstates  this  underlying  strength  as  the  flattening  of  the  yield 
curve and the general rise in risk aversion may have increased the demand for M3 
deposits.  Bank  loans  continue  to  grow  strongly,  particularly  to  the  non-financial 
corporate  sector,  which  both  underpins  the  view  that  the  underlying  pace  of 
monetary expansion is strong and points against any significant impairment to bank 
credit supply stemming from the turmoil in money markets.  
On the basis of its economic and monetary analyses, and by acting in a firm and 
timely  manner,  the  ECB  will  ensure  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  do  not  materialise  and  that  medium  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability.  This  will  thereby 
favour  an  environment  conducive  to  sustained  economic  growth,  well-functioning 
markets  and  job  creation.  Providing  such  an  anchor  for  medium  and  long-term 
inflation expectations is all the more important at times of financial market volatility 
and increased uncertainty.  
As  regards  the  financial  markets,  although  improving,  the  situation  in  the  money 
market is not yet back to normal. It thus appears necessary to pay great attention to 
developments over the period to come and to stand ready to act if needed, but of 
course without impinging on or prejudicing the delivery of price stability. 
Against  this  background,  taking  also  into  account  the  continuation  of  heightened 
uncertainty  over  recent  months,  it  is  also  necessary  for  the  time  being  to  gather 
additional information before drawing further conclusions for monetary policy, fully in 
line with our monetary policy strategy focused on maintaining price stability over the 
medium term. 
Concluding remarks 
7.  
The ECB has put in place a clear and transparent strategy with decisions which are made by 
the Governing Council to achieve its primary objective of price stability in the medium term. 
In  practice,  there  are  key  principles  which  underline  these  decisions  to  ensure  the  central 
bank to act properly and consistently over time. 
To end, I would like to make three concluding points: 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 9
   First, the ECB has an interest in contributing to the functioning of money markets. 
However,  neither  the  ECB  nor  any  other  central  bank  can  ensure  that  the  money 
market is always shielded from volatility and turmoil. As recent events have shown, 
market  participants’  behaviour  –  reflecting  underlying  trust,  confidence  and 
transparency over which the ECB exerts little direct influence – are the prerequisites 
for a well functioning market. 
Second,  while  the  ECB  has  made  a  contribution  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
money market during the recent turmoil, there is a need for market participants and 
supervisory  authorities  to  address  the  roots  of  the  current  mistrust  among 
participants. Market participants must recognise that the central bank cannot solve 
the underlying problems. However, the ECB will continue to pay great attention to 
developments in the financial markets over the period to come. 
Third, given the continued uncertainty surrounding the conjunctural situation – which 
derives  from  recent  financial  market  volatility  and  re-pricing  of  risk  –  further 
additional information is needed in order to draw conclusions about monetary policy 
actions.  This  notwithstanding,  it  is  crystal  clear  that  recognition  of  the  benefits  of 
gathering further information does not imply that monetary policy does not remain 
resolutely focused on the maintenance of price stability and remains ready to act in 
a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  address  the  strengthening  of  upward  pressures  and 
risks to the outlook for price stability.  
Bibliography 
Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2007a), “Understanding Financial Crises”, Clarendon Lecture Series 
in Finance, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Baker,  M.,  and  Stein  J.  C.  (2004):  “Market  liquidity  as  a  sentiment  indicator”,  Journal  of 
Financial Markets, Vol. 7, Issue 3, pages 271-299. 
Blinder, A. (1998): Central Banking in Theory and Practice, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Durré,  A.,  S.  Evjen,  R.  Pilegaard  (2003),  Estimating  Risk  Premia  in  the  Euro  Area  Money 
Markets, ECB Working Paper, n°221. 
Durré, A. (2006), “The Liquidity Premium in the Money Market: A Comparison of the German 
Mark Period and the Euro Area”, German Economic Review, Vol. 7(2), pp. 163-187. 
ECB (2002): “Transparency in the monetary policy of the ECB”, Monthly Bulletin, November. 
ECB (2004): “The Monetary Policy of the ECB”. 
ECB  (2005),  “The  Implementation  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  euro  area  –  General 
Documentation on Eurosystem Monetary Policy Instruments and Procedures” 
ECB (2007), “Euro Money Market Study 2006”. 
Friedman, M. (1968), “The Role of the Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol. 58 
(1), pages 1-17. 
Gaspar, V., Pérez-Quirós, G. and Sicilia, J. (2001): “The ECB monetary policy strategy and 
the money market”, International Journal of Finance and Economics 6(4), pages 325-342. 
Goodfriend,  M  (1991):  “Interest  Rates  and  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy”,  Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 
Gürkaynak, R., Sack, B. and Swanson, T. (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? 
The  Response  of  Asset  Prices  to  Monetary  Policy  Actions  and  Statements”,  International 
Journal of Central Banking 1(1), pages 55-93. 
10 
 BIS Review 133/2007
Lindholdt,  P.  and  Wetherilt,  A.  (2004)  “Anticipation  of  Monetary  Policy  in  UK  Financial 
Markets”, Bank of England working paper 241. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 11
