Savenaca Narube: Reserve management in Fiji 
Opening remarks by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the IMF 
PFTAC  Workshop  on  Foreign  Exchange  Reserve  Management  Framework  for  Strategic 
Asset Allocation, Suva, 17 September 2007. 
 Dr Susan Adams, PFTAC Coordinator 
Resource  Persons  (Jay  Surti  from  the  IMF,  Kristian  Flyvholm  from  the  IMF  and,  Tørres 
Trovik,  Senior  Advisor  (Research)  and  formerly  Senior  Advisor  (Investment  Strategy), 
Norges Bank; Board of Trustees of the East Timor Pension Fund. 
Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
Good Morning, Bula and Welcome to Fiji. 
Let  me  thank  the  International  Monetary  Fund  for  bringing  this  important  workshop  to  the 
Pacific. I thank the resource persons and the workshop coordinatorsyou’re your contribution 
to this workshop. I thank you, the participants for taking time to attend this workshop. I am 
told  that  such  a  workshop  is  very  expensive  to  mount  as  it  is  usually  coordinated  by 
investment  houses.  I  am  therefore  glad  to  see  so  many  participants  from  the  region  here 
today. 
Reserves management 
Reserve management, as you will no doubt know, is a complex set of processes, guidelines 
and  strategies.  They  are  made  more  complex  by  the  financial  crises  that  seem  to  be 
happening  now  and  then  in  the  global  financial  markets.  The  recent  crisis  on  sub  prime 
mortgages in the United States is a classical example. While this crisis appear to have a long 
tail, we are somewhat insulated from its impact by our fixed exchange rate and the narrow 
range of our allocation of foreign assets. 
You see for Fiji we only have cash in our investment portfolio. This is not entirely by choice. 
While we have a benchmark of 60 percent cash and 40 percent bond we have not been able 
to replicate this benchmark. As a result, the average duration of our currency portfolio is well 
short of the benchmark. This is largely because of our difficulty in dealing with the flow on 
impact of valuation losses from falling bond prizes on our profit at year end. Our valuation 
dilemma arose because of the accounting classification of our bond holding. While we had 
classified  these  as  “held  for  trading”  and  we  were  marking  to  market,  we  were  in  fact 
holding these bonds to maturity. Hence, by marking to market, we sometimes were booking 
unrealized losses on our bonds at the end of the year. We have resolved this by reclassifying 
the bonds as “available for sale”. Our external auditors have advised us that under this new 
accounting classification, we do not have to take the unrealized losses to the profit and loss 
statement  of  the  Bank.  Very  recently,  we  therefore  decided  to  liquidate  all  of  our  bond 
holdings.  We  will  then  reclassify  the  new  bonds  that  we  are  going  to  buy  under  the  new 
classification. 
This example shows some of the issues around reserve management and the allocation of 
assets. As I have said, we have a benchmark which is anchored on the maintenance of value 
of our foreign reserves. We have liquidity guidelines. The question that is normally posed is: 
What  about  return?  This  becomes  more  critical  when  reserves  are  falling  as  what  is 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 1
happening in Fiji now. The temptation is perhaps to abandon your benchmark in search for 
higher return. To me this is a dangerous road to take. You may end up in a win-win situation. 
But you may also end up in a loose-loose situation too! My risk-averse nature as a central 
banker compels me to keep to our benchmark and protect values then look for return in the 
better allocation of assets.  
This  workshop  addresses  many  of  these  asset  allocation  issues  and  I  am  certain  will  add 
value to how we manage our foreign reserves. The contents of your workshop are relevant 
and interesting. I know that you will have an interesting 5 days. We may have different levels 
when  it  comes  to  reserve  management  methods  and  capacities.  Therefore,  please  freely 
share your country experience during the course of the workshop and in the case studies. I 
find that this sharing is one of the best parts of what we take home after such workshop. And 
please  keep  your  network  intact  after  the  workshop  so  you  may  be  able  to  help  your 
colleagues in some way.  
There  is  also  the  related  issue  of  how  important  is  the  central  bank’s  profits.  Reserve 
management is the major source of our revenue. While we predominantly spend this revenue 
on  the  important  role  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  I  am  of  the  view  that  we 
cannot totally ignore the strength of our balance sheets. Not so much from the point of view 
of funding the government budget, but more so from the confidence that a strong balance 
sheet gives to the financial system.  
Conclusion 
I wish you all a fruitful week of discussions and deliberations. 
Please also take some time away from your workshop to enjoy Suva. 
Once again, I thank the IMF, the resource persons and the organizers for putting together 
this workshop. 
Official opening 
I have much pleasure in declaring this Workshop open. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2007
