Thomas Jordan: Real estate prices falling in the US, rising in Switzerland 
– implications for the SNB’s monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft, Chur, 18 December 2007. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Developments  in  the  real  estate  market  are  important  for  monetary  policy.  Real  estate 
markets  can  influence  inflation  and  economic  cycles,  but  also  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. Property bubbles can result in a massive misdirection of capital and thus give rise to 
lengthy  and  difficult  adjustment  processes.  Therefore, 
the  SNB  closely  monitors 
developments on the real estate markets both in Switzerland and abroad. 
The  economic  outlook  is  still  clouded  by  undesirable  developments  on  the  US  real  estate 
market, notably in the period 2004-2006. Given the size of the United States and the broad 
international spread of investments in the US mortgage market, these distortions have had a 
serious impact on the world’s financial markets and on global economic development. 
For  some  years  now,  Switzerland  too  has  been  experiencing  a  construction  boom  and  a 
relatively  sharp  rise  in  property  prices  in  certain  regions  and  in  given  market  segments. 
Comparison of the Swiss and US real estate markets shows, however, that these markets 
differ in a number of key respects. In particular, stricter discipline is observed in Switzerland 
in terms of compliance with credit conditions, and price swings have been considerably less 
extreme. Moreover, there is no evidence to date of any upsurge in speculative trends on the 
Swiss  property  market.  At  present,  neither  a  general  property  bubble  nor  any  general 
mortgage problem could probably be said to exist. 
Although the banks have largely drawn the correct conclusions from the real estate crisis of 
the 1990s with regard to lending in Switzerland, it is still essential – given the losses on the 
US real estate market – to carefully assess risks when granting loans (including mortgages) 
in Switzerland too.  
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
