David Dodge: Economic outlook and recent developments in Canada 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 6 December 2007. 
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. 
Let  me  start  by  saying  how  much  I  have  appreciated  our  semi-annual  meetings  with  this 
committee  over  the  past  seven  years.  The  discussions  that  Paul  and  I  have  had  with  you 
have been very valuable for the Bank of Canada. I hope that you have found them equally 
useful and that these regular appearances will continue long after I have left the Bank. 
Today's  meeting  comes  just  a  couple  of  hours  after  we  published  the  latest  edition  of  our 
Financial  System  Review.  But  it  has  been  quite  some  time  since  we  issued  our  October 
Monetary Policy Report. Nevertheless, I want to begin with the economic outlook as we saw 
it in October. I will then talk about developments since that time and our current assessment 
of the risks to the outlook. 
The  Bank's  outlook  from  October  is  summarized  in  Tables  1  to  3  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Report.  In  October,  we  saw  strong  global  economic  growth  continuing  in  2008  and  2009, 
although we foresaw considerably weaker U.S. growth in 2008 than had previously been the 
case. The global outlook is summarized in Table 1. 
In Canada, we were looking for weaker economic growth in the fourth quarter of this year 
and the first half of 2008, but some strengthening thereafter. As you can see from Table 2, 
we were expecting continued strong final domestic demand throughout the projection period, 
but  considerably  weaker  net  exports.  This  outlook  reflected  weaker  U.S.  growth  and  a 
stronger Canadian dollar, which was assumed to average 98 cents U.S. over the projection 
period. Inflation was expected to peak in the fourth quarter of this year before returning to the 
2 per cent target around the middle of 2008, as you can see from Table 3. 
Against this background, we left the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 4 1/2 per cent 
on 16 October, and judged the risks to our outlook to be roughly balanced with perhaps a 
slight tilt to the downside. 
Now,  let  me  turn  to  developments  since  October.  The  Canadian  economy  continues  to 
operate  above  its  production  capacity.  Given  the  strength  of  domestic  demand  and  weak 
productivity growth, there continue to be upside risks to the Bank's inflation projection. 
However, other developments since October suggest that the downside risks to the Bank's 
inflation  projection  have  increased.  Difficulties  in  global  financial  markets,  related  to  the 
valuation of structured products and anticipated losses on U.S. subprime mortgages, have 
worsened since mid-October. These difficulties are expected to persist for a longer period of 
time  than  previously  thought.  In  these  circumstances,  bank  funding  costs  have  increased 
globally and in Canada, and credit conditions have tightened further. There is an increased 
risk  to  the  prospects  for  demand  for  Canadian  exports  since  the  outlook  for  the  U.S. 
economy – particularly, the U.S. housing sector – has weakened.  
All these factors considered, the Bank judges that there has been a shift to the downside in 
the balance of risks around its October projection for inflation through 2009. In light of this 
shift, the Bank decided to lower the target for the overnight rate at our fixed announcement 
date on Tuesday. At our next interest rate decision in January, we will assess all economic 
and financial developments and the balance of risks, and have a full updated projection for 
the  economy  and  inflation  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  to  be  published  on  24 
January 2008. 
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I will now be happy to answer your questions.  
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
   2 
   BIS Review 146/2007
 BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
