Stanley Fischer: Tomorrow’s economic agenda 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the Israel Business 
Conference, Tel Aviv, 10 December 2007. 
 The  announcement  in  the  newspapers  about  the  Israel  Business  Conference  bears  the 
slogan “Come and join us, so that you’ll be part of tomorrow’s economic agenda”. And that is 
what I would like to talk about today, “Tomorrow’s economic agenda.” 
The objective of such an agenda should be rapid and sustained growth, the benefits of which 
would  be  enjoyed  by  the  whole  population.  Such  growth  is  critical  for  the  future  of  the 
economy, the future of the society, and the future of the country. 
The reason is simple, and is like the effect of compound interest: if, for example, we manage 
to grow during the next 25 years at an average rate of 6 percent a year, in the year 2032 
Israel’s  GDP  will  reach  NIS  2,830  billion  (at  2007  prices),  compared  with  about  NIS  660 
billion in 2007. If on the other hand the economy grows at only 3 percent a year over the 
same period, GDP will reach NIS 1,380 billion. That is a huge difference of more than 100 
percent, and proves what my late friend Professor Herbert Stein used to say: “The difference 
between 3 percent growth and 6 percent growth is 100 percent.” 
If we succeed in traveling along the path of rapid, sustained growth, we will have the means 
available to deal with the various problems confronting us – in the fields of education, the 
economy, the social fabric, security, etc. Failure to do so will cost the country and society 
dearly. 
Today I will speak about two important aspects of growth: (1) the fact that actual economic 
growth permeates the whole population; (2) the need to maintain fiscal discipline. 
Actual economic growth permeates the whole population 
1 
Growth of more than 5 percent a year, which the economy has been enjoying since 2003, 
significantly improves the standard of living of the whole population. 
a) 
In  2006  the  rate  of  poverty,  based  on  the  relative  measure  that  relates  mainly  to 
income  differentials,  stopped  rising.  Moreover,  if  we  use  the  absolute  measure  of 
poverty,  i.e.,  the  ability  to  purchase  a  basket  of  basic  goods,  the  rate  of  poverty 
actually declined in 2005 as well as in 2006.  
The  decline  in  unemployment  since  2003  can  be  seen  at  all  educational  levels, 
including the lowest.  
The increased rate of participation in the labor market is evident in all parts of the 
country, including outlying areas (the northern and southern districts). 
The  rate  of  employment  of  Israelis  is  rising  in  all  industries,  including  the  low-
technology  ones  (such  as  construction,  agriculture,  hotels  and  catering,  and 
electricity and water). 
The  average  real  wage  is  rising  in  all  industries,  including  the  low-technology 
industries.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
What conclusion do we draw from this? It’s very simple: the longer we stick to the path of 
rapid growth, the more people will be absorbed in the labor market, and the standard of living 
of  all  segments  of  the  population  will  rise.  Hence  the  importance  of  rapid  and  continuous 
growth to the economy, society, and the country, as everyone enjoys its benefits. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 1
The need to maintain fiscal discipline 
2 
In order to achieve rapid and continuous growth, the government’s strategy – which enables 
the  economy  to  continue  to  grow  and  economic  and  financial  stability  to  be  maintained  – 
must be adhered to. The essence of this strategy is fiscal discipline, alongside the Bank of 
Israel’s  interest  rate  policy,  and  the  continued  process  of  structural  reforms  in  areas  that 
promote growth and improve the country’s social fabric. One such area, possibly the most 
important, is without doubt education; hence the vital importance of a comprehensive reform 
in this field. 
I turn now to fiscal discipline. In order to escape from the recession that gripped the economy 
in  the  early  2000s,  the  government  adopted  a  fiscal  strategy  aimed  at  reducing  both  the 
share of its expenditure in GDP, which had reached 52 percent, and also the budget deficit. 
There were two good reasons for doing so: the need to free resources for the private sector, 
which is the main source of growth, and the need to reduce the debt burden, which in 2003 
had reached 102 percent of GDP and was threatening to undermine economic stability. The 
situation was so serious that we had to obtain US government guarantees so that we could 
borrow on the international markets. 
As a result of that policy, and with the extra advantage of global economic growth, since mid-
2003 the economy has been growing at an impressive pace of more than 5 percent a year, 
the  debt  burden  has  been  reduced  to  82  percent  of  GDP,  the  government’s  interest 
payments on its debt fell by more than NIS 10 billion, the government’s share of GDP has 
fallen to below 45 percent, exports are expanding swiftly, the current account of the balance 
of payments is showing a surplus of more than 5 percent of GDP, the unemployment rate 
has  dropped  by  about  4  percentage  points,  the  rate  of  poverty  is  declining  (based  on  the 
absolute measure), and so are tax rates. 
This is a huge success, which must be protected. At present, when uncertainty about global 
growth has risen, it is even more important for Israel to maintain fiscal discipline. 
What  is  the  government’s  fiscal  strategy?  It  set  a  rigid  framework  of  discipline  based  on 
budget targets for its expenditure and the budget deficit, and it makes sure that it adheres to 
them. This greatly enhanced its credibility in the eyes of investors and in the domestic and 
international financial markets. 
The high level of the government’s credibility, combined with the success of its policy, led to 
the  reduction  of  Israel’s  sovereign  risk  premium,  the  improvement  of  its  credit  rating,  the 
OECD  decision  to  invite  Israel  to  start  the  process  of  joining  the  organization,  and  the 
agreement of the US government to extend the guarantees. The result of the above is that 
the  government  and  the  business  sector  can  borrow  at  reasonable  cost.  Thus,  yields  to 
maturity on indexed government bonds have fallen from about 5 percent in 2003 to about 3 
percent  today.  Households,  too,  pay  lower  interest  on  their  loans.  For  example,  indexed 
interests on mortgages have fallen from an average of about 6 percent in 2003 to an average 
of about 4 percent currently. 
Now,  just  prior  to  the  approval  of  the  2008  budget  by  the  Knesset,  and  just  after  the 
government set its budget targets for next year, proposals are being made to abandon those 
targets. It would be very dangerous to accept these proposals. Abandoning the targets set by 
the government itself is likely to severely undermine its credibility, and will cancel much of the 
progress that has been made. Just now, when uncertainty about continued global growth has 
increased, we must not go back on our undertakings. 
I  support  the  efforts  of  the  Minister  of  Finance,  with  the  backing  of  the  Prime  Minister,  to 
ensure  that  the  framework  of  the  budget  for  2008,  based  on  the  expenditure  and  deficit 
targets  set  by  the  government,  will  soon  receive  Knesset  approval.  These  efforts  were 
certainly an important consideration that led to Israel’s recently improved credit rating, and 
we should help the Minister and the government as much as we can to make sure that their 
undertaking is implemented. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2007
The responsible way to increase expenditure on certain items is to alter the order of priorities 
in the budget, within the framework of the targets that have been set, and to implement them 
in conjunction with reforms that would boost efficiency. The budget for 2008 already reflects 
changed priorities, with increased expenditure on defense and education. It is obvious that 
education is one of the most important subjects, for the future of the economy, the society, 
and the country. Human capital is Israel’s main natural resource. It is therefore vital to invest 
in  education  and  promote  the  reform  that  will  raise  the  level  of  youngsters’  achievements, 
while remaining within the budget framework. 
Maintaining  the  budget  framework,  and  growth-inducing  reforms  such  as  the  education 
reform constitute a very important contribution by the government to the achievement of the 
goal of tomorrow’s economic agenda – rapid and sustained growth which benefits the entire 
population. Such growth is critical for the future of the economy, society, and the country. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 3
