V Leeladhar: Customer centricity and the Reserve Bank 
Opening keynote address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the seminar on “Balancing Cost, Profitability and Customer Experience” organised by The 
Asian Banker, Mumbai, 24 October 2007. 
 Mr. Daniel, Professor King, Mr. Kapfer, Mr. Burt, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here this morning at the first session of the seminar on the theme of 
“Balancing  Cost,  Profitability  and  Customer  Experience”  organised  by  the  Asian  Banker 
under its annual event “The Excellence in Retail Financial services, South Asia”. I am glad to 
be able to share my thoughts on this very topical subject of the cost-benefit analysis of the 
customer experience in the banking industry. I am thankful to the organisers for providing me 
this opportunity to address this august audience on a subject which has been so close to the 
Reserve Bank’s operations over the past several decades.  
As  most  of  you  might  be  aware,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  has  a  fairly  diverse 
functional  mandate  and  one  of  the  very  important  aspects  of  its  operations  in  the  banking 
sector has been the protection of the interests of the bank depositors. The fact that the RBI’s 
mandate for depositors’ protection is enshrined in a statute dating as far back as 1949, is 
itself a tribute to the vision of the public policy makers who thought it appropriate to enact a 
highly  customer-centric  legislation  and  to  entrust  this  onerous  responsibility  to  the  central 
bank  of  the  country,  which  is  a  unique  institution  in  every  country  of  the  world.  What  is 
interesting to note here is that this responsibility was assigned to the RBI in an era probably 
long  long  before  the  concepts  like  customer  service,  customer  experience,  customer 
satisfaction, customer delight and “customer centricity” found an entry into the lexicon of the 
banking or business world and became rather fashionable.  
The role of Reserve Bank 
The Reserve Bank, as the regulator of the banking sector, has been actively engaged, from 
the  very  beginning,  in  the  review,  examination  and  evaluation  of  customer  service  in  the 
banks. It has been reviewing the progress periodically and has been continually nudging the 
Indian  banking  industry  to  become  more  customer  friendly  and  customer  centric  in  its 
conduct  and  business  practices.  It  has  also  put  in  place  appropriate  incentive  framework, 
through a set of disclosure norms for the banks, to induce improvement in customer service, 
on an ongoing basis. At a wider level, however, there is a feeling that the customer does not 
get satisfactory service even after demanding it and there has been a disenfranchisement of 
the depositor. In this background, I would like to briefly touch upon the enduring role played 
by the RBI in enabling customer empowerment and the re-enfranchisement of the customer 
– who, as the adage goes, is the king!  
The Reserve Bank’s enduring and abiding concern for the quality of services extended to the 
bank  customers  has  been  reflected  in  its  ongoing  regulatory  initiatives  taken,  over  the 
decades,  from  time  to  time.  The  issue  of  services  rendered  by  the  banks  to  the  common 
person  dates  back  to  1970s  when  the  R.K.  Talwar  Committee  was  appointed  in  1975, 
followed  by  the  Goiporia  Committee  constituted  in  1990.  Subsequently,  pursuant  to  the 
report of the Committee on Financial System (the first Narasimham Committee -1991), wide-
ranging financial sector reforms were also initiated, which were expected to spur competition 
in the banking sector through deregulation and entry of new private sector banks, which, in 
turn,  was  expected  to  lead  to  provision  of  high-quality  customer  service  to  meet  the  long-
standing  aspirations  of  the  bank  customers.  However,  there  has  been  an  increasing 
realisation, both in India and several other countries, that the forces of competition alone do 
not ensure the fair treatment of the customer or adequate quality of customer service, at a 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 1
justifiable  price,  determined  in  a  transparent  manner.  This  has,  therefore  necessitated 
interventions from the regulators to institutionalise a mechanism for securing better customer 
service for the public at large.  
Institutional infrastructure for ensuring customer service 
Let  me  briefly  recount  here  some  of  the  initiative  of  the  RBI  to  put  in  place  the  requisite 
institutional mechanisms aimed at improving the customer service in the banking sector.  
Banking Ombudsman Scheme  
The Reserve Bank had introduced the Banking Ombudsman Scheme for the first time way 
back  in  1995  to  provide  an  expeditious  and  inexpensive  forum  to  bank  customers  for 
resolution of their complaints relating to banking services. The Scheme was revised in 2002 
mainly to cover Regional Rural Banks and to permit a review of the Banking Ombudsman's 
Awards  against  the  banks  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  RBI  recently  announced  the  revised 
Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006, effective from January 1, 2006, which has much wider 
scope and includes several new areas of customer complaints. The Scheme is applicable to 
all  commercial  banks,  regional  rural  banks  and  scheduled  primary  cooperative  banks 
functioning in India and provides a forum to the bank customers to seek redressal of their 
most common complaints against the banks. Under the revised Scheme, the complainants 
can file their complaints in any form, including online, and can also appeal to the Reserve 
Bank  against  the  Awards  and  other  decisions  of  the  Banking  Ombudsmen.  The  Banking 
Ombudsmen  currently  have  their  offices  in  15  Centres  spread  across  the  country  and  are 
fully staffed and funded by the Reserve Bank, in order to make the revised Scheme more 
effective. 
Customer service set up in the banks 
The  RBI  had  appointed  the  Committee  on  Procedures  and  Performance  Audit  of  Public 
Services  (CPPAPS  –  Tarapore  Committee)  in  December  2003  to  suggest  measures  for 
bringing about improvement in the quality of customer service rendered by banks. Based on 
the  recommendations  of  the  CPPAPS,  banks  were  advised,  among  other  things,  to  put  in 
place  an  institutional  machinery  comprising  of  (a)  a  Customer  Services  Committee  of  the 
Board including, as invitees, experts and representatives of customers, to enable the bank to 
formulate policies and assess the compliance thereof internally; (b) Standing Committee of 
Executives on Customer Service, in place of the earlier ad hoc committees, to periodically 
review  the  policies  and  procedures,  and  working  of  the  bank’s  own  grievance  redressal 
machinery; and (c) a nodal department/ official for customer service at the Head Office and 
each  Controlling  Office,  whom  customers  with  grievances  could  approach  in  the  first 
instance, and with whom the Banking Ombudsman (BO) and RBI could liaise.  
Customer Service Department in the RBI 
As I mentioned, the Reserve Bank has been taking measures for protection of customers’ 
rights,  enhancing  the  quality  of  customer  service  and  strengthening  grievance  redressal 
mechanism in the banks and within the RBI. These activities were, till recently, undertaken 
by different departments of the RBI. In order, however, to appropriately signal the importance 
that the Reserve Bank attaches to the customer service rendered, both by the Reserve Bank 
and  by  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  a  new  department  called  Customer  Service 
Department,  was  created  in  the  RBI,  on  July  1,  2006  by  regrouping  various  customer-
service-related  activities  handled  by  different  departments  of  the  RBI,  under  a  single 
department.  The  functions  of  the  department  encompass  a  variety  of  activities  relating  to 
customer service and grievance redressal in the RBI and the banking sector, including the 
aspects relating to the Banking Ombudsman Scheme and the Banking Codes and Standards 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2007
Board  of  India,  Such  an  oragnisational  dispensation  has  enabled  a  more  focused  policy 
attention to the customer service dimension of the banking sector.  
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI)  
Recognising an institutional gap in measuring the performance of the banks against codes 
and standards based on established best practices, the RBI took the initiative for setting up 
the  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI).  It  is  an  autonomous  and 
independent body, adopting the stance of a self-regulatory organisation. The dispensation of 
the BCSBI provides for voluntary registration of banks with the Board as its members and 
committing to provide customer services as per the agreed standards and codes. The Board 
in turn, monitors and assesses the compliance with codes and standards which the banks 
have  agreed  to.  The  Board  released  in  July  2006  a  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to 
Customers to provide a framework for a minimum standard of banking services. The Code is 
not only a commitment of the banks to their customers but, in a sense, is also a Charter of 
Rights  of  the  Common  Man  vis-à-vis  his  bank.  By  setting  the  minimum  standards  of 
reliability,  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  provision  of  customer  service,  the  Code 
outlines  how  each  bank  expects  to  deal  with  the  customers'  day-to-day  requirements,  and 
accordingly, what each customer could reasonably expect from his bank. As on date, out of 
74  scheduled  commercial  banks  registered  with  the  BCSBI  indicating  their  intention  to 
become members, 70 banks, accounting for 98 per cent of the total domestic assets of the 
Indian banking system, have already enrolled as its members.  
Fair Practices Codes for Lenders  
The  RBI,  apart  from  safeguarding  the  interest  of  the  bank  depositors,  has  also  been 
concerned to ensure that the borrowing community too gets a fair deal from the bankers. The 
Reserve  Bank  had  accordingly  formulated  a  Fair  Practices  Code  for  Lenders,  which  was 
communicated to the banks in 2003 to protect the rightful interest of the borrowers and guard 
against undue harassment by the lenders. The Code was revised in March 2007 to include 
the  requirement  that  the  banks  should  provide  to  the  borrowers  comprehensive  details 
regarding  the  loans  as  also  the  reasons  for  rejection  of  the  loan  applications  of  the 
prospective borrowers, regardless of the amount or type of the loan involved. Similarly, the 
Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA)  has  formulated  a  Fair  Practices  Code  for  Credit  Card 
Operations,  Model  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Direct  Sales  Agents,  and  Model  Code  for 
Collection of Dues and Repossession of Security. 
Transparency and reasonableness of bank charges 
The RBI had been receiving representations from the public about unreasonable and non-
transparent service charges being levied by banks from the customers, which indicated the 
inadequacy  of  the  existing  institutional  mechanism  in  this  regard.  In  order  to  ensure  fair 
practices in banking services, RBI has made it obligatory for the banks to display and update 
on an ongoing basis, in their offices/branches as also on the home page of their websites, 
the details of various service charges and fees, in a format approved by the Reserve Bank, 
to provide for better comparability. A hyperlink to the websites of the banks has also been 
provided  on  the  RBI’s  website  (www.rbi.org.in)  to  enable  the  bank  customers  to  have  a 
single-point  access  to  the  websites  of  various  banks,  particularly  for  information  on  the 
service charges and fees levied by the banks for their various services.  
As regards the levy of unreasonably high charges from the customers, RBI had constituted a 
Working Group to Formulate a Scheme for Ensuring Reasonableness of Bank Charges and 
to  incorporate  the  same  in  the  Fair  Practices  Code,  the  compliance  with  which  would  be 
monitored by the BCSBI. The Group submitted its report in August 2006 and recommended 
broad principles for determining reasonableness of the bank charges for the identified basic 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 3
banking services. The recommendations of the Group were accepted and conveyed to the 
banks for implementation in February 2007.  
Customer service and financial inclusion 
Let  me  mention  here  that  the  customer,  broadly  defined,  does  not  mean  only  the  existing 
clientele of the banks but also includes the potential user of the banking services who could 
enter the domain of banking, some time in future. In this context, therefore, the role of the 
banks does not end with only serving their existing customers. They also need to endeavour 
to  ensure  that  the  large  part  of  the  under-privileged  Indian  population  that  does  not  have 
access to a bank account and other banking services, is also brought within the fold of the 
formal  banking  sector  so  that  at  least  the  basic  banking  services  are  made  available 
equitably to all sections of the society. This would not only promote financial inclusion of the 
hitherto excluded class of people but also makes eminent business sense. Given the rapid 
pace  of  credit  growth  in  the  Indian  banking  system  in  the  recent  past,  the  banks  need  to 
expand  their  resource  base  and  by  encouraging  new  clients  to  join  the  banking  system, 
initially as depositors, they would be able to achieve a win-win solution. The current public 
policy framework also favours such a business strategy.  
It was in this context that in the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2005-06, the RBI had 
stated that there were legitimate concerns in regard to the banking practices that tended to 
exclude  rather  than  attract  vast  sections  of  population,  in  particular  pensioners,  self-
employed and those employed in the unorganised sector. The Policy had noted that while 
commercial  considerations  were  no  doubt  important,  the  banks  had  been  bestowed  with 
several privileges, and consequently, they should be obliged to provide banking services to 
all segments of the population, on equitable basis. Against this background, the Policy had 
stated  that  the  RBI  would  implement  policies  to  encourage  the  banks  which  provide 
extensive  services  while  disincentivising  those  which  were  not  responsive  to  the  banking 
needs of the community, including the underprivileged. Furthermore, the nature, scope and 
cost of services rendered by the banks were also to be monitored to assess whether there 
was any denial, implicit or explicit, of the basic banking services to the common person. The 
banks  were,  therefore,  urged  in  the  Policy  Statement  to  review  their  existing  practices  to 
align them with the objective of financial inclusion. 
It  was  recognised  that  in  many  banks,  the  requirement  of  minimum  balance  and  charges 
levied, although accompanied by a number of free facilities, deterred a sizeable section of 
population from opening / maintaining bank accounts. The RBI, therefore, advised the banks 
in  November  2005  to  make  available  a  basic  banking  “no-frills”  account  either  with  “nil”  or 
very low minimum balances as well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to 
vast  sections  of  population.  This  was  aimed  at  achieving  the  objective  of  greater  financial 
inclusion. The nature and number of transactions in such accounts could be restricted, but 
made  known  to  the  customer  in  advance  in  a  transparent  manner.  The  banks  were  also 
advised  to  give  wide  publicity  to  the  facility  of  such  a  “no-frills”  account,  including  on  their 
web sites, indicating the facilities and charges in a transparent manner.  
I would, therefore, like to take this opportunity to emphasise this societal dimension of the 
banking  sector  and  the  resultant  obligation  of  the  banking  system  to  actively  promote 
financial inclusion and to mainstream the masses into the formal financial sector.  
Banks customers and financial education 
In the context of increasing focus on financial inclusion, and the past episodes of financial 
distress  observed  in  certain  segments  of  the  farming  community,  a  need  has  been  felt  to 
provide  a  mechanism  for  improving  the  financial  literacy  and  level  of  financial  education 
among the consumers of banking services. Such education has become an imperative in the 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2007
current  era  of  financial  deregulation,  which  has  led  to  availability  of  a  variety  of  complex 
financial products in the markets.  
Financial  education  can  be  broadly  defined  as  one’s  capacity  to  become  familiar  and 
understand the features of financial market products, specially the risk-reward equation, and 
the  ability  to  make  informed  choices.  Thus,  financial  education  would  primarily  be  of 
relevance to the individuals to enable them to take right financial decisions in their personal 
life  and  to  avoid  any  distress  in  their  financial  affairs.  With  the  rapid  growth  in  the  retail 
banking  segment  in  India  and  the  resultant  large  influx  of  a  growing  number  of  retail 
borrowers into the banking system, the imperative of adequate financial education can hardly 
be over-emphasised, specially if the markets are to expand and operate efficiently. Proper 
financial education to the bank customers would ensure that they are equipped with the basic 
financial  skills  and  discipline  to  manage  their  budget,  by  appropriately  balancing  their 
expenses, borrowings and savings. The financially educated bank customers would not only 
be able to afford a better quality of life but could also lead to an improvement in the integrity 
and quality of the markets.  
A  very  useful  dimension  of  financial  education  is  financial  or  credit  counselling.  With  the 
changing  growth  dynamics  of  the  economy,  it  is  not  difficult  to  envisage  situations  where 
certain segments of the population become vulnerable due to excessive borrower optimism 
or  are  impacted  by  a  downturn  in  their  economic  conditions.  Their  vulnerability  could  also 
arise  from  unforeseen  shocks  or  personal  emergencies  that  make  their  debt-servicing 
difficult.  In  such  a  situation,  credit  counselling,  by  providing  sound  advice  to  arrest  the 
deterioration of incomes and to restructure their debt, could offer a meaningful solution for 
the borrowers and could enable them to gradually overcome their debt burden and improve 
their  money  management  skills.  Some  urgency  has  been  lent  to  this  issue  in  India  by  the 
rapid growth in consumer loans, housing loans and the more recent emphasis on financial 
inclusion.  
The banks have a role to play in the area of providing financial education to their customers 
and would also have a beneficial interest in providing such education, as timely counselling 
of  the  borrowers  could  have  positive  implications  for  the  asset  quality  of  the  banks.  I  am 
aware that some of the Indian banks have already taken the initiative by establishing credit 
counselling  centres  for  the  borrowers.  Though  these  centres  are  still  in  their  early  days  of 
operation,  I  understand  that  these  have  been  doing  good  work.  I  would  like  to  urge  the 
bankers  present  here  to  make  more  vigorous  efforts  to  make  the  concept  of  credit 
counselling in the Indian context a great success.  
At what price customer centricity? 
Coming to the precise theme of this session, viz., the price or cost of customer centricity, I 
would like to briefly touch upon a few special aspects of operations of a banking institution.  
There  could  be  a  view  that  the  too  much  of  customer  orientation  or  customer  centricity  in 
provision of banking services could impose a heavy cost on the banks, which are after all 
commercial  organisations  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  profit.  It  can  also  be  argued  that  the 
customer-centric regulatory guidelines stipulated by the RBI or other regulators do entail the 
burden  of  compliance  cost  for  the  banks,  albeit  it  might  be  in  the  ultimate  interest  of  the 
customer. In this context, I would like to remind the audience here that banks are “special” all 
over the world and would continue to be so for a variety of systemic reasons. Also, banking is 
one of the most closely regulated industries in most of the countries. It needs being borne in 
mind  that  the  banking  licence  granted  by  a  banking  regulator,  such  as  the  RBI,  is  the 
regulatory authorisation given to a bank for accepting uncollateralised deposits, at a relatively 
low  cost,  for  virtually  unlimited  amounts,  from  the  members  of  public,  who  may  not  be 
financially very savvy. Moreover, the banks are also allowed to deploy a very high degree of 
leverage through mobilisation of deposits, on a relatively small capital base, but subject to 
meeting certain prudential requirements, such as capital adequacy ratio. The banks are able 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 5
to do this primarily on account of the confidence of the customers in the bank concerned and 
in the banking system, as a whole. Since offering good quality customer service is one of the 
ways of winning the customers’ confidence in the operations and efficiency of the bank, it is 
only logical that the banks should strive to provide the best possible standards of customer 
service  to  their  clientele,  so  as  to  ensure  their  continued  patronage.  In  this  backdrop,  it  is 
only reasonable to expect that the bank customers, who entrust their hard-earned money to 
the  banks  in  good  faith  and  are  the  primary  source  of  low-cost  funding  as  well  those  who 
provide revenue to a bank, deserve to be treated fairly and efficiently in provision of various 
banking  services.  This  is  precisely  what  the  regulatory  interventions  of  the  RBI  seek  to 
achieve for the customer community of the banking industry, particularly in the face of less-
than-adequate sensitivity of the banks in this regard.  
As regards the cost aspect of the providing good customer service, I would like to view the 
cost element as a long-term investment for nurturing and developing a healthy and robust 
bank-customer relationship. The challenge for the bank management, therefore, is to devise 
innovative  and  cost-effective  means  of  delivering  banking  services  efficiently,  evolve 
remunerative business models, while fully leveraging modern technology so that there is an 
optimal trade off between their bottom line and the extent of customer centricity they choose 
to deploy in their business operations. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the RBI, as the banking regulator, has taken wide-
ranging  pro-active  measures  aimed  at  securing  better  customer  service  for  the  bank 
customers and has sought to improve financial inclusion and financial literacy of the under-
privileged in our society. It is my hope that the banking community in India would rise to the 
occasion and measure equal to the challenging task of delivering banking services efficiently 
to the masses, at a reasonable cost. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 121/2007
