Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Deposit insurance and consumer protection 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
"Deposit  Insurance  and  Consumer  Protection"  6th  International  Association  of  Deposit 
Insurers (IADI) Annual Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2007. 
 In 
financial  disruptions 
that  have  had  severe  economic  repercussions. 
Introduction 
As  the  international  and  domestic  financial  landscape  continues  to  transform,  the  quest  to 
secure  financial  stability  has  become  increasingly  challenging.  Regardless  of  the  stage  of 
development, financial systems have continued to be vulnerable to crisis that have resulted 
in 
these 
circumstances regulators and financial safety net frameworks have been tested to the limit.  
While  the  rapid  pace  of  globalisation,  the  rising  internationalisation  of  the  financial  system 
and the advances in technology have brought benefits in terms of increased access to new 
markets,  encouraging  financial  innovation  and  increasing  consumer  choice,  it  has  also 
brought new risks to the financial system. The intensification of cross-border financing, and 
the growing complexity of financial structures has resulted in new international inter-linkages 
which has increased the international interdependence. The transmission of negative shocks 
in one country to others via the international financial system has demonstrated the potential 
for financial crises and economic disruptions to spread on a global scale. These concerns 
have  been  brought  into  the  forefront  recently  with  the  developments  in  the  sub-prime 
mortgage market in the United States and its contagion effect on financial systems in other 
parts  of  the  world.  Indeed,  it  has  shown  that  in  today's  globalised  and  increasingly 
internationally integrated financial markets, seemingly isolated events in a small segment in 
one market can have far reaching and vastly magnified implications in other financial markets 
across the world.  
This  recent  episode  of  financial  turmoil  has  shown  that  even  the  more  sophisticated  and 
informed investors are pre-disposed to over-react to uncertainties in financial institutions. It 
also  needs  to  be  recognised  that  the  changes  in  the  international  environment  has  also 
increased the challenges to understanding and managing risks, even for financial institutions 
and  the  authorities.  These  developments  have  also  brought  issues  of  the  effectiveness  of 
financial safety nets as well as institutional arrangements for the regulation and supervision 
of banks, to the forefront. 
Elements of financial safety net 
It is in this context that the components of the financial safety net, the prudential regulation 
and  supervision,  deposit  insurance,  liquidity  support  arrangements,  crisis  management 
approaches  and  the  consumer  protection  framework  –  have  continued  to  evolve  over  the 
recent  decade.  My  remarks  this  morning  will  consider  some  of  the  developments  and 
challenges  that  are  shaping  the  calibration  of  the  financial  safety  net  in  the  current 
environment.  
Prudential regulation and supervision 
Sound risk management by banking institutions, which is reinforced by prudential regulation 
and supervision, remains the first line of defence against financial crisis. This recent decade 
has  seen  important  strides  being  achieved  at  both  the  international  and  national  levels 
towards strengthening the prudential regulatory and supervisory frameworks in response to 
the changing nature and scope of banking activities.  
BIS Review 130/2007 
 1
that  has  been  adopted  by  some 
While lending and deposit-taking remain the mainstay of commercial banking, the profile of 
credit  markets  has  changed  significantly.  Today,  conventional  credit  products  are  being 
offered  alongside  the  growing  significance  of  asset  securitisation  and  credit  derivative 
activities. This has had a profound impact on the nature of banking. The rapid development 
of these synthetic credit markets, coupled with an extended period of ample liquidity in the 
global financial system, has expanded the avenues for banks to engage in more aggressive 
lending practices that are funded by borrowing from the wholesale money markets, and by 
repackaging and selling loans to other investors in the form of asset-backed securities. This 
represents  a  significant  shift  from  the  more  traditional  banking  models  where  loans  are 
predominantly funded by deposits.  
The  increasing  complexity  in  the  way  that  debt  is  created  and  distributed  in  the  financial 
system  raises  important  implications  for  financial  stability.  The  “originate  and  distribute” 
strategy 
institutions  warrants  addressing  more 
comprehensively the full range of risks to which the banks are exposed. This includes the 
liquidity,  foreign  exchange  and  moral  hazard  risks  in  banking  institutions.  Credit  risk 
exposures  have  also  taken  on  more  complicated  forms,  including  counterparty  risks  on 
derivatives and foreign exchange transactions. The valuation of such financial transactions 
and  instruments  are  also  often  difficult  to  measure  particularly  under  distressed  market 
conditions.  In  addition,  the  correlations  between  credit  and  market  risk,  both  within  and 
across  national  borders,  have  become  more  complex.  Of  concern  has  also  been  lack  of 
adequate  information  on  debt  concentrations  in  the  system  partly  due  to  the  increasingly 
elaborate ways in which debt is passed on from originating institutions to different investors. 
The propensity to under-price credit risk, especially under conditions of excess liquidity, has 
also  increased  concerns  over  underwriting  standards.  The  consequent  sharp  pricing 
corrections would in turn have the potential to result in broader economic disruptions.  
Recent developments in the prudential regulatory and supervisory framework have, and will 
continue to play an important role in promoting sound risk management practices in the light 
of  these  changes.  These  of  course,  include  the  modification  of  capital  standards  that  are 
more  granular  in  addressing  different  types  of  risk.  Supervisory  approaches  globally  have 
also evolved to place a greater emphasis on sound risk management and early interventions 
to address emerging risks before they become major problems. There is also more emphasis 
being  placed  on  the  expectations  of  financial  institutions  to  play  a  greater  role  in  ensuring 
that financial products offered to customers and investors are suitable given their needs and 
financial circumstances, and that they have a good understanding of risks assumed with the 
products.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  approach  to  the  financial  regulation  and  supervision  has  similarly 
evolved  to  achieve  a  more  robust  regime  that  emphasises  three  key  dimensions:  first, 
creating  a  strong  risk  management  culture  that  overlays  the  operations  of  banking 
institutions; second, facilitating market-led adjustments that will allow the industry to evolve in 
response  to  market  and  technological;  and  third,  ensuring  mutually  consistent  prudential 
policies across the financial sector. 
Underpinning  this  approach  has  been  a  more  pronounced  shift  towards  principle-based 
regulations. Increasingly, regulations have focused less on prescriptive rules, and more on 
establishing  broad  parameters  for  sound  financial  and  business  practices  that  leave 
substantial flexibility for banks to apply the principles in the manner most appropriate to their 
specific circumstances. Of importance, has been the creation of appropriate incentives within 
the system to counteract potential market distortions that could undermine financial stability. 
The differentiated regulatory framework under which stronger banking institutions would have 
substantially  greater  operating  flexibility  and  a  lower  level  of  supervisory  intervention,  for 
example,  provides  a  powerful  competitive  incentive  for  the  adoption  of  sound  risk 
management practices.  
2 
 BIS Review 130/2007
While enhanced bank regulatory and supervisory functions have had a direct and significant 
impact on improved risk management by banking institutions, the primary responsibility for 
sound  institutional  risk  management  will  continue  to  rest  with  the  boards  and  senior 
management of banks. It is the boards, and not supervisors, that are principally responsible 
for  the  performance  of  banks  and  for  their  financial  strength.  Boards  set  the  tone  for  their 
institutions' risk taking activities, and provide effective oversight to ensure that their decisions 
are  followed.  Of  paramount  importance  is  the  need  for  boards  to  ensure  that  risks  are 
estimated in a consistent and timely manner, and escalated to the board with attention being 
focussed on the management of the emerging risks.  
Today,  boards  face  additional  challenges  of  discharging  these  responsibilities  in  an 
environment that is rapidly changing and highly competitive. Achieving effective boards and 
strengthening  the  foundations  of  sound  corporate  governance  have  therefore  become  a 
priority in the reform agenda for many countries in the recent period. The implementation of 
Basel II, new financial reporting standards and principles-based regulatory approaches have 
also  significantly  increased  the  importance  of,  and  reliance  on  sound  judgement,  integrity 
and competence by the board and senior management. This, in turn has been a key driver in 
galvanising efforts to strengthen market discipline as a countervailing influence that will rein 
in high risk behaviour by banking institutions.  
Achieving  a  framework  with  the  right  mix  of  regulatory  and  market-based  incentives, 
however,  continues  to  remain  a  significant  challenge.  Transitioning  to  market-based 
discipline can be particularly challenging in emerging markets where regulation has tended to 
be more prescriptive. In these markets, safety nets are also more prevalent and the tolerance 
for institutional failures is lower given its far reaching implications on consumer confidence. 
For  the  most  part,  the  liabilities  of  banks  are  not  traded  in  the  market,  so  debtholders 
generally  lack  the  opportunity  to  exercise  market  discipline.  Moreover,  the  market 
preoccupation  with  short-term  stock  price,  rather  than  long-term  creditworthiness  also 
presents potential risks to financial stability. 
Notwithstanding  these  challenges,  several  recent  positive  developments  in  emerging 
economies  have  augured  well  for  market  discipline  to  have  a  more  effective  role  in 
reinforcing  sound  governance.  In  particular,  the  development  of  financial  markets  have 
resulted  in  more  efficient  markets  with  wide  options  for  investors  to  exert  discipline.  The 
adoption  of  international  financial  reporting  standards,  efforts  to  strengthen  auditor 
independence  as  well  as  financial  capability  initiatives  will  also  reinforce  market-based 
discipline going forward. 
All of these initiatives will improve the prospects for financial stability by preventing problems 
from  occurring  at  the  level  of  individual  institutions.  However,  the  recent  events  in  the 
international financial environment have demonstrated the increasing complexity of banking 
activities which has raised the broader challenges for financial regulation and the design of 
safety  nets  in  the  context  of  managing  systemic  risk.  Regulators  have  begun  to  carefully 
consider  the  need  to  re-calibrate  current  regulatory  approaches  to  appropriately  address 
risks  to  the  financial  system  stemming  from  large  and  complex  institutions  that  are 
increasingly engaged in non-traditional activities. This has, in turn, placed new demands on 
financial regulators as well as for institutions to develop a deeper understanding of the inter-
linkages  between  the  financial  system  and  the  economy,  and  in  particular,  the  macro-
economic transmission of financial risk. Going forward, a more optimal balance of micro (that 
is,  at  the  institution  level)  and  macro  (that  is,  affecting  broader  economy)  responses  will 
become increasingly important in the management of such systemic risks.  
An  important  dimension  to  effectively  manage  the  increasing  inter-linkages  between  the 
financial system and the economy involves the strengthening of cooperative arrangements 
between Central Banks and other regulatory authorities, within and across borders. Indeed, 
cooperation, coordination and goodwill have become essential in the increasingly integrated 
system.  Such  arrangements  could  include  the  more  formal  institutional  arrangements  for 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 3
cooperation  in  surveillance  efforts  and  crisis  management,  as  well  as  the  home-host 
arrangements for the supervision of international financial institutions, in supporting the early 
identification of risks and the pre-emptive interventions that need to be made. Cross border 
surveillance  in  the  Asian  region  in  particular  has  now  been  enhanced  to  ensure  that 
information gaps are identified and that the mechanisms to facilitate information sharing are 
put in place. 
Achieving  effective  inter-agency  coordination  between  financial  safety  net  participants  also 
needs to be considered carefully in the context of crisis management. Inevitably, the task of 
managing a financial crisis particularly in the areas of timely decision making, coordination 
and communication become much more complex when the functions of lender of last resort, 
bank  supervision  and  deposit  insurance  are  allocated  to  separate  agencies,  as  each 
respective agency is accountable for discharging its own mandate having regard to its own 
inherent priorities. Consequently, issues relating to information sharing, allocation of powers, 
responsibilities, accountability and coordination among the various agencies must be clearly 
and explicitly addressed at the outset. The legislative mandates would need to provide clear 
roles  and  responsibilities  for  each  relevant  authority.  This  will  form  the  foundation  for  the 
adoption of an integrated and coordinated approach. The need for such coordinated action 
becomes particularly important in conditions of an imminent financial crisis. Having in place a 
crisis management framework would allow for its prompt and effective implementation. The 
issues relating to the effective management of the inter-relationships between the safety net 
participants  were  brought  to  the  forefront  recently  in  the  United  Kingdom,  testing  the 
framework in which the functions of lender of the last resort and the supervisory function are 
placed in separate entities.  
In  comparison,  when  a  single  agent  such  as  the  central  bank  is  entrusted  with  these 
respective functions, the interrelationship issue, as well as potential conflicts and trade-offs 
become internal and would be resolved across the organisation. It would nevertheless still 
need  to  rely  on  an  adequate  accountability  regime  among  the  respective  departments  or 
divisions that are responsible for each mandate.  
Malaysia's own experience during the Asian financial crisis exactly ten years ago allowed the 
Central Bank as a single regulator, to promptly respond to the liquidity and solvency issues 
that were confronting the financial system. The preemptive action that was supported by a 
comprehensive  resolution  programme  significantly  reduced  the  cost  of  the  crisis  on  the 
financial system and the overall economy. 
More recently, the Central banks in the East Asian region have come together to put in place 
a  comprehensive  regional  surveillance  system  that  is  supported  by  a  comprehensive 
integrated crisis management framework that would deal with any imminent financial crisis in 
the region. These initiatives are aimed at effectively preventing or containing developments 
that could trigger destabilising consequences, thereby promoting regional financial stability. 
Deposit insurance system 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Following the restructuring and reform of our financial system, Malaysia has two years ago 
implemented  the  deposit  insurance  system  as  part  of  our  efforts  to  build  a  cohesive  and 
mutually  reinforcing  financial  safety  net  system.  The  deposit  insurance  system  has  an 
important role not just in promoting confidence with explicit coverage of deposits, but also in 
reinforcing  sound  risk  management  practices.  It  therefore  has  embed  features  that 
complements the supervisory process in promoting sound risk management practices in the 
financial  institutions.  In  addition,  the  deposit  insurance  corporation  in  Malaysia  is  also 
mandated  with  the  responsibility  for  the  “least-cost”  resolution  of  problem  financial 
institutions.  
4 
 BIS Review 130/2007
A comprehensive approach was thus adopted in establishing the Malaysia Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (MDIC). To promote depositors confidence, the deposit insurance scheme was 
designed  to  ensure  that  there  was  optimum  coverage  with  sufficient  reach  to  retail 
depositors.  In  designing  the  deposit  insurance  scheme,  about  95%  of  all  depositors  are 
covered  in  full  while  in  value  terms  about  35%  of  total  deposits  is  covered.  An  important 
element  in  the  framework  is  the  strong  collaboration  between  the  supervisor  and  deposit 
insurer in promoting discipline in the banking system. As the supervisor, recognition is given 
to  sound  risk  management  practices  demonstrated  by  banking  institutions  to  have  greater 
business flexibility, while the deposit insurer, through a differential premium system, provides 
incentives for financial institutions to adopt sound financial and business practices.  
In adopting this framework, clear accountabilities have been critical in ensuring that there is 
no  duplication  in  efforts  so  that  the  banks  would  not  be  over  burdened  by  overlapping 
regulation  and  submission  requirements.  There  was  also  a  need  to  ensure  close  co-
operation  and  collaboration  between  the  supervisor  and  the  deposit  insurer  to  ensure  the 
intervention  and  resolution  actions  instituted  by  the  deposit  insurer,  would  not  be  to  the 
detriment  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  These  resolution  powers  would  be  invoked  by  the 
deposit insurer following notification by the Central Bank that a member institution was likely 
to cease to be viable.  
It is in this context, the strategic alliance between the Central Bank and the deposit insurer 
was formed as a basis for cooperation to ensure the safety and soundness of the financial 
system.  In  Malaysia,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  mandated  with  the  responsibility  of 
safeguarding and ensuring the stability of the financial system. The overall supervision of the 
financial  institutions  remains  within  the  functions  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  Strategic 
Alliance Agreement with the Deposit Insurer provides for a structured collaboration between 
the  Bank  and  MDIC  to  share information  on  key  issues  and  developments  to  facilitate  the 
operations of MDIC. 
Both  formal  and  informal  information  exchange  mechanisms  have  been  put  in  place  to 
facilitate timely data and information exchange that can be leveraged upon to support and 
enable  MDIC  to  fulfil  its  mandated  role.  This  has  proven  to  be  effective  in  minimising 
duplication of efforts. These information exchanges include cooperation and consultations on 
supervisory  and  prudential  regulations  where  both  agencies  are  involved  from  the  early 
planning stage, particularly in circumstances in which the initiatives impact the functions of 
the respective institutions.  
framework 
that  covers 
financial  education, 
Consumer protection framework 
To complement the deposit insurance system, Bank Negara Malaysia has also put in place a 
comprehensive  consumer  protection 
fair 
treatment  of  consumers,  avenues  for  redress,  distress  management  and  rehabilitation  as 
well as advisory services. These include having in place the Financial Mediation Bureau to 
ensure that consumers of financial services that are under the purview of the Central Bank 
have recourse to a fair and impartial dispute resolution mechanism. The establishment of the 
Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency  provides 
individuals  with  credit 
counselling  and  assistance  in  restructuring  of  debts;  and  the  establishment  of  the  Bank 
Negara Malaysia LINK and BNMTELELINK forms an integrated customer service centre for 
members of the public and small and medium sized enterprise on matters relating to services 
provided in the financial sector. This has evolved a high rate of participation in the financial 
system  with  deposits  now  accounting  for  160%  of  GDP.  This  has  allowed  for  the  efficient 
functioning  of  the  intermediation  process  to  effectively  mobilise  and  channel  savings  to 
productive activity thereby supporting the overall growth and development process.  
BIS Review 130/2007 
 5
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Essential to a progressive financial system is prudential safety and soundness, competition 
and consumer protection which needs to co-exist to effectively serve the interests of various 
stakeholders. As regulators we need to adopt the right balance between providing adequate 
protection for consumers while promoting competition and financial innovation in the financial 
system.  But  it  is  the  combined  efforts  of  regulators,  the  industry,  and  consumers  that 
ultimately maintain market confidence and ensures the effective and efficient functioning of 
the financial system. The recognition of, and commitment to this shared responsibility will not 
only contribute to the evolution of the financial landscape and preserving financial stability, 
but  will  enhance  its  overall  contribution  to  the  overall  functioning  of  the  economy  and 
securing its full potential. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2007
