Bandid Nijathaworn: “Implementation of Basel II and IAS” from a 
regulator’s perspective 
Keynote address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a 
meeting hosted by the Thai Bankers’ Association and organized by the Bankers Association 
of the Philippines and ASEAN Bankers Association, Bangkok, 4 October 2007. 
 Distinguished Participants, 
Let  me  first  thank  the  Thai  Bankers’  Association  for  the  invitation  to  give  today’s  keynote 
address, on the “Implementation of Basel II and IAS” from a regulator’s perspective. Looking 
at  the  agenda,  the  meeting  in  the  next  two  days  will  dwell  into  a  number  of  important 
regulatory issues. Therefore, to help set the stage for the discussion to follow, I would like to 
take this opportunity to speak on the Bank of Thailand’s perspective on the implementation of 
Basel II and the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), looking in particular at 
the  benefits  from  such  adoption,  the  progress  we  have  made  on  implementing  the  two 
standards,  and  the  challenge  and  adjustments  that  need  to  be  made  for  a  successful 
implementation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Recognizing  that  today’s  global  financial  system  has  become  increasingly  complex  and 
interdependent, a number of organizations around the world have been working on improving 
international  standards  to  ensure  sound  risk  management  and  disclosure  by  financial 
institutions.  Among  these,  Basel  II  and  IFRS  are  undoubtedly  the  most  important  recent 
efforts. 
As  an  international  framework  for  capital  adequacy,  Basel  II  is  designed  to  ensure 
soundness  and  stability  of  the  global  banking  system.  Improved  from  Basel  I,  Basel  II 
provides  guidelines  for  maintaining  capital  for  more  comprehensive  types  of  risks.  Under 
Pillar 1, as you know, banks are required to maintain minimum capital for operational risk in 
addition to market and credit risks as previously required. And on top of the minimum capital, 
additional capital may be recommended by national supervisors under Pillar 2 for risks not 
covered by Pillar 1. 
Because  Basel  II  will  be  imposed  on  a  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  with  different 
sophistications,  the  framework  offers  several  approaches  to  calculate  minimum  capital, 
ranging  from  a  simple  factor  multiplication  approach  to  model-based  methodology. 
Obviously, we as supervisors, expect complex financial institutions to adopt the model-based 
methodology for a better measurement and assessment of risk. 
One important point I would like to stress here is that Basel II should not be viewed as merely 
a capital calculation methodology. Rather, it should be seen as a principle-based guideline 
for  sound  risk  management.  This  is  because  Basel  II’s  advanced  approaches  are  derived 
from the best banking practice. It is, therefore, a vehicle for better risk management. Banks in 
emerging  markets,  including  here  in  Thailand,  should,  therefore,  take  advantage  of  this 
opportunity to improve their operations. 
From the perspective of financial information, it is also necessary for banks to produce good 
quality financial statements so that stakeholders will be well-informed, and a sound judgment 
on  their  financial  status  can  be  made  by  the  market.  Good  quality  financial  statements 
typically  contain  comparable  and  reliable  information,  which  depends  in  turn  on  the 
accounting  standards  being  used.  In  this  respect,  IFRS  can  help  ensure  that  financial 
reporting  is  prepared  under  accepted  principles  that  convey  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the 
financial position. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 1
For  the  banking  sector,  the  most  important  accounting  standard  is  the  IAS  39  because  it 
deals specifically with financial instruments. The standard assures that financial instruments 
are correctly recognized and measured in the financial statements, to reflect the true financial 
position  and  performance,  as  well  as  the  related  risk  exposure.  Under  IAS  39,  there  is 
important change to the accounting for derivative transactions, in which banks need to mark-
to-market and record all derivatives on their balance sheets, as well as classify them as held 
for  trading,  unless  they  are  used  as  hedging  instruments.  Previously,  all  derivative 
transactions  are  kept  off  the  balance  sheet,  and  hence  from  the  recognition  of  external 
stakeholders or even bank management. IAS 39, therefore, brings off-balance sheet items 
into  the  spotlight.  Apart  from  IAS  39,  commercial  banks  also  need  to  comply  with  the 
accounting standards concerning financial instrument’s presentation (IAS 32) and disclosure 
(IFRS 7), which require banks to present their financial statements in an appropriate format, 
and to disclose information sufficiently regarding financial instruments and risk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Bank of Thailand has taken a careful timing to implement both standards in Thailand. 
Similar to many economies in the region, commercial banks in Thailand will start maintaining 
capital according to Basel II by the end of next year, and by the end of 2009 for banks with 
the advanced approach. IAS 39, on the other hand, will be fully enforced by the Federation of 
Accounting Professions in the beginning of 2010. However, the Bank of Thailand has already 
adopted some parts of IAS 39, namely the impairment of assets since December last year, 
and we are now considering adjusting the related regulations to be in line with the concept of 
IAS 39. 
For Basel II, preparations on the supervision side started a number of years ago. The Bank 
has set up several internal working groups to study the guidelines and its suitability to the 
Thai  market.  Staff  were  sent  abroad  for  training  on  Basel  II  implementation.  Experts  from 
other supervisory authorities and consultants were invited to hold seminar and training on the 
underlying concepts, applications, and supervision issues. The drafting of the Thai version of 
Basel II has been quite involving. During the drafting, the Bank of Thailand carefully studied 
other  countries  guidelines  and  consulted  with  other  supervisors  to  gain  insights  on  the 
suitability of Basel II to the Thai financial system. 
As  a  result,  we  have  made  some  necessary  adjustments  to  the  guideline  taking  into 
consideration its practicality. Banks in Thailand have been consulted in the process so that 
the  guideline  does  not  impose  extra  unnecessary  burden.  At  this  time,  we  have  mostly 
completed Basel II’s key guidelines with only a few remaining issues. This includes finalizing 
Pillar 1 – namely, Minimum Capital Adequacy Return Form, and the Recognition of External 
Credit Assessment Institutions and the Mapping Process Under the Standardized Approach 
(SA). 
On  the  commercial  bank’s  side,  our  assessment  shows  that  the  preparation  for  Basel  II 
implementation is on track. In terms of capital impact, based on end of June data for 2006, 
our quantitative impact study shows that the BIS ratio for the whole industry is expected to 
decline approximately by 1.5 percentage point. This means Basel II implementation will not 
have a major impact on the Thai banking industry. 
At this time, while most of our banks have decided on using the SA for calculating minimum 
capital, they are fully aware of the need to improve the database to support a more advanced 
risk  management  process.  Reflecting  this,  larger  banks  are  in  the  process  of  developing 
advanced internal rating systems to be fully compliant with Basel II advanced approaches in 
the near future. By the end of this year, banks in Thailand will also begin parallel calculations 
of the required capital under Basel II. And we, at the BOT, are keeping a close watch on this 
progress with keen interest. 
Regarding  the  implementation  of  IFRS,  I  have  to  say  the  readiness  amongst  Thai 
commercial banks and foreign bank branches do vary a great deal. Foreign bank branches, 
especially European banks, are better prepared to implement the IAS 39 and IFRS as they 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2007
are more familiar with the new accounting principles. This is because they get the supporting 
systems, as well as knowledge, from their head offices. Thai commercial banks, on the other 
hand, are studying the implications and the context of the new accounting standards, and are 
preparing their IT systems with the help of external consultants. 
In terms of regulation, as I already noted, the Bank of Thailand has begun implementing IAS 
39  for  the  impairment  of  assets  or  NPL  since  December  last  year.  By  June  this  year, 
commercial  banks  have  set  an  additional  provision  of  about  90  billion  Baht,  with  their  BIS 
ratios remaining comfortably well above the minimum requirement at 14 percent. We at the 
BOT  are  studying  the  remaining  issues  of  IAS  39  pertaining  to  supervisory  policies  and 
financial  impacts  on  the  banking  sector.  And  our  policies  on  components  of  capital  and 
related reports are scheduled to be prescribed by the end of next year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Implementing Basel II and IFRS has been a challenging experience. For Basel II, the most 
difficult issue is arguably going to be the application of the principles embedded in Pillar 2 
where supervisors have the ability to require banks to hold capital in excess of the minimum. 
Since  the  amount  of  required  capital  has  a  direct  impact  on  business  performance,  it  is 
therefore quite a challenge for supervisors to be requiring banks to hold different amounts of 
additional capital. 
For  accounting  standards,  the  most  recent  challenge  is  the  accounting  methods  for 
sophisticated financial products, such as CDO and structured notes, in which differences in 
financial assets’ classifications can result in different financial impacts. For example, held-to-
maturity  classification  conceals  profit  or  loss  until  maturity,  while  trading  classification 
charges profit or loss to financial statements in every accounting period. The interpretation 
for a suitable classification relies significantly on the intention of bank management as well 
as  on  the  judgment  of  external  auditors.  The  importance  of  this  issue,  as  we  know,  has 
reemerged more demandingly following the sub-prime crisis in the US. 
Another practical challenge in implementing both standards is the use of complex financial 
models  to  measure  risks  in  banks’  portfolio.  In  order  to  confidently  use  the  models,  there 
must be sufficient data, appropriate risk measurement techniques, and a rigorous validation 
process. At present, the most important concern is the lack of data. For example, for credit 
risk measurement, a certain amount of data on default is required. Such data typically are not 
readily available, and this is also the case here in Thailand. 
In addition to the lack of data, the IAS 39 also allows the use of fair value for all financial 
assets and liabilities, or the Fair Value Option. Although this concept is attractive, there are 
still  many  concerns  from  a  regulatory  point  of  view.  The  Fair  Value  Option  may  be 
inappropriately used and may result in unreliable financial information. For example, when a 
bank  applies  the  Fair  Value  Option  to  its  liabilities  and  is  downgraded,  the  yield  for  its 
liabilities will increase to reflect the increased risk. Consequently, the mark-to-market value 
will be lower than the original value, and the gain is recorded as profit. Therefore, it seems 
unreasonable  that  banks  can  record  profit  in  a  difficult  period  by  applying  the  Fair  Value 
Option to their own liabilities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
My last point is that Basel II and IFRS will undeniably bring some fundamental changes to 
the business of banking. 
First, banks may need to rethink their operations and strategies on account of the expected 
greater involvement of third parties. The point here is that new regulations allow banks to use 
financial  models  to  estimate  required  capital  and  fair  values  of  assets  and  liabilities.  This 
means banks can take advantage of the lower capital requirements by offering cheaper or 
more  cost  efficient  products  to  their  customers.  However,  to  develop  financial  models 
requires a certain amount of data and know-how which a single bank may not have. So, to 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 3
overcome this difficulty, banks may have to seek support for additional credit data from peer 
banks, rating agencies, or the credit bureau. 
Second, banks must increase their knowledge base regarding risk management techniques, 
especially on risk modeling. Going forward, a good internal rating system is key to business 
expansion and growth. To do so, banks can initially seek support from external consultants to 
transfer  the  know-how  on  risk  management.  But,  in  a  longer  term,  it  will  be  necessary  for 
banks to have their own staff and expertise to work as specialists on internal rating system 
and risk modeling. 
Lastly, I would like to stress the importance of coordination and cooperation in implementing 
the two standards. We at the BOT have always sought comments and views on our policy 
statements, and on the implementation plan from both local and international entities. Within 
Thailand,  comments  were  sought  from  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand,  the  Federation  of 
Accounting Professions, private consultants, rating agencies, external auditors, the Foreign 
Banks’ Association and most importantly the Thai Bankers’ Association. 
On the commercial bank side, a Basel II Implementation Working Group has been set up by 
the  Thai  Bankers’  Association  and  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  Through  this  working  group,  I 
encourage banks to share Basel II implementation experience so that common issues can be 
resolved more effectively. Any common concerns, on the other hand, can be passed on to 
the BOT for consideration. And if necessary, the BOT is ready to act as a mediator to voice 
the concerns to the appropriate international channels. As a result, where possible, banks in 
Thailand are now pursuing a coordinated effort for a better implementation of Basel II. Such 
effort  can  be  as  close  as  forming  an  alliance  to  pool  the  necessary  data  for  model 
development, or as loose as sharing the costs of training and seminar similar to the one we 
are having here today. 
I should now end my talk. It has been a pleasure to share with you a regulator’s perspective 
on the implementation of Basel II and IFRS. I hope my remarks and observations have been 
useful.  We  are  traveling  on  an  important  and  challenging  path  towards  achieving  a  robust 
and  resilient  financial  system,  and  steady  progress  is  being  made.  You,  as  a  key 
stakeholder, are also an important part of this journey. 
I wish the rest of the seminar great success and accomplish its objective, and be interesting 
and educating to all. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2007
