Njuguna Ndung’u: Legal frameworks for microfinance – a rush to 
regulate 
Opening address of Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
official  opening  of  the  Kenya  Microfinance  Workshop,  Strathmore  University,  Nairobi, 
23-24 November 2007. 
 The Honourable Minister for Finance, Mr. Amos Kimunya 
The Vice Chancellor, Strathmore University 
The Chairperson, the Association of Microfinance Institutions (AMFI) 
The Chief Executive Officer, AMFI 
Microfinance Practitioners 
Development Partners 
Distinguished Guests and Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today  during  this  very  important  Microfinance 
Conference and to make the opening address “Legal Frameworks for Microfinance: A Rush 
to Regulate”. Before I make my opening remarks, let me take this opportunity to thank the 
organizers and facilitators of this conference for inviting me to make the opening address on 
this pertinent topic. 
This Microfinance Conference comes at the right moment when the microfinance industry is 
awaiting  the  implementation  of  the  Microfinance  Act,  2006.  The  licensing,  regulation  and 
supervision of deposit-taking microfinance institutions under the Microfinance Act is expected 
to enhance the orderly growth and development of a sound, vibrant and stable microfinance 
industry in Kenya. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; a number of studies have shown that the provision of microfinance 
services in a long-term, sustainable and viable manner does have a positive impact, and in 
fact has changed the quality of life for millions of people in developing countries by allowing 
them to build income and assets, either by savings mobilization or the productive investment 
of loan capital. This helps them manage risk to increase production, cushion themselves in 
times of crisis, improve their welfare, upgrade their standard of living and improve the quality 
of their lives. The majority of the poor, low income households and MSEs, in Kenya, just like 
in  many  developing  countries,  however,  largely  experience  lack  of  access  to  financial 
services, including credit, savings, insurance, money transfers among others. 
According to a most recent survey on the access to financial services in Kenya, FinAccess 
Study, whose findings were launched in January 2007, only 19% of Kenyans have access to 
formal  financial  services  through  commercial  banks  and  Postbank.  An  additional  8%  of 
Kenyans are served by SACCOs and MFIs, while 35% depend primarily on informal financial 
services  such  as  ROSCAs  and  ASCAS.  This  brings  to  about  62%  the  population  that  is 
“financially included” meaning that they have access financial services and products either 
from formal, semi-formal or informal financial service providers. On the other hand, 38% of 
Kenyans,  classified  as  “financially  excluded”,  have  no  access  to  financial  services  and 
products. This implies that more effort is required to improve access to financial services and 
products. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; previously, it had been argued that lending to the poor was not only 
administratively  costly,  but  was  highly  risky  because  of  their  limited  saving  propensity  and 
inability  to  come  up  with  sufficient  traditional  collateral  as  a  guarantee  for  loans.  Formal 
financial institutions thus tended to concentrate their lending on investment opportunities and 
transactions  that  had  high  or  more  assured  rates  of  returns.  Conversely,  the  success  of 
microfinance  in  many  developing  nations  in  Africa,  Asia,  and  Latin  America  has  slowly 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 1
caused  microfinance  to  be  embraced  by  the  rest  of  the  world  as  a  key  tool  to  reduce  the 
cyclical  and  persistent  plague  of  poverty.  A  diverse  range  of  alternative  service  providers, 
including SACCOs, MFIs, ROSCAs and ASCAs, have mushroomed across Africa, Asia, and 
Latin  America  to  fill  the  gaps  left  by  formal  financial  institutions.  Serving  over  100  million 
households worldwide, they have shown great commitment in serving those who have been 
excluded  from  sourcing  services  from  the  formal  banking  sector.  Undeniably,  providing 
financial  services  to  the  poor,  low-income  households  and  MSEs  can  go  a  long  way  in 
alleviating poverty. 
In  Kenya,  microfinance  services  and  products  are  provided  by  a  variety  of  institutions  of 
different  institutional  forms  under  more  than  nine  different  Acts  of  Parliament.  These 
microfinance  providers  can  be  clustered  into  three  broad  categories,  notably,  formal, 
semiformal  and  informal  institutions,  with  the  level  of  formality  defined  by  the  degree  of 
formal  regulation  and  supervision.  The  formal  category  includes  banks  and  financial 
institutions  licensed  under  the  Banking  Act,  building  societies  and  the  Kenya  Post  Office 
Savings  Bank.  The  semi-formal  category 
includes  SACCOs,  Development  Finance 
Institutions Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC), Industrial and Commercial Development 
Corporation (ICDC), Kenya Industrial Estates (KIE), Industrial Development Bank (IDB), and 
Kenya  Tourist  Development  Corporation  (KTDC)}  and  microfinance  institutions;  while 
Accumulating  and  Rotating  Savings  and  Credit  Associations  (ASCAS,  and  ROSCAs), 
shopkeepers and money-lenders dominate the informal category. 
I  am  happy  to  note  that  these  alternative  financial  services  providers  have  emerged  with 
new,  innovative,  and  pro-poor  alternative  modes  of  financing  the  poor,  low  income 
households and MSEs in the rural and urban areas of Kenya. They have indeed played a key 
role in providing increased access to financial services and products to the underserved or 
un-served segments of the Kenyan population. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; with respect to the diversity in the microfinance operations in Kenya, 
however,  come  a  number  of  constraints  that  have  had  to  be  addressed  to  enable  the 
providers  improve  their  stability,  outreach  and  financial  sustainability.  The  major  challenge 
has  been  the  lack  of  a  specific  legal  and  regulatory  framework  and  appropriate  regulatory 
oversight  to  govern  and  guide  the  specific  operations  of  microfinance  business  in  Kenya. 
This has had a bearing on a number of other constraints faced by the industry including weak 
corporate  governance  and  management  capacity,  weak  internal  controls,  unhealthy 
competition  and  multi-lending,  low  scale  &  outreach,  unfavorable  image  and  public 
confidence, information constraints, high transactions costs, limited access to funds and the 
lack  of  industry  performance  standards  and  accountability.  To  reduce  these  constraints, 
while also harnessing the emerging innovations within the sector and stimulating the effective 
development of the sector, it was necessary to put in place appropriate laws and regulatory 
and supervisory framework clearly defining the roles to be played by the Government, the 
Central Bank of Kenya, and the microfinance practitioners in the development of the sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen;  the Microfinance Act was enacted in December 2006 to provide a 
level  playing  field  and  the  appropriate  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  the 
microfinance industry. The Act is expected to promote the growth and development of the 
microfinance  industry  in  Kenya,  set  prudential  standards,  create  an  enabling  environment 
and act as a road map and catalyst towards achieving the desired objectives of increased 
outreach and sustainability of MFIs. We expect that this legal and regulatory framework will 
promote a viable and sustainable system of microfinance in Kenya by ensuring that licensed 
MFIs contribute to poverty alleviation and at the same time comply with the requirements of 
financial sector safety and soundness. Through this we expect that the fast-growing Kenyan 
microfinance industry will develop into an integral part of the financial system in Kenya, and 
will  play  a  pivotal  role  in  deepening  financial  markets  by  expanding  access  of  affordable 
financial services and products to majority of Kenyans. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2007
Ladies and Gentlemen; we are pleased with the steady growth in the microfinance portfolio 
of  the  six  mainstream  institutions  involved  in  microfinance,  namely  Equity  Bank  Ltd, 
Cooperative Bank, K-REP Bank, Family Bank and Kenya Commercial Bank as well as the 
Kenya  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  (KPOSB).  These  models  have  had  far  reaching  impact 
while influencing the microfinance practices and outreach modalities of similar microfinance 
institutions  within  the  Eastern  African  region.  This  steady  growth  in  Kenya’s  microfinance 
portfolio  indicates  that  prudentially  regulated  and  supervised  institutions  are  more  able  to 
mobilize  savings  on  a  viable  and  sustainable  basis.  This  is  to  say,  in  other  words,  that 
appropriate  and  effective  supervision  with  necessary  and  appropriate  prudential  rules 
provides  a  conducive  and  enabling  environment  for  microfinance  business  to  grow  and 
thrive. This is also an indication that microfinance institutions that will opt to be licensed and 
regulated  under  the  Microfinance  Act  will  be  in  a  better  position  with  regard  to  improved 
efficiency,  effectiveness  (increased  outreach)  and  long-term  sustainability.  This  will  further 
enable  these  institutions  to  establish  sufficient  and  effective  linkages  to  commercial  banks 
and payment systems. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  the  Central  Bank  acknowledges  that  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision  of  microfinance  institutions  is  not  only  intrusive,  but  has  cost  implications,  not 
only to the regulator, but also for the regulated institutions. The regulation and supervision of 
institutions is anchored on a legal and regulatory framework that requires, first and foremost, 
the  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  the  institutions’  capital  to  meet  their  business 
requirements  to  match  their  risk  profiles  and  to  protect  the  interests  of  their  depositors. 
Although prudential regulations, which subscribe minimum corporate governance standards, 
capital adequacy levels, liquidity requirements and adequate provisioning for loan losses etc, 
create  a  stringent  regime,  it  is  essentially  necessary  for  deposit-taking  microfinance 
institutions. This is to ensure the protection of their financial soundness in order to protect 
depositors' funds and uphold confidence in the financial system. 
The  Central  Bank  also  acknowledges  that  although  prudential  regulation  is  considered 
necessary  when  there  are  depositors  to  protect,  it  is  not  appropriate  for  credit-only  MFIs 
which fund themselves from donors’ funds or commercial loans. The Bank asserts that such 
MFIs  require  relatively  non-intrusive,  non-prudential  regulation,  involving,  for  example, 
screening  out  unsuitable  owners/managers  or 
reporting  and 
disclosures. To this end, the Microfinance Act, Section 3  makes appropriate provisions for 
the  deposit  taking  and  credit-only  microfinance  institutions  respectively  to  allow  for  the 
expansion of microfinance in Kenya. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; the regulation and supervision of the microfinance sector is important 
as it is expected to lead to quality growth, broaden the funding base for deposit-taking MFIs 
and initiate the process of integrating these institutions into the formal financial system. The 
regulation and supervision of the sector will enable Central Bank to define, and enforce, rules 
and procedures for MFIs operations, entrance, exit, and ultimately create an environment for 
fair competition and efficiency in the sector. These rules will further aim to contribute to the 
stable and efficient performance of these institutions and protect clients (in particular those 
making deposits) against excessive risks that may arise from failure, fraud, or opportunistic 
behaviour. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; to achieve the above, and in preparation to regulate and supervise 
the institutions that will be licensed under the Microfinance Act, the Central Bank is deeply 
involved in its capacity as well as the microfinance industry’s capacity, in collaboration with 
key  microfinance  stakeholders.  The  cost  of  regulation  and  supervision  are  not  to  be 
overlooked,  for  both  the  regulator  and  the  soon-to  be  regulated  microfinance  institutions. 
Research  and  development,  infrastructure  development,  human  resource  capacity  building 
for both CBK and the industry, and the development of appropriate performance standards 
and  regulations  for  MFIs  are  some  of  the  activities  that  will  need  great  financial  input  and 
technical assistance to develop. Although there are cost implications for MFIs, the outcomes, 
with  regard  to  expansive  outreach  to  majority  Kenyans  and  financial  sustainability  are 
transparent 
requiring 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 3
benefits  worth  considering  against  the  costs.  The  Central  Bank,  therefore,  will  seek  to 
advance market discipline as a complementary layer to reducing the costs of regulation and 
supervision. 
In  conclusion,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  I  am  pleased  to  inform  this  forum  that  the  Central 
Bank is not only committed to fostering the soundness, stability and integrity of the financial 
sector  in  Kenya  but  also  is  also  committed  to  fostering  the  development  and  growth  of 
alternative financial service providers for the benefit of our people. Microfinance is one sub-
sector that the Central Bank is very keen to develop as a powerful tool for fighting poverty 
and increasing access to financial services and products to majority of Kenyans. 
As a way forward, let me underscore the important role of the microfinance industry and the 
need for all microfinance industry players and key stakeholders to continue to promote close 
partnership  and  collaboration  with  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  the  Government  in  the 
development  of  this  industry.  I  recommend  that  partnership  should  involve  regular 
consultations towards seeking solutions to issues and challenges facing the industry with the 
objective of building a sustainable and sound microfinance industry. Together, as a team, we 
can  change  the  microfinance  landscape,  set  the  pace  and  ensure  the  development  of  a 
sound and stable microfinance industry in Kenya as an integral part of the financial system. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  organisers,  Strathmore 
University  and  the  Association  of  Microfinance  Institutions  (AMFI),  for  organising  this 
important conference. I look forward to seeing more collaboration amongst key microfinance 
industry stakeholders in fostering the growth and development of the microfinance industry. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2007
