Nicholas C Garganas: EU enlargement 
Remarks  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  panel 
discussion:  “The  Future  of  Europe”,  at  the  Cultural  Days  of  the  ECB,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
24 October 2007. 
 1. I am delighted to be taking part in this discussion on the future of Europe. My remarks will 
deal with the issue of enlargement. 
EU  enlargement  has  been  a  long  and  involved  process.  The  EU  has  expanded  on  five 
occasions, growing from six members to 27 members. Beginning with the First Enlargement 
in 1973, enlargement has been at the core of the EU’s development. It has provided both 
political and economic benefits.  
The first four enlargements involved only two or three countries on average and took place 
every 10 years or so. The fifth enlargement was much larger; it comprised 12 countries and 
took place in two stages – in May 2004 and January of this year. Although it was larger, it 
went smoothly and was a success. The 12 countries were integrated into the EU without any 
problems for the EU or for the countries themselves. It brought over 100 million new citizens, 
with rising incomes, into the EU. 
Politically,  enlargement  has  helped  to  overcome  the  division  of  Europe  and  succeeded  in 
establishing a regional system based on democracy, and a respect for human rights and the 
rule of law. It has helped the EU respond to major changes, including the fall of dictatorships 
and the collapse of communism, bringing stability and solidarity among its members.  
Economically, enlargement has helped to increase prosperity and competitiveness, enabling 
the enlarged Union to respond better to the challenges of globalization. In sum, enlargement 
has increased prosperity in the Union and has strengthened the security of all EU citizens.  
In  a  continent  the  history  of  which  had  been  marked  by  turbulence  and  conflicts,  these 
political and economic benefits are not small achievements.  
2. Now let me say something about the present enlargement agenda. As you know it covers 
Turkey,  Croatia,  and  the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia,  which  are  at  different 
stages on the road towards EU membership.  
These  countries  have  been  given  by  the  Council  the  clear  perspective  of  becoming  EU 
members once they fulfill the necessary conditions.  
However,  these  countries  each  face  some  difficulties,  especially  since  some  enlargement 
fatigue appears to have set in. After growing from six members to 27 members, we should 
expect some slowdown in the pace and extent of adjustment. Indeed, it is worth noting that 
the latest enlargement took place after many years of careful preparation.  
With regard to Turkey, politically, there has been some opposition to that country’s entrance. 
However, the EU has to honour its existing commitments towards countries already in the 
process of negotiations, provided that countries can fulfill all the necessary conditions.  
Turkey has continued to make progress in reforms. However, the pace has slowed during the 
past year. Significant further efforts are needed to fulfill fully the Copenhagen political criteria. 
In particular, concrete steps are needed for the normalization of bilateral relations with all EU 
member states.  
All  three  countries  should  ultimately  be  admitted  into  the  EU  but  sufficient  time  should  be 
allowed  for  the  necessary  reforms  to  be  implemented.  Their  dates  of  entry  into  the  Union 
depend on the results of their reforms. Each country will be judged on its own merits.  
BIS Review 126/2007 
 1
3a. What should be the next round of enlargement? Potential candidates are the remaining 
countries of the Western Balkans, that is Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and 
Serbia, including Kosovo.  
That  the  future  for  these  countries  holds  the  prospect  of  eventual  EU  accession  is  widely 
acknowledged and has been mentioned on several occasions, for example by the European 
Council in Feira in 2000 and the EU-Western Balkans Summit in Thessaloniki in 2003. Each 
of these countries will be invited to join the EU once the accession criteria have been met. 
Nevertheless,  this  group  of  potential  candidate  countries  still  has  some  way  to  go  before 
reaching that point.  
The  speed  of  accession  is  determined  by  how  quickly  countries  meet  the  political  and 
economic criteria.  
The  political  criteria  require  that  countries  ensure  the  stability  of  institutions  guaranteeing 
democracy, the rule of law, the protection of human rights and respect for, and protection of, 
minorities.  The  two  basic  economic  criteria  are,  first,  the  establishment  of  a  functioning 
market economy, and, second, the ability to withstand competitive pressure in the Union.  
Meeting these basic criteria requires determination and time. Economic reforms have been 
initiated – and are progressing – in many of these countries. Nevertheless, these countries 
continue to face challenges. They are, however, making genuine transition efforts and, given 
sufficient  time,  I  expect  they  will  be  able  to  prepare  their  economies  for  membership.  The 
recently acceded Member States have proved that this is possible.  
3b. Although the speed of further enlargement of the EU depends on the pace of reforms in 
candidate,  or  potential  candidate,  countries,  this  process  is  only  one  part  of  the  EU’s 
enlargement  policy.  The  other  part  concerns  the  capacity  of  the  EU  to  integrate  new 
members.  
In  this  connection,  I  believe  that  the  EU  should  look  at  its  own  governance  and  adjust  it 
where  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  that  its  institutions  and  decision-making  processes 
remain  effective  and  accountable,  and  that  it  can  maintain  its  capacity  to  function,  for  the 
sake of current Member States as well as in view of further enlargement.  
The institutional reform treaty approved by the EU summit in Lisbon on October 19, reshapes 
the  main  institutions  of  the  Union  –  the  European  Council,  the  Commission  and  the 
Parliament – and takes us a good way toward enhancing the EU’s capacity to function. The 
new reform treaty should be ratified as soon as possible and at least by the time that the next 
new member is likely to be ready to join the Union.  
The prospect of EU accession offered to the countries of the Western Balkans and to Turkey 
is an important catalyst for reform in these countries. There are clear benefits on the whole 
for  the  EU  in  terms  of  growth,  stability  and  security.  However,  these  need  to  be  better 
communicated to the public. It is essential to listen to citizens and address their concerns. 
Although enlargement has been a success story, in my view we have not done as well as we 
might  have  in  communicating  the  benefits  that  this  policy  of  enlargement  has  brought  to 
citizens of the enlarged EU. For example, earlier concerns about the effects of enlargement 
on Labor migration and on wages have proved to be unfounded  
4.  What  about  enlargement  beyond  the  Western  Balkans  and  Turkey?  Should  there  be  a 
further enlargement of the EU after the integration of the Western Balkans and Turkey?  
A  key  issue  we  will  need  to  address  is  the  ultimate  borders  of  the  European  Union.  This 
issue is not an easy one to address because European borders are not clearly defined. The 
European  identity  combines  geographical,  historical  and  cultural  elements.  Ultimately,  the 
shared experience of ideas, values and historical interactions that contribute to the European 
identity are qualities that change over time. Therefore, the EU will need to continue to evolve.  
The  legal  basis  of  the  enlargement  is  Article  49  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  which 
states  that  “Any  European  State,  which  respects  the  principles  set  out  in  Article  6(1)  may 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2007
apply to become a member of the Union”. However, this treaty provision does not mean that 
all European countries must apply, or that the EU must accept all applications.  
A great strength of the EU has always been its ability to adapt to changing circumstances, 
and I am confident that it will continue to do so in the future. In this way, the EU will continue 
to ensure a prosperous and secure environment for its citizens. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 126/2007 
 3
