Stanley Fischer: The growth of the Israeli economy in the long run 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Sderot 
Conference for Society, Sderot, 6 November 2007. 
 The subject for this evening is "Evaluating the Socio-Economic Situation of Israel in 2008". I 
prefer, with your permission, to take a longer perspective, and to speak about the growth of 
the economy in the long run. 
In  this  context,  I  will  focus  on  economic  policy,  and  the  importance  of  sustainable  growth. 
The rate of growth is critical for the future of the economy, and the future of the state. If we 
manage on average to grow in the next 25 years at a rate of 5 percent a year, in 2032 we will 
attain a level of GDP of NIS 2,235 billion (in 2007 prices), compared to a GDP of NIS 660 
billion in 2007. To compare, if we were to grow by only 3 percent a year, GDP would reach 
only NIS 1,380 billion. That's an enormous difference, of more than 60 percent. It is important 
that  we  understand  that  if  we  can  achieve  persistent  high  growth,  then  we  will  have  the 
necessary resources to address existing problems in critical areas, such as social welfare. 
With regard to sustainable growth, I will not speak here of the importance of continuing the 
strategy  of  macroeconomic  stability,  free  markets,  the  opening  of  the  economy,  and  its 
integration  into  the  global  economy.  Instead,  I  will  speak  today  on  three  structural  and  no 
less important issues: education, welfare and investment. 
I  have  listed  welfare  among  these  three  topics,  because  Israeli  society  cannot  succeed  – 
certainly  not  in  the  long  term  –  if  there  are  wide  social  gaps,  and  if  a  large  part  of  the 
population has to subsist on a very low standard of living. 
Education 
A.  
In  principle,  we  all  understand  the  importance  of  education  in  Israel.  We  have  no  natural 
resources but we have human resources, which should be constantly developed in order to 
maintain and increase the qualitative edge of the State of Israel. Over the years the country 
has placed great stress over the years on the subject of education, and if this topic does not 
continue  to  hold  a  high  enough  place  in  our  priorities,  then  we  shall  find  ourselves  in  a 
continually deteriorating situation. And in some ways this erosion has already begun. 
When  looking  at  our  spending  on  education  in  international  comparison,  we  find  a  very 
interesting and important picture: on average, spending per child in compulsory and tertiary 
education as a share of GDP is not low by OECD standards, and in some cases is higher. 
But  when  we  see  the  decline  in  pupil  achievement  over  the  years,  compared  to  other 
countries,  then  we  must  conclude  that  the  Israeli  education  system  is  not  effective.  To 
improve the situation, it is important that we examine the reasons for this ineffectiveness and 
that we act to put it right. Why? Because we are referring to our most important investment, 
the investment in our young, who are our future source of labor, enterprise and growth. 
In the field of higher education too there is room for special concern. It is sufficient to see the 
lists of Israelis on the faculties of the leading universities of the US and other countries. This 
is a difficult situation to accept. The Shochat Committee, which reported earlier this year, has 
done  sterling  work  on  advancing  higher  education  in  Israel  and  it  is  important  that  its 
recommendations be implemented, including granting wage differentials in order to reward 
the best academic staffers. 
Another  area  that  has  been  neglected  in  recent  years  is  that  of  technological  education.  I 
hear this from various sources: in the educational system, and from industrialists who need 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 1
individuals  with  technological  qualifications.  This  is  also  a  field  that  needs  cultivating  and 
promoting. 
As  is  well  known,  education  is  the  best  way  of  reducing  poverty  in  the  long  run.  And  this 
leads me onto the next topic, that of welfare. 
Welfare 
B. 
A very important way of alleviating poverty is by integrating those who can work into the field 
of  employment,  and  at  the  same  time  raising  the  compensation  that  poorly  paid  people 
receive. In this context I am delighted that the subject of Earned Income Tax Credits is on the 
government's socioeconomic agenda and I hope that it will be implemented soon, along with 
the other subjects found on this important agenda. 
I will not elaborate today on the ways to integrate the poor into employment and to support 
those who cannot work. Rather, I would like to refer to the topic of the composition of Israeli 
society. According to data from the Central Bureau of Statistics, most of the poor in Israel are 
concentrated in two sectors: the ultra-Orthodox and the Arab. While the incidence of poverty 
among the non-ultra-Orthodox Jewish population was only 12 percent in 2006, the incidence 
of poverty among the ultra-Orthodox and Arabs was 57 percent and 58 percent respectively. 
This is connected to the low rates of employment in these two sectors, particularly among 
ultra-Orthodox  men  and  Arab  women.  In  2006  the  employment  rate  among  ultra-Orthodox 
men  was  25  percent  (compared  to  62  percent  among  the  male  population  overall)  and 
among Arab women it was 17 percent (compared to 53 percent among women in general). 
If we do not manage to deal with this issue, more and more of the Israeli population are likely 
to find themselves outside of the labor market and, as a result, poor. It is important that this 
sensitive and complex topic be addressed, and that appropriate solutions are found based, 
inter alia, on the right system of incentives. 
Investments 
C.  
Investment is the key to growth, and therefore it is important that the Israeli economy is an 
attractive  place  for  local  and  foreign  investors.  In  this  context,  I  will  refer  to  the  easing  of 
processes required in order to do business in Israel. 
There are a number of reports that refer to this topic, such as the World Economic Forum's 
Global  Competitiveness  Report.  I  will  concentrate  on  another  important  report,  the  Doing 
Business Report, published by the World Bank. This report ranks 178 countries measured by 
parameters that represent the ease (or difficulty) of doing business in each country. 
Overall, Israel is ranked 29th, which is not bad, and even relatively high. If we examine the 
parameters of the index more closely, we will find that Israel ranks even higher on some of 
these:  for  example,  on  the  strength  of  minority  shareholder  protections  against  misuse  of 
corporate  assets  by  directors  for  their  personal  gain,  Israel  is  ranked  fifth;  or  on  the  legal 
rights of borrowers and lenders, and the availability and legal framework of credit registries, 
Israel  comes  seventh;  on  the  procedures  necessary  to  import  and  export  by  sea  a 
standardized  cargo  of  goods,  eighth;  and  on  the  procedures  and  costs  associated  with 
setting up a business, 17th. 
However in other parameters Israel ranks very low: for example, on legal procedures relating 
to the enforcement of contracts (102nd place); on the procedures, time, and costs to build a 
warehouse (109th place); and on registering property (152nd place). These findings will not 
surprise any Israeli. 
It is very important that all the relevant authorities cooperate, to remove these bureaucratic 
obstacles, and to bring about an improvement in all these fields, especially in those where 
Israel currently ranks low. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2007
It  is  easy  to  think  that  details  like  these  are  not  important.  But  we  have  to  contend  with 
competition  from  all  the  world,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  achievement  of  sustainable  growth 
depends on our dealing with these barriers to growth. And for the long run, there is nothing 
more  important  for  the  Israeli  economy  and  the  economic  well-being  of  Israelis  than 
sustained rapid growth. 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 3
