Emsley D Tromp: Small and medium-sized enterprises in Curaçao – 
challenges and opportunities 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  “Siman  di  Empresario  Chikí  i  Mediano”, 
Willemstad, 17 October 2007. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  address  you  today  on  the  occasion  of  the  Siman  di  Empresario 
Chikí i Mediano. It has become a tradition in Curaçao that every year we dedicate a week to 
the  entrepreneur  and  his  business.  The  “Siman  di  Empresario”  is  a  unique  opportunity  for 
entrepreneurs  to  discuss  and  exchange  ideas  with  fellow  entrepreneurs,  government 
officials,  bankers,  and  other  stakeholders  concerning  important  issues  affecting  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises. Today, I would like to add to these discussions by sharing with 
you  my  views  on  the  challenges  and  opportunities  facing  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises in Curaçao. 
Ladies and gentlemen, small and medium-sized enterprises, or SMEs, play a predominant 
role in most developed and developing economies, both because of their number and variety 
and because they are represented in all sectors of the economy. In most countries, SMEs 
make up the majority of businesses and account for the highest proportion of employment. 
Furthermore, small and medium-sized enterprises contribute significantly to Gross Domestic 
Product.  For  example,  SMEs  in  the  OECD  countries  account  for  more  than  55  percent  of 
Gross  Domestic  Product  and  65  percent  of  total  employment.  In  middle-income  countries, 
small and medium-sized firms account for over 70 percent of Gross Domestic Product and 
95 percent of total employment.  
In  addition  to  their  contribution  to  economic  growth  and  employment,  small  and  medium-
sized  firms  in  mostly  developed  economies  represent  an  important  source  of  innovation. 
They tend to be in niche markets and follow competitive strategies that distinguish them from 
other companies.  
In the Netherlands Antilles, the situation is no different. SMEs are of vital importance to the 
economy  of  Curaçao,  for  example.  SMEs  are  a  large  contributor  to  employment  and 
economic  activity  on  the  island.  According  to  the  Central  Bureau  of  Statistics,  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises comprise the majority of firms in Curacao and account for close to 
35 percent of the island’s Gross Domestic Product. In addition, these enterprises account for 
over 50 percent of our island’s total employment. Needless to say, small and medium-sized 
enterprises are the backbone of our economy.  
Despite these impressive figures, the SME sector in Curaçao has not been able to realize its 
full potential.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I believe there are three critical preconditions for small and medium-
sized firms to realize their potential: (1) a sound and stable macroeconomic environment that 
supports private investment, (2) an investment climate that is conducive to the establishment 
and  growth  of  SMEs,  and  (3)  an  environment  that  encourages  an  entrepreneurial  culture. 
Allow me now to elaborate on these preconditions in Curaçao. 
First,  with  regard  to  the  macroeconomic  environment,  we  all  know  that  fiscal  stability,  low 
inflation,  sound  monetary  policy,  and  political  stability  support  private  investment  by 
promoting  transparency,  reducing  risk,  and  providing  sound  economic  signals.  These 
conditions  are  crucial  for  small  and medium-sized  firms  in evaluating  risks and  investment 
decisions.  However,  Curacao’s  macroeconomic  environment  has  for  many  years  been 
characterized by fiscal imbalances, related to high government debt and political instability.  
BIS Review 118/2007 
 1
Despite  an  expanding  world  economy,  these  domestic  imbalances  have  suppressed  our 
growth potential. As a consequence, our economy has been expanding only marginally with 
average real growth figures of less than one percent. 
Therefore, it is encouraging that after years of fiscal consolidation and adjustment efforts, the 
economy  of  Curaçao  grew  by  1.5  percent  in  2006.  It  seems  that  our  economy  is  finally 
benefiting  from  the  world  economic  expansion.  Growth  in  2006  was  mainly  due  to  an 
encouraging performance in Curacao’s stay-over tourism. Rising occupancy rates triggered a 
wave of new hotel projects and expansion of existing hotels. Furthermore, the wholesale and 
retail sectors grew as a result of increased activities in the free-zone and tourism, and higher 
domestic spending. Activities in the construction sector also rose, due largely to investments 
in tourism and tourism-related activities on the island.  
A  continuation  of  this  positive  development  is  possible  only  if  we  address  our  fiscal 
imbalances and high public debt. Therefore, it is encouraging that the island government of 
Curaçao,  in  light  of  the  upcoming  constitutional  changes,  recently  reached  an  agreement 
with the Netherlands to eliminate a considerable part of its unsustainable debt. 
As  we  all  know,  our  island  has  arrived  at  an  important  and  historical  crossroads.  By 
December 2008, it is expected that the Antillean constellation will cease to exist and Curaçao 
will become an autonomous country within the Dutch Kingdom. The status aparte will give us 
the  opportunity  to  address  our  social  and  economic  problems  in  a  more  island-specific 
context.  
The debt relief accompanied by additional capital injections related to the Social Economic 
Initiative will give Curaçao the opportunity to invest in important policy areas that have been 
lagging  behind,  such  as  health  care,  education,  and  poverty  alleviation.  However,  it  falls 
short  of  prompting  an  effective  and  common  response  to  the  increasingly  intolerable 
inequalities in the human condition within the Kingdom.  
The  agreed-upon  debt  relief  will  go  a  long  way  toward  alleviating  the  current  budgetary 
imbalances. But the overall strategic objective of a full and complete debt forgiveness that I 
envisaged  in  my  November  2005  proposal  has  been  conceded  for  the  short-term  tactical 
objective  of  continuing  to  be  able  to  borrow.  Given  the  over-reliance  on  the  forthcoming 
budgetary assistance from Holland to balance the 2008 draft budget, it should be all too clear 
to everybody that this tactical success has proven short-lived. Not only will it unnecessarily 
burden  our  budget  with  interest  expenditures  and  hence  make  compliance  with  the 
forthcoming  budgetary  rules  overly  ambitious,  but  it  will  also  create  a  constant  source  of 
potential conflict between the government and the financial supervisor. This situation will not 
be conducive to a harmonious relationship among the partners of the Kingdom. 
The  envisaged  budgetary  rule,  the  so-called  interest  rate  norm,  is  also  too  ambitious.  It  is 
guided by political rhetoric that far exceeds our institutional capabilities. Furthermore, it will 
constrain the authorities from pursuing policies aimed at stimulating the establishment and 
the  further  development  of  the  sector  that  we  all  agree  is  so  essential  for  our  economic 
progress, namely, the SMEs. Ladies and gentlemen, we need to ask ourselves whether we 
understand the historic moment in which we find ourselves.  
The vital question we need to address is: What are the basic principles that should guide us 
if we are to succeed in fulfilling our historical vocation? The logical course one would think is 
a  complete  and  full  debt  forgiveness  coupled  with  a  constitutionally  mandated  balanced 
budget.  I  still  hope  that  this  issue  is  being  given  constructive  thought.  The  introduction  of 
these  safeguards,  including  a  financial  supervisor,  will  prevent  a  new  build-up  of  debt  to 
unsustainable proportions. By introducing this form of fiscal discipline, we will also improve 
our macroeconomic environment. 
The  second  key  precondition  for  small  and  medium-sized  firms  to  flourish  is  an  attractive 
investment climate. An attractive investment climate provides opportunities and incentives for 
all firms, irrespective of their size, to invest productively, create jobs, and grow.  
2 
 BIS Review 118/2007
Ladies and gentlemen, all too many studies have been conducted to identify the weaknesses 
in  our  investment  climate.  These  weaknesses  include  complicated  and  time-consuming 
licensing procedures, high labor costs, rigid labor laws, a qualitative mismatch between labor 
demand and supply, difficulties in accessing finance, a complex tax system with opaque tax 
incentive  schemes,  and  high  utility  costs.  These  weaknesses  form  an  obstacle  for  the 
creation and growth of all firms, but they impose disproportionately more costs on SMEs than 
on large firms.  
One of the obstacles that in my opinion adversely affect SMEs disproportionately in Curaçao 
is  the  bureaucracy  or  “red-tape”  on  the  island.  Small  businesses  are  relatively  more 
susceptible to the high administrative costs of compliance with government regulation than 
are larger firms.  
Too many and complex procedures for registering a business hamper  and delay business 
start-ups.  In  addition,  because  potential  entrepreneurs  usually  do  not  have  the  necessary 
resources – either financial or human – to deal with complex administrative procedures, “red 
tape” can discourage formal entrepreneurial activities. 
Consequently,  some  potential  entrepreneurs  are  discouraged  from  entering  the  market 
because  of  those  perceived  high  entry  barriers.  In  other  cases,  potential  entrepreneurs 
choose  to  conduct  their  economic  activities  outside  the  formal  regulatory  environment. 
Evidence suggests that countries with costly regulations and heavy bureaucracy tend to have 
a rather large “informal” sector. One disadvantage of informal economic activities is that they 
do  not  provide  workers  with  job  protection  and  benefits,  such  as  health  insurance  and 
pension  schemes.  In  addition,  informal  firms  have  only  limited  or  no  access  to  investment 
facilities.  Furthermore,  since  they  take  place  outside  the  formal  regulatory  framework, 
informal activities escape taxation. As a consequence, the government forgoes considerable 
revenue. 
With the introduction of the new constitutional status for Curacao, the government will have 
the  unique  opportunity  to  create  an  enabling  regulatory  environment  for  SMEs.  The 
elimination  of  the  double  layer  of  government  will  reduce  the  administrative  burden  in  the 
existing  government  apparatus  considerably  and  facilitate  the  decision-making  process  of 
policies  and  projects.  Therefore,  the  government  should  streamline  its  administrative 
procedures, aimed at eliminating all unnecessary bureaucracy, and simplify the procedures 
for obtaining business and work permits and business visas.  
Furthermore,  the  introduction  of  one-window  to  serve  potential  entrepreneurs  is  highly 
recommended. These changes will encourage the creation of more formal business activities 
on our island.  
Another  constraint  for  small  business  creation  and  growth  is  our  rigid  labor  market 
regulations,  making  it  difficult  for  SMEs  to  adjust  their  workforce  according  to  market 
fluctuations. Therefore, it is important to promote a more flexible labor market that ensures a 
reasonable balance between workers’ preference for employment stability and firms’ need to 
adjust the workforce.  
Besides  these  regulatory  rigidities,  our  labor  market  is  also  characterized  by  a  qualitative 
mismatch  between  supply  and  demand.  Insufficient  or  inadequate  availability  of  personnel 
hampers the development of small and medium-sized enterprises, especially in those sectors 
of the economy with high-growth potential, such as the tourism and construction sectors. Our 
investment  climate  will  benefit  greatly  from  investment  in  education  and  training  to  reduce 
this qualitative mismatch. In this context, it is important to bring our education system more in 
line with the market realities. Our schools need to produce workers with the skills needed by 
the firms. 
Ladies and gentlemen, difficulties regarding access to risk capital and long-term finance are 
another  main  barrier  for  investment  by  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  Curaçao. 
Usually,  institutional  investors,  such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies,  are  the 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 3
main suppliers of these types of financing. However, in Curaçao, the market for risk capital 
and long-term financing is relatively underdeveloped. As a consequence, SMEs are mostly 
dependent on loans from commercial banks.  
While  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  a  more  liberal  policy  with  regard  to  the  domestic 
investment  requirements  for  institutional  investors,  it  has  built  incentives  in  the  existing 
regulations to encourage the availability of more domestic risk capital. The Bank, therefore, 
cannot  acquiesce  the  way  domestic  savings  are  being  channeled  by  domestic  institutional 
investors to finance foreign investment opportunities. With due regard to the optimal spread 
of risk, this issue will become critical in the context of the government’s debt relief. For now, 
the Bank will continue to monitor the situation, and will act as needed to foster the further 
development of SMEs and sustainable economic growth. 
One  characteristic  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms  in  this  context  is  that  they  are  usually 
more  credit-constrained  than  larger  firms.  Information  asymmetry,  inherent  in  any  bank 
lending relationship, is especially challenging for the small business sector because of the 
absence of a track record. In addition, SMEs’ lending is usually associated with higher costs 
because of the relatively small size of loans. Because commercial banks generally consider 
loans  to  SMEs  as  costly  and  high-risk,  they  prefer  safer  investment  options,  such  as 
investing overseas and holding high-yielding government bonds.  
The access that SMEs have to finance is affected also by the high fiscal deficits and public 
debt,  resulting  in  a  substantial  borrowing  requirement  by  the  government  on  our  financial 
market.  The  extensive  government  borrowing  has  decreased  the  financial  resources 
available  for  the  financing  of  private  investment  projects, known  also as  the  “crowding  out 
effect”. This situation has resulted in, among other things, an upward pressure on domestic 
interest rates.  
However, given the upcoming debt relief, combined with safeguards for financial discipline, 
more  funds  will  become  available  to  finance  private  projects.  In  addition,  less  government 
borrowing on the financial market will exert a downward pressure on domestic interest rates. 
Nevertheless, despite increased competition in the domestic commercial banking market and 
various incentives schemes, and financing possibilities through development agencies, such 
as Korpodeko and OBNA, SMEs in Curacao still face difficulties in obtaining risk capital and 
long-term financing. Therefore, in my view, we should promote other financing alternatives in 
our capital market. One such alternative is a venture capital fund for investment projects with 
a  high  risk  profile.  Through  such  a  fund,  equity  financing  of  start-up  firms  with  promising 
projects can be stimulated by offering higher than usual returns to investors.  
Another  alternative  for  the  financing  of  especially  the  very  small  or  micro  firms  is  micro 
financing. Evidence suggests that in many economies, micro financing has a  very positive 
impact  on  entrepreneurship  and  small  business  development.  Best  practices  from  abroad 
show  that  successful  micro  financing  schemes include  business  support  services, such  as 
training, mentoring, and capacity building of the potential entrepreneur. Furthermore, these 
micro financing schemes take into account the macroeconomic environment and the stage of 
economic  development  of  a  country.  In  addition,  these  schemes  are  usually  commercially 
driven in a public-private partnership. We should take these factors into consideration when 
designing and implementing a micro financing scheme in Curaçao.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  last  but  certainly  not  the  least  important  precondition  for  the 
development of SMEs that I would like to highlight today is a value system that encourages 
an “entrepreneurial culture” or “entrepreneurial spirit”. This value system includes factors that 
affect an individual’s willingness to consider becoming an entrepreneur.  
But  first,  allow  me  to  define  an  “entrepreneur”.  In  my  view,  an  entrepreneur  is  not  just  a 
business owner. An entrepreneur is a person who creates and develops economic activity 
within  a  new  or  existing  organization  by  being  creative  and  innovative.  Therefore,  an 
entrepreneur is not afraid of risk-taking behavior. Moreover, an entrepreneur manages his or 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2007
increase, 
the  preference 
thereby  enhancing 
her  organization  soundly.  Thus,  it  is  partly  intellect,  partly  organization,  partly  a  drive  to 
create and innovate, but more important, the willingness to take risk. 
This definition highlights several crucial characteristics and skills of an entrepreneur including 
creativity,  innovation,  sound  management,  and  risk-taking  behavior.  These  skills  and 
characteristics  must  be  developed  from  a  very  young  age.  Consequently,  our  education 
system plays a crucial role. It should put more emphasis on creativity and problem-solving 
abilities. In addition, starting a business should be promoted as a viable career opportunity. 
Therefore,  more  publicity  should  be  given  to  successful  entrepreneurs  within  our  society. 
These successful entrepreneurs could serve as role models to our young people. We should 
never be ashamed of our successes! 
An individual’s decision to become an entrepreneur is also influenced by the perception of 
the risks and rewards involved.  
When the perception exists that entrepreneurship means giving up benefits, such as health 
care coverage, a retirement pension, disability or unemployment insurance, the opportunity 
costs  of  self-employment 
for  payroll 
employment. In Curacao especially, the perceived risk to lose pension benefits and health 
care  insurance  coverage  has  been  identified  as  a  disincentive  for  self-employment. 
Therefore,  in  my  opinion  the  government  should  explore  incentives  to  make  retirement 
pension schemes and health care insurance schemes more accessible for entrepreneurs. 
Becoming an entrepreneur requires a different mindset. In our society, we have relied for too 
long  on  the  government.  Due  to  its  own  financial  problems,  the  government  today  has 
become a part of our problems, not the solution. Therefore, as a society we should become 
less dependent on the public sector and take more initiatives on our own. In other words, we 
should become more entrepreneurial. 
Ladies and gentlemen, small and medium-sized enterprises have always played a vital role 
in  the  economy  of  Curaçao.  They  make  an  important  contribution  to  our  economic  growth 
and employment. I strongly believe that SMEs will continue to play a crucial role in our future 
economic development. 
The economic outlook for Curacao is positive. To underpin the recent economic recovery, it 
is imperative for the authorities to continue to pursue a policy conducive to growth – that is, a 
policy  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  complemented  by  investments  in  our 
social infrastructure.  
With the upcoming constitutional changes, we have the opportunity to achieve those goals 
and at the same time create an environment that is more conducive for the development and 
growth of our small and medium-sized firms.  
The recent proposal to seek access to the Dutch healthcare system is an encouraging first 
step  in  the  right  direction.  Not  only  do  we  benefit  from  economies  of  scale,  but  it  also 
encourages competition, hence lowering social premiums and consequently business costs 
for SMEs. Increased competition in the banking sector, or the so-called, flexibilisation of the 
capital market, for example, resulted in a reduction in the average mortgage rate from 11% in 
the year 2000 to 8% presently. This represents a saving to society of almost Naf 900 million 
during the average lifetime of a mortgage. 
In addition, for small and medium-sized enterprises to continue to thrive, we must promote 
and  nourish  the  entrepreneurial  spirit.  This  means  a  proactive  attitude  towards  innovation, 
creativity,  and  risk  to  maximize  the  potential  benefits  from  the  development  and  growth 
opportunities ahead of us. But above all, ladies and gentlemen, the new Curacao should be a 
country that encourages success and solidarity by intensifying individual’s aspirations so that 
a better country can emerge. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 5
