Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining the country’s economic gains 
through monetary stability 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  ACI  Phils-IHAP-Mart-TOAP  Joint  Gen.  Assembly, 
Manila, 9 October 2007. 
 Introduction  
I.  
Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  The  Financial  Markets  Association  (ACI  Phils), 
Investment Houses Association of the Philippines (IHAP), Money Market Association of the 
Philippines  (MART),  and  the  Trust  Officers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (TOAP), 
Colleagues  from  the  Bangko  Sentral,  friends  from  media,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
evening. 
I  thank  ACI,  IHAP,  MART  and  TOAP  for  this  invitation  to  speak  at  your  joint  general 
membership  meeting  on  the  topic  “Sustaining  the  Country’s  Economic  Gains  through 
Monetary  Stability”.  Its  an  interesting  topic  as  it  suggests  movement,  evokes  a  sense  of 
continuous  motion  in  the  right  direction.  Indeed,  the  economy  has  chalked  up  impressive 
gains  this  year  and  the  Philippines  is  experiencing  its  most  stable  macroeconomic 
environment in a decade.  
Current state of economic gains  
II.  
Let  me  begin  by  having  a  few  cracks  at  describing  the  headway  that  has  been  made  in 
consolidating macroeconomic gains this year. 
• 
The economy has been expanding quite briskly. In the second quarter of 2007, GDP 
expanded  by  a  faster-than-expected  rate  of  7.5  percent,  outperforming  the  5.5 
percent growth achieved in the same quarter in 2006 and bringing the first semester 
2007 growth to 7.3 percent.  
This  strong  growth  has  been  achieved  against  a  generally  benign  inflation 
environment. The headline inflation rate was 2.7 percent in September, bringing the 
average inflation rate for the first nine months to 2.6 percent, lower compared to the 
6.8 percent recorded during the same period last year.  
Lower inflation meantime has allowed interest rates to decline. The average 91-day 
T-bill rate was at 3.3 percent in September, lower by 2 percentage points compared 
to its year-ago figure.  
The NPL ratio of U/KBs at 5.18 percent (July 2007) has been in single-digit territory 
since June 2005 and is close to the pre-1997 crisis level of 4 percent. (For banks, 
the latest NPL ratio for July was at 5.6 percent.)  
   Essentially, I’d say, so far, so good. 
Which brings to my mind Newton’s First Law of Motion: Does anyone recall? 
Every  object  in  a  state  of  uniform  motion  tends  to  remain  in  that  state  of 
motion unless an external force is applied to it. 
This is often termed simply the "Law of Inertia". 
We are all hopeful that our macro fundamentals will continue to be in the same state. That is, 
that  our  fundamentals  would  remain  sound,  with  all  the  indicators  pointing  in  the  right 
direction, and the economy experiencing steady growth. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 1
But, many of you have been in the market long enough a quick sweep of the room tells me I 
am correct indeed, many of you have been around long enough to know that markets are 
never  really  at  inertia  for  very  long  periods  there  are  always  agents  who  are  constantly 
looking for opportunities, driven by what Adam Smith called “animal spirits” (although these 
days, the politically appropriate characterization for this is that “there is always an incentive 
to do better for oneself.”) 
In addition, there have recently been events in the global arena which, as they continue to 
unfold,  pose  risks  to  any  steady  and  uniform  pace  of  economic  growth  and  decelerating 
inflation which we may wish for or be envisioning. 
Let  me  extend  the  analogy  to  Newton’s  second  law  of  motion,  by  suggesting  that  these 
global  events  could  be  the  forces  (F),  which  could  alter  the  velocity  of  the  moving  object. 
Recall  that  Newton’s  second  law  states  that  F  =  ma,  where  m  is  mass,  and  Force  F  and 
acceleration a are vectors that go in the same direction. By extension, we can say that any 
external force that is applied to a moving object could alter the latter’s direction to coincide 
with that of the force. In our analogy, this force could alter the path of an economic variable, 
such as inflation. 
There  are  several  of  these  recent  global  forces.  Tonight,  however,  allow  me  briefly  to  talk 
only  about  two  of  these:  1.  the  increase  in  global  liquidity,  and  2.  the  changing  nature  of 
financial risk. 
Increase in global liquidity 
III.  
Over the last few years, a significant contributor to global growth has been the expansion in 
the  real  GDP  of  the  Emerging  Market  Economies.  The  large  surpluses  generated  by  the 
phenomenal growth in emerging markets, particularly in Asia, have contributed to the rise in 
global liquidity. In Asia alone, foreign reserves excluding gold have risen from just over $680 
billion  at  end  1997  to  almost  $3.4  trillion  as  of  latest  available  2007  data.  Add  to  this,  the 
dramatic  increase  in  both  trade  and  financial  integration  in  the  Asian  region.  Intra-regional 
trade  in  Asia  has  gone  up  from  43  percent  in 1990  to  over  55  percent  in  2005.  Together, 
these have facilitated cross border flows in the region.  
At the same time, halfway around the globe, the Fed (and the other major economies) set out 
on  an  easing  mode.  This,  coupled  by  greater  global  financial  integration  caused  the 
movement of capital across borders, raising global liquidity.  
Recently, moves of major central banks to help stabilize the markets during the height of the 
subprime mortgage problem in the US, have also served to further increase global liquidity. 
These official moves seem to have produced their intended effects by halting further sell-offs 
in the markets, which subsequently showed a recovery. At the same time, we also know that, 
what  I  sometimes  refer  to  as  “liquidity  upon  liquidity”  or  the  rising  wall  of  liquidity,  may 
eventually find its way again into emerging economies as investors search for higher yields, 
causing the cycle to continue. 
Further, we need to watch out for the scenario when this wall of liquidity would have risen to 
the point that it begins to negatively impact on inflation in the US and other countries. How 
the  Fed  and  other  major  central  banks  would  deal  with  that  scenario;  more  precisely,  the 
speed and extent of any change in their monetary policy stances, would definitely have an 
impact on liquidity and interest rates in the rest of the world.  
A  possible  slowdown  in  the  US  would  also  affect  global  liquidity.  On  the  one  hand,  a 
slowdown  could  trigger  a  further  round  of  easing  from  the  Fed,  which  could  again  raise 
liquidity. On the other hand, it could also cause a slump in demand for goods from this part of 
the world, depressing current account surpluses here. A study by the ADB, however, shows 
that the impact of a downturn or recession in the US is likely to be modest and short-lived. 
This is expected to trim growth in developing Asia by 1-2 percentage points. Nevertheless, 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2007
economic policy makers have to closely monitor any potential impact of the financial turmoil 
on the growth of the real economy.  
Given the Philippines’ improved macro fundamentals, the upshot of the dramatic increase in 
global liquidity for our country has been a strong external position, which has allowed us to 
build up our international reserves to an all-time high of $30.7 billion as of end September 
and, consequently prepay over US$3 billion in debt in 2006 and the first half of 2007. This 
has also resulted in an appreciation of the peso, which in turn has helped to temper inflation. 
The challenge brought about by strong foreign exchange inflows, however, is the increase in 
domestic  liquidity  which,  if  unchecked,  could  undermine  the  inflation  process  including 
inflation expectations of agents. 
Capital inflows are often seen as a “mixed blessing”. Foreign direct investments provide an 
opportunity to boost long-term growth and portfolio flows may allow a global diversification of 
risk. Hot money flows, however, are prone to sudden reversals, especially in the short-term 
when the changing conditions of perceived risk reversal could outweigh the fundamentals of 
the  recipient  economy.  Central  banks  of  emerging  economies,  including  the  BSP,  should 
therefore  find  the  appropriate  mix  of  measures  to  maximize  the  benefits  and  minimize  the 
costs brought by these capital inflows. 
Changing nature of financial risk 
IV.  
Let me now go to the second “force” I wish to discuss. In this era of financial globalization, 
risks transcend national borders. The international rules of the game are changing. Financial 
innovation,  for  instance,  has  created  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  that  allow  banks  to 
offload credit risk without affecting their relationship with borrowers. Banks no longer have to 
keep  in  their  books  loans  which  they  originated.  These  can  now  be  offloaded  to  final 
investors,  depending  on  investors’  risk  appetite.  The  complexity  of  some,  if  not  many  of 
these,  new  credit  instruments,  however,  renders  the  assessment  of  their  riskiness  rather 
complicated.  Blurred  risk  pricing,  enveloped  by  complacency  and  topped  by  the  need  for 
greater and greater yield is the perfect combination for the cycle to feed on itself.  
Clear  examples  are  the  financial  products  that  evolved  because  of  the  growth  of  the 
subprime  mortgage  market  in  the  US.  As  the  issues  surrounding  the  subprime  market 
unraveled,  and  risk  had  to  be  repriced,  aversion  towards  other  higher-yielding  and  less 
transparent  issues/credit  increased.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  just  because  banks  and 
other financial agents are able to offload risk, doesn’t mean that the overall risk in the market 
has diminished. The risk is just redistributed to those who are willing, and hopefully, equally 
able to take on such risk.  
Market discipline becomes very important for the orderly unwind of not just a few of these 
structures and to avoid widespread contagion to other markets. 
Effective  risk  management,  therefore,  now  requires  a  better  understanding  of  risks  by  the 
borrower and lender, the recipient and investor, as well as the supervisor.  
BSP’s policy responses 
V.  
These global forces necessitate action from central banks. This leads me to Newton’s third 
law of motion, which states that “For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.” 
Monetary policy 
A. 
For  the  Philippines,  the  first  of  the  two  forces  I  mentioned,  i.e.,  increased  global  liquidity, 
poses a risk to BSP’s inflation target.  
BIS Review 114/2007 
 3
If a force is threatening to alter the course of a variable under the BSP’s control, in this case, 
inflation,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  BSP  to  act  in  order  to  keep  inflation  in  check  and  the 
public’s inflation expectations well-anchored.  
Let me briefly trace our monetary policy action during the course of this year, to see how we 
have responded to our assessment of the risk of global liquidity.  
The period December 2006 to May 2007 was marked by six consecutive months of domestic 
liquidity  growth  of  more  than  20  percent  y-o-y.  Continued  foreign  exchange  inflows  from 
export  receipts,  foreign  investments  and  OF  remittances  fanned  the  surge  in  domestic 
liquidity. Understanding that if unchecked domestic liquidity growth could stoke inflation, the 
BSP implemented additional liquidity management tools in May this year. These included the 
expansion  of  the  coverage  of  entities  that  could  access  our  SDA  window.  Indicators  show 
that these tools are producing the desired effects as M3 growth has slowed down to below 
20 percent in the last three months, with the latest figure at 14.9 percent as of August.  
To  improve  the  transparency  of  our  monetary  tools,  the  BSP  implemented,  in  July,  two 
complementary moves which effectively kept the monetary policy stance neutral. The tiering 
system on placements with the BSP was lifted and the BSP’s key policy interest rates were 
adjusted to 6.0 percent for the overnight borrowing or reverse repurchase (RRP) rate and 8.0 
percent for the overnight lending or repurchase (RP) rate. 
Just last week, the Monetary Board decided to reduce key policy rates by 25 basis points 
effective  October  5,  2007.  With  the  risk  coming  from  liquidity  moderating,  benign  inflation 
readings over the policy horizon provided room for a reduction in policy rates. The continued 
appreciation  of  the  peso,  meanwhile,  provides  a  buffer  against  rising  global  commodity 
prices, including food and oil.  
The  move  can  also  be  expected  to  help  support  domestic  demand,  increase  lending  to 
productive activities, and shield the economy from any potential slowdown in global output 
growth that could occur as a result of the correction in the global financial markets.  
Earlier moves by the BSP were also geared toward coping with the surges in capital inflows 
as well as easing the pressure on the exchange rate. These included the liberalization of the 
foreign  exchange  regulations  to  allow  the  markets  greater  access  to  foreign  exchange  for 
outward investment and over-the-counter transactions.  
Financial sector reform 
B.  
With regards the second global force, that of the changes in the nature of financial risk, we 
believe that our suite of banking and financial sector reforms would equip the banking system 
to better appreciate, monitor and mitigate risks. 
Among the most critical of these, are: 
1. 
2. 
The continued drive towards speedy asset clean-up;  
The  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  capital  adequacy  framework,  with  the  steady 
enhancements from the standardized approach to the use of internal models;  
The adoption of international accounting standards;  
the  enhancement  of  corporate  governance  structures,  particularly  in  developing 
oversight  capacity  of  the  Board  of  Directors  to  promote  proper  risk  management 
environment;  
The  enhancement  of  the  transparency  of  the  system  through  improved  disclosure 
requirements;  
The implementation of risk-based supervision and continuous capacity building.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2007
We  will  also  continue  to  support  the  development  of  the  financial  markets,  including  the 
derivatives market, and we will be unwavering in our push for legislative reforms, particularly 
the Credit Information System. 
An important lesson that could be learned from recent crises, including the risk aversion that 
resulted from the subprime mortgage fall out in the US, is that in order to minimize contagion, 
transparency  is  a  key  principle.  When  markets  become  frantic  and  fear  dominates,  the 
absence  of transparency  could  foster  a  herd  behavior  and  could  considerably  magnify  the 
initial impact of the disturbance.  
Conclusion 
VI.  
I  have  only  briefly  touched  upon  two  of  the  risks  that  challenge  the  sustainability  of  our 
economic gains. To address these as well as the other challenges we face, the BSP’s policy 
thrusts will remain as follows:  
1. 
To  nurture  a  resilient  economy  by  ensuring 
is  anchored  on  sound 
macroeconomic fundamentals; in particular, we will stay focused on achieving our 
inflation target while maintaining a policy of flexible exchange rates; 
To build a strong financial system that is flexible in the face of global competition 
and innovation; in particular, we will continue to ensure that the banking system is 
adequately capitalized, well-governed, profitable and efficiently managing its risks.  
this 
2. 
Let me end by answering the question, can the country’s economic gains be sustained? 
The  answer  is  YES.  Our  macroeconomic  fundamentals  are  sound.  We  have  undertaken 
significant  macroeconomic,  fiscal,  banking  and  financial  sector  reforms  which  make  the 
economy  more  resilient  to  domestic  and  global  uncertainties.  We  are  mindful  though  that 
there  are  risks  to  this  outlook.  Thus,  even  as  our  assessments  show  that  the  risks  are 
manageable and moderating, we continue to monitor these carefully.  
Going  forward,  the  challenge  lies  in  continuing  the  reform  process  to  sustain  the  growth 
momentum and improve the country’s competitiveness.  
I continue to look to all of you, our partners in this endeavor, for your support as we move 
this country forward. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 5
