Svein Gjedrem: Turbulence in credit markets – mortgage financing at 
home and abroad  
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
annual meeting of the Norwegian Savings Banks Association, Hamar, 11 October 2007. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain assessments of the 
economic situation or the monetary stance. 
 Financial markets in different countries have become more closely interwoven over the past 
few years. New participants have appeared and new and more complex products to diversify 
risk  have  been  introduced  ―  across  sectors  and  across  national  borders.  Some  of  these 
products were put to the test for the first time during this autumn’s turbulence in credit and 
money  markets.  Triggered  by  problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  in  the  US,  the 
turbulence quickly spread to other financial market segments.  
In my remarks today, I will try to describe the driving forces behind these developments and 
the contagion effects on the Norwegian money and credit markets, with a discussion of the 
lessons to be drawn.  
Turbulence in the financial sector 
  
The US subprime mortgage market has expanded sharply in recent years. These mortgages 
usually have low interest rates at the beginning of the loan term followed by higher interest 
rates  after  a  period.  Subprime  mortgages  are  based  on  expectations  of  a  rise  in  house 
prices.  Borrowers  can  maintain  their  debt-servicing  capacity  by  refinancing  their  mortgage 
when house prices rise. Alternatively, they can sell their house at a profit. 
In 2006, there was a turnaround in the US housing market and house prices began to fall. 
This  pulled  the  carpet  from  under  many  investments  and  resulted  after  a  period  in  rising 
 BIS Review 115/2007 
 1
defaults on mortgages. These developments then triggered widespread turbulence in money 
and credit markets. 
The  US  mortgage  market  has  gradually  developed  into  a  complex  structure  with  a  large 
number of participants. The distance between borrower and investor can be considerable. 
 The chart shows possible interlinkages in the US subprime market. There is a long chain of 
intermediaries. On the one side is a borrower who wishes to take out a mortgage in order to 
buy  a  house.  Between  the  borrower  and  the  lender  is  an  agent  who  functions  as  sales 
channel. The lender is a financial institution specialising in granting and following up these 
mortgages. The first special purpose vehicle buys the mortgage and packages it with other 
mortgages.  The  mortgages  are  financed  by  securities  split  into  tranches.  The  mezzanine 
tranches  are  sold  to  another  special  purpose  vehicle,  which  repackages  them  and  issues 
CDOs  split  into  tranches.  A  third  special  purpose  investment  vehicle  invests  in  the  senior 
tranches  and  obtains  its  financing  by  issuing  asset-backed  commercial  paper.  The 
commercial paper is bought by a money market fund, which in turn has received its capital 
from savers. 
Banks can be involved in all stages of the chain. A bank may have an ownership share in 
and/or  provide  credit  lines  to  both  the  lender  and  several  other  types  of  special  purpose 
vehicles. If problems arise in one of more of the intermediaries, the responsibility easily falls 
on  the  bank.  US  and  European  banks  have  also  invested  in  securities  issued  by  special 
purpose vehicles. 
An important part of the process is the packaging of mortgages by special purpose vehicles. 
The  senior  tranches  have  a  high  rating.  The  subprime  mortgage  market  has  thus  gained 
access to funding from insurance companies and other financial institutions that would not 
otherwise have invested in this market, and credit risk associated with these mortgages has 
been spread to international financial markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2007
  
Rising defaults on subprime mortgages resulted in a sharp rise in the yield spread between 
securities backed by this type of loan and US government bonds.  
The turmoil quickly spread to other financial market segments. 
Uncertainty  arose  in  banks  that  were  directly  or  indirectly  exposed  to  losses  on  loans  to 
subprime  borrowers.  Banks’  oversight  of  their  own  potential  losses  was  poor.  It  was  also 
unclear  to  what  extent  special  purpose  vehicles  would  draw  on  credit  lines.  A  number  of 
takeover companies, known as private equity companies, had difficulty obtaining financing in 
bond markets for their leveraged buy-outs. As a result, banks that had guaranteed temporary 
funding for these companies were left holding these loans for longer than originally planned. 
For  both  these  reasons,  banks  did  not  know  how  much  their  balance  sheets  would  grow. 
This created uncertainty as to their own liquidity requirements. 
Banks were also uncertain about the size of potential losses in other banks. Information was 
not available to indicate which banks were exposed to losses in the US subprime market. In 
addition,  it  was  difficult  to  pin  down  the  actual  risk  associated  with  subprime-related 
securities.  Banks  became  highly  reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other,  resulting  in  a  marked 
increase in risk premia in financial markets. 
Several funds began to lose money on securities that were linked to the US housing market. 
As a result, customers wanted to redeem their investments. The funds were forced to sell 
securities in order to meet their customers’ demands. Since a number of the securities they 
held were not easy to trade, the funds were pressured into selling highly rated paper. This 
led to a fall in prices even for highly rated securities.  
BIS Review 115/2007 
 3
   
Equity prices fell, and bond markets saw a pronounced rise in credit spreads. In spite of high 
earnings and a low level of defaults, credit spreads have risen for both US and  European 
corporate bonds with a BBB rating. Credit spreads have also increased for US bonds with 
speculative-grade  ratings,  i.e.  ratings  lower  than  BBB-,  even  though  there  are  no  signs  of 
more  widespread  problems  in  these  markets.  For  emerging  markets,  credit  spreads  have 
increased somewhat, but the impact of the turbulence on these markets seems so far to be 
moderate. Equity markets have also seen a turnaround and in a number of countries have 
now regained lost ground. 
4 
  BIS Review 115/2007
The market for asset-backed commercial paper has been severely affected. The volume of 
paper outstanding has fallen markedly, and the share of short-maturity paper has increased. 
This is in part due to the withdrawal of a number of money market funds from this market. 
Substantial losses in this type of fund would have resulted in customer flight and funds are 
therefore  having  to  dispose  of  their  investments  in  markets  that  are  now  considered 
uncertain. 
The  current  turbulence  differs  from  previous  periods  of  turbulence.  The  impact  on  equity 
markets and emerging economies has been limited. This time, we are dealing with a credit 
and  liquidity  squeeze  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system.  This  affects  many  participants, 
including large banks. 
Subprime mortgages account for more than 6 per cent of the total volume of mortgages in 
the  US.  However,  the  problems  in  this  segment  are  spreading  to  other  housing  market 
segments. The housing supply increases because of the rise in the number of foreclosures, 
and  housing  demand  declines  as  it  becomes  more  difficult  for  new  borrowers  to  obtain  a 
mortgage.  This  may  lead  to  a  further  decline  in  house  prices.  The  resulting  wealth  effects 
may have a dampening impact on household consumption. 
Banks’ accountants and auditors are now working hard to calculate losses and reductions in 
earnings. It is also important to limit the macroeconomic effects so that banks can put this 
episode behind them as soon as possible. At the same time, we know – not least from the 
Nordic countries’ experience in the 1980s and 1990s – that the situation is demanding when 
the value of collateral falls. The most realistic scenario is therefore that it will probably take 
time for the turbulence to abate. 
There are important lessons to be learned here. The turbulence has revealed a number of 
shortcomings, primarily in the markets themselves, but also in the regulatory and supervisory 
systems. 
First, it became apparent that there are serious shortcomings in the originate-and-distribute 
model. Banks used to retain mortgages on their balance sheets. They had an incentive to 
assess  the  credit  risk  carefully  in  order  to  avoid  losses.  Now  it  has  become  common  for 
banks  to  grant  mortgages  and  then  sell  them  in  capital  markets,  to  investors  that  have 
traditionally purchased securities, such as pension funds and life insurance companies, but 
also to special purpose vehicles established for this purpose. The mortgages have thus been 
removed from the banks’ balance sheets, leaving the banks apparently free of credit risk.  
The  sale  of  mortgages  via  the  securities  market  can  diversify  risk  and  make  the  financial 
system  more  stable  and  robust.  However,  the  risk  has  proved  to  be  considerably  more 
concentrated  than  participants  themselves  or  supervisory  agencies  had  believed.  At  the 
same time as banks sold mortgages to special purpose vehicles, they established credit lines 
to these same vehicles. When the special purpose vehicles encountered funding difficulties, 
they had to draw on their credit lines. This put credit risk back on banks’ balance sheets.  
Second,  there  were  shortcomings  in  the  regulatory  system.  Through  high  credit  lines  to 
special purpose vehicles, some banks had large exposures to a single counterparty. Banks 
may have used a loophole in the old capital adequacy rules, Basel I, where the risk weight 
for unutilised credit lines was zero in banks’ capital requirements. If national regulations for 
large  exposures  were  based  on  Basel  I,  this  may  explain  why  some  of  the  beleaguered 
German  banks  had  extended  credit  lines  that  were  many  times  larger  than  their  capital. 
Under  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules,  Basel  II,  banks  are  required  to  set  aside  capital 
against all of these credit lines. 
Third, there were shortcomings in the US subprime mortgage market. A substantial share of 
these mortgages was sold through agents, such as estate agents and mortgage brokers. The 
agents’ earnings were based on high lending volumes, and they did not have to bear any risk 
for losses on these mortgages. Negative incentives are created when the responsibility for 
credit assessment and the responsibility for bearing risk are separated. As a result, agents 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 5
have  extended  loans  to  many  borrowers  who  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  service  these 
loans. 
Fourth, the question has been raised whether the agencies rating the securities issued by 
special  purpose  vehicles  are  independent  enough.  Growth  in  these  agencies’  earnings  in 
recent years has to a large extent derived from rating these securities. Rating is requested 
and paid for by banks. High ratings result in sales to more investors. Without high ratings, 
this market would be far less attractive and the agencies would lose some of their earnings. 
This  may  have  generated  incentive  problems.  In  addition,  the  agencies,  which  have 
specialised  in  the  assessment  of  corporate  bonds,  may  have  lacked  the  expertise  to  rate 
asset-backed securities. 
Fifth, there have been shortcomings in the supervisory system. As mentioned above, some 
German banks have taken substantial off-balance-sheet risk. In the US, neither agencies nor 
lending  institutions  have  been  subject  to  federal  supervision,  and  the  various  lending 
institutions  and  brokers  have  operated  under  different  regulatory  and  supervisory  regimes 
with varying intensities of enforcement effort.1  
Both supervisory authorities and banks have underestimated liquidity risk. Special purpose 
vehicles and banks have invested in long-term assets and taken out short-term loans.  
The problems in the US mortgage market and the contagion effects in other financial market 
segments have had negative consequences for many financial institutions and banks. One 
US bank has gone bankrupt so far. Several US mortgage institutions have had to close or 
have been bought by other institutions. In Europe, the bank in greatest difficulty has been 
taken over and more banks are expected to be taken over by other financial institutions in the 
period ahead. 
                                                   
1   Ben S. Bernanke: “Subprime mortgage lending and mitigating foreclosures.” Remarks before the Committee 
on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington  DC,  20  September  2007.  Hentet  fra  BIS 
Review 104/2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2007
Financial market turmoil has had a severe impact on the British bank Northern Rock. This 
bank,  with  its  low  deposit-to-loan  ratio,  was  not  able  to  renew  its  short-term  financing  in 
money  markets  and  was  forced  to  turn  to  the  Bank  of  England  for  assistance.  When  the 
news broke, many customers quickly withdrew their savings. The UK had not experienced 
such  panic-driven  withdrawals  since  1866.  The  Financial  Services  Compensation  Scheme 
was  not  sufficient  to  calm  the  bank’s  customers.  Finally,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
announced that the government would guarantee all deposits in addition to the cover already 
available.2 Only then did the long queues outside the bank’s branches disappear. When the 
worst was over, Northern Rock share prices had fallen by over 70 per cent. 
Compared  with  the  UK  and  other  countries,  Norway  has  a  generous  deposit-guarantee 
scheme covering deposits up to NOK 2 million per depositor per bank. Norwegian banks are 
required  to  be  members  of  the  scheme.  Branches  of  foreign  banks  in  Norway  are  not 
required to be members of the scheme, but some have chosen to join it. 
Just as important as the amount guaranteed under the scheme is how quickly the deposits 
can be released. This will partly depend on the amount of capital in the guarantee fund. The 
rapid  release  of  funds  also  depends  on  sound  procedures  for  bank  data  centres  and 
automated systems. 
                                                   
2   On Monday 17 September, HM Treasury issued the following statement: “I can announce today that following 
discussions  with  the  Governor  and  the  Chairman  of  the  FSA,  should  it  be  necessary  we,  with  the  Bank  of 
England,  would  put  in  place  arrangements  that  would  guarantee  all  the  existing  deposits  in  Northern  Rock 
during the current instability in the financial markets”. On Thursday 20 September, HM Treasury specified the 
accounts that were covered by the guarantee issued on 17 September. The guarantee covers all accounts 
existing at midnight on Wednesday 19 September and all accounts in Northern Rock re-opened in the future 
by those who closed them between Thursday 13 September and Wednesday 19 September, inclusive. The 
guarantee covers future interest payments, movements of funds between existing accounts, and new deposits 
into existing accounts. HM Treasury also stated that it would cover existing and renewed wholesale deposits 
and existing and renewed wholesale borrowing which was not collateralised. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 7
Central banks can respond in a number of ways to combat the kind of turbulence that several 
countries have now experienced. One response is to supply short-term liquidity, as a number 
of central banks have done, including Norges Bank.  
Another way to respond is to supply liquidity with a longer maturity. Central banks in the euro 
area,  the  US  and  the  UK  opted  for  this  response,  as  a  number  of  banks  were  finding  it 
difficult to obtain loans with somewhat longer maturity on the market.  
A third response is to lower the discount rate. Banks that have miscalculated their liquidity 
requirements can obtain a loan through the discount window facility. Normally, the discount 
rate has a fixed premium above the key policy rate.3 On Friday 17 August, the Fed reduced 
this premium and lowered the discount rate by 0.5 percentage point.  
All  central  bank  loans  are  backed  by  securities  or  some  other  form  of  collateral.  A  fourth 
response is to approve a wider range of collateral. The central banks in the UK and Australia 
expanded their range of approved collateral during the turbulent period.  
A final response is to provide liquidity support on special terms. Central banks can provide 
this support if a bank faces short-term liquidity problems. The Bank of England approved a 
liquidity support facility for Northern Rock. 
In  situations  where  the  need  for  extraordinary  measures  arises,  central  banks  must  weigh 
two  important  considerations  against  each  other.  The  objective  of  financial  stability  in  the 
short term must be weighed against moral hazard in the longer term. When central banks 
intervene and bail out operators that have taken on too much risk, this may be perceived as 
insurance against moral hazard, which may increase the risk of similar situations arising in 
the future.  
Moral hazard may be related to single institutions that take on too much risk. In these cases, 
it is manageable. Central bank measures are formulated in such a way that shareholders, 
management and staff, and probably also lenders, suffer substantial losses. There is no such 
thing as comprehensive insurance. 
It is more complicated when banks herd with other banks in taking on excessive risk. This 
herd behaviour was described by John M. Keynes in 1931: 
“A sound banker, alas, is not one who foresees danger and avoids it, but one who, when he 
is ruined, is ruined in a conventional way along with his fellows, so that no one can really 
blame him.”4  
Note  that  a  banker’s  reputation  might  thus  be  intact,  although  not  her  job  or  assets.  The 
management of the Nordic banking crisis also showed that it is possible to respond in order 
to reduce moral hazard, i.e. reduce the risk of a repetition of the herd behaviour that led to 
the crisis. 
Expectations  of  a  slowdown  as  a  result  of  falling  house  prices  in  the  US  have  resulted  in 
some increase in credit premia in Norway as well. Equity prices on the Oslo Stock Exchange 
fell considerably during the turbulence, but have recently picked up again somewhat. 
The  spread  of  market  turbulence  to  Norwegian  financial  institutions  is  a  pure  contagion 
effect.  Surveys  by  Kredittilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  show  that 
Norwegian banks are not directly exposed to losses related to the US subprime market. And 
no  Norwegian  banks  operate  in  the  same  way  as  the  British  bank  Northern  Rock,  with  its 
extensive debt-financing in money markets. 
In Norway, the premium is one percentage point. 
                                                 
3  
4   John.  M.  Keynes  (1931):  “The  Consequences  to  the  banks  of  the  collapse  of  money  values”,  Essays  in 
persuasion,  and  Wolf,  Martin  (2007):  “Life  Could  Yet  Follow  Death  for  the  Idea  of  Securitisation”,  Financial 
Times, 3 October 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 115/2007
Contagion  occurred  because  a  substantial  share  of  Norwegian  banks  obtain  financing 
abroad. The eurodollar market has been a frequently used source of financing for Norwegian 
banks. This is both because Norwegian banks have substantial dollar lending and because 
this market is used as a source of NOK, i.e. banks borrow in dollars and then swap them for 
NOK.  
In  the  early  1990s,  a  market  was  established  for  pure  krone  liquidity,  called  the  NIDR 
(Norwegian  Interbank  Deposit  Rate)  market,  but  this  market  has  few  participants  and  low 
liquidity. 
   
Since  the  beginning  of  August,  the  eurodollar  market  has  not  functioned  well.  This  has 
affected the Norwegian money market. The difference between the money market rate and 
the expected key policy rate has widened considerably, although less than in major markets 
abroad.  This  has  resulted  in  a  rise  in  banks’  borrowing  costs  –  at  least  for  a  period.  This 
might have an impact on banks’ profitability. 
Turnover time for deposits and loans in the interbank market has also increased and loan 
terms have decreased. 
Norwegian banks and mortgage companies are now also entitled to issue mortgage-backed 
bonds. The rules for covered bonds entered into force on 1 June 2007. Norwegian covered 
bonds  are  very  different  from  US  CDOs  backed  by  subprime  mortgages.  The  regulations 
ensure that Norwegian covered bonds are a more transparent and substantially more secure 
investment alternative. Norwegian mortgages have a maximum loan-to-value ratio of 75 per 
cent. In addition, all holders of covered bonds have the same claim over the cover pool.  
A  number  of  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  the  turmoil  in  credit  and  money  markets. 
Problems in markets far beyond Norway’s borders may have an impact on Norwegian banks 
even if the banks are not directly involved. As a result of the globalisation of financial markets 
and new and complex instruments, turbulence spreads quickly.  
Banks  extend  long-term  loans.  They  should  therefore  be  cautious  about  basing  borrowing 
growth on short-term financing. They should ensure access to a solid local deposit base or 
long-term bond issues for any expansion.  
BIS Review 115/2007 
 9
When times are good, it may be difficult to perceive and assess risk. New products that are 
dependent  on  favourable  economic  developments  are  not  viable.  New  products  must  be 
robust to slowdowns and unforeseen events.  
The housing market in Norway and the financial position of households 
The recent turbulence originated in the US housing market. It may be interesting to compare 
with developments in the housing market in Norway and in household saving and investment 
decisions. 
 
Growth in household credit has been high for a long period, accompanying the sharp rise in 
house prices. The increase in housing wealth has amplified the demand for loans. 
The annual rise in house prices in Norway has been positive since 1992. In real terms, prices 
have almost trebled, making this the second longest period of rising real house prices since 
1819. The rise in house prices accelerated through 2006, and the market showed signs of 
increased risk-taking and even a state of euphoria. 
 10 
 BIS Review 115/2007
  
Periods of sharply rising house prices have occurred previously.  
    
House  prices  have  risen  in  many  countries.  Up  to  2006  the  US  experienced  the  longest 
period of an uninterrupted rise in house prices. This period lasted for nine years, while the 
rise in house prices in Norway has lasted for 14 years. Furthermore, the total increase in real 
house prices in the US through the last period of expansion was far lower than in Norway. 
House prices have generally risen more in Norway than in the US in periods of expansion. 
  
BIS Review 115/2007 
 11
  
Developments in house prices reflect periods of expansion – often long – that are followed by 
a contraction. In periods when house prices have fallen in Norway, they have declined at a 
faster  pace  than  during  downturns  in  the  US.  It  is  only  to  be  expected  that  fluctuations  in 
Norway are much wider than in the US, with its many large local markets. In addition, the 
extensive  use  of  adjustable-rate  mortgages  in  Norway  is  probably  the  reason  why 
movements in house prices are more pronounced here than in other countries. 
In recent months, there have been signs of an impending turnaround in the housing market 
in  Norway.  The  rise  in  house  prices  has  slowed.  The  housing  supply  has  increased 
considerably this year and in September reached its highest level since November 2002. In 
the last three months, prices have fallen when the figures are adjusted for normal seasonal 
variations.  There  is  none  the  less  no  definitive  evidence  that  we  are  approaching  a  more 
long-term  decline.  Demand  for  housing  in  Norway  has  also  been  supported  by  strong 
economic growth and a marked rise in the number of households. 
12 
 BIS Review 115/2007
   
Intensified  competition  for  market  shares  has  put  pressure  on  banks’  lending  margins.  In 
recent years, mortgage borrowing rates have not always risen in pace with Norges Bank’s 
key policy rate.  
The introduction of new capital adequacy requirements (Basel II) has also influenced banks’ 
lending margins. Under Basel II, risk weights on lending are required to reflect differences in 
risk  to  a  greater  extent.  Risk  weights  for  mortgages,  for  example,  have  been  sharply 
reduced.  This  will  lead  to  a  considerable  reduction  in  capital  adequacy  requirements  for 
Norwegian banks. The new rules were introduced in Norway in 2007, but it is likely that many 
banks began to adjust to the effects even before the rules were introduced. This has resulted 
in a fall in banks’ interest margins. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
  13
Banks’  lending  margins  on  new  mortgages  are  estimated  at  -0.05  percentage  point  at  the 
beginning of October. As mentioned above, the money market rate is clearly higher than the 
key policy rate as a result of the problems in the interbank market. With normal interest rate 
formation in money markets, given our key policy rate, lending margins would have been ½ 
percentage point.  
Norges Bank’s estimates show how low lending margins on fully secured mortgages could 
fall  when  banks  have  a  required  return  on  the  equity  underlying  the  mortgages  of  15  per 
cent.  Lending  margins  are  determined  by  expected  loan  losses,  the  loan’s  administrative 
costs, the share of the loan financed by the bank’s equity capital, and the required return on 
equity. In the estimates, it is assumed that expected loan losses and administrative costs will 
be  0.3  per  cent  of  the  lending  volume.  The  method  banks  choose  to  calculate  capital 
adequacy will affect the share of lending that is financed by equity capital.  
Under  Basel  I,  the  lending  margin  on  fully  secured  mortgages  is  estimated  to  be  0.9 
percentage  point.  Using  the  standardised  approach  under  Basel  II,  banks  will  be  able  to 
operate  with  a  lending  margin  on  fully  secured  mortgages  of  0.8  percentage  point.  Banks 
using the internal rating-based advanced approach under Basel II, will be able to make the 
largest reduction in their lending margins. As an illustration, we have assumed that the share 
of equity capital is 1.5 per cent. The lending margin on fully secured mortgages could then be 
0.5  percentage  point.  In  conclusion,  we  should  be  able  to  say  that  the  decline  in  lending 
margins has probably come to an end.  
It  will  come  as  no  surprise  if  lending  margins  rise  somewhat  ahead.  It  is  now  likely  that  a 
number  of  banks  are  not  achieving  a  satisfactory  return  on  new  loans.  Banks  may  have 
compensated for this by having low deposit rates. However, as mentioned above, there has 
been  a  marked  rise  in  borrowing  costs.  Even  if  some  of  the  increase  should  be  reversed, 
competition for  ordinary  deposits  will  have  to  intensify  ahead  –  also  in view  of  the  greater 
uncertainty experienced by many banks with regard to funding in the money market. 
  
A  number  of  features  of  household  behaviour  make  households  more  vulnerable  to 
economic disturbances. Household debt has grown more than income since 1999. Both the 
 14 
 BIS Review 115/2007
debt burden and the interest burden have increased markedly and are expected to continue 
to rise somewhat in the years ahead.  
Most  household  loans  are  adjustable-rate  loans.  This  is  perhaps  not  so  surprising.  In  the 
post-war period up to the late 1980s, the Norwegian State Housing Bank played a key role in 
mortgage  financing,  and  banks’  lending  rates  were  regulated.  The  interest  rate  for  house 
purchases was politically determined, and – for a period that was perhaps surprisingly long – 
borrowers were confident that their best interests were being safeguarded. The question of 
whether borrowers should choose an adjustable or fixed borrowing rate – in order to be able 
to safeguard their own interests to a greater extent – became more relevant with the advent 
of credit market liberalisation in the 1980s. However, in almost the entire period since then, 
the nominal interest rate level has exhibited a falling tendency, first as a result of a decline in 
inflation expectations, then after 2000 due to a decline in real interest rates. Borrowers who 
chose  a  fixed-rate  loan  have  therefore  not  benefited  from  falling  interest  rates  during  the 
fixed rate period. There are few success stories to be heard from borrowers who chose fixed-
rate loans. This will probably change ahead.  
The  share  of  mortgages  with  a  high  loan-to-value  ratio  has  increased  in  recent  years, 
particularly among young borrowers. In addition, more households are choosing interest-only 
mortgages.  The  opportunity  to  postpone  paying  the  principal  can  act  as  a  buffer  when 
servicing the debt becomes more demanding. For many households, this buffer has already 
been used.  
  
The  increase  in  household  borrowing  has  not  been  matched  by  a  similar  increase  in 
investments in financial assets. The household saving ratio has been on the decline since 
2002  and  was  very  low,  probably  negative,  in  2006.  Household  saving  also  seems  to  be 
negative this year. This means that in addition to financing housing investments by raising 
loans, borrowers are also financing some of their consumption – often a new car or boat – by 
increasing their (net) debt. 
 
 BIS Review 115/2007 
 15
 Norway has a substantial current account surplus. If oil prices remain high, this might also be 
the situation in the years ahead.  
Most  of  the  current  account  surplus  is  matched  by  capital  outflows  from  the  state  to  the 
Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global.  Adjusted  for  these  outflows,  the  surplus  has  been 
between  NOK  0  and  70  billion  in  recent  years.  It  is  also  likely  that  oil  companies  invest 
substantial foreign exchange earnings abroad. In the chart, the term basic balance has been 
used to mean the current account adjusted for the estimated capital outflows from the state 
and  oil  companies.  The  basic  balance  has  been  negative  in  the  past  few  years  and  is 
estimated to fall close to minus NOK 150 billion this year and next. 
16 
  BIS Review 115/2007
The large basic balance deficit reflects a substantial saving deficit among mainland industries 
and households combined. 
Developments  in  banks’  balance  sheets  and  sources  of  liquidity  are  influenced  by  these 
flows. The saving deficit is to a great extent financed by raising capital abroad, often through 
banks.  Access  to  and  pricing  of  this  funding  is  influenced  by  the  recent  turbulence  in 
international money markets. 
The situation has similarities with the situation in the mid-1980s. Then, as now, there was a 
large  saving  deficit  in  the  private  sector  of  the  mainland  economy,  while  high  petroleum 
revenues laid the basis for a current account surplus. Norges Bank built up foreign exchange 
reserves  while  banks  financed  household  and  corporate  saving  deficits,  partly  by  raising 
loans abroad. With the decline in oil prices, confidence in the Norwegian economy faltered, 
capital flowed out of the country and out of banks’ balance sheets. Norges Bank had to step 
in as lender to the banks. 
The developments that followed the decline in oil prices in 1986 will not be repeated. In 1986, 
confidence in the Norwegian economy faltered while inflation was high and rising. Monetary 
policy  measures  had  to  be  applied  –  through  a  resolute  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  from 
summer  1986  –  to  restore  confidence  in  the  national  and  international  value  of  the 
Norwegian krone, i.e. to reduce inflation. 
The Norwegian economy is on a much stronger footing now than it was in 1986. None the 
less,  fluctuations  in  household  saving  and  corporate  saving  and  investment  could  pose 
challenges for both monetary policy and our banks. 
The outlook ahead 
The past 15 years have been a golden era for the Norwegian economy. It must also have 
been a privilege to be in a position to engage in banking activities in Norway in this period. 
Selling  loans  has  been  easy,  there  have  been  virtually  no  losses,  and  deposits  and 
borrowing have been stable. Banks have in addition been particularly adept at making use of 
new  technologies  and  being  more  cost-effective.  The  combination  has  led  to  favourable 
results. 
Lending growth will probably have to be reduced and losses may rise. More emphasis will 
have  to  be  given  to  keeping  costs  in  check  and  to  risk  and  asset-liability  management. 
Perhaps banks will spend more of their resources on attracting deposits and a little less on 
selling loans. 
In any event: Keep an eye on your earnings. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 17
