Y V Reddy: India at 60 in a changing world – the next 20 years 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the London School of 
Economics and Political Science, London, 15 October 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman, distinguished speakers and friends 
On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and on my own behalf, I would like to express 
our deep appreciation to LSE and, in particular, to Mr. Howard Davies, the Director, for his 
initiatives in establishing the India Observatory (IO). RBI is doubly privileged to be associated 
with  the  IO,  as  a  partner,  since  it  is  in  honour  of  Dr.  I.G.  Patel,  one  of  my  distinguished 
predecessors,  and  also  because  the  economic  policy  departments  in  RBI  hope  to  benefit 
immensely from the new research network. Further, deepening the relations with LSE is of 
special significance for India since London is the most prominent global financial centre. 
India  at  60,  is  both  old  and  young.  It  has  a  great  heritage  and  history  of  more  than  three 
millennia,  yet  the  independent  India  is  very  young,  aspiring  to  remove  poverty  and  bring 
dignity to all of the billion of its people by achieving an inclusive and rapid growth. 
What has been the record of India's performance in 60 years? 
Independent  India  exhibited  more  impressive  price  stability  than  most  of  the  developing 
economies. The inflation rate was, on an average, in single digit for 43 out of 57 years since 
1950,  and  on  most  occasions,  the  provocations  for  higher  inflation  rates  were  external  or 
domestic shocks, such as oil prices or monsoon conditions. The record of RBI in maintaining 
price stability, in terms of what is currently known as “core inflation”, is thus noteworthy. 
On  growth  rate  also,  the  record  is  one  of  a  self-accelerating  growth,  which  was,  to  some 
extent, enabled by RBI. The average annual GDP growth in the decade of 1950s was 3.6 per 
cent, in 1960s it was 4.0 per cent, in '80s it was 5.6 per cent and in '90s, excluding crisis year 
1991-92, it was 6.3 per cent. The problem decade was the '70s and the problem year, due to 
the Gulf crisis, was 1991-92, when the GDP growth rates were 2.9 per cent and 1.4 per cent 
respectively. In the new millennium, the GDP growth rate accelerated to 6.9 per cent and in 
the last four years (2003-04 to 2006-07), it averaged 8.6 per cent. 
The impressive growth performance since 1990s was possible due to the strong foundation 
of  an  indigenous  industrial  base,  domestic  entrepreneurial  class,  knowledge  enhancing 
institutions,  and  improvement  in  vertical  social  and  economic  mobility  during  the  decades 
1950s to 1990. The recent growth dividend is not just a miracle of the marketisation, but is 
built  on  decades  of  conscious  nation  building  since  independence,  and  the  extension  of 
RBI’s  mandate  during  the  period,  inter-alia,  to  building  of  institutions  and  improving  their 
delivery capabilities. 
In terms of financial stability, India remained resilient to a series of crises faced by several 
emerging  markets,  because  of  careful  pacing  and  sequencing  of  economic  and  financial 
sector reforms. In the external sector, India has come out with a clean track record, having 
met all payment obligations in time, even by pledging gold, a cherished national reserve of 
sentimental value, when it became necessary in 1991 due to liquidity crisis. Yet, both sectors 
have not only become reasonably efficient and resilient but are also in alignment with global 
best practices. 
In the current debate on macro-imbalances of global economy, India does not figure at all as 
a  contributing  source,  since  our  Saving-Investment  as  well  as  domestic-external  demand 
balance in the economy are by and large appropriate. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
RBI’s  policies  increasingly  recognise  global  developments,  but  their  adaption  to  such 
developments,  in  the  Indian  context,  is  tailored  to  the  prevailing  status  of  institutions  and 
markets,  immediate  relevance  and  the  evolving  needs  of  the  country.  As  an  example,  the 
function  of  financial  supervision  continues  with  RBI,  but  in  1994,  this  function  attained  a 
semi-independent status through the establishment of an overseeing authority in the Board 
for Financial Supervision – but within RBI. 
What is the outlook for the next 20 years? 
Prospects  for  next  20  years,  in  our  view,  are  bright  for  all  the  reasons  and  the  record  of 
performance that I have given. Yet, there are several challenges that are to be met in the 
medium term, as articulated in the recent Annual Report of RBI, which reflects the views of 
eminent Directors on its Board. Permit me to list these challenges briefly. These are growth 
of agriculture sector, improvement in physical infrastructure, fiscal empowerment to enhance 
coverage  and  quality  of  education  and  health,  improvement  in  governance  and  further 
reforms in financial and external sector. 
The financial sector reforms are aimed at further development of financial markets, especially 
bond market, enhancing integration of these markets and further improvement in the banking 
sector. In particular, determined emphasis on financial inclusion, financial literacy and credit 
counselling  is  appropriate  and,  therefore,  should  continue.  In  the  external  sector,  the 
approach is towards fuller capital account convertibility, with focus on the enabling conditions 
for minimizing the risks and maximizing the benefits. 
Are  we  reasonably  confident  that  we  can  meet  the  challenges  and  maintain  the  present 
growth momentum with stability?  
There  are  grounds  for  optimism  and  these  include  democratic  values,  financial  system 
stability,  skilled  manpower,  technological  capabilities,  demographic  dividends,  large  and 
growing  entrepreneurial  class,  and  penchant  for  innovation.  The  single  most  critical 
determining factor for the future would, by all accounts, be the improvements in governance 
that impacts personal security, property rights, business environment, and above all, a sense 
of fairness in the conduct of public policy.  
India and LSE 
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  recall  that  many  distinguished  Indians  benefited  from 
education at the LSE. The most prominent, of course, are Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the architect of 
the  Indian  Constitution  and  an  eminent  economist,  and  Mr.  K.R.  Narayanan,  a  reputed 
diplomat and former President of India. In a way, India might have, perhaps, repaid its debt 
through  Dr.  I.G.  Patel,  who  steered  the  LSE,  as  its  Director,  during  a  critical  period.  Now, 
India and LSE are entering a period of productive partnership, in which RBI is privileged to 
play an active role. 
Let me thank all those assembled here for participating in the launch of the India Observatory 
in the LSE. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2007
