Mario Draghi: Fact-finding preliminary to the examination of the budget 
documents for the period 2008-10 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Joint Session of the Fifth 
Committees of the Italian Senate and Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 10 October 2007. 
 The public finances have steadily improved since 2006 as a result of a sharp increase in tax 
revenue, attributable in part to progress in reducing tax evasion and avoidance. The ratio of 
taxes and social security contributions to GDP will be two percentage points higher in 2007 
than in 2005. It will remain stable in 2008 at a relatively high level by international standards. 
During  2007  the  unexpected  revenue  has  mostly  been  used  to  fund  increased  spending. 
Similar choices have been made for the 2008 budget, which increases the deficit in relation 
to  that  on  a  current  legislation  basis.  The  progress  in  reducing  the  budget  imbalances  is 
modest.  The  measures  needed  to  balance  the  budget  are  put  off  to  the  three-year  period 
2009-11. 
In the two years 2007-08 the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP will remain constant 
at the highest levels recorded in recent decades. 
The key issue for the public finances in Italy is curbing primary current expenditure. A public 
spending  review,  budget  reform,  and  strengthening  the  mechanisms  for  making  local 
authorities accountable are important ways of improving the use of resources in the public 
sector. Studies by the Ministry for the Economy and Finance show that there is ample scope 
for making savings without compromising the achievement of the main policy objectives. 
The  progress  made  in  fighting  tax  evasion  and  avoidance  means  that  the  levy  can  be 
redistributed  in  a  fairer  and  less  distortionary  way.  It  is  important  that  social  policy  be 
carefully  aimed  at  achieving  objectives  of  fairness.  Funded  by  reductions  in  expenditure, 
vigorous action to reduce the burden of taxes and social security contributions on labour and 
firms would boost the potential growth rate of the economy. 
The public finances 
1.  
Between 1997 and 2005 the general government primary surplus fell from 6.6 to 0.3 per cent 
of GDP. In 2005 net borrowing amounted to 4.2 per cent of GDP and the debt ratio began to 
rise again. 
Excluding  one-off  measures,  in  the  three  years  2003-05  net  borrowing  and  the  borrowing 
requirement were about 5 per cent and above 6 per cent of GDP respectively. 
The  increase  in  the  imbalances  was  influenced  by  the  gap  between  the  strong  growth  in 
current expenditure net of interest payments and the modest increase in GDP. 
In  2006  the  accounts  improved  significantly.  Excluding  the  extraordinary  charges  deriving 
from the cancellation of State Railways debt towards the State and from a European Court of 
Justice  decision  on  VAT  (which  together  cost  nearly  2  percentage  points  of  GDP),  net 
borrowing fell to 2.5 per cent of GDP. 
Excluding  the  effects  of  the  economic  cycle  and  a  broader  set  of  one-off  measures,  net 
borrowing fell by 1.5 percentage points to about 3 per cent of GDP. 
The improvement in the accounts was due to a significant increase in revenue. Taxes and 
social security contributions rose from 40.6 to 42.3 per cent of GDP. Despite the fairly strong 
growth  in  output,  the  ratio  of  primary  current  expenditure  to  GDP  remained  basically 
constant. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
In  2006  expenditure  (net  of  the  extraordinary  charges  referred  to  above)  and  revenue 
increased by €25.6 billion and €48.5 billion respectively and the deficit was reduced by €23 
billion. 
In 2006 the ratio of debt to GDP rose further, to 106.8 per cent. 
The improvement in the accounts has continued in 2007. As in 2006, tax revenue forecasts 
have been increased several times. 
In  September  2006  the  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report  estimated  net  borrowing  in  2007 
would be 2.8 per cent of GDP. 
In  March,  the  Combined  Report  on  the  Economy  and  Public  Finances  projected  net 
borrowing on a current legislation basis at 2.3 per cent of GDP. 
At the end of June, the Economic and Financial Planning Document lowered the projection to 
2.1 per cent, mainly as a result of a further upward revision of revenue. At the same time 
measures were adopted entailing additional expenditure amounting to 0.4 percentage points 
of GDP; net borrowing for 2007 was therefore estimated at 2.5 per cent. 
Decree Law 81 of 2 July 2007 provides for an increase in outlays of €5.6 billion in 2007 (a 
further €0.8 billion comes from the simultaneous revision of the budget) and of €1.6 billion in 
each of the two following years. Most of the provisions (€2.5 billion) consist in supplementary 
appropriations  or  attenuate  spending  constraints  on  central  government  departments.  A 
further €0.9 billion is allocated to finance an increase in low pensions. Resources are made 
available  to  modernize  the  ordinary  road  and  railway  network  (€0.5  billion  and  €0.7  billion 
respectively), for current transfers to public enterprises (€0.3 billion, of which two thirds to the 
State  Railways)  and  for  international  peace-keeping  missions  and  humanitarian  aid  (€0.3 
billion). Finally, €0.2 billion is made available for short-term substitution of school personnel 
and around €0.3 billion for changes to the domestic stability pact. 
Additional  provisions  inserted  when  the  decree  was  ratified  have  no  final  effect  on  net 
borrowing. The amendments that increase the deficit (the easing of the constraints imposed 
by  the  domestic  stability  pact,  the  extension  of  the  IRAP  relief  on  labour  costs  to  banks, 
financial  companies  and  insurance  companies,  and  the  attenuation  of  the  rules  on  sector 
studies)  are  offset  by  new  tax  measures  (changes  in  the  deductibility  of  expenses  for 
company cars) and by a reduction in current and capital spending. 
At  the  end  of  September,  the  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report  further  updated  the 
projections  for  the  public  finances  on  a  current  legislation  basis:  revenue  was  revised 
upwards by more than €6 billion, while expenditure was reduced by nearly €3 billion. 
A  decree  law  approved  together  with  the  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report  allocated  the 
improvement  largely  to  finance  a  one-off  measure  for  persons  with  low  incomes  who  are 
unable to exploit all the income tax reliefs (€1.9 billion, accounted for in the official estimate 
as a reduction in revenue) and a net increase in expenditure of €5.4 billion. 
The  technical  note  appended  to  Decree  Law  159  of  1  October  2007  estimates  that  the 
measure  entails  an  expenditure  increase  of  €5.9  billion  –  most  of  which  for  the  advance 
payment  of  charges  pertaining  to  2008  –  and  expenditure  savings  of  €0.5  billion.  The 
additional  current  expenditure  amounts  to  €2.1  billion,  excluding  the  indirect  effects  on 
revenue,  and  the  additional  capital  expenditure  to  €3.8  billion.  The  decree’s  effects  in 
subsequent  years  will  be  negligible.  Measures  to  support  the  weakest  households  include 
the start of a public housing construction programme (€0.6 billion), which will also be used for 
the modernization of existing dwellings. A further €0.1 billion is allocated for the purchase of 
property to be leased for social housing. Additional resources are granted for the 2006-07 
public  employment  labour  contracts;  adjusted  for  the  indirect  impact  on  revenue,  the 
measure  will  cost  around  €0.5  billion.  Some  current  transfers  to  the  State  Railways  (€1.0 
billion) and the National Road Agency (€0.2 billion) are also brought forward. A further €1.5 
billion is allocated for other capital expenditure, mainly on the metropolitan transport systems 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2007
of  Rome,  Naples  and  Milan  (€0.8  billion)  and  for  the  MOSE  barrier  project  and  other 
measures  to  safeguard  Venice  (€0.2  billion).  Finally,  expenditure  of  €0.9  billion  is  brought 
forward for development cooperation and assistance, of which €0.4 billion on capital account. 
A one-off payment of €150 is to be made to taxpayers whose net personal income tax liability 
for 2006 was nil, plus an additional €150 for each dependent (€1.9 billion). 
The  Report  now  estimates  general  government  net  borrowing  for  2007  at  2.4  per  cent  of 
GDP. 
With respect to the forecasts made in the autumn of 2006, which put net borrowing at 2.8 per 
cent, revenue has been revised upwards by  a total of €16.4 billion (1.1 per cent of GDP); 
excluding the measure in favour of persons with low incomes who are unable to exploit all 
the income tax reliefs, the increase amounts to €18.3 billion. The estimate for expenditure 
has been raised by €10.7 billion (0.7 per cent of GDP) mainly as a result of the measures 
passed in June and September (€11.8 billion). 
Over half of the revision to the estimate for revenue (€9.3 billion) was made in March 2007 
on the basis of the 2006 outturn for receipts. The subsequent revisions have mainly involved 
direct taxes (€6.4 billion, excluding the effects of the measure in favour of persons with low 
incomes who are unable to exploit all the income tax reliefs), in connection with the sharp 
increase  in  receipts  of  self-assessed  taxes  in  the  four  months  from  June  to  September 
compared with the same period of 2006 (31.1 per cent). 
According to the official estimates, without the above provisions net borrowing in 2007 would 
be close to 1.5 per cent of GDP. 
The Report estimates that the ratio of revenue to GDP in 2007 will be 0.6 percentage points 
higher  than  in  2006.  This  increase  is  largely  ascribable  to  self-assessed  taxes  paid  by 
enterprises  and  social  security  contributions,  which  include  allocations  to  severance  pay 
provisions. 
Compared  with  2006,  the  ratio  of  primary  current  expenditure  to  GDP  declines  by  0.1 
percentage points, to 39.8 per cent. This estimate does not include the cost of the measure 
in favour of persons with low incomes who are unable to exploit all the income tax reliefs, 
which, as mentioned earlier, is accounted for as a reduction in revenue. Using the consumer 
price index as a deflator, expenditure in real terms increases by 2.5 per cent, broadly in line 
with the average for the last ten years (2.3 per cent). 
The  estimates  given  in  the  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report  show  capital  expenditure 
increasing by 12.6 per cent and its ratio to GDP by 0.3 percentage points (excluding for 2006 
the extraordinary expenditure connected with the decision on VAT and the cancellation of the 
debts of the State Railways). The measures passed in the second half of the year to increase 
and anticipate expenditure, of which more than €5 billion on capital account, should reverse 
the decline recorded in the first half of the year (-4.1 per cent, according to Istat). 
The Report estimates that the ratio of public debt to GDP will fall from 106.8 to 105 per cent. 
The  information  currently  available  on  the  performance  of  the  public  accounts  basically 
confirms the estimates contained in the Report. 
In the first nine months of the year State budget tax revenue grew by 6.4 per cent. In the first 
seven months the general government borrowing requirement, net of privatization receipts, 
was €25.8 billion, almost €15 billion less than a year earlier. Its ratio to GDP in 2007 is the 
lowest of the last ten years. 
The  increase  in  tax  revenue  has  been  driven  by  receipts  from  self-assessed  taxes,  which 
reflect the upturn in economic activity in 2006, the measures taken to counter evasion and 
avoidance, and the provisions broadening the tax base to offset the effects of the European 
Court’s 2006 decision on VAT. Overall revenue from other taxes has also grown faster than 
GDP: excluding one-off taxes (receipts from which are down from €5.6 billion to €1.2 billion) 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 3 
and receipts from self-assessed taxes, State budget receipts grew by 5.3 per cent in the first 
nine months of the year. 
As in 2006, VAT receipts have increased faster than consumption, reflecting the shift in the 
composition  of  demand  towards  goods  taxed  at  a  higher  rate  
while  consumption  of  food 
products  has  declined,  there  has  been  a  significant  rise  in  purchases  of  durables  
and  the 
measures  taken  to  reduce  the  scope  of  tax  evasion  and  avoidance.  Revenue  from  the 
withholding taxes on income from financial assets has reflected the strong performance of 
share  prices  in  2006  and  the  rise  in  interest  rates.  The  rapid  growth  in  social  security 
contributions has been influenced both by payments connected with the transfer to INPS of 
the portions of workers’ severance pay accrued during the year and by the increase in some 
contribution rates introduced with the Finance Law for 2007. 
In the first seven months of the year general government debt rose by €44.9 billion. The main 
contributory  factors  were:  the  overall  borrowing  requirement  (€22.3  billion),  curbed  by  the 
reduction in the share capital of SACE, which led to €3.5 billion in revenue for the Treasury; 
the increase, of a seasonal nature, in the assets held by the Treasury with the Bank of Italy 
(€18.7 billion); and the issue of securities at a discount (€4.1 billion). In the two-month period 
from August to September the above-mentioned assets fell by about €9 billion, slowing the 
rise in the debt by an equivalent extent. In the last quarter they are likely to fall further; at the 
end of September they exceeded €32 billion. 
2.  
Forecasts on a current legislation basis and objectives for 2008 and the 
following years 
The  update  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Planning  Document,  presented  at  the  end  of 
September, contained improved public finance forecasts on a current legislation basis for the 
years 2008-11. 
Net  borrowing  on  a  current  legislation  basis  in  2008  is  estimated  at  1.8  per  cent  of  GDP, 
compared  with  an  estimate  of  2.2  per  cent  last  June  and  2.9  per  cent  in  last  year’s 
Forecasting and Planning Report. However, the objective of 2.2 per cent for net borrowing 
indicated in the Report is confirmed. 
Compared  with  2007,  the  planning  scenario  shows  the  ratio  of  tax  and  social  security 
receipts  to  GDP  unchanged  at  43  per  cent.  Primary  current  expenditure  increases  by  0.2 
percentage points, to 40 per cent, equal to the peak reached in 2005. Capital expenditure is 
expected to fall by 0.4 percentage points. 
The  targets  for  net  borrowing  indicated  in  last  June’s  Economic  and  Financial  Planning 
Document for the years 2009-11 are substantially confirmed, even though the estimates on a 
current legislation basis improve by 0.3 percentage points each year. A balanced budget is 
expected to be achieved in 2011, the last year of the current legislature; the primary surplus 
should reach 4.9 per cent of GDP. The public debt should fall below GDP in 2010. 
In the planning scenario of the update of the Economic and Financial Planning Document the 
budget  balance  adjusted  to  take  account  of  the  economic  cycle  and  one-off  measures 
improves by 0.2 percentage points of GDP in 2008 and by about 0.7 points in each year of 
the three subsequent years, going from structural net borrowing of 2.1 per cent of GDP in 
2008 to close to balance in 2011. 
In the official estimates the achievement of these objectives will require yearly interventions 
to  curb  net  borrowing  from  2009-11  of  the  order  of  0.4  percentage  points  of  GDP.  This 
estimate is based on projections on a current legislation basis and therefore excludes some 
outlays that, while forecast, require the formal adoption of legislative measures (in particular, 
expenditure for the renewal of public employment contracts, service contracts and contracts 
for public works). To finance this additional expenditure, the corrective measures will have to 
be significantly greater than those indicated. 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2007
The budget for 2008 
3.  
The budget includes several related provisions that the Government intends to present over 
the  coming  weeks.  These  regard  the  implementation  of  the  Social  Security,  Labour  and 
Competitiveness Agreement signed by the Government and the two sides of industry in July, 
government  rationalization  measures,  and  social, 
infrastructure  and 
environmental policies. 
Overall, the budget increases net borrowing in 2008 by €6.5 billion (0.4 percentage points of 
GDP). It raises resources amounting to €5.4 billion and increases expenditure and introduces 
tax reliefs amounting to almost €12 billion. 
Beginning  this  year,  the  analysis  of  the  budget  measures  and  documents  has  been  made 
easier by their organization according to missions and programmes recently introduced for 
the State budget. 
family,  health, 
Expenditure 
3.1  
The budget increases public expenditure by €3.9 billion. 
An  expected  €4.7  billion  in  savings  is  offset  by  an  increase  of  almost  €8.7  billion  in 
expenditure, two thirds of which is current expenditure. 
The  increases  in  current  expenditure  principally  regard  public-sector  employment  (€2.2 
billion) and allocations for the July agreement (€1.3 billion). 
The resources for public employment serve almost entirely for the renewal of the 2006-07 
national  contract;  together  with  what  was  allocated  by  previous  Finance  Laws  and  by  the 
decree  law  of  1  October,  they  guarantee  an  increase  in  earnings  equal  to  4.85  per  cent 
beginning  in  February  2007,  as  agreed  in  the  spring  with  the  trade  unions.  Regarding  the 
2008-09 contract, it should be noted that the accounts on a current legislation basis include: 
€0.7 billion for an indemnity in 2008 for late signing of the new contract. Other increases in 
current  expenditure  regard  the  ministries  (€1  billion),  the  armed  forces  (€0.3  billion)  and 
social policies (€0.2 billion). 
For  the  first  time  since  1999,  the  rules  of  the  domestic  stability  pact  remain  substantially 
unchanged;  this  contributes  to  the  stability  of  the  legislation  and  accordingly  to  its 
effectiveness. The structure of the pact outlined in the 2007 Finance Law, centred on local 
government monitoring of balances rather than expenditure, is confirmed. The new structure 
requires that local entities have significant margins of financial autonomy. 
Several  new  provisions,  with  costs  amounting  to  €0.3  billion,  are  introduced  to  resolve 
problems that emerged in the first year of applying the new rules for local authorities. The 
objectives set for those that on average recorded a budget surplus in the three years 2003-
05  have  been  made  less  demanding;  the  administrative  surplus  can  be  used  to  finance 
investment  expenses.  An  adjustment  is  introduced  for  the  authorities  that  recorded 
extraordinary one-off revenue in the period 2003-05, making the objective (calculated on the 
basis of the results in the same period) less stringent. 
In the health sector several regions will be granted a thirty-year central government advance 
of  €9.1  billion,  to  help  implement  the  plans  agreed  with  the  Government  to  eliminate  their 
deficits.  While  having  significant  effects  on  the  borrowing  requirement  and  on  the  debt  in 
view of its financial nature, the measure does not affect net borrowing. 
Under this transaction the regions’ liabilities will be replaced by government debts (needed to 
finance the advance granted to the regions). The impact on the borrowing requirement and 
on the public debt will not be null (it is officially estimated at €3.2 billion) since about one third 
of the debts to be repaid are of a commercial nature and accordingly are not included in the 
public debt. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 5 
The  increases  in  capital  expenditure  (€2.5  billion)  are  mainly  for  ministries  and  the 
refinancing  of  measures  to  support  the  economy  (€1.2  billion),  territorial  protection,  local 
transport and infrastructure. 
More  than  half  of  the  expenditure  savings  (€4.7  billion)  are  on  capital  account;  those  on 
current expenditure (€1.8 billion) are mainly due to a reduction in intermediate consumption. 
In detail, savings are expected from the shortening from 7 to 3 years of the time limit before 
extinction  of  expenditure  arrears  (€1.6  billion),  from  ceilings  on  extraordinary  maintenance 
expenditure  for  public  buildings  (€0.5  billion)  and  from  the  requirement  that  social  security 
institutions’  real-estate  investments  consist  exclusively  in  units  of  real  estate  investment 
funds  or  shareholdings  in  real-estate  firms  (€0.4  billion).  Capital  grants  for  business 
investment are reduced by €0.1 billion. 
The  reduction  in  the  intermediate  consumption  of  central  government  departments  (€0.8 
billion)  derives  from  the  introduction  of  expenditure  ceilings  on  ordinary  maintenance  of 
public buildings and on rentals (€0.3 billion) and from the rationalization of procurement of 
goods  and  services  (€0.5  billion).  Parameters  are  introduced  to  permit  more  effective 
management control by the single departments, and the use of a central purchasing system 
is encouraged. 
Measures to improve public spending and reorganize general government are expected to 
yield savings of €0.4 billion. Reorganization will involve military justice, local government and 
mountain  communities.  Rules  are 
the  computerization  of 
government. 
The provisions setting limits on the utilization of some types of tax credit will reduce outlays 
by €0.3 billion. 
to  speed  up 
introduced 
Revenue 
3.2 
The budget measures are expected to reduce tax revenue by €2.6 billion, providing for €3.3 
billion in tax reliefs and €0.7 billion in tax increases. 
Tax  relief  of  €2.8  billion  is  granted  to  households,  mainly  in  relation  to  first  homes  (€2.5 
billion), and the structure of taxes on companies is modified. 
Households will get relief on the municipal property tax (ICI) and income tax relief mainly in 
connection with house rental. 
For persons with annual income of €50,000 or less, there is a reduction in the tax on first 
houses of up to €200, or 1.33 per mille of the tax base, over and above the basic reduction 
provided for by the central government and others enacted by each municipality. The cost of 
this  measure  (€0.8  billion)  is  charged  to  the  central  government,  as  the  revenue  loss  to 
municipalities will be made good by central government transfers. 
In addition, tenants with a registered lease for their first house are allowed a personal income 
tax credit of €300 if total income does not exceed €15,493.71 and €150 if it is between that 
figure and €30,987.41. There is an alternative tax credit for young people aged 20 to 30 for 
the  first  three  years  of  a  registered  lease  for  their  first  house.  The  amount  is  €991.60  for 
incomes up to €15,493.71 and €495.80 for incomes between that amount and €30,987.41. 
Persons with incomes so low as not to be taxable will receive an amount equal to the portion 
of the tax credit they are unable to benefit from; the procedures have yet to be determined. 
Overall these measures will entail a revenue loss of €1.3 billion. 
It  is  provided  (at  a  cost  of  €0.4  billion)  that  the  imputed  income  from  first  houses  will  no 
longer count in calculating tax credits for dependents and for labour income, and also that 
taxpayers with only income from real estate up to €500 will be exempt from income tax. 
Some other tax reliefs for households are extended, at a total cost of €0.3 billion. Income tax 
credits  for  housing  renovation  expenses  are  extended  to  the  years  2008-10  (retaining  the 
6 
 BIS Review 117/2007
€48,000  ceiling  and  the  10  per  cent  VAT  rate).  So  are  the  incentives  for  upgrading  the 
energy-efficiency of buildings (retaining the 55 per cent tax credit and the ceilings already in 
place, which vary with the type of work performed). 
Taxes on companies are reorganized on a large scale, with essentially no net impact on the 
public finances. The measures involve significant simplification. 
Tax rates are lowered. The rate of corporate income tax (Ires) is reduced from 33 to 27.5 per 
cent and that of the regional tax on productive activities (IRAP) from  4.25 to 3.9 per cent. 
Nevertheless,  the  overall  rate  of  taxation  remains  higher  than  in  many  EU  countries, 
including Germany and the United Kingdom. 
However, the lowering of the rates will be essentially offset, when the new system is fully in 
place, by the broadening of the tax bases and by the limits to the use of reliefs granted via 
tax credits. 
The Ires tax base is broadened mainly by setting a new limit to the deductibility of interest 
expenses and abolishing accelerated depreciation. There will be redistributive effects among 
firms, generally to the benefit of the less heavily indebted. Also, a more favourable treatment 
for corporate reorganizations is reinstituted. 
To broaden the corporate income tax base, the treatment of consolidated reporting is also 
revised. The portion of capital gains enjoying the participation exemption is raised to 95 per 
cent, as for dividends; this measure tends to shrink the tax base. Consistently with the new 
treatment of interest expense, the rules on thin capitalization and the pro rata capital tax are 
abolished, simplifying the system. 
The  tax  base  for  IRAP  can  now  be  drawn  directly  from  the  company’s  income  statement 
without the adjustments required for business income, independently of the rules followed in 
drawing  up  the  accounts  (Italian  Civil  Code  or  international  accounting  standards).  This 
produces  not  only  a  simplification  of  formalities  but  also  greater  certainty  for  firms,  by 
reducing the scope for possible disputes. 
The restructuring of IRAP is accompanied by the diminution of some tax credits (those for 
small  enterprises  and  the  fixed-amount  credit  in  connection  with  labour  costs);  and  as  for 
Ires, accelerated depreciation is no longer allowed. For banks and insurance companies the 
tax base will include 50 per cent of dividends. 
Sole proprietorships and partnerships will be able to opt, in place of personal income tax, for 
separate taxation of retained earnings, at the same rate as corporate income tax. 
For  self-employed  workers  and  small  enterprises  with  revenues  of  less  than  €30,000  a 
substitute tax regime is introduced with a tax rate of 20 per cent, exemption from VAT and 
IRAP, and documentation and accounting simplifications. 
In  addition  to  the  revenue  requirement,  eligibility  for  this  regime  also  requires  that  the 
taxpayer not have made export sales, not have had any employees during the year, and not 
have purchased capital goods worth more than €15,000 in the last three years. 
At  present  self-employed  workers  and  small  enterprises  can  opt  for  one  of  four  different, 
favourable tax regimes, if they comply with a specific set of requirements (involving amount 
of revenues, start-up of new business, inclusion within sector studies). Of these regimes, the 
only  one  that  will  remain  is  that  for  persons  who  start  up  new  professional  or  business 
activities, and only for the tax year in which the business is started up and the following two. 
Finally, some sectoral tax reliefs are extended to 2008, reducing estimated revenue by €0.7 
billion. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 7 
Some evaluations 
4.  
The  Government  has  said  on  more  than  one  occasion  that  the  crucial  challenge  of  Italy’s 
public  finances  consists  in  simultaneously  bringing  down  the  debt  ratio  and  reducing  the 
fiscal  burden  on  honest  taxpayers.  To  achieve  these  objectives  it  is  necessary  to  curb 
primary current expenditure, which in the past few years has grown at a real rate of between 
2 and 2.5 per cent a year, and to “spend better” by improving the effectiveness and efficiency 
of public-sector operations. 
Recent  fiscal  policy  decisions  do  not  brake  the  growth  in  expenditure.  The  unexpected 
additional revenue that has come in this year has gone largely to increasing expenditure. For 
2008, the budget will result in a net increase in expenditure of almost €4 billion with respect 
to the projection on a current legislation basis. This estimate includes the expected effects of 
an effort to rationalize outlays. However, the spending cuts planned in recent years have not 
always  been  carried  out  in  full.  Moreover,  the  recent  agreements  on  pensions  will  have  a 
significant amplifying impact on expenditure in the medium term. 
Partly as a consequence of these fiscal policy decisions, the Government’s estimates show 
primary current expenditure growing by 4.3 per cent both this year and next. In real terms, 
the increases are close to those registered in the last ten years. 
These  developments  are  difficult  to  square  with  the  medium-term  objectives  set  out  in  the 
update of the Planning Document. According to this document’s macroeconomic scenario, in 
order to achieve budget balance in 2011 without increasing taxes or cutting back investment 
with respect to the levels planned for 2008, the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP 
needs to fall by more than 2 percentage points in the three years 2009-11; expenditure would 
have to decrease slightly in real terms. 
If it were also intended to bring revenue as a percentage of GDP back down to the 2005 level 
(44.4 per cent), the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP would have to fall by more 
than 4 percentage points in 2009-11, with expenditure contracting in real terms by more than 
2 per cent per year. 
As the “Green Paper” prepared by the Advisory Committee for the Public Finances observes, 
there is ample scope for achieving savings in all the main expenditure items by reorganizing 
departments,  reviewing  priorities,  assigning  duties  more  precisely  and  establishing  clear 
criteria for the evaluation of results. 
The  budget  reform  and  the  start  of  the  spending  review,  implemented  at  some  ministries 
(Justice,  Infrastructure,  Interior,  Education  and  Transport),  go  in  the  direction  of  improving 
the quality of public spending and curbing its level in the medium term. Added to them are 
the revision of the classification of the State budget, the action begun last year in the health 
care sector and the proposals for the universities and for the school system. 
Entrenched  practices,  the  multiplicity  of  actors,  and  the  inevitable  complexity  of  the  rules 
mean that expenditure reform is a long-term endeavour. However, it is important to achieve 
results in the short term too. 
The projected reduction of net borrowing in the two years 2007-08 is slow-paced. Forecast 
net borrowing this year (2.4 per cent of GDP) is barely lower than last year’s figure (2.5 per 
cent  excluding  the  extraordinary  charges  for  high-speed  rail  infrastructure  and  for  the 
decision  on  VAT).  For 2008  the  Government  confirms  the  objective  of  2.2  per cent,  which 
had  been  fixed  assuming  much  less  favourable  developments  in  the  public  finances. 
Excluding the contributions received in respect of employees’ severance pay, which will have 
to be returned to workers, net borrowing would be significantly higher in both years. 
According  to  the  Government’s  estimates,  net  borrowing  will  decrease  by  0.5  percentage 
points of GDP in 2007, excluding cyclical effects and one-off  measures. The improvement 
would be smaller if the contributions in respect of employees’ severance pay were included 
among one-off measures. A further improvement of 0.2 points is planned for 2008. 
8 
 BIS Review 117/2007
The experience of the years 2000-01 suggests it would have been advisable to exploit the 
positive  cyclical  phases  in  order  to  reduce  net  borrowing.  The  decision  again  to  postpone 
action  on  the  expenditure  side  increases  the  budget  adjustments  needed  to  achieve  a 
balanced  budget  in  2011.  And  there  is  the  risk  that  cyclical  conditions  in  the  future  could 
make the adjustment put off today even more complicated. 
The jump in revenue is due in part to factors that may not be repeated in the coming years. 
Revenue has exceeded the forecasts not only in Italy but in other countries too. In some of 
them, the extra revenue has gone above all to reducing the budget deficit. In Germany it has 
been used to achieve a budget position that is broadly in balance as early as this year, with a 
small surplus planned for 2008, while as recently as 2005 net borrowing exceeded 3 per cent 
of GDP. Furthermore, as part of the reform of the federal structure, the German government 
has  proposed  adopting  budgetary  rules  aimed  at  ensuring  budget  balance  over  the  entire 
economic cycle. 
The official forecasts indicate that in 2008 the ratio of tax and social security receipts to GDP 
will remain at the same high level of 2007. 
The taxation of households will be affected above all by the new tax breaks for the taxpayer’s 
home, largely offset by the automatic increase in taxation due to fiscal drag. 
Personal  income  tax  (Irpef)  has  a  highly  progressive  structure  that,  in  the  presence  of 
inflation,  results  every  year  in  households’  tax  liability  increasing  more  than  their  taxable 
income.  A  periodic  evaluation  of  the  effects  of  fiscal  drag  would  help  to  increase  the 
transparency of fiscal policies. 
The  taxation  of  firms  will  undergo  a  series  of  changes  that  will  ultimately  tend  to 
counterbalance  each  other.  Some  measures  involve  an  appreciable  simplification  of 
formalities and an improvement from the standpoint of the certainty of tax rules. 
The proposal for the municipal property tax (ICI), a tax that is relatively non-distortionary for 
economic  activity,  does  not  appear  to  be  consistent  with  the  objective,  confirmed  with  the 
draft  enabling  law  presented  in  August,  of  strengthening  the  tax  autonomy  of  local 
government  bodies.  The  municipal  property  tax  is  the  linchpin  of  local  finance  in  many 
countries, thanks to the ease of assessing it, the low mobility of its tax base and the latter’s 
relatively uniform geographical distribution compared with other forms of wealth. 
The  threshold  of  income  below  which  taxpayers  may  benefit  from  the  ICI  relief,  set  at 
€50,000, excludes a limited number of taxpayers. The size of the break for taxpayers who 
live  in  a  rented  home  is  independent  of  the  number  and  income  of  other  members  of  the 
household and of the zone of residence. 
The  July  agreement  between  the  Government  and  the  social  partners,  which  will  be 
incorporated into a bill accompanying the Finance Bill, increases the eligibility requirements 
for length-of-service pensions, starting in 2008, more gradually than had been established in 
the 2004 reform. 
In a context marked by pronounced ageing of the population, it will only be possible to pay 
adequate pensions by raising the average effective retirement age. 
The  agreement  postpones 
the  coefficients  for  converting  accrued 
contributions  into  benefits  until  2010.  This  will  be  15  years  after  the  introduction  of  the 
coefficients,  which,  moreover,  were  based  on  the  1990  mortality  tables.  The  agreement 
creates  the  conditions,  after  2010,  for  the  coefficients  to  be  updated  more  frequently  and 
automatically. 
Some of the solutions envisaged in the agreement risk moving the system further away from 
the basic principles of a notional defined-contribution system: equal treatment of workers and 
a close link between contributions and benefits. The latter improves labour market incentives, 
in particular making irregular employment less advantageous, and allows greater freedom to 
be offered in the choice of retirement age. 
the  updating  of 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 9 
More specifically, the agreement indicates the possibility that the coefficients will no longer 
be  the  same  for  all  workers,  with  distinctions  made  according  to  sector  of  activity.  The 
possibility  is  also  mooted  of  guaranteeing  some  workers  a  minimum  income  replacement 
ratio of 60 per cent, independently of the contributions paid, the growth of the economy and 
demographic developments. 
The  new  rules  on  supplementary  pensions,  which  entered  into  force  on  1  January  2007, 
have led to a significant increase in the number of persons signed up with private pension 
funds, but the proportion of workers who have enrolled is still insufficient. 
According  to  data  collected  by  Covip,  the  supervisory  authority  for  pension  funds,  in  the 
middle of 2007 the workers signed up with some form of supplementary retirement scheme 
(pre-  and  post-1993  occupational  pension  funds,  open  pension  funds,  individual  pension 
plans)  numbered  about  4.3  million  (3.3  million  at  the  end  of  2006).  Counting  only  private-
sector payroll workers, who were affected by the reform of the severance pay system, the 
number  signed  up  rose  between  end-2006  and  mid-2007  from  1,828,000  to  2,730,000, 
corresponding  to  a  membership  rate  of  22  per  cent.  Members  of  pre-  and  post-1993 
occupational funds authorized at the end of 2006 numbered 28 per cent of the potential total. 
The data do not take account of those who were registered for supplementary pension plans 
via tacit consent (whose number is not yet available). 
To make sure that future pensioners have adequate incomes, it is necessary to continue the 
efforts to increase the proportion of workers signing up. In particular, it needs to be increased 
among young workers and employees of small firms and service businesses. 
The contribution of persons operating in the asset management field is crucial to ensure that 
individuals’ retirement saving choices are as appropriate as possible. The resources devoted 
to advising customers need to be increased; the products offered must be simple and meet 
workers’ needs. Administrative and management expenses must be kept as low as possible. 
Competition  between  funds  must  be  fostered  by  guaranteeing  the  maximum  transparency 
and comparability between the different products. Workers should periodically receive clear 
information on the public and supplementary pensions they can expect to receive. 
Some measures are intended to counter poverty and social exclusion. They are in addition to 
the increases in small pensions approved at the end of June and the measures to strengthen 
unemployment benefits outlined in the July agreement. According to Istat, in 2006 some 11 
per  cent  of  Italian  households  were  poor,  that  is  2.6  million  households  and  7.5  million 
individuals. Poverty is especially common among households in the South, those in which 
the head of the household is unemployed and those with a large number of members, above 
all children not of legal age. Italy’s poverty rate is high by international standards. 
It  is  important  to  identify  instruments  that  give  systematic  support  to  persons  in  need.  A 
preliminary  assessment  suggests  that  some  of  the  measures  proposed  could  be  targeted 
more specifically at the weakest categories. 
Apart from its temporary nature and the implementation difficulties, the subsidy for persons 
with  low  incomes  who  are  unable  to  exploit  all  the  personal  income  tax  reliefs,  introduced 
only for 2007, might not be very effective in reducing the extension of poverty. In particular, it 
does not take account of households’ overall economic conditions. 
 The budget for 2008 keeps the main items of the public finances at the levels forecast for this 
year;  it  does  not  take  advantage  of  the  good  performance  of  revenue  to  accelerate  the 
reduction in the public debt; it does not return a significant share of the recent increases in 
revenue to taxpayers. 
10 
 BIS Review 117/2007
Over  a  longer  span  of  time  the  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report  shows  that  a  one 
percentage point increase in the growth rate of the economy for ten years would reduce the 
ratio of the public debt to GDP by about 10 percentage points. 
Fiscal  policy  can  be  a  major  factor  in  the  growth  of  the  economy.  A  pension  system  that 
encourages people to continue to work; a tax system that attenuates the heaviest and most 
distortionary forms of taxation (the measures on corporate income tax and the regional tax 
on productive activities are steps in the right direction); an education system that, reformed 
along the lines of the Government’s White Paper, guarantees higher and more uniform levels 
of learning across the country; and a system of social assistance carefully targeted to needy 
citizens these are the pillars of such a fiscal policy. 
A  start  has  been  made  on  measures  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  public  expenditure  and 
improve  the  organization  of  the  public  sector.  The  challenge  is  now  to  achieve  a  sharp 
slowdown  in  primary  current  expenditure,  reduce  the  burden  of  taxes  and  social  security 
contributions on workers and firms, and increase the share of public resources invested in 
infrastructure and human capital, together with that allocated to the alleviation of poverty. 
  accounts 
government projections – EFPD of June 2007 and September update 
Tables and Figures 
Table 1.   Main indicators of general government finances 
Table 2.  General government revenue 
Table 3.   General government expenditure 
Table 4.   General government borrowing requirement 
Table 5.   General government selected fiscal indicators: 
 
Table 6.   Estimated effects of the budget on the general government consolidated  
 
Table 7a.   Requirements to qualify for early retirement (July 2007 agreement) 
Table 7b.   Requirements to qualify for early retirement (2004 reform) 
Figure 1.   General government net borrowing, primary surplus and interest payments 
Figure 2.   General government debt level and determinants of its change 
Figure 3.   Tax  revenue  and  social  security  contributions  and  primary  expenditure  in  Italy 
 
Figure 4.   Average cost of the debt, average gross interest rate on BOTs and gross yield of 
 
Figure 5.   10-year yield differentials with respect to Italy 
Figure 6.  Primary surplus: objectives and outturns 
Figure 7.   Primary surplus and temporary effects 
Figure 8.   Budget for 2008: composition and effects on net borrowing 
and the euro area 
10-year BTPs 
  BIS Review 117/2007 
 11 
12 
 BIS Review 117/2007
   BIS Review 117/2007 
 13 
  14 
BIS Review 117/2007
 BIS Review 117/2007 
  15 
16 
 BIS Review 117/2007
  BIS Review 117/2007 
 17 
 18 
 BIS Review 117/2007
BIS Review 117/2007 
  19 
 20 
 BIS Review 117/2007
BIS Review 117/2007 
  21 
