David Dodge: Monetary policy report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 18 October 2007.  
 Today, we released the October Monetary Policy Report, which discusses current economic 
and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Since  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  and  against  a  backdrop  of  robust  global 
economic  expansion  and  strong  commodity  prices,  the  Canadian  economy  has  been 
stronger than projected. It is now operating further above its production potential than had 
been previously expected.  
Since the July Update, the outlook for the U.S. economy has weakened. The Canadian dollar 
has  appreciated  sharply,  and  credit  conditions  have  tightened.  Despite  these  tighter  credit 
conditions, the momentum of domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain strong. The 
combined effect of a weaker U.S. outlook and a higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar 
implies, however, that net exports will exert a more significant drag on the economy in 2008 
and  2009  than  previously  expected.  As  a  result,  Canada's  gross  domestic  product  is 
projected to grow by 2.6 per cent in 2007, 2.3 per cent in 2008, and 2.5 per cent in 2009.  
With the economy moving back towards balance, and with the direct effect of the stronger 
Canadian dollar on consumer prices, core inflation is projected to gradually decline to 2 per 
cent in the second half of 2008. Total CPI inflation is expected to peak at about 3 per cent 
later this year and then move back down to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2008.  
But there are a number of upside and downside risks to the Bank's inflation projection. The 
main upside risk is that excess demand in the Canadian economy could persist longer than 
projected. The main downside risk is that output and inflation could be lower if the Canadian 
dollar  were  to  be  persistently  higher  than  the  assumed  average  level  of  98  cents  U.S.  for 
reasons not associated with demand for Canadian products. 
All  factors  considered,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  risks  to  its  inflation  projection  are  roughly 
balanced, with perhaps a slight tilt to the downside. 
The Bank also judges, at this time, that the current level of the target for the overnight rate is 
consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
