Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the 
Parliamentary Budget Committee, Madrid, 9 October 2007.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
My appearance before this Committee as part of the Parliamentary discussion of the State 
budget  for  2008  comes  at  a  time  when  shocks  are  still  reverberating  through  some  of  the 
major international financial markets, and the attendant uncertainty inevitably bears on the 
analysis of the economic situation. 
In  my  appearance  before  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs  on  17 
September, I examined in detail the origin and the main implications for ECB monetary policy 
and  for  the  Spanish  economy  of  these  shocks,  which  emerged  last  summer  against  a 
background of marked momentum of the economy and of world trade. 
A significant part of this dynamism – reflected in growth rates above 5% for world output and 
above  6%  for  trade  –  derives  from  the  sound  performance  of  the  emerging  economies  in 
recent  years;  indeed,  they  seem  to  have  been  less  affected  by  the  shocks  than  the  more 
developed  Western  economies.  This  is,  in  fact,  a significant  feature of  the  present  bout  of 
turbulence  which,  if  I  may  briefly  recall,  originated  in  a  financial  market  of  a  developed 
country  (the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market).  The  turbulence  was  initially  transmitted  to 
other international financial markets through sharp corrections in the credit quality of certain 
complex structured financial products which, at least apparently, were relatively concentrated 
in the financial systems of a number of developed economies. The Spanish economy is not 
one of them. Although I will pass quickly over this point, which I addressed in depth in my 
recent appearances before Congress and the Senate, I do wish to remind you of the safety 
buffer afforded by the Spanish financial system’s non-exposure to practices and products of 
this type and by the soundness of our credit institutions in terms of profitability, solvency and 
ample provisions. 
In  the  economies  most  directly  affected,  credit  institutions  active  in  originating  and 
distributing  these  complex  structured  products  have  prompted  tensions  in  the  interbank 
markets  in  which  the  liquidity  provided  by  central  banks  to  the  financial  system  is 
redistributed. The rapid response of the central banks, led by the US Federal Reserve and 
the  European  Central  Bank,  prevented  these  tensions  from  acting  as  a  channel  through 
which  the  instability  was  further  amplified.  We  must  acknowledge,  however,  that  there  are 
still uncertainties hindering the normalisation of these markets and that dissipating them will 
require an additional effort by institutions to increase the transparency of their operations. 
The euro area stands ready to face these shocks from a solid position and, therefore, with 
significant resilience. That said, in the second quarter of 2007 the euro area's GDP grew less 
than expected, although it held at levels in line with potential growth. 
The  fundamentals  underlying  this  growth  pattern  remain  firm,  so  conditions  are  generally 
favourable for the continuation of the current economic boom. Significant in this respect is, 
firstly,  the  favourable  trend  of  employment,  which  is  a  necessary,  albeit  not  sufficient, 
condition for the increased buoyancy of private consumption in the area. Secondly, European 
firms  on  the  whole  enjoy  a  healthy  financial  position  and  are  posting  substantial  profits,  a 
situation which is conducive to the growth of private productive investment. 
In the external sector, however, most of the available forecasts point to a loss of steam in the 
US economy in the coming quarters. But this will be countered by the continued thrust of the 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 1
emerging economies which, as stated, are showing notable resilience to the type of financial 
tensions currently at large. 
The  sound  economic  performance  of  the  area  has,  moreover,  been  compatible  with 
continued  low  inflation  rates.  The  rise  evidenced  by  the  September  figure  –  which  will 
probably continue in the closing months of this year and in the opening months of 2008 – is 
largely  attributable  to  the  more  volatile  components  of  the  HICP.  Firstly,  it  is  strongly 
influenced by energy prices, which in the closing stages of 2007 are unlikely to repeat the 
favourable  pattern  of  late  2006,  so  the  growth  rate  of  the  HICP  is  being  subjected  to  an 
upward base effect of some size. Secondly, the demand pressures and decreased supply in 
the markets for certain food products are exerting upward pressure on the prices of those 
products. 
This is, in short, the macroeconomic situation of the euro area as it faces the financial market 
shocks.  The  time  elapsed  and  the  information  it  has  been  possible  to  gather  since  the 
summer  are  clearly  insufficient  to  predict  with  any  accuracy  the  most  likely  effects  of  this 
turbulence on the European economy in the medium term. 
Before July, the persistence of the global imbalances and of protectionist pressure in some 
markets,  the  uncertainty  over  the  future  behaviour  of  oil  and  commodity  prices,  and  the 
pressure that more buoyant employment might exert on wage demands made for a scenario 
in  which  the  balance  of  risks  to  euro  area  activity  growth  and  price  stability  was  moving 
downwards in the first case and upwards in the second. 
Subsequent  events  in  international  financial  markets  since  then  suggest  an  increase  in 
downside  risks  to  activity,  which  may  have  mitigated  to  some  extent  the  risks  to  price 
stability, which continue to be upward. However, uncertainty is still very high in relation to at 
least three factors that may be crucial for the outcome of this bout of turbulence. 
First, more information has to be gathered to determine more accurately the extent of the US 
slowdown and its possible transmission to the world economy. Second, the ultimate effects 
that  the  upward  revision  of  credit  risk  premiums  will  have  on  the  cost  and  availability  of 
private sector financing will have to be determined. These premiums had reached very low 
and,  in  general,  scantly  discriminatory  levels  in  recent  years  against  a  background  of 
widespread  optimism  and  economic  boom,  and  so  may  have  led  to  probably  excessive 
investment in certain potentially high-risk activities. Such a revision is, in itself, a healthy sign, 
but  it  is  yet  to  be  seen  how  large  it  will  be  and  whether  it  will  be  orderly,  as  would  be 
desirable.  Also,  the  significance,  and  the  impact  on  European  corporate  and  consumer 
confidence, of the poor functioning of some markets will largely depend on how long this bout 
of turbulence lasts. 
Against this backdrop of uncertainty, on 4 October the ECB Governing Council decided to 
hold  official  interest  rates  unchanged,  reiterating  its  commitment  to  price  stability,  close 
attention to ongoing developments and readiness to act as necessary to prevent the risks to 
price stability from materialising. At the same time, the ECB has expressed its determination 
to  use  the  resources  available  to  it  to  smooth  the  process  of  normalisation  of  European 
interbank market conditions. 
As I mentioned before Parliament scarcely a month ago, these events come at a time when 
the Spanish economy continues to show considerable buoyancy, with GDP growth in the first 
half  of  the  year  around  or  slightly  above  a  rate  of  4%  and  employment  growth  somewhat 
higher  than  3%.  This  period  saw  the  continuation  of  the  slight  moderation  in  domestic 
demand first seen in 2006 and of the improvement in the contribution of net external demand 
to growth, which began that same year, enabling the composition of domestic and external 
sources of expenditure to be brought more into balance. 
But  the  change  in  composition  extended  also  to  domestic  demand,  where  lower  relative 
household spending growth and stronger business investment were observed during the first 
half  of  the  year.  Indeed,  the  gradual  moderation  in  household  consumption  initiated  some 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2007
quarters  ago  continued,  reflecting  a  natural  adaptation  to  less  generous  monetary  and 
financial conditions as a result of the interest rate rise under way since late 2005 and of the 
weaker  wealth  effect  on  consumption  due  to  slower  house  price  rises.  However,  the 
buoyancy  of  employment  and  its  effect  on  income  prospects  are  helping  to  smooth  the 
adjustment of consumption to more sustainable levels. 
It  is  precisely  this  behaviour  of  employment,  which  continues  to  be  underpinned  by 
considerable demographic dynamism that is the main factor behind the gradualness of the 
first-half slowdown in residential investment, since also in this case the higher interest rates 
and the lower expectations of capital gains are making for less vigorous housing investment. 
The change in monetary and financial conditions also induced a certain moderation in their 
demand for credit, contributing to a progressive stabilisation of household debt ratios. 
Corporate investment and borrowing plans are being affected somewhat less perceptibly by 
the  rise  in  interest  rates.  Particularly  notable  is  the  continued  strength  of  productive 
investment in a situation of high profitability and favourable business expectations. In fact, it 
has become the most buoyant component of domestic demand, although moving on a mildly 
decelerating trend in the second quarter. Also apparent in the last few months is an incipient 
change in the purpose of loans extended to firms, with a slowdown in those used to finance 
real estate and construction activities, and an increase in those to industrial firms. 
Net external demand is helping to mitigate the impact of slower spending on growth, mainly 
due to the moderation in imports in the first half of this year, probably in response to the mild 
slowdown in final demand. Meanwhile, exports, after the good results last year, are showing 
the  effect  of  more  contained  world  –  and  especially  European  –  growth  and  perhaps  the 
effect of the euro's appreciation on sales to non-Community countries. Spain’s net borrowing, 
although it has continued to increase, is doing so more slowly than in previous years. 
The  changes  I  have  described  in  GDP  composition  on  the  expenditure  side  have  been 
feeding through to the various productive branches which, as a whole, have remained most 
robust  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Noteworthy  in  this  respect  is  the  strength  of  industrial 
production and the mild slowdown in construction activity. 
But  the  most  notable  feature  on  the  supply  side  was  again  the  abundance  of  labour 
resources,  which  continue  acting  to  smooth  the  adjustment  of  activity  to  the  buoyancy  of 
demand,  preventing  cost  pressures  and  excessive  prices. The  growth  of  consumer  prices, 
spurred by a temporary turnaround in oil prices in the first half of the year, posted a year-on-
year rate of 2.2% in August, leaving the differential with the euro area close to its historical 
low. However, it is very likely that, once the base effect of the energy price falls in the closing 
months of 2006 has been stripped out, inflation will again rise and that at the end of this year 
it will reach levels similar to those at end-2006. This is in fact suggested by the HICP growth 
flash estimate of 2.7% for September. 
In examining the outlook of the Spanish economy for the coming quarters, it has to be kept in 
mind  that  there  are  still  few  indicators  of  the  situation  since  the  turbulence  erupted  on 
international  financial  markets.  Nonetheless,  the  available  information  indicates  that  the 
profile  of  smoothly  moderating  activity  apparent  since  the  second  quarter  continued  in  the 
third quarter, and this pattern can be expected to persist throughout the rest of the year, with 
scant deviations from the forecasts published by the Bank on 30 March (3.7% for 2007). This 
slight slowdown is based on domestic demand and, more specifically, on the consumption 
and  residential  investment  components,  while  the  contribution  of  net  external  demand  to 
growth in the first half of 2007 improved further. The slowdown in GDP seems to point to a 
gradual shift to a growth rate of around 3% in 2008 as a result of some rebalancing of the 
domestic  and  external  sectors.  However,  the  shocks  affecting  the  international  financial 
markets  since  August  have  also  increased  uncertainty  over  the  forecasts  for  the  Spanish 
economy and have possibly heightened the downside risks. 
Allow  me  to  spell  out  some  of  the  factors  behind  this  scenario  of  a  smooth  slowdown, 
compatible with continued highly dynamic activity and employment. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 3
First, the change in monetary and financial conditions will foreseeably ease the adjustment to 
a  more  sustainable  pace  of  private-sector  spending  and  indebtedness.  This  adjustment 
started some time back and is proceeding smoothly. Second, the progressive normalisation 
of  the  real  estate  market,  against  a  background  in  which  the  demographic  factor  and  the 
buoyancy  of  employment  are  lending  greater  support  to  housing  demand  than  in  previous 
property cycles, would limit the effect of slower house price rises on consumption and soften 
the impact of the cyclical change on residential investment. 
At the same time, the step-up in private- and public-sector investment in recent years has 
raised the level of capitalisation of the economy following a prolonged period of intense job 
creation,  and  this  should  manifest  itself  in  higher  long-term  potential  growth.  Although  it  is 
unlikely  that  the  expansion  of  business  investment  and  non-residential  investment  in 
construction will maintain the pace of recent quarters, the growth outlook for both spending 
components is, at first sight, favourable. 
In  any  event,  it  seems  unlikely  that  productive  investment  alone  can  offset  the  lower 
contribution from household spending. Hence, as I pointed out in my previous testimony, the 
role  of  net external  demand  will  be  fundamental  in  making  some  containment  of  spending 
compatible  with  a  continued  growth  rate  of  around  3%.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  last  few 
years, the contribution of this variable to growth depends very much on the performance of 
Spain’s export markets, but also on the competitiveness of Spanish production. Therefore, a 
scenario of recovery  in  net  exports such  as  that  described requires  Spanish  firms to  push 
ahead  with  the  improvement  in  competitiveness  made  by  them  in  response  to  the  sharp 
ongoing adjustment in the structure of world trade due to the entry of new competitors. At the 
same  time,  the  slower  momentum  of  final  demand  should  manifest  itself  in  a  certain 
slowdown in imports, curbing the leakage of spending out of Spain. 
However, as I indicated in September, it is precisely in the external economic environment 
where  the  main  factors  of  risk  to  the  macroeconomic  scenario  outlined  above  are  to  be 
found.  If  the  recent  bout  of  financial  instability  and  of  heightened  international  uncertainty 
were to significantly affect the buoyancy of Spain’s export markets, the capacity of external 
demand  to  contain  the  adverse  impact  of  a  slowdown  in  domestic  spending  would  be 
diminished and, accordingly, the efforts required to improve competitiveness would be even 
greater. 
Domestically, the continued dynamism of employment and the gradual normalisation of the 
property  market  are  fundamental  for  keeping  income  expectations  and,  consequently, 
agents’ spending  plans  on  a  mildly  slowing  course.  In  any  event,  the Spanish  economy  is 
witnessing  a  process  in  which  construction  investment  is  diminishing  in  importance  as  the 
engine  of  growth.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  have  a  sufficiently  flexible  mechanism  of 
resource allocation to enable industrial activity and services to take over from construction, 
furthering  the  change  in  output  composition  that  has  been  taking  place  in  the  last  few 
quarters. 
In the current circumstances, economic policies have an important role to play by holding the 
euro area firmly on course to meet its macroeconomic stability objectives, which are those 
that  make  sustained  growth  possible  and  shore  up  the  economy  against  shocks  and 
outbreaks  of  insecurity  and  uncertainty.  As  mentioned  above,  the  main  task  of  monetary 
policy  is  to  ensure  euro  area  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  and  it  is  against  this 
background that monetary conditions have gradually been normalised since December 2005. 
This process has been correcting the benign monetary conditions of the Spanish economy in 
recent years and promoting a more balanced growth pattern. 
The  most  valuable  contribution  fiscal  policy  can  make  is  to  ensure  the  commitment  to 
budgetary  stability.  This  commitment  has  been  essential  for  establishing  the  conditions 
propitious  to  the  recent  long  period  of  economic  growth  of  the  Spanish  economy  and  it  is 
particularly relevant to the macroeconomic setting I have described. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2007
The latest official forecasts for the general government account are for a surplus of 1.3% of 
GDP in 2007. This would amply meet the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact and 
enable  a  further  reduction  of  the  public  debt/GDP  ratio.  Moreover,  it  represents  an 
improvement of 30 bp on the target set in the latest update of the Stability Programme. This 
improvement basically reflects a positive deviation of tax revenue with respect to budget, in a 
setting of higher-than-expected growth. 
The  target  set  in  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2008  for  the  general  government  surplus  is 
1.15%,  in  a  macroeconomic  scenario  characterised  by  a  mild  slowdown  in  GDP.  The 
projected decrease in the surplus is based essentially on tax cuts mainly affecting personal 
and corporate income tax, whereas on the spending side the draft Budget sets a growth rate 
for the State in line with expected nominal GDP growth. This entails strict compliance with 
the ceiling established in the Budget Stability Law in June. 
In any event, it should be kept in mind that the Budget is based on a projection for end-2007 
that is very prudent on the revenue side. The strong buoyancy of receipts in the year to date, 
particularly in direct taxes, might enable the latest official projection of the surplus for 2007 to 
be exceeded. Should this occur, under a macroeconomic scenario similar to that assumed in 
the Budget, this improved result in 2007 should be carried over to the budget for 2008 and 
thus enable another surplus in excess of projections. What is most important is that, as in 
previous years, the additional revenue that may arise should not lead to increased spending, 
but rather to a higher surplus. 
Regarding  the  size  of  the  budget  surplus,  I  wish  to  underline  that  the  current  situation  of 
public finances is, in part, temporary. This is because, after ten years of rapid expansion at a 
rate  that  has  recently  exceeded  potential  growth,  the  actual  buoyancy  of  tax  revenue  has 
naturally been associated with the buoyancy of domestic demand and, in particular, with the 
vigour of the real estate sector, and therefore has a temporary component that would tend to 
disappear  in  an  economic  slowdown.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to  preserve  the  stabilising 
potential  provided  by  the  current  state  of  public  finances  so  that  phases  of  less  dynamic 
private spending can be faced with strength and the ability to react and, above all, so as to 
be prepared for unexpected contractionary shocks. This approach is especially valid in the 
current climate of uncertainty, in which a continued economic policy of rigour and budgetary 
stability  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  resources  when  it  comes  to  preserving  internal  and 
external confidence in our economy. 
Perseverance in the strategy of budgetary consolidation is also necessary from a medium-
term perspective so as to be in the best possible position to address the foreseeable impact 
of  population  ageing,  aside  from  the  required  further  progress  in  reform  of  the  pension 
system. 
Regarding the co-ordination of this strategy, I would like to add two more comments. First, it 
is very important that all tiers of government  contribute effectively, particularly the regional 
governments,  whose  weight  in  public  spending  policies  has  become  most  substantial. 
However,  the  official  forecast  is  that,  overall,  these  territorial  governments  will  still  post  a 
deficit in 2007 despite the benign economic circumstances over the last few years. 
Second,  budgetary  stability  should  be  accompanied  by  an  improvement  in  the  quality  of 
public  finances  to  secure  advances  in  the  allocation  of  factors  of  production,  particularly 
human and technological factors, and in the efficiency of the economy. The spending policies 
included  in  the  draft  Budget  give  priority  to  areas  of  key  importance  for  improving 
productivity,  such  as  increased  resources  for  research  and  development,  education  and 
infrastructure, although other priority items entail increases in current primary spending. It is 
important that the envisaged increase in resource allocation be managed efficiently through 
the use of better suited mechanisms to assess and select public policies so as to enable real 
increases in productivity. 
The  budget  is  not,  however,  the  only  instrument,  nor  often  the  most  appropriate  one,  to 
achieve the aim of raising the efficiency of the economy. Structural policies designed to make 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 5
factor and product markets more flexible will be called on to make an essential contribution to 
this aim and, for this purpose, it is necessary to persevere with and extend the processes of 
liberalisation undertaken in recent years. Policies of this type, which enable growth potential 
to be raised and make for the efficient allocation of resources in the economy, are pivotal in 
the  present  conjuncture,  which,  as  stated  earlier,  requires  a  rebalancing  of  the  sources  of 
growth of the Spanish economy. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2007
