Malcolm D Knight: European financial integration in the context of 
current financial market turbulence 
Keynote  remarks  by  Mr  Malcolm  D  Knight,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the 2007 Eurofi Conference “Achieving the integration of European financial 
markets in a global context”, Brussels, 3 December 2007. 
 Let me thank you for the opportunity to address this distinguished group of executives and 
policymakers. Eurofi is playing a leading role in identifying key strategic issues that need to 
be addressed to advance further towards the fundamental goal of achieving comprehensive 
financial  integration  in  Europe,  and  of  promoting  a  closer  dialogue  between  market 
participants and policymakers and in particular financial regulators. 
In  my  brief  remarks  tonight  I  want  first  to  underscore  several  important  achievements  of 
financial integration in Europe thus far that are key to its further progress. Then I will outline 
several features of the current international financial market turmoil that have implications for 
the  future  progress  of  European  financial  integration.  Finally,  I  will  comment  on  how  the 
preliminary  lessons  from  the  financial  disturbances  we  are  currently  witnessing  may  be 
important in shaping the ongoing process of financial integration in coming years. 
European financial integration 
The  achievements  of  European  financial  integration  over  the  past  two  decades  are  truly 
impressive.  Prior  to  the  advent  of  the  euro  in  1999,  European  authorities  took  deep  and 
successful  steps  to  stabilise  cross-country  exchange  rates  and  eliminate  controls  on 
international  capital  movements  within  what  is  now  the  euro  zone.  The  introduction  of  the 
single currency less than nine years ago has led to an acceleration of financial integration by 
eliminating intra-zone exchange rate risk and achieving low and stable inflation. Indeed, the 
establishment  of  a  common  currency  backed  by  a  European  Central  Bank  with  a  clear 
monetary  policy  mandate  and  underpinned  by  firm  fiscal  rules  has  helped  to  clarify  policy 
responsibilities and make more transparent the structure of this huge multi-country economic 
region. This has had the expected positive effect on European economies and, indeed, on 
global markets. Over the past two decades, inflation in what are now the euro area countries 
has come down substantially, nominal interest rates have fallen, and inflation expectations 
have become well anchored at low and stable levels. As a result of these achievements, the 
European  Central  Bank  has  rapidly  established  itself  as  a  key  and  credible  institution  in 
global financial markets. 
In itself, this move towards greater macroeconomic stability has boosted European financial 
integration. From the earliest years of the euro, issuance of corporate debt securities surged, 
supported  by  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk  within  the  currency  zone  and  higher 
demand from a larger pool of investors. Likewise, a deep euro area-wide interbank money 
market developed rapidly. This is a key component – indeed, perhaps the key component – 
of the financial infrastructure of the euro zone. Its rapid development owes much to the major 
efforts of the European Central Bank in elaborating its monetary policy procedures and its 
liquidity  operations.  To  be  sure,  European  financial  integration  has  not  proceeded  at  the 
same  pace  across  all  sectors  and  markets.  Integration  of  the  retail  banking  markets,  for 
instance, has remained limited, reflecting the persistence of legal, institutional and regulatory 
differences. But things are moving. Even a cursory reading of the financial press shows that 
financial integration is making visible progress almost day by day. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
The current financial market turmoil 
But how does the current turmoil in global financial markets impact on the positive picture 
that I have just sketched for you? Let me recall that this turmoil follows a prolonged period of 
broadly based and aggressive risk-taking that was reflected in unusually low risk premia and 
low volatility across many asset classes. Thus, prior to last summer, many careful observers 
believed that the price of risk was too low – so an increase in risk premia was widely seen as 
healthy from a financial stability perspective.  
There was a large element of wisdom in this point of view. Nevertheless, when risk aversion 
suddenly jumped last summer there were major surprises. A first surprise was that a shock in 
one  specific  segment  of  the  mortgage  sector  in  the  United  States  led  to  severe  adverse 
effects not only in that country, but also in the euro zone, the United Kingdom and Canada. 
The impact in the euro zone was a surprise to many observers because increasing financial 
integration had greatly strengthened the European financial system.  
A second surprise was the sudden evaporation of liquidity in the major interbank markets, 
which  has  persisted  since  the  summer  and  which  has  transmitted  the  tensions  in  credit 
markets to the very heart of the international financial system. The distortions in the interbank 
money markets have occurred mainly in the United States, the euro zone and a few other 
key  economies,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom.  They  are  much  less  severe  in  Japan;  and 
major emerging market economies have weathered the global turmoil relatively well so far. In 
the  euro  area,  the  spread  between  the  market  expectation  of  the  overnight  interest  rate 
during  the  next  three  months  (the  EONIA  swap  interest  rate)  and  the  rate  at  which 
commercial banks can borrow from each other over the same period – the three-month Libor 
rate – suddenly jumped in August and has stayed elevated since, while it is usually a few 
basis  points  only.  Indeed,  this  spread  has  been  widening  again  since  early  November,  to 
around  75  bp  today.  Since  the  interbank  credit  markets  are  uncollateralised,  this  large 
premium  presumably  reflects  increased  liquidity  and  credit  risk  concerns,  even  among  the 
largest banks. 
Liquidity and credit risk  
What are the main causes behind this unexpected upsurge in liquidity risk and credit risk? I 
would stress two key factors: information failures in credit markets; and weaknesses in the 
“originate-and-distribute”  business  model  adopted  in  recent  years  by  large  internationally 
active banks. 
First, the opacity of certain parts of the global financial marketplace, particularly the markets 
for  structured  financial  products  and  the  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  designed  to  hold  them 
(the now famous “conduits” and SIVs), has led to a sudden collapse of confidence in asset 
valuations and a generalised distrust of counterparties. As a result, market participants now 
wonder  about  the  size  and  character  of  banks’  exposures  –  including  those  of  large 
European  banks  –  because  of  the  existence  of  explicit  or  implicit  backup  credit  lines  to  a 
wide variety of market players. Beginning last summer, this crisis of confidence triggered an 
evaporation of market liquidity for the instruments concerned and a funding liquidity squeeze 
for those institutions that were suspected of being vulnerable to them. 
Second,  weaknesses  in  the  “originate-and-distribute”  business  model  of  the  large  banks, 
primarily  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  There  are  some  very  positive  aspects  of  this 
model, since it helps to diversify banks’ revenue streams and risks. But the operation of this 
model  in  recent  years  has  been  associated  with  an  excessive  relaxation  in  standards  of 
credit origination and credit monitoring in the financial system as a whole. As a result of the 
current  turmoil,  the  originators  and  securitisers  of  complex  financial  instruments  have 
become – in many cases to their own surprise – the “holders of last resort” of the more exotic 
credit products. This development has also underlined weaknesses in the risk management 
practices  of  investors,  who  underpriced  the  risks  concerned  and  relied  excessively  on 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
external ratings for monitoring risk. And it has demonstrated that the wider distribution of risk 
across the financial system, if not supported by transparency and market discipline, makes it 
difficult to gauge the risk exposures of market participants. 
The combination of these two factors – inadequate public information in credit markets and 
weaknesses in the way credit risk has been distributed in the market – helps to explain why 
the current turbulence has primarily affected the interbank markets at the core of our modern 
global  financial  system  and  why  this  weakness  was  not  foreseen  before  last  summer. 
Because  they  were  focusing  on  the  balance  sheets  of  the  regulated  banking  institutions, 
observers wrongly underestimated the actual degree of leverage in the financial system as a 
whole – I mean all the leverage generated not only by the activities of commercial banks, but 
also  by  highly  leveraged  institutions,  SIVs,  conduits,  LBO-financed  firms,  etc;  that  is,  the 
leverage of all institutions that, implicitly or not, was predicated on backup credit lines being 
provided by regulated institutions in times of stress. 
Looking forward 
I believe that the financial integration that has taken place in the euro zone since the advent 
of the euro in 1999 has contributed importantly to a remarkable rise in living standards and 
greater  financial  and  economic  stability.  It  follows  that  continued  financial  integration  is 
essential  to  further  the  remarkable  progress  of  Europe.  So  the  question  is:  what  lessons 
should we draw from the current financial turbulence that can help to make the future course 
of European financial integration both stronger and more immune to financial disturbances at 
its core? 
I do not pretend to have an answer to this question – at least not yet. But in closing let me 
offer  just  four  thoughts  that  are  relevant  to  it.  First,  firm  euro  zone  monetary  policy  will 
continue to play a key role in fostering further European financial integration. The European 
Central Bank has shown great success in maintaining an appropriate monetary stance while 
at the same time fine-tuning its liquidity operations in the interbank market so as to ensure 
that its overnight rate remains broadly on target, and that monetary conditions continue to be 
set  effectively  given  prevailing  macroeconomic  conditions.  And  the  ECB  has  also  been  a 
leading  central  bank  in  taking  action  to  address  dislocations  in  the  longer-term  interbank 
money markets, even though this has proven difficult to realise given that the term premium 
comes from banks’ own uncertainties about liquidity and counterparty risks. 
My  second  thought  is  that  there  is  clearly  a  need  for  greater  transparency  in  financial 
markets on both sides of the Atlantic. This can take many forms. One is to reduce product 
complexity:  I  expect  to  see  more  emphasis  on  financial  assets  –  including  structured 
products – that have simpler features to make them less illiquid in difficult market conditions. 
Another is more refined rating scales for these assets, giving investors a better sense of their 
risk  characteristics.  There  are  signs  that  this  is  already  happening  in  the  marketplace,  as 
rating agencies and market participants adjust their methodologies for assessing and rating 
risk. 
Third,  there  is  a  need  for  improvement  in  risk  management  practices  –  not  least  liquidity 
management  by  financial  firms;  standards  of  credit  origination;  and  monitoring  of  the  debt 
servicing performance of borrowers. Experience suggests that prior to the current turbulence 
investors  underestimated  the  tail  risks  to  which  they  were  exposed,  including  the 
interdependencies between credit, market and liquidity risks. Improvements in stress testing 
can  play  a  key  role  here.  Needless  to  say,  such  stress  tests  should  consider  the  cross-
country nature of the euro area financial system. 
Finally,  greater  financial  stability  calls  for  closer  communication  and  cooperation  among 
players in the financial system, not just within the official sector, but also between the official 
and  private  sectors.  This  is  especially  true  in  the  euro  area  given  its  multiplicity  of 
jurisdictions and layers of responsibility, which puts a premium on cooperation. Meetings like 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
this suggest that the lesson is well understood by all the parties involved. This can only augur 
well for the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2007
