Jean-Claude Trichet: Enhancing the EU regulatory and supervisory 
framework – the Eurosystem’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  2007 
Eurofi  Conference  “Achieving  the  Integration  of  European  Financial  Markets  in  a  Global 
Context”, European Parliament, Brussels, 3 December 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to introduce the discussion on the EU regulatory and supervisory 
framework at this year’s EUROFI conference. The issue is particularly topical at the present 
juncture for two reasons. First, a wide range of EU institutions and fora are contributing to the 
first full review of the functioning of the Lamfalussy approach across financial sectors in view 
of a discussion on the matter by the ECOFIN Council. Second, the recent financial market 
turbulence  has  underscored,  among  other  things,  the  importance  of  effective  cross-border 
cooperation  and  information-sharing  among  the  competent  authorities.  The  Eurosystem 
which has strongly supported the Lamfalussy  approach from its inception and has actively 
contributed to its development during the past years also intends to contribute to the review 
process. It will publish its formal assessment – focusing on the banking sector – within the 
coming  days  and  therefore  I  would  like  to  take  today  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  a 
number of issues which I judge important. 
Basic premises underlying the Eurosystem’s assessment 
Let me start with the two basic premises underlying the Eurosystem’s assessment. The first 
premise  relates  to  the  main  challenges  for  the  EU  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework, 
namely  the  need  to  promote  further  progress  in  the  single  market  and,  at  the  same  time, 
safeguard  financial  stability  in  an  increasingly  interdependent  financial  system  at  EU  and 
international level. The Eurosystem is convinced that the EU framework will effectively meet 
these challenges only if divergences in supervisory requirements and practices are reduced 
to a minimum. At the same time, there is a need to ensure effective and timely information-
sharing  and  cooperation  among  the  competent  authorities.  While  in  recent  years  we  have 
undoubtedly seen very good progress in these areas, it is also clear that the level of cross-
border  cooperation  and  convergence  attained  is  not  yet  sufficient.  Moreover,  structural 
developments – notably the increasing prominence of cross-border activities and institutions 
in  the  EU  banking  markets  and  the  growing  level  of  functional  integration  of  cross-border 
groups – highlight that there is no room for complacency, and that further progress in cross-
border convergence and cooperation is of the essence. 
The  second  premise  underlying  the  Eurosystem’s  position  relates  to  the  choice  of  an 
adequate  institutional  vehicle  to  foster  the  heightened  degree  of  supervisory  convergence 
and  cooperation.  The  Eurosystem  remains  convinced  that  the  Lamfalussy  framework 
provides an appropriate setting in this respect. One of the key advantages of the Lamfalussy 
approach is the combination of a decentralised set-up with cross-border coordination at EU 
level. A decentralised approach is in line with the national responsibilities for safeguarding 
financial  stability  –  relating  not  only  to  prudential  supervision,  but  also  to  financial  stability 
monitoring and assessment, crisis management, and deposit insurance – while also allowing 
to  reap  the  benefits  of  geographical  proximity  and  of  the  established  experience  and 
knowledge of local supervisors. However, the accompanying coordinating mechanisms need 
to be sufficiently strong so as to achieve the required high level of cross-border convergence 
and cooperation and to ensure a level playing field. We consider that the EU regulatory and 
supervisory policy process has not yet been sufficiently strengthened in this respect. To this 
avail, further measures will be necessary at all levels of the policy process, pertaining to (i) 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
the  overall  institutional  setting  and  political  guidance  for  the  pursuit  of  cross-border 
convergence and cooperation; (ii) the EU regulatory framework, as laid down at levels 1 and 
2 of the Lamfalussy process, (iii) closely convergent supervisory requirements, as developed 
at  level  3  of  the  Lamfalussy  process  and  (iv)  streamlined  and  consistent  supervisory 
processes, as implemented by national supervisors on a day-to-day basis with the support of 
the level 3 committees.  
Three key issues for enhancement 
The Eurosystem’s views on the required measures within these four broad areas are broadly 
in  line  with the  respective  recommendations  of  other  EU  institutions  and  fora,  such  as  the 
European  Commission,  the  Inter-Institutional  Monitoring  Group,  the  Financial  Services 
Committee, and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS).  
I would like now to briefly highlight three key issues on which we place particular importance. 
First, one priority in the coming period will be to reinforce the role and operating mechanisms 
of the CEBS. The current status of the CEBS – a private network of national supervisors with 
a limited formal recognition at either EU or national level – is simply not commensurate with 
the  important  tasks  entrusted  to  this  committee.  The  institutional  standing  of  the  CEBS 
should therefore be enhanced significantly.  
Against this background we very much support the Commission’s plans to assess possible 
options  for  strengthening  the  EU  legal  status  of  the  Level  3  committees  as  well  as  to 
underscore  the  responsibility  of  national  supervisors  to  contribute  to  EU  cross-border 
convergence and cooperation by introducing a respective reference in their national mission 
statements. We also believe that a framework could be envisaged to allow EU institutions to 
provide  enhanced  political  impetus  to  the  work  of  the  CEBS,  and  the  other  level  3 
committees,  by  giving  strategic  guidance  and  comments  on  their  work  programme. 
Furthermore, an enhanced recourse of the CEBS to majority voting could facilitate decision-
making  in  those  areas  where  no  sufficient  progress  can  be  attained  on  the  basis  of  a 
consensual approach. In order to integrate majority voting effectively within CEBS’s voluntary 
mode  of  cooperation,  the  respective  decisions  should  be  observed  by  supervisors  on  a 
comply-or-explain basis and implementation should be carefully monitored via CEBS’ peer 
review mechanism. 
Second,  further  efforts  are  warranted  to  improve  the  level  of  regulatory  convergence. 
Progress in this field is a key issue especially in the banking sector, where most EU rules – 
with the exception of the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) – had been adopted before 
the Lamfalussy approach became available. Even in the case of the CRD, the Lamfalussy 
approach  was  implemented  only  to  some  extent.  Furthermore,  the  CRD  entails  a  large 
number of national options and discretions which hamper consistent implementation. Given 
that  the  lack  of  regulatory  convergence  represents  a  serious  obstacle  to  enhancing 
supervisory convergence, progress towards more consistent EU banking rules is absolutely 
critical.  
In the short-term, a main priority should be to achieve a significant reduction of the national 
options  and  discretions  enshrined  in  the  CRD.  Enhanced  action  by  the  Commission  to 
ensure  consistent  transposition  of  the  CRD  into  Member  States’  national  laws  is  also 
warranted.  Furthermore,  a  requirement  for  Member  States  to  disclose  any  regulatory 
additions  adopted  could  help  address  unnecessary  further  “goldplating”  of  EU  rules.  In 
addition, we welcome the suggestion of the CEBS to provide own-initiative advice on areas 
in which regulatory convergence should be further enhanced with a view to broadening the 
scope for supervisory convergence. As to future new regulatory initiatives, it would be helpful 
if EU bodies would specify more clearly the level of harmonisation to be achieved in level 1 
and  2  measures  and  follow-up  closely  the  respective  progress.  In  the  medium-term,  a 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
gradual restructuring of EU banking legislation more in line with the Lamfalussy framework 
should be pursued.  
Third, the arrangements for cross-border cooperation and information-sharing with respect 
to the major cross-border banking groups in the EU should be further enhanced. In particular, 
we consider that the cross-border arrangements between supervisors and central banks for 
the  major  EU  banking  groups  can  be  further  strengthened  also  with  a  view  to  enhancing 
preparedness  for  crisis  situations.  Indeed,  the  recent  financial  market  turbulence,  whilst 
being correctly weathered until now, has confirmed the need for effective information sharing 
not  only  between  supervisors,  but  also  between  supervisors  and  central  banks  (without 
supervisory responsibilities). This is important given the key role of central banks in ensuring 
the  orderly  functioning  of  money  markets,  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment 
systems, and contributing to safeguarding financial stability.  
Against this background, the Eurosystem strongly supports the ECOFIN conclusions on the 
EU financial stability arrangements adopted in October 2007, whereby the Council invites the 
Commission  to  assess  possible  clarifications  in  the  legal  framework  for  the  exchange  of 
information  between  supervisory  authorities,  central  banks  and  finance  ministries.  In  this 
respect, it is also useful to enhance the cooperation between supervisors and central banks 
at  the  operational  level.  In  particular,  the  involvement  of  central  banks  in  the  supervisory 
colleges  for  the  major  EU  banking  groups,  whenever  stress  situations  so  require,  is  an 
important aspect.  
Another important strand of work to improve cross-border supervision relates to the further 
extension of the scope and depth of CEBS’s project on “operational networking” in order to 
establish a sufficiently integrated, practical framework for day-to-day supervisory cooperation 
and to identify and address possible obstacles in this respect.  
Finally, the supervisory colleges for the major EU groups should be committed to playing a 
pioneering role in developing enhanced processes for cross-border supervision, for example 
by  pursuing  with  particular  intensity  measures  to  foster  the  enhanced  cross-border 
delegation of tasks and efforts to build up a common supervisory culture. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. I share the thrust of the EUROFI’s assessment – as expressed in the title 
to this session – that simply maintaining the status quo in EU regulation and supervision is 
not a suitable option for the way forward. Instead, cross-border convergence and cooperation 
will need to continue to be stepped up significantly to safeguard financial stability and foster 
further  integration  and  competitiveness  of  the  European  financial  market.  The  Lamfalussy 
framework  provides  the  right  institutional  setting  in  this  respect.  The  present  review  of  the 
institutional framework provides a unique opportunity for introducing measures to enhance its 
effectiveness,  from  the  provision  of  strategic  guidance  and  impetus  for  the  pursuit  of 
enhanced cross-border cooperation and convergence of supervisory practices to the actual 
delivery of consistent supervisory processes on a day-to-day level. As regards the banking 
sector,  the  Eurosystem  considers  that  priority  should  be  given  to  reinforcing  the  role  and 
operating  mechanisms  of  the  CEBS,  improving  the  level  of  regulatory  convergence,  and 
enhancing  the  arrangements  for  cross-border  cooperation  and  information-sharing  for  the 
major  EU  banking  groups,  also  ensuring  when  necessary  the  adequate  involvement  of 
central banks, given their role in contributing to the maintenance of financial stability.  
As you see I remain personally fully convinced that the Lamfalussy approach is at present 
the good one and that we must continue to give it all its chances. But this implies reinforcing 
tirelessly  its  functioning  and  fostering  the  close  cooperation  and  coordination  amongst  all 
authorities  concerned.  The  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  do  all  it  can  to  enhance  these 
cooperation and coordination within the present decentralised framework. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
One  last  remark.  If  there  is  a  provisional  lesson  we  can  draw  from  the  present  significant 
market correction, with episodes of turbulences, it is neither that the surveillance authorities 
have  not  been  up  to  their  tasks,  nor  that  central  banks  have  not  been  up  to  their 
responsibilities  but  that  a  very  close  connection  between  central  banks  and  surveillance 
authorities appear to be extremely important when dealing with acute and pressing issues in 
real time. It was the conviction of the Eurosystem, expressed repeatedly and publicly long 
before the present turmoil. We feel deeply reinforced in this conviction and encouraged to do 
all what we can to reinforce the link between Central Banks and banking surveillance. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2007
