Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The sub-prime banking crisis in the USA 
and its impact on the East African financial system  
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  a 
Commonwealth Business Forum Luncheon, Kampala, 21 November 2007.  
 Over  the  last  few  months,  capital  markets  around  the  world  have  been  going  through 
uncertain times as a result of the sub-prime mortgage crisis affecting the American banking 
industry.  
This started out as a problem of excess liquidity and quickly degenerated into a credit crisis, 
originating from financial institutions having exposure to the sub-prime market and thereby 
incurring  huge  losses  as  delinquencies  and  foreclosures  increased  following  US  Federal 
Reserve’s tighter monetary policy.  
Over  the  last  few  years,  the  US  financial  system  had  experienced  substantial  excess 
liquidity, which created huge surges in the valuations for home prices in the US.  
As interest rates fell due to excess liquidity, house prices rose rapidly. This was attributable 
to  declining  interest  rates  that  saw  their  lowest  levels  in  the  last  20  years.  Banks  lowered 
lending standards, allowing “sub-prime” borrowers to obtain home mortgages on increasingly 
favorable and imprudent terms.  
This,  coupled  with  the  emergent  practice  of  selling  these  mortgages  to  other  financial 
institutions, in packaged products known as Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), enabled 
the  lending  banks  immediately  to  take  such  mortgage  loans  off  their  balance  sheets.  This 
increased  the  banks’  propensity  to  make  such  loans  on  increasingly  liberal  and  imprudent 
terms.  Borrowers  with  very  poor  or  insufficient  creditworthiness  were  able  to  obtain 
mortgages  far  in  excess  of  what  they  should  have  been  able  to,  for  houses  that  were  far 
beyond their means.  
In addition, these sub-prime mortgages were frequently granted to borrowers with limited or 
no  credit  history  at  variable  interest  rates,  characterized  by  very  low  initial  “teaser”  rates, 
which would be sharply adjusted upwards after the initial period – typically after two years.  
As  house  prices  rose,  borrowers’  equity  in  the  properties  grew  and  they  were  able  to  sell 
their homes and take out profits or as was more frequently the case, they borrowed against 
their “increased equity” in the properties and used such “secondary mortgages” to engage in 
increased  consumer  spending,  and  in  other  cases,  to  make  payments  on  the  original 
mortgage.  
This  further  created  a  cycle,  resulting  in  very  high  consumer  spending  and  fuelling  global 
growth.  However,  as  interest  rates  started  to  rise  in  the  US  due  to  inflation  concerns,  this 
cycle came to an end and the demand for houses started to decline. This resulted in sharp 
falls in home prices and as a result, many owners/borrowers have become unable to service 
their mortgage loans.  
The excess liquidity has been slowly drying up and the levels of equity extraction available 
from  home  purchases  is  coming  down  –  leaving  less  money  for  consumer  spending.  This 
has  started  causing  problems  for  the  US  economy  in  the  form  of  foreclosures,  job  losses, 
loss of consumer confidence and reduced consumer spending and the fears of a slowdown, 
if not outright recession.  
This is what has become known as the sub-prime crisis.  
The sub prime crisis has also had a “contagion effect” and we have already started to see 
huge write-offs by banks business in the US as well as the UK, where housing prices during 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
last five years have also risen very rapidly, creating a potential effect such as in the US. This 
is expected to have global effects since the US consumer demand amounts to more than 40 
percent of the total OECD demand, and to 18 percent of world demand.  
Unlike the Asian financial crisis approximately 10 years ago, the current events triggered off 
by  the  US  sub-prime  market  has  not  sent  global  markets  and  currencies  into  a  tailspin. 
Indications are that, fundamentally, the global economy has firm foundations, although there 
is  still  the  possibility  that  the  turmoil  may  have  some  long-term  impact  due  to  the  domino 
effect of reduced economic activity in the world’s largest economy, the US.  
Initially,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Asian  crisis,  as  the  problem  exacerbated  over  the  last 
couple  of  months,  large  institutional  investors  appeared  to  shed  both  developed  and 
emerging-market equities and foreign exchange markets witnessed a significant increase in 
volatility, and emerging-market spreads rose significantly between late July and mid-August, 
as losses related to sub prime mortgages prompted investors to shed riskier assets, and the 
spread,  or  extra  yield,  investors  demand  to  own  emerging-market  dollar  bonds  instead  of 
U.S. Treasury securities widened according to JPMorgan Chase & Co.'s EMBI index.  
Interestingly, however, unlike the previous global financial crisis, the rise in emerging-market 
debt spreads was not as pronounced or as sustained as that of credit markets in developed 
economies.  
What does all this mean for East Africa?  
There appear to be two broad schools of thought.  
Substantial impact  
Some think it will reduce the flow of capital coming to the emerging as well as “pre-emerging” 
markets  as  ours  is  characterized.  In  this  regard  in  East  Africa,  we  have  experienced 
significant interest and flows into our markets of late. There has been a large increase in the 
number of foreigners participating in our market, as international investors across the globe 
have searched for higher yielding assets, including ours. Therefore, some consider that as a 
region,  we  are  vulnerable  to  any  increase  in  global  risk  aversion  stemming  from  the  sub 
prime crisis. Proponents of this view suggest that when investors get scared, they sell their 
riskiest assets (among them investments in emerging and pre-emerging markets) in search 
of safe havens, as they reassess their appetite for risky assets. It is therefore felt that now, 
with the sub-prime crisis, this interest will dry up.  
Little or no impact  
The  other  thought  school  is  of  the  opinion  that  our  economies  appear  resilient,  and  will 
weather  the  ongoing  market  correction  in  the  industrialized  world.  It  has  also  been 
speculated  that  lower  demand  for  products  in  the  developed  world  would  be  balanced  by 
increased demand in developing countries.  
In fact, some analysts have started to talk about a new "flight to quality" idea – that buying 
securities in an emerging market could be an appealing opportunity when there is turmoil in 
the developed markets. In other words, emerging markets have started to resemble a safe 
haven!  
Given  these  observed  phenomena,  a  school  of  thought  is  becoming  convinced  that 
economies in the rest of the world have become “de-coupled” from the US. In this view, it is 
claimed  that,  even  if  the  US  economy  slows,  the  rest  of  the  world,  particularly  the  fast-
growing emerging markets of China and India, will not.  
This  view  appears  to  be  supported  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  which  in  its 
most  recent  World  Economic  Outlook  publication,  released  in  September,  stated  that  “… 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
world growth is expected to slow but remain solid, supported by the strong momentum of the 
main emerging markets, China, India and Russia, which together accounted for one-half of 
global growth over the past year".  
Others  suspect  this  latest  burst  of  enthusiasm  is  nothing  more  than  a  whim  that  will 
disappear when confidence in US and European markets returns. Still others see it as the 
beginning  of  a  new  speculative  bubble.  Nonetheless,  investors'  new-found  confidence  in 
emerging markets does reflect one reality, namely that many emerging economies are in far 
better shape than ever before to weather broader financial turmoil.  
Impact on East Africa 
In  East  Africa,  our  money  markets  have  so  far  been  relatively  unaffected.  Our  banking 
systems within the region had very little exposure to the sub-prime market and as such, there 
has not been a need for the Bank of Uganda or any of the regional central banks to provide 
extra liquidity to markets, for this purpose.  
Based upon these trends and observations, there is reason to believe that, at least to some 
extent, East Africa, which now enjoys a more stable regional financial economy than in the 
past, may equally be able to “decouple” from this slowdown that has been triggered off by 
events in the mortgage industry in the US and has impacted other countries such as the UK.  
Our banks are now well capitalized in accordance with Basel II requirements and very liquid. 
In contrast to recent surges in US fed funds rates, our regional and domestic rates have not 
been affected by the sub-prime situation.  
Furthermore,  BOU  and  sister  central  banks  in  the  region  have  made  a  deliberate  move 
towards the use of market-based instruments for monetary and fiscal purposes. This is a key 
aspect of the East Africa Community’s monetary and financial convergence criteria, and this 
has also enhanced our capability to respond to external shocks. For example, we now rely 
substantially  on  treasury  securities  sales  and  the  use  of  repurchase  agreement  (repo) 
operations for the transmission of monetary policy.  
We also have developed our domestic debt markets and have seen a more diverse group of 
investors – including our pension funds, regional asset managers and non resident nationals 
and local retail investors – whom are increasingly investing for the long term. Thus, overall, it 
would  appear  that  our  markets  are  far  less  susceptible  to  events  in  the  markets  of  the 
developed world, than they may have been in the past.  
In  particular,  it  may  be  noted  that  many  of  us  are  commodity  exporters  and  many 
commodities are at record highs. We have also substantially shed the baggage of external 
debt  and  have  built  relatively  strong  foreign  exchange  reserves  thereby  making  us  less 
vulnerable to currency depreciation and other contagion effects.  
However,  to  say  that  we  will  be  completely  immune  is  very  dangerous,  since  a  significant 
volume of our regional commodity exports is to the US and UK and an increasing volume of 
investment inflows are from the US and the UK.  
Also, the rapid movement of capital as result of globalization as well as the liberalization of 
capital  accounts  such  as  we  have  done  in  Uganda,  has  increased  significantly  in  recent 
years, posing further challenges to the conduct of monetary policy. To a large extent, most of 
us  would  agree  that  globalization  has  been  positive  insofar  as  it  has  imposed  market 
discipline on us. There are many who also think that globalization actually reduces volatility.  
Going forward – what we need to do  
As  the  IMF  has  noted,  most  of  the  world  will  likely  emerge  relatively  unscathed  from  this 
crisis. The recent shifts away from the US as being the key driver of global growth, together 
with the better balance achieved during the last two years represents significant support for 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 3
the  global  economy.  However,  the  ramifications  of  any  sharp  slowdown  in  the  US  always 
remain and should not be underestimated.  
Whilst  the  global  economy  is  deemed  to  be  robust  enough  to  shake  off  US  weakness, 
contagion effects means that the sub-prime problems can contaminate other countries. As 
noted,  our  markets  are  better  prepared  for,  but  certainly  not  immune  to  global  financial 
market risks. A reduction in global risk appetite would eventually reduce net capital inflows 
into our markets and may dry up much needed FDI.  
If the US, which has a 25 per cent share of global GDP, slows down, it will definitely have an 
impact  on  the  entire  global  economy,  including  East  Africa.  The  next  few  months  will 
therefore, be crucial for the US and international markets.  
However,  our  lower  external  debt,  better  external  reserves  levels,  more  prudent  fiscal 
management, debt markets with a investor base that is not dependent on foreign investors, 
will  all  undoubtedly  help  to  cushion  our  financial  system  compared  to  say,  those  of  China 
which exports a fifth of all Chinese exports. China’s Central Bank estimates that ever 1 per 
cent drop in US economic growth translates into a 6 per cent drop.  
The fact however, is that we should be concerned about the problems in the US. A slowdown 
in the biggest economy in the globe will have repercussions for all of us.  
Under  these  circumstances,  extreme  vigilance  on  the  part  of  policy  makers  is  warranted. 
During  periods  of  financial  market  stress,  the  focus  of  central  banks  shifts  to  ensuring  the 
banking system remains functional. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2007
