Martín Redrado: The monetary policy response to recent international 
turmoil 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the National 
Academy of Economics, Buenos Aires, 22 November 2007. 
 The  current  turbulences  in  the  most  advanced  credit  markets  are,  in  my  view,  the  most 
important global financial crisis in the past ten years. And it is here to stay.  
Financial  conditions  in  developed  economies  have  deteriorated.  There  is  still  uncertainty 
about the global banking system’s real exposure to losses associated to off-balance sheet 
special investment vehicles. In turn, the ongoing decline of the US real estate market clouds 
prospects for recovery, since it affects the quality of underlying assets. 
Financial innovation in recent years has enabled the fragmentation, division, and transfer of 
credit risk to new market players. Therefore, it is no longer traditional banks that grant and 
keep  mortgage  loans  on  their  books;  instead,  mortgage  loans  are  securitized  and  sold  to 
investors  who  are  more  prone  to  taking  risks  and  operate  outside  the  scope  of  monetary 
authorities’  prudential  regulations.  These  funds  have  not  only  taken  and  traded  high-risk 
mortgages,  but  have  also  leveraged  themselves  based  on  such  assets.  These  operations 
crossed the Atlantic to include some of the major European banks.  
Back  then,  this  contributed  to  considerably  reducing  interest  rates,  creating  incentives  to 
borrow. The supply of mortgage and real estate projects aimed to meet increasing housing 
needs  thus  multiplied  in  the  US.  However,  when  interest  rates  began  to  rise,  this  easily 
accessible financing became non-existent, which affected the housing market. As the value 
of  assets fell,  loans,  mostly  floating-rate  loans,  not  only  became  more  expensive,  but  also 
lacked sufficient collateral.  
We are facing an “information crisis,” since nobody knows how many times these risks have 
been transferred, nor  where they  are placed today, hence anesthetizing the credit market. 
Liquidity constraints have also created uncertainty as to the real value of these assets. Thus, 
we have witnessed the indiscriminate sale of higher-risk assets, such as emerging markets’, 
and a total paralysis of short-term credit in developed countries. Recently, the drop in the US 
real  estate  market  deepened,  affecting  consumption  expectations  of  the  world’s  largest 
economy. The potential effects of this on the global economy’s growth are still not clear.  
However, we have also seen that the new international financial context has had no impact 
at  all  in  the  real  economy  in  Argentina.  This  is  mainly  due  to  the  monetary  and  financial 
strategy  the  Central  Bank  is  carrying  out.  Between  the  second  and  third  quarter,  we 
experienced a reversal of $ 5 billion (2 percent of GDP) in the capital account, which would 
have significantly affected domestic economic activity in other times.  
In  particular,  our  role  is  to  provide  for  two  important  public  goods:  monetary  stability  and 
financial  stability.  To  this  end, steps  have  been  taken to ensure  a  predictable  scenario  for 
spending, savings and investment decision-making.  
We  know  that  the  country  has  a  long  history  of  macroeconomic  instability.  In  Argentina, 
monetary regimes have unsuccessfully shifted from one extreme to the other. The relatively 
stable  periods  were  short  due  to  inconsistencies  in  programs  that  should  have  ensured 
macroeconomic solvency. Suffice it to recall the end of price stability in the 1990s, after a 
sharp  appreciation  of  the  local  currency  resulting  from  a  fixed  exchange  rate  that  was 
inconsistent with fiscal and external deficits.  
Therefore,  in  an  economy  with  precedents  such  as  confiscation  of  deposits  (1989,  2001), 
hyperinflation (1989, 1990), mega-devaluations (1989, 1990, 1991, 2002), and a default on 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
the public debt (2001), the monetary system cannot set itself an exclusive goal and ignore 
the  economy’s  health  and  vulnerabilities.  To  achieve  long-term  monetary  and  financial 
stability, this historical evolution needs to be taken into account.  
It  is  not  an  abstract  exercise.  Today,  each  monetary  and  financial  policy  move  is  fully 
coherent with the intertemporal goals of money market equilibrium and the preservation of 
the value of currency, stability and financial system depth. By “intertemporal” I mean that the 
Central Bank must have an across-the-cycle rather than a short-term view. 
In this framework, the monetary strategy includes three main pillars: 
• 
First,  a  prudent  and  theoretically  consistent  monetary  policy  that  ensures  the 
equilibrium between supply and demand in the monetary market. This system is the 
most  appropriate  for  an  economy  in  transition  that  still  makes  intensive  use  of 
relatively liquid means of payment and has a relatively low bank penetration. 
The use of the various monetary policy instruments (the placement of securities at fixed and 
floating  rates,  the  repo  market,  the  reserve  requirement  policy,  and  the  collection  of 
rediscounts)  is  reflected  in  the  evolution  of  the  means  of  payment.  The  M2  shows  a 
downward trend, with a significant drop vis-à-vis growth rates in 2003 and 2004. In fact, for 
the first time after the crisis, money supply is growing below the nominal GDP, reflecting the 
prudential bias of our approach. 
• 
Second,  a  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  that  enables  us  to  weather 
financial stress situations – that is, a regime that prevents excessive volatility and 
provides predictability. 
Third,  countercyclical  insurance  policies  to  be  prepared  against  shocks.  These 
include the accumulation and active management of foreign reserves and a sound 
and well-matched financial system that buffers turmoil, instead of spreading it. 
 In this regard, the past few months have provided a valuable opportunity to stress-test the 
current  system.  And,  in  this  case,  the  flexibility  of  our  monetary  and  financial  system  has 
proved to be adequate. 
The Central Bank took several steps to mitigate the adverse effects that could be anticipated, 
including  buy-backs  of  our  securities  in  auctions  and  the  secondary  market;  and  the 
optimization of auctions, according to prevailing liquidity conditions.  
In this sense, the current managed floating exchange rate regime has been a key factor to 
our strategy. On the one hand, it does not provide a “foreign exchange insurance” that favors 
the inflow of hot money. On the other, it aims to prevent short-term volatility from affecting 
spending,  savings  and  investment  decisions.  We  do  not  want  to  prevent  variables  from 
converging  to  their  long-term  values,  but  we  would  rather  avoid  excessive  volatility  as  a 
source of unnecessary disturbances in economic decisions. 
From  the  outset  of  this  international  crisis,  the  nominal  peso-dollar  exchange  rate  has 
changed  by  around  2.5  percent.  To  put  it  in  perspective,  in  the  same  period  of  time,  the 
Brazilian real changed by 10 percent; the Colombian peso, by 13 percent; the Russian ruble, 
by 2 percent; the Thai baht, by 12 percent; and the Korean won, by 6 percent. There is no 
point  in  mentioning  other  examples.  Clearly,  the  Argentine  exchange  market  has  recently 
behaved in a normal way from an international viewpoint. Under a free float, the exchange 
rate  would  have  reached  much  higher  levels,  running  serious  risks  of  going  back  to  the 
devaluation-inflation  dynamics  that  has  been  so  recurrent  throughout  Argentine  economic 
history.  
This  foreign  exchange  market  evolution  was  due  to  the  Central  Bank's  prudential  foreign 
reserve accumulation policy pursued during the favorable phase of the international financial 
cycle. By definition, countercyclical policies should start in the cyclical upturn, and thinking 
that such a favorable phase could last forever would have been a short-sighted interpretation 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
of our most recent history. In fact, the $44 billion in the Central Bank’s coffers were enough 
to discourage any speculation.  
The  building  of  a  sound  financial  system  which  allowed  for  the  recovery  of  solvency  and 
liquidity should not be overlooked either. Nowadays, the system’s liquid assets represent 40 
percent  of  total  deposits.  Nobody  ignores  the  banks’  robust  position  against  risk  –  be  it 
liquidity, credit, currency or market risk – thanks to the improved regulatory framework. 
Financial institutions are still in the process of normalizing both its assets and liabilities. As to 
the former, credit to the public sector has considerably decreased as compared to credit to 
the private sector (crowding in), as a result of regulations specifically aimed to that end. As to 
the latter, there has been an increased recovery of financing through its “normal” channels, 
time and sight deposits, to the detriment of Central Bank liquidity assistance (which has been 
fully  paid  back  by  the  banks).  Furthermore,  prudential  regulations  aim  to  extend  financing 
terms. It is important not to lose dynamism and always keep solvency and prudence.  
In a nutshell, we have responded quickly to preserve monetary and financial stability in an 
uncertain  international  scenario,  where  turmoil  shows  clear  symptoms  of  permanence  in 
time.  Overcoming  external  crises  such  as  the  present  one,  with  limited  volatility  and  not 
giving up integration into the world, is an ideal way of ensuring economic growth. This is the 
only  sustainable  monetary  policy  that  will  enable  us  to  build  credibility,  not  only  on  the 
banking sector but also on the local currency, and thus develop a long-term local currency. In 
short, thanks to the current monetary policy strategy, we have been able to weather recent 
international  financial  turmoil,  combining  the  necessary  doses  of  monetary  prudence  and 
flexibility.  
And I emphasize this because we should bear in mind two critical issues: 
First,  that  we  live  and,  therefore,  have  to  conduct  monetary  policy,  in  a  highly  uncertain 
world.  
Second, within this uncertain framework, our economy is still heading towards its long-term 
equilibrium path. 
Alan  Greenspan  defined  this  phenomenon  in  his  own  words:  “uncertainty  is  not  just  an 
important  feature  of  the  monetary  policy  landscape;  it  is  the  defining  characteristic  of  that 
landscape.” This statement may seem evident, almost redundant, especially to those of us 
who have had to weather crises, either as economic policy makers or in the private sector 
under changing financial conditions. 
Nevertheless, until not long ago, the notion of uncertainty was not systematically included in 
monetary policy theory. The “world” was considered, as portrayed by models, to be perfectly 
known by decision-makers. At most, the notion of risk was taken into account which, unlike 
uncertainty, entails a knowledge of the probability distribution function. 
Only  recently,  since  the  contribution  of  Walsh  (2003),  has  the  scientific  study  of  the 
conditions under which monetary policy works focused on uncertainty. Until not long ago, the 
consensus in the literature on monetary policy implicitly assumed that central banks knew the 
true economic model, that we were able to correctly observe all relevant variables, and that 
they accurately knew the various random forces affecting the economic system. Under this 
perspective,  the  only  remaining  “uncertainty”  was  actually  the  effective  value  of  these 
stochastic disturbances. 
The different sources of uncertainty are reflected in the concrete challenges central banks 
face  in  monetary  policy  design  and  implementation.  Moreover,  they  influence  the  way  in 
which information is processed and the procedures to determine appropriate intervention and 
operation rules. However, most of these developments are applied in developed economies, 
relatively  little  prone  to  crises  (or,  at  least,  frequent  crises)  and  characterized  by  a  high 
degree of macroeconomic stability.  
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
Despite the considerable progress in many countries of the emerging world, it is undeniable 
that our countries’ macroeconomic behavior substantially differs from that of countries with 
higher relative development.  
Shock absorption mechanisms in developed economies (such as financial depth to diversify 
risk) are not only absent, but also work as amplifying mechanisms, deepening the effects of 
shocks.  All  in  all,  the  same  external  disturbance  that  might  cause  temporary  internal 
imbalances in a developed economy might lead in our economies to fundamental variables 
taking  diverging  paths.  And  this  would  imply  a  costly  return  back  to  equilibrium.  It  follows 
logically that consumption in developing countries is more volatile than output, contrary to the 
case in developed economies. This shows that the international capital market is procyclical.  
As  emphasized  by  Sargent  (2003),  uncertainty  can  be  especially  intense  in  the  case  of 
economies  in  transition.  In  these  economies,  the  “right”  model,  the  value  of  structural 
parameters,  transmission  mechanisms  or  the  nature  of  shocks  are  not  accurately  known. 
Under  such  circumstances,  the  lessons  learned  by  agents  can  markedly  increase 
uncertainty, translating into adaptive answers that permanently alter the economic structure. 
Uncertainty inherent to every economy boosts in developing countries. Thus, the idea that 
uncertainty  is  crucial  when  analyzing  monetary  policy  options  derives  not  only  from 
methodological or epistemological considerations, but also from the concrete difficulties we 
policymakers  come  across  in  changing  scenarios  and  that,  unfortunately,  in  our  case,  are 
encountered too often. 
Recent  studies  have  emphasized  the  fact  that  economic  agents  should  learn  about  the 
economic  environment  on  a  day-to  day  basis.  During  the  “learning  period”  their  behavior 
does not always turn out to be compatible with that of agents with rational expectations. In 
other  words,  economic  system  players  should  learn  while  interacting,  which  results  in  a 
variety of behaviors not always provided for in standard models. In turn, and focusing on the 
policymaker’s  task,  many  papers  (such  as  Levin  and  Williams,  2003)  have  shown  the 
significant challenges faced by analysis under uncertainty. They have thus highlighted that 
the best policies in certain contexts may perform badly in different conditions.  
This  has  resulted  in  the  notion  of  “robustness”:  ideally,  monetary  policy  rules  should  be 
sustained against the changes in the economy’s pattern of behavior. For example, a certain 
policy may be considered optimal but have very negative effects if the true model governing 
the behavior of variables differs from the supposed model. On the contrary, if the economic 
model  coincides  with  the  assumed  model,  an  alternative  policy  might  be  somewhat  less 
effective, but at the same time less harmful.  
Against  this  backdrop,  the  latter  policy  alternative  –  though  not  necessarily  optimal  in  all 
possible circumstances – may be considered more robust than the former. Given the limited 
knowledge of certain key structural aspects of the economy and the skewed distribution of 
the  costs  and  benefits  of  specific  outcomes,  Greenspan  has  encouraged  a  “risk 
management”  approach  in  the  definition  of  monetary  policy  (Blinder  y  Reis,  2005).  Under 
such  circumstances,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  not  only  the  most  likely  future  path  of 
economic development, but also the distribution of feasible outcomes around that path. An 
informed  judgment  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  these  possible  outcomes  under  alternative 
choices should be made.  
The outcome of a low-probability event with severe adverse effects may then be considered 
riskier than the costs of insuring against contingencies that in the end are not materialized. In 
this  sense,  relatively  simple  instrumental  rules  can  perform  as  well  as  other  much  more 
complex  “optimal”  reaction  functions.  There  is  consensus  on  the  fact  that  pursuing  these 
rules may contribute to an appropriate reference framework for decision-making by monetary 
authorities.  Unusual  –  or  even  usual  –  circumstances  make  it  necessary  to  assign  a 
predominant role to policymakers’ judgment and analysis, in line with the “risk management” 
approach.  
4 
 BIS Review 142/2007
Model-based rules should thus be an important supplement to the judgment based on the 
careful  analysis  of  empirical  evidence  and  data,  but  cannot  be  replaced  by  it.  When 
designing  and  implementing  monetary  policy,  it  is  necessary  to  take  these  considerations 
into  account,  as  well  as  the  characteristics  of  the  local  and  international  macroeconomic 
environment. Otherwise, monetary policy will not only be inconsistent and lead nowhere, but 
also  an  additional  source  of  uncertainty,  as  had  been  the  case  in  our  country  many  times 
before. 
One of the most distinctive features of aggregate operating dynamics in Argentina has been 
the  recurring  macroeconomic  instability  episodes.  It  follows  logically  that,  in  the  past  25 
years, our economy has spent over a third of its time off the dynamic stability path (defined 
as the range between two standard deviations of the long-term trend), against Australia’s 18 
percent or Brazil’s 25 percent. Argentina shares its resources and position in the world with 
these  countries,  and  it  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  symmetrical  with  them  as  regards  the 
impact of external shocks. 
These phenomena have severely harmed long-term performance, and were not cost-free in 
terms of welfare: excessive volatility is probably the main reason for our country’s economic 
stagnation in the last three decades of the previous century. Furthermore, the past quarter of 
a century was prolific in terms of the lessons learned from the crises of diverse origin and the 
consequences  for  the  monetary  and  financial  regime.  We  know  that  the  channels  through 
which excessive volatility affects economic performance are different. 
In Argentina, we have undergone two type of crises: 
• 
Crises arising from ex ante nominal volatility, characterized by a persistent noise in 
nominal signals to agents (high inflation), that lead to a shortening of the horizon, 
financial anemia, and the loss of value in money functions. 
Crises arising from nominal stability by rule (such as convertibility), which, although 
they  induce  an  audacious  behavior  in  agents  and  “shortcuts”  to  financial  depth, 
cause  mass  defaults  if  the  rule  is  not  matched  by  consistent  macroeconomic 
policies. 
 In this type of economy, where society has developed a high risk aversion and the need to 
prevent  a  new  crisis  becomes  a  priority  objective,  macroeconomic  policy  coordination  is 
critical.  If  there  are  doubts  about  the  intertemporal  solvency  of  any  of  the  macroeconomic 
policy  set,  the  conventional  monetary  policy  room  for  maneuver  can  be  limited.  When 
designing monetary policy, it is important to take the fiscal, financial and external conditions 
into account. An autistic monetary regime that dodges these issues, at the risk of becoming 
an additional source of uncertainty, would be of no use. 
In Sargent’s words, there is no robust monetary regime for an inconsistent fiscal policy. Our 
twentieth century history says a lot about the close link between the lack of fiscal solvency 
and  inflation.  Even  though  in  recent  years  the  restriction  has  eased  thanks  to  the  surplus 
public  accounts,  the  literature  on  fiscal  dominance  problems  is  not  limited  to  the  current 
period.  It  is  well  known  that  tax  revenue  structure  depends  on  the  current  relative  price 
structure – hence the need to address the question under a general equilibrium approach.  
Similarly, doubts as to the financial system’s solvency or external sustainability can also limit 
monetary  policy  room  for  maneuver.  As  to  external  solvency,  it  would  be  wrong  to  tailor 
exchange rate policy to temporary trends: part of the current pressure for the appreciation of 
emerging  currencies  relates  to  commodity  prices  (through  the  current  account)  and  the 
investors’ risk appetite (through the capital account), which may clearly be temporary instead 
of permanent forces. 
Rajan  and  Subramanian  (2006)  have  highlighted  the  difference  in  treatment  according  to 
whether  the  trend  is  caused  by  permanent  or  temporary  factors.  In  a  financial  world 
characterized by capital flow volatility, a massive amount of capital may lead to some kind of 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 5
“dutch  disease,”  with  unsustainable  paths  and  high  real  variable  volatility.  This  kind  of 
problem might be often the case in small economies, where the local financial market may be 
negligible  as  compared  to  international  flows,  and  where  it  is  very  difficult  to  know  the 
equilibrium  level  of  real  variables.  Thus,  temporary  forces  that  work  from  the  market  side 
may lead to nominal exchange rate overshooting (whether up or down). Far from adjusting 
towards  the  long-term  equilibrium  level,  this  may  cause  excessive  volatility  and  distort 
relative price signals for savings and consumption. 
All in all, it is clear that uncertainty faced by an economy such as Argentina’s is not limited to 
the notion of risk. While in the latter case the stochastic process to generate data is known, 
in  the  former  the  true  model  of  macroeconomic  operation  is  unknown.  A  frequency 
distribution bar chart of the Argentine GDP in the last 25 years would show that it is equally 
probable to grow or fall at a 10 percent rate, so there are empirical problems to project the 
trend of fundamental variables. I remember that the 1998 national budget provided for a 4.7 
percent economic growth for the following year, and in 1999 the decline ended up surpassing 
3 percent. This an eloquent example to illustrate the problem. Similar references could be 
made to the consumption path or long-term equilibrium exchange rate. 
Against  an  uncertain  background,  my  approach  is  to  prevent  euphoria,  adopting  prudent, 
gradual  and  coordinated  policies  to  lead  the  economic  convergence  process  towards  its 
“cruising speed.” In that framework, the classical dilemma of rules versus discretion cannot 
be  addressed  with  a  “corner  solution.”  Extreme  strategies  such  as  rigid  and  lock-in  rules 
would  not  only  lead  to  nowhere  but  also  not  even  meet  the  initial  aim  of  building  fast 
credibility  if  agents  do  not  perceive  their  consistency  with  the  other  policies.  On  the  other 
extreme, we cannot pursue pure discretion strategies. The demand for flexibility might be the 
perfect  excuse  for  “not  having  a  plan”  and  validating  persistent  trends  in  nominal  variable 
imbalance.  Between  both  ends,  the  pillars  of  our  development  model  must  gradually  and 
patiently be built based on a path that adequately combines the right doses of flexibility and 
credibility. 
This approach is not an isolated case in the world either. According to a study based on the 
work  of  Sturzenegger  and  Levy-Yeyati,  only  50  percent  of  inflation-targeting  countries  – 
where  there  is  theoretically  no  central  bank  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  – 
effectively pursue a free floating regime policy. In the field of monetary policy, this resulted 
initially in the recovery of the basic functions of money, with the normalization of the financial 
system. In the current phase, it refers to the rebuilding of transmission channels of traditional 
policy tools to adequately use them when the economy nears its steady state. 
In an economy in transition, not only the precise connections among fundamental variables 
are unknown, but also, and most importantly, many policy tools that are typical of the steady 
state are unavailable. To mention a few examples of the current case of Argentina, economic 
agents  markedly  favor,  since  the  crisis,  liquid  forms  of  money  to  the  detriment  of  wider 
monetary aggregates. It remains to be seen whether this trend will revert or when it will do 
so, or even if it is a “structurally” higher demand for liquid means of payment. 
As to the effectiveness of conventional policy tools, we know that credit to the private sector 
represents  around  12  percent  of  GDP.  Firms´  access  to  the  capital  market  tends  to  be 
restricted, with evident credit rationing. The money market is highly segmented. This leads to 
a low relative effectiveness of the Central Bank’s reference interest rate as a tool to manage 
aggregate demand, and with it, pressures on prices. In addition, the financial system, which 
is  undergoing  an  open  normalization  phase  since  the  crisis,  is  however  exposed  to  real 
interest  rate  risk.  Consequently,  using  such  a  tool  might  be  counterproductive  and  might 
cancel out the very transmission channel that is to be rebuilt. 
To conclude, against a backdrop of high uncertainty, where the economy is still in transition 
and  trying  to  overcome  decades  of  marked  decline,  the  Central  Bank  must  provide  and 
guarantee two public goods: monetary and financial stability. To that end, our prudent and 
flexible  strategy,  together  with  the  theoretical  consistency  shown  in  this  presentation,  has 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2007
proved to be the best approach at this stage. Its effectiveness was proved in the last months, 
when we quickly responded to preserve monetary and financial stability in the face of a new 
international  scenario.  This  scheme  undoubtedly  reinforces  the  need  to  permanently  and 
comprehensively work to reconcile tools with objectives. This is also the challenge we face in 
building  institutions  and,  at  the  same  time,  contributing  to  growth  with  stability  and  social 
inclusion, which is, after all, the ultimate aim of every economic authority having a strategic 
vision. Otherwise, all efforts will be vain and we will fall in the classical Argentine pendulum, 
going  from  one  extreme  of  the  range  of  possible  policies  to  the  other  with  no  continuity 
whatsoever. It is, in fact, a two-fold challenge; not a sequential but a synchronic one: making 
progress in the achievement of our objectives and, at the same time, building institutions for 
the prosperity of future generations. 
Thank you very much.  
References 
- Blinder, A. and Reis, R. (2005). “Understanding the Greenspan Standard”, paper presented 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for 
the Future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27. 
-  Evans,  G.  and  Honkapohja,  S.  (2001).  Learning  and  Expectations  in  Macroeconomics, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
-  Greenspan,  A.  (2003).  Opening  Remarks  at  “Monetary  Policy  under  Uncertainty,” 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming. 
-  Goldfajn,  I.  and  Gupta,  P.  (1999).  “Does  Monetary  Policy  Stabilize  the  Exchange  Rate 
Following a Currency Crisis?”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50, No. 1, International Monetary Fund. 
-  Levin,  A.,  Wieland,  V.  and  Williams,  J.  (2003).  “The  Performance  of  Forecast-based 
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, 
pp. 622-45. 
- Levy Yeyati, E. and Sturzenegger, F. (2005). “Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds 
vs. Words”, European Economic Review, Vol. 49. August. 
-  Lucas,  R.  (1976).  “Econometric  policy  evaluation:  a  critique”,  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1. 
- Rajan, R. and Subramanian, A. (2006). “Aid, Dutch Disease, and Manufacturing Growth”, 
Mimeo, IMF. 
- Sargent, T. (1993). Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
-  Sargent,  T.  (2007).  “Evolution  and  Intelligent  Design”,  Eleventh  Annual  Conference, 
Santiago, Chile. 
-  Svensson,  L.  (1999).  “How  Should  Monetary  Policy  Be  Conducted  in  an  Era  of  Price 
Stability,”  in  New  Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
195-259. 
-  Walsh,  C.  (2003).  “Implications  of  a  Changing  Economic  Structure  for  the  Strategy  of 
Monetary  Policy”,  in  Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing  Economy, 
Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 297-348.  
BIS Review 142/2007 
 7
