Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Welcoming innovations in the Ugandan 
banking sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
launching  ceremony  of  the  Orient  Express  Visa  Card  –  Orient  Bank  Limited,  Kampala, 
1 November 2007. 
 The Chairman and Board of Directors of Orient Bank Ltd.  
Management and Staff  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Let me begin by expressing my gratitude for Orient Bank’s invitation to me to preside over 
this  auspicious  occasion  of  launching  the  Orient  Express  Visa  Card.  The  Visa  Card  which 
Orient Bank Limited is launching today is in line with the Orient Bank’s business theme: “we 
care for your financial needs”.  
Visa is the world’s largest retail payments system. Its introduction in Orient Bank will enable 
the bank’s customers to gain access to the Visa electron network, which reportedly operates 
in 150 countries with a network of 27 million outlets. The Visa card will enable the customers 
of Orient Bank Limited to use their debit card worldwide at ATMs, Points of Sale terminals 
and Internet. The introduction of this product will therefore go a long way in reducing inherent 
risks associated with moving around with large sums of money in order to execute business 
transactions within Uganda and beyond the borders of Uganda.  
The Orient Express Visa card can be used to pay for goods and services or withdraw cash 
from  any  ATM  or  Bank  displaying  the  Visa  sign.  The  card  acts  as  a  debit  card  and  the 
customers’  account  will  be  immediately  debited  upon  completion  of  the  transaction. 
Customers will be asked to complete a simple application form but will not have to pay any 
fees to acquire the new card.  
The  Orient  Bank  is  today  also  announcing  the  deployment  of  250  new  Point  of  Sale 
terminals, which will also accept any Visa branded cards. The new Point of Sale terminals 
also have value added functions, which will enable customers to pay for goods and services, 
to purchase airtime and mobile telephone top-ups, to pay utility bills and at selected sites, to 
obtain cash advances. Merchants will receive a credit on their collection account at close of 
business each day for all transactions executed during the day. The new terminals are also 
able  to  recognize  the  new  “chip  and  pin”  cards,  which  are  gradually  being  introduced 
worldwide in order to enhance card security.  
The  Orient  Express  Visa  card  can  be  used  at  various  ATMs  of  other  Banks  through  Visa 
switching system. This will provide relief to Bank customers in the face of the refusal of some 
banks to join the local switch. I am also glad to recognize that this facility will greatly help our 
international visitors during the forthcoming CHOGM meetings.  
It is encouraging to note that a major focus of the Orient Xpress Visa project will be provision 
of basic banking services in rural areas of Uganda through the deployment of Point of Sale 
machines  to  rural  trading  centers.  I  am  informed  that  this  Orient  Bank  initiative  has  been 
strongly supported by USAID rural Speed Project who deserves our unreserved praise. It is 
my  ardent  hope  that  this  initiative  will  prove  a  success,  which  will  be  replicated  by  other 
banks. There is too high a proportion of the branches of commercial banks concentrated in 
Kampala and its environs while many regional towns, let alone the rural areas, are neglected 
in terns of access to financial services.  
Ugandan bank customers have been relatively slow to adopt many of the features that card 
technology offers. In many cases, Ugandans carry around sums of cash that are far too large 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 1
for  safety  because  they  do  not  know  that  there  are  other  ways  of  doing  business.  It  is 
therefore important that people should know what options are available to them to make the 
management of their money and their daily financial transactions easier.  
In  this  regard,  I  would  urge  Orient  Bank  to  embark  on  a  rural  information  campaign  to 
promote wide use of Orient Xpress Visa card. Such a campaign, if vigorously implemented, 
could enable some customers who are presently bankable but do not have accounts to skip 
a whole generation of technology and go straight to the use of plastic money.  
The Bank of Uganda fully backs such developments and pledges all the necessary support 
to  financial  institutions,  which  pro-actively  initiate  innovations  of  financial  products  as  they 
foster financial deepening. Consequently, Bank of Uganda congratulates Orient Bank Limited 
upon this historic achievement.  
However, while the Bank of Uganda very much welcomes innovations, we know that such 
initiatives come along with a wide range of inherent risks which should be carefully evaluated 
and  credible  mitigation  measures  instituted  in  order  to  ensure  not  only  the  safety  of 
depositors’  funds  but  also  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Consequently,  all 
supervised  financial  institutions  planning  to  roll-out  new  financial  products  must  conduct 
comprehensive  evaluation  of  inherent  risks  associated  with  such  products  and  proceed  to 
institute credible risk management framework prior to launching such products. I am reliably 
informed that Orient Bank Limited has met these requirements.  
Turning to the current state of Uganda’s financial sector, I must confirm to the public that the 
sector has continued to be sound and resilient to external shocks soundness. The sector has 
also benefited from the strengthening of supervision and regulation of the banking system by 
the Bank of Uganda. There has been continued strong public confidence in the sector and 
increased product diversification by financial institutions. All banks are adequately capitalized 
and the value of non-performing assets as a percentage of total lending remained well below 
3% as at June 2007. The low ratio of non-performing assets to total credit portfolio is due to 
improved risk management by banks and strengthened supervisory framework.  
The  Housing  Finance  Company  of  Uganda  Ltd.  was  recently  upgraded  into  a  full-fledged 
Bank, and a number of Banks from abroad have made applications to Bank of Uganda for 
licenses to set up Commercial Banks in Uganda. The Bank of Uganda has already licensed 
the  Continental  Trust  Bank  from  Nigeria  whose  shareholders  also  invested  in  the  National 
Insurance  Corporation,  and  the  Kenya  Commercial  Bank,  which  will  start  their  operations 
soon. I am pleased to announce that just this morning I approved the application of another 
large Nigerian Bank, the United Bank for Africa Plc to open Commercial Banking Business in 
Uganda. All this is very good news for the development of our financial sector. We should 
thank the Government for providing the enabling environment for foreign and local investors 
alike.  
In  conclusion,  I  once  again  wish  to  congratulate  Orient  Bank  Limited  upon  this  auspicious 
occasion of launching the Orient Express Visa Card and further wish the bank prosperity in 
all its efforts to render innovative financial services to the public.  
Finally, it is now my privilege and pleasure to launch the Orient Express Visa Card. 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2007
