Timothy F Geithner: Restoring market liquidity in a financial crisis  
Welcoming remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Second  New  York  Fed-Princeton  University 
Liquidity Conference, New York, 13 December 2007. 
 Welcome to the New York Fed and to this conference on liquidity. You are addressing some 
of the most important issues affecting financial markets today. Your timing is good, perhaps 
too good. We are all going to need some time and perspective before we will know enough to 
draw  conclusions  and  recommendations  from  the  events  of  the  past  six  months.  The 
conditions that led to this crisis took a long time to develop and they will take some time to 
resolve. I think it is appropriate, though, that as central banks act to address the challenges 
in markets today, we also begin to define the agenda for future research and policy.  
On December 12, the Federal Reserve and several other major central banks, announced a 
series of actions in response to the elevated pressures in funding markets. Together, these 
actions provide a more flexible and potentially more effective set of instruments, alongside 
our  conventional  monetary  policy  instruments,  to  help  mitigate  the  risks  that  liquidity 
pressures in markets going forward could pose to the broader economy. With this framework 
of tools, we have the capacity to calibrate our response as market conditions change.  
Although  the  specifics  vary  across  central  banks,  the  approaches  outlined  have  several 
important common elements. We each have taken actions to provide more financing at terms 
longer than overnight. We each have chosen to auction funding against a broader range of 
collateral, collateral other than government securities, and in our case with a broader set of 
counterparties. And we have activated swap lines to help the relevant central banks provide 
liquidity in dollars in their markets.  
The initial spark to the pressures we observe in markets today was the sharp deterioration in 
the value of nonprime mortgage securities and the resulting increase in uncertainty about the 
value of a much larger amount of financial assets exposed to that risk. This was magnified by 
a substantial increase in uncertainty about the economic outlook and the consequences of 
that uncertainty for asset values and credit losses. Financial institutions faced a sharp drop in 
demand for a range of assets, impairing the securitization market as a source of funding. And 
a  substantial  amount  of  these  illiquid  assets  were  held  in  vehicles  with  implicit  or  explicit 
liquidity  guarantees  provided  by  banks.  This  produced  a  large  unexpected  increase  in 
demand  for  funding  from  banks  at  the  same  time  banks  confronted  a  reduced  capacity  to 
raise financing.  
As market participants have adjusted to what has been a very acute change in expectations 
about  economic  and  credit  risk,  they  have  become  more  cautious  in  how  they  use  their 
liquidity  and  capital.  The  symptoms  of  this  are  apparent  in  the  high  risk  premia  across  a 
range  of  assets,  as  well  as  in  the  dramatic  contraction  in  the  volume  of  transactions  for 
certain  assets  and  the  securities  that  reference  those  assets.  Elevated  term  premia  in  the 
interbank market has the effect of tightening overall financial conditions, offsetting some of 
the impact of reductions in the target federal funds rate. 
The danger this poses is the risk of an adverse, self-reinforcing dynamic in which concerns 
about  overall  liquidity  magnify  concerns  about  credit  problems.  As  financial  institutions 
prepare  for  a  more  challenging  funding  environment,  in  part  by  conserving  capital,  and  as 
they  anticipate  the  higher  potential  losses  that  would  normally  accompany  an  economic 
slowdown, their response, in aggregate, makes markets and the economy potentially more 
vulnerable  to  that  adverse  outcome.  The  risk  is  a  greater  contraction  in  the  availability  of 
credit beyond what might have otherwise occurred, with attendant risks to growth.  
BIS Review 149/2007 
 1
Monetary policy has an important role to play in addressing these dynamics in markets. By 
adjusting policy proactively as the risk to the outlook changes, central banks can help reduce 
the probability of the extreme adverse outcome. And this can positively affect the incentives 
that  might  otherwise  lead  market  participants  to  protect  themselves  against  the  extreme 
outcome. 
Central banks have been employing a range of different tools to help reduce the incentive for 
an  excessive  level  of  liquidity  hoarding  by  banks  that  might  impede  an  efficient  flow  of 
liquidity among banks. Although the mix of tools and approaches has varied across the major 
economies,  each  has  tried  to  provide  a  more  effective  form  of  liquidity  insurance  to  its 
financial institutions by expanding the capacity of banks to borrow at longer maturities from 
the central banks against a broader range of collateral. 
The actions to address liquidity issues – those we announced this week and those that we 
have  taken  over  the  past  five  months  –  can  help  reinforce our  monetary  policy  actions  by 
providing greater assurance for market participants of access to funding. By allowing strong 
banks to borrow against collateral that they can no longer easily finance in the market, the 
central bank is providing an additional source of liquidity to banks as a complement to our 
open market operations.  
The  Term  Auction  Facility  gives  us  a  tool  that  lies  somewhere  between  our  open  market 
operations and our primary credit program. It provides a mechanism for expanding the range 
of  collateral  against  which  we  provide  funds  to  the  market  –  in  effect  to  change  the 
composition of our balance sheet – in ways we cannot do through traditional open market 
operations.  And  it  does  this  in  a  way  that  may  be  more  effective  in  mitigating  a  broader 
marketwide liquidity shortage than does the existing discount window facility, in part because 
of the perceived stigma in recourse to a facility that has come to be regarded as a source of 
funds for individual institutions facing a temporary, exceptional need for liquidity. Because the 
quantity  of  funds  to  be  injected  is  known  in  advance,  this  mechanism  poses  fewer 
complications for our ability to reduce volatility in the fed funds rate around the target.  
The auction facility and other measures we have taken to address market liquidity problems 
do not directly address the balance sheet or capital constraints facing financial institutions. 
Nor can they be expected directly to reduce the perceived risk in exposure to other financial 
counterparties.  But  by  providing  a  more  effective  form  of  access  to  liquidity,  these  new 
measures  can  help  reduce  the  uncertainty  that  gives  institutions  the  incentive  to  secure 
liquidity in ways that might lead to a further deterioration on market conditions.  
Major  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  entered  this  period  of 
adjustment with capital substantially above the various regulatory thresholds. These capital 
cushions have enabled banks to expand their balance sheets as they have met contingent 
commitments and as the economics of other non-bank financing vehicles have deteriorated. 
This has been an important part of the adjustment process in markets.  
We have also seen some early steps by a range of different institutions to bring new capital 
into the banking and financial system. This is a healthy development. It reduces the need for 
further asset sales to preserve capital ratios. And it gives those institutions that acted earlier 
and  on  a  more  substantial  scale  the  flexibility  to  play  a  greater  role  in  markets  and  in  the 
economy going forward.  
Finally,  let  me  say  something  about  future  challenges  in  this  area  that  are  of  special 
relevance to today’s conference and to the research agenda in which you are all engaged. 
We are already involved in a coordinated review with other central banks and supervisors of 
how we should adapt policy and supervision in the wake of this financial crisis. Two issues 
are of particular interest in the context of this conference. 
The  first  relates  to  the  incentives  we  create,  through  regulation  and  supervision  and  other 
policies,  for  influencing  how  financial  market  participants  manage  liquidity  risk.  Several 
aspects  of  the  existing  capital  framework  and  other  parts  of  the  policy  and  regulatory 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2007
framework  affect  these  incentives.  In  addition,  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system  has 
altered  the  role  and  importance  of  liquidity  provision  by  banks  and  how  that  provision  of 
liquidity responds to different types of stress to the financial system. 
The second issue relates to the tools that central banks have at their disposal for providing 
liquidity  in  ways  that  do  support  our  monetary  policy  objectives.  Do  we  need  additional 
instruments that would better enable us to mitigate marketwide liquidity problems? And how 
can we mitigate the moral hazard risk inherent in such instruments? 
Efforts  are  underway  to  address  these  issues  both  within  the  Fed  and  among  our  central 
banking colleagues around the world. We will be looking both to financial market participants 
and to the academic community for advice. 
For now, though, our principal task is to address the challenges of the present. The Federal 
Reserve Act gives us broad authority to act in response to these types of conditions. We will 
continue to examine ways to adapt our instruments as market conditions evolve. We will do 
so in close cooperation with other central banks, as indeed we have since August. And we 
will  do  so  in  the  tradition  of  pragmatism  and  flexibility  that  has  been  one  of  the  defining 
features of the central bank of the United States.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 3
