Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the global financial system 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
2007 25th Anniversary IIF Annual Membership Meeting, Washington DC, 20 October 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  on  the  occasion  of  the  25th  Anniversary  IIF  Annual 
Membership Meeting. During the last quarter of a century, the Institute has proved to be both 
an important coordination forum for the international financial industry and a counterpart to 
international  financial  institutions  and  fora,  making  many  valuable  contributions  to  the 
international  dialogue  on  the  global  financial  system.  Back  in  1983  when  the  Institute  was 
founded – in response to the international debt crisis – one of its key jobs was to provide its 
members  with  information  about  the  policies  and  performance  of  borrowing  countries.  As 
time passed by, the range of the Institute’s activities broadened and it has worked as well on 
such issues as global financial regulation. Moreover, it played an active role during the last 
number  of  years  in  the  debate  about  the  international  financial  architecture  and  emerging 
market policy issues.  
Celebrating  today’s  anniversary  brings  to  mind  not  only  the  many  policy  issues  that  we 
discussed over the past 25 years but also the many colleagues and friends from all parts of 
the world whose professional careers are in various ways linked to the development of the 
international  financial  system  and  to  the  issues  that  the  Institute  has  been  dealing  with.  I 
myself have interacted with the IIF on many occasions, not only back in the 1980s when I 
was chairman of the Paris Club, but also thereafter in my capacity as governor of the Banque 
de France and today as President of the European Central Bank.  
In my talk today, I will seize the opportunity of the 25th anniversary of the Institute and share 
with  you  some  thoughts  on  two  broad  issues  that  I  deem  particularly  relevant.  First,  I  will 
recall the past financial crises that have hit emerging market countries over the last two and 
a half decades and focus on the progress that has been achieved with regard to devising 
mechanisms for crisis prevention and crisis containment. Second, I will take a closer look at 
the recent turmoil in financial markets and provide some preliminary reflections.  
II.  
Emerging market countries and their access to international financial markets 
The financial integration of countries into the global economy continues at a high pace. While 
advanced  countries  are  the  most  financially  integrated,  emerging  market  countries  have 
significantly  increased  their  cross  border  asset  and  liabilities  positions  and  hence  improve 
their degree of integration. The tremendous benefits that are associated with this integration 
process  in  terms  of  rising  living  standards  and  overall  prosperity  should  not  be  taken  for 
granted though since globalisation and rising capital mobility require taking into account the 
possibility of shocks spilling over into different countries. The financial crises that we have 
witnessed  over  the  last  25  years  and  that  were  largely  confined  to  emerging  market  and 
developing countries have not been few: The debt crises during the 1980s that started with 
Poland  and  Mexico  and  spread  to  Latin  America,  Africa,  the  Middle  East  and  the  Soviet 
Union;  some  years  later,  the  Mexican  crisis  in  1994;  the  Asian  crisis  starting  in  1997;  the 
Russian crisis in 1998; and the Argentinian crisis in 2001-02. 
As is well known, the composition of private capital flows to emerging market and developing 
countries in the periods before and after the crisis of the 1980s differed substantially. Looking 
at  World  Bank  Global  Development  Finance  data,  from  the  1973  oil  price  shock  until  the 
1982  Mexican  crisis  bank  lending  amounted  to  almost  two  thirds  of  overall  private  capital 
flows,  dwarfing  bond  financing  and  equity  flows,  which  stood  at  below  5  percent  and  17 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
percent  respectively.  This  composition  of  private  capital  flows  changed  dramatically  in  the 
1990s. In the period between 1990 and 1997, while bank lending made up only 12 percent, 
FDI and portfolio equity flows as well as bond financing combined had risen to an impressive 
80  percent  of  overall  private  capital  inflows.  In  hindsight,  the  1989  Brady  Plan  of 
collateralized  debt  reduction  could  be  seen  as  paramount  in  paving  the  way  for  these 
significant changes. 
That said, and irrespective of whether the crisis took place in the 1980s or 1990s, all of these 
crises have in common that they not only imposed major macroeconomic costs on emerging 
market countries and led to significant financial losses on the part of commercial banks and 
bond  holders  in  mature  economies.  These  events  posed  also  major  threats  to  the 
international  financial  system.  What  is  important  to  note,  though,  is  that  the  international 
community  managed  to  resolve  all  of  these  crises.  This  was  so  because  the  international 
institutions and forums that are charged with crisis resolution were up to their responsibilities. 
Moreover, measures were taken by sovereigns in emerging market countries and the private 
sector in mature economies to fight these crises.  
Going forward, an important lesson that we have learned from these events is that our efforts 
aimed to strengthen the global financial architecture need to continue tirelessly to ensure that 
the resilience of the global financial system is preserved. Updating the effectiveness of this 
architecture in the areas of crisis prevention and crisis management is an ongoing task, and 
many crucial steps have been taken, and are being taken, to this end. Over the last number 
of  years,  it  has  of  course  been  the  preventive  rather  than  the  resolving  mechanisms  that 
have been more relevant.  
In this respect I would like to focus not so much on the various institutional adjustments of 
the international financial architecture, but concentrate on a subject that I deem particularly 
relevant,  namely  the  development  and  implementation  of  international  financial  standards 
and codes. Such tools, which set out widely accepted good principles, practices, rules and 
guidelines,  determine  the  interaction  between  public  policy  and  market  functioning.  They 
serve  as  effective  mechanisms  for  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  containment  and  hence  do 
deserve a closer look. 
Following the Asian crisis, the need to strengthen the international financial architecture was 
widely recognized. A major initiative was clearly the creation of the Financial Stability Forum 
(FSF) in 1999 and its work on developing and implementing financial standards and codes. 
Most relevant are the 12 standards that the FSF has designated as key to strengthening and 
preserving the soundness of financial systems and that cover a broad range of subject areas. 
These standards pertain to macroeconomic policy and transparency, institutional and market 
infrastructure as well as financial regulation and supervision.  
As far as creation and implementation of these standards is concerned, many international 
institutions and fora have been involved, including the G20, the Basel-based committees, the 
Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  Money  Laundering  and  the  International  Financial 
Institutions.  The  progress  that  has  been  made  over  the  last  number  of  years  is  truly 
impressive. For example, as of today, three quarters of the Fund membership has completed 
more than 840 modules of the IMF’s Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes, 
the so-called ROSCs. Moreover, more than a third of the IMF’s member countries subscribe 
to its special standard for dissemination of economic and financial data, the SDDS. Finally, 
more  than  60  percent  of  the  Fund  membership  has  so  far  completed  a  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Programme  (FSAP).  That  said,  further  improvements  should  be  sought  in 
respect  of  participation  rates,  including  also  as  regards  the  reporting  to  the  IMF  on  the 
currency composition of countries’ foreign exchange reserves.  
Why  does  the  implementation  of  internationally  agreed  standards  and  codes  play  such  an 
important role when it comes to the prevention  of financial crises? There are a number of 
benefits that bear emphasis. At the national level, these tools do not only help anchor market 
expectations  as  they  make  more  predictable  future  macroeconomic  and  financial  policy 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
institutions,  markets, 
infrastructure  and  policies  more 
measures.  They  also  make 
transparent,  thus  mitigating  the  risks  of  disruptive  developments.  Moreover,  international 
financial  stability  is  promoted  and  the  risks  of  financial  distress  are  curbed  through  better-
informed  lending  and  investment  decisions.  In  passing,  I  would  also  note  the  more 
widespread use of market-based policy frameworks in many countries that has been highly 
conducive to preventing financial crises. 
Another  consideration  that  deserves  emphasis  is  that  standards  and  codes  do  not 
necessarily  have  to  be  set  and  enforced  solely  by  public  authorities.  Rather,  the  private 
sector  in  many  instances  plays  an  important  role,  and  rightly  so.  Indeed,  there  can  be  no 
doubt that ensuring transparency and an appropriate flow of information is the responsibility 
of both the public and the private sector. One example of private sector involvement in the 
area  of  international  standards  relates  to  accounting  and  auditing  where  private  sector 
organisations are the issuing bodies. Another prominent example – one that relates directly 
to the work of the IIF – are the “Principles for stable capital flows and debt restructuring in 
emerging markets”, on which I will now elaborate in more detail.  
The  Principles,  which  have  been  agreed  between  sovereign  debtors  and  their  private 
creditors, serve a number of important purposes. They aim to foster transparency and the 
timely  flow  of  information  between  debtors  and  creditors.  Moreover,  they  seek  to  ensure 
close debtor-creditor dialogue and cooperation to avoid restructuring. In cases where a debt 
restructuring becomes inevitable, the Principles request relevant parties to pursue good faith 
actions and call for fair treatment of affected creditors.  
With regard to the creation of the Principles, I remember launching the idea at a luncheon 
organised  by  the  Bretton  Woods  Committee  in  2001.  What  was  important  then,  and  is  of 
course  today,  is  the  clear  support  that  the  Principles  received  from  private  sector 
representatives as well as public officials of the issuing countries. Indeed, the work that has 
been  done  by  the  IIF  in  this  area  and  its  backing  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  highly 
valuable. And I remember that the first mention of the “Principles” in a communiqué of the 
G20 was made in New Dehli.  
When it comes to awareness and implementation of the Principles, I am very pleased to see 
that  further  progress  has  been  achieved.  A  rising  number  of  sovereign  debtors  and 
international  investors  have  underlined  their  backing  for  the  Principles  and  have  already 
applied them. What is the Principles’ formula for success and why is it that commitment to, 
and  compliance  with,  the  Principles  is  advancing?  I  believe  that  the  answers  to  these 
questions  lie  in  the  Principles’  design  features.  The  Principles  are  not  a  heavy-handed 
mandatory  approach,  but  a  soft  mode  of  governance:  they  incorporate  strictly  voluntary, 
market-based, and flexible guidelines which are applied on a case-by-case basis.  
Talking about the market-based approach to avoiding and resolving sovereign debt crises, I 
should also mention collective action clauses (CACs) that are incorporated into international 
sovereign bonds. While there was not much enthusiasm for CACs back in 1996 when the 
G10  Rey  report  was  published,  the  changing  international  financial  landscape  and  the 
experience  with  the  crises  of  the  1990s  led  to  a  fresh  look  at  CACs  and  ultimately  an 
increasing interest. We all remember well how the Mexican government assumed the role of 
an  icebreaker  and  in  February  2003  announced  a  bond  issue  with  CACs.  Many  other 
countries  have  followed  Mexico’s  example,  and  today  CACs  are  a  standard  provision  in 
international bonds. As a consequence, the share of outstanding emerging market sovereign 
bonds including CACs has now reached two third. What is worth underlining, and confirmed 
by  empirical  evidence,  is  that,  contrary  to  earlier  concerns,  CACs  have  not  significantly 
affected the price of the bonds or the levels of subscription. 
In concluding, I would point out that there are many examples of international standards and 
codes – be they agreed solely by the public sector, jointly by the public and the private sector 
or by the private sector only – that have proven highly useful as tools for crisis prevention. 
They  are  woven  into  the  fabric  of  the  international  financial  architecture  and  make  an 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
important  contribution  to  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  international  financial  system. 
Finally, what ought to be stressed is that for standards and codes to retain their relevance, 
policymakers and standard-setters are faced with the constant challenge to ensure that these 
instruments are mutually consistent and regularly updated so that they are in line with the 
fast changing global financial environment.  
Mature economies and the recent turmoil in financial markets  
III.  
Let me now move from some lessons of past crises in emerging economies to the situation 
we  are  now  facing  in  the  global  financial  system.  What  has  been  notable  about  recent 
experience  is  that  the  epicentre  of  market  turbulence  has  shifted  from  the  emerging 
economies. This we saw during the bursting of the “dot com bubble” at the beginning of the 
decade  and  now,  a  financial  market  liquidity  squeeze  that  simultaneously  affected  many 
advanced economies was triggered in late July this year. It began with a loss of confidence in 
the  valuations  of  credit  market  securities  where  the  underlying  assets  are  US  sub-prime 
mortgages and it quickly spread, causing disruptions in the asset-backed commercial paper 
(ABCP) market and eventually, by way of consequence, in the unsecured inter-bank money 
markets as concerns mounted about counterparty credit risks. Several markets were affected 
by the turbulence and the spill-over effects were generally characterised by losses of market 
liquidity and heightened market volatility.  
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  present  significant  market  correction  is  not  an  event  that 
should  surprise  us.  We  had  been  quite  clear,  since  a  number  of  months  if  not  years  in 
stressing a global phenomenon of underpricing of risks which was signaled in particular by a 
low level of volatility, a low level of spreads, a low level of risk premia across the board in a 
large array of products and markets. 
In many respect the present episode can be interpreted as correcting those anomalies and 
paving  the  way  –  once  the  turbulences  would  have  dissipated  –  for  a  more  sustainable 
structure of global finance. That being said even if the likelihood and even the necessity of a 
market  correction  was  largely  recognised  by  the  public  as  well  as  the  private  sector,  the 
channels that were the vehicles for the propagation of the turbulences were not identified ex 
ante. Several observations can be made in this respect. 
First, despite the fact that over recent years credit risk transfer has facilitated a widespread 
sharing  of  risk  in  the  financial  system,  the  recent  market  turbulence  has  nevertheless 
confirmed pre-existing concerns about the risks stemming from a lack of transparency about 
where credit risks ultimately reside in the financial system. Paradoxically in a large number of 
cases the credit risk remained in the realm of the commercial banks through the commitment 
they still had to activate back up lines of conduits or structured investment vehicles. 
Second,  even  if  the  risks  were  well  dispersed  across  the  system,  the  recent  events  have 
illustrated the importance of adverse selection problems in a crisis situation in that even a 
suspicion  that  counterparties  could  have  modest  exposures  to  assets for  which  no  market 
value can be computed can significantly impair market functioning.  
Third, the financial market turmoil has highlighted vulnerabilities created by off-balance sheet 
special investment vehicles set up mostly by banks. Such vehicles have proven to be more 
prone to liquidity mismatches than anticipated, which, as a result, caused contingent credit 
lines to be drawn on banks.  
Finally,  the  fact  that  the  problems  were  related  to  the  rolling  over  of  secured  short-term 
financing  instruments  rather  than  unsecured  instruments  highlighted  the  risks  created  by 
excessive reliance on ratings in valuing complex assets which are used as collateral in short-
term asset-backed commercial paper markets.  
Although  some  signs  of  normalisation  of  credit  market  conditions  emerged  throughout 
September and early October, for global financial institutions the turbulence in the financial 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
markets has clearly created some challenges. Many large institutions have been warning that 
future earnings will be materially affected as a result of both direct and indirect exposures to 
US sub-prime mortgage securities. Nevertheless, after several years of strong profit growth, 
capital bases are comfortably in excess of regulatory requirements. As a result, the global 
financial system – especially the core financial institutions within it – has remained resilient.  
Looking  forward,  the  uncertainty  as  to  how  market  liquidity  problems  will  eventually  be 
resolved  clearly  complicates  the  assessment  of  the  medium-term  outlook  for  financial 
stability,  both  globally  and  in  the  euro  area.  Given  the  relative  strength  of  the  underlying 
fundamentals – although pockets of vulnerability do exist – the central scenario is that the 
impact  of  the  financial  turbulence  on  the  intermediation  of  credit  is  likely  to  be  relatively 
contained.  
Nevertheless,  low  probability  but  plausible  and  challenging  scenarios  for  financial  stability 
could be triggered by adverse disturbances that affect global market liquidity conditions or if 
unanticipated credit events were to occur.  
Let  me  draw  some  further,  albeit  preliminary,  lessons  and  putting  forward  tentative 
suggestions.  First,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  recent  market  liquidity  squeeze 
originated  from  a  surge  in  defaults  by  a  sub-set  of  borrowers  with  particularly  weak  credit 
fundamentals. As the global credit cycle advances, one can hope that default rates do not 
start rising in other parts of the credit markets. We need to monitor the situation closely in 
order to identify any such adverse spill-over effects.  
Second, an important factor holding back market liquidity in the credit and money markets at 
the  current  juncture  seems  to  be  uncertainties  about  the  ultimate  holders  of  assets  and 
derivatives where credit quality has deteriorated. In such an environment, further voluntary 
disclosure  by  both  banks  and  non-regulated  entities  –  including  conduits,  special  purpose 
vehicles, etc – could work as an important signalling mechanism that would allow investors to 
re-assess positions and gradually help the market for structured finance to start functioning 
again.  
Third, for financial institutions, the period ahead is likely to provide a first material test of the 
effects  of  changing  banking  business  models  to  one  whereby  the  securitisation  of  bank 
assets  and  the  role  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  have  become  increasingly  important. 
Although  currently  profitable  and  well  capitalised,  many  banks  will  experience  income  and 
credit losses, which may trigger a re-assessment by some of them of the suitability of this so-
called “originate-and-distribute” business model. With regard to hedge funds, they have not 
been at the centre of the turmoil. An important lesson in this regard is that many funds with 
solid  financing  structures  and/or  strategies  geared  towards  distressed  asset  management 
are likely to have prospered from recent events, thereby smoothening volatility and mitigating 
the effects of a financial de-leveraging process.  
Finally,  certain  supervisory  and  regulatory  issues  can  already  be  identified  as  warranting 
further attention or action. Initiatives are already underway at the European and international 
level to draw lessons and consider further policy actions. Whilst it is still too early to draw 
definitive  conclusions,  there  is  a  common  understanding  on  the  need  for  finding  solutions 
that can be applied consistently at the global level. In this respect, international coordination 
is  of  the  utmost  importance,  as  any  policy  action  should  be  applied  consistently,  thus 
ensuring a level playing field globally.  
Turning to possible lessons from a regulatory and supervisory viewpoint, I would stress first 
of all the importance of effective implementation of Basel II which, despite the possible need 
for  some  revisions  in  light  of  the  recent  financial  market  developments,  provides  a  sound 
basis for banking supervision and incentives for improvements in banks’ risk management.  
Second,  I  would  mention  three  key  areas  that  warrant  further  attention  on  the  part  of  the 
international  community.  First,  banks  need  to  further  improve  their  risk  management,  in 
particular liquidity risk management. The complexity of structured finance products calls for 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 5
banks to have in place commensurately sophisticated risk management systems, including 
liquidity  risk  stress-testing.  Second,  the  role  rating  agencies  played  in  the  recent  events 
needs to be assessed. In particular, a better insight is needed into the incentive structures, 
including possible conflicts of interest, to perform proper due diligence. At the same time, the 
possible  lack  of  incentives  for  investors  to  carry  out  their  own  credit  analysis  and  due 
diligence should also be taken into account. Third, certain areas of the regulatory framework 
may  need  to  be  reviewed,  such  as  the  treatment  of  liquidity  risk  and  the  securitisation 
framework, in particular the treatment of liquidity exposures to special purpose vehicles and 
the assessment of risk transfer, given their significance in the recent financial turbulences.  
Let me conclude by stressing that I am confident that from this process, an even stronger 
financial  system  will  emerge,  which  will  be  well  able  to  face  the  future  challenges  for  the 
global intermediation of credit.  
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
One  important  lesson  that  we  have  learned  from  past  financial  crises  and  that  should  be 
applied  at  the  current  juncture  is  that  fostering  transparency  proves  to  be  an  effective 
mechanism  for  both  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  containment.  This  is  so  because  ensuring 
transparency through the appropriate disclosure of information reduces uncertainties on the 
part  of  market  participants,  thus  leading  to  less  disruptive  market  movements  and 
overshooting.  Moreover,  transparency  helps  minimise  contagion  in  all  compartments  of 
global  finance,  not  least  through  its  preventive,  but  also  dampening,  impact  on  herd 
behaviour of market participants. Enabling market participants to differentiate across players 
and to price risks appropriately is therefore a highly valuable outcome.  
As we have seen, the concept of transparency relates to many different areas such as the 
domain of sovereign risks and the interaction between sovereign borrowers and their private 
creditors and investors as well as to financial markets of industrialized countries. While I am 
firmly  convinced  that  more  progress  ought  to  be  achieved  when  it  comes  to  introducing 
transparency in the various areas of the global financial system, I am equally convinced that 
we do not need heavy-handed public sector regulation to reach our goals. On the contrary, 
there  are  many  examples  of  both  self-regulation  by  the  financial  industry  and  joint 
governance involving both the private and the public sector. One promising recent initiative 
are  the  benchmarks  for  best  practices  that  a  number  of  highly  leveraged  institutions  have 
worked out voluntarily. Another example that has proven highly successful are the Principles 
for stable capital flows on which I have elaborated before. In sum, I would underline that it is 
the  task  of  all  the  stakeholders  of  the  global  financial  system,  regardless  of  whether  they 
belong to the private or the public sector, to live up to their respective responsibilities and 
contribute appropriately to the stability of this system. In this context, the IIF has made very 
significant and valuable contributions during the last 25 years, and I look forward to its future 
work. 
6 
 BIS Review 119/2007
