José Darío Uribe Escobar: Recent performance of the Colombian 
economy and the central bank’s monetary policy reactions  
Speech by Mr José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank of Colombia, at the 
Bear Stearns 2007 Colombia Conference, Cartagena, 28 September 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  take  part  in  this  event.  I  will  begin  by  describing  and 
interpreting  the  recent  performance  of  the  Colombian  economy  and  then  explain  our 
monetary  policy  reactions.  Then  I  will  comment  on  the  recent  turbulence  in  international 
financial  markets  and  how  it  might  affect  the  Colombian  economy.  I  will  conclude  with  a 
summary of what I think are the key strengths of our economy and our policy framework and 
why they can cope with what may lie ahead. 
The economic situation 
II.  
The Colombian economy is growing at historically high rates. After expanding at around 5% 
for  two  years,  it  grew  by  6.8%  in  2006.  This  strong  surge  has  continued  into  2007.  GDP 
growth  in  the  first  semester  was  estimated  to  be  7.6%,  and  available  indicators  suggest 
growth in the third quarter will surpass 5%. As illustrated in Chart 1, there have been very 
few years since the 1970s when the Colombian economy has expanded as fast as this. 
Productive capacity and productivity also have increased at a high rate especially in industry 
and commerce. There is also an ample supply of labor. 
Turning  to  domestic  demand,  the  most  noticeable  feature  in  recent  years  has  been  the 
strong momentum in private investment. As Chart 2 shows, private investment has grown at 
two-digit rates since 2002 and, until recently, was concentrated in machinery and equipment. 
Private investment was up by 18.5% in 2006 compared to 2005 and up by 20% in the first 
 BIS Review 113/2007 
 1
half  of  2007  compared  to  the  first  half  of  2006.  This  momentum  was  stimulated  by  good 
prospects for economic growth, improvements in security and confidence, tax incentives and 
the combination of historically low borrowing costs and the real appreciation of the peso. 
 
  
The  growth  rate  of  real  private  consumption  has  been  above  7%  for  three  quarters. 
Consumption growth was supported by favorable financial conditions as well as a sustained 
increase in salaried employment. Our surveys tell us that families are optimistic both about 
their  own  financial  prospects  and  those  of  the  Colombian  economy.  Moreover  a  sharp 
increase  in the  terms  of  trade  has  contributed to  income  growth,  and  quite  possibly  made 
firms  also  feel  optimistic  about  future  profits.  All  this  has  boosted  demand  for  goods  and 
services. 
Merchandise exports in current price dollar terms have doubled during the last four years. 
This applies to both traditional and non-traditional exports. In real peso terms, total exports 
were up by 7.8% in 2006 as a whole and up by 6.5% in the first half of 2007 compared to the 
first half of 2006. Our three fastest growing exports in terms of first semester annual growth 
rates  were  coal,  transport  equipment,  machinery  and  electricity.  When  split  by  destination, 
we see that it is exports to Venezuela that have increased the most. This strong growth in 
exports  reflects  particularly  favorable  external  conditions  in  Venezuela  and  more  generally 
the  improvement  in  international  prices  for  Colombia’s  leading  export  products,  and 
successful efforts of the Colombian private sector to increase productivity. 
This is likely to continue in the near term. So far, there are very few signs of a reduction in 
the rate at which demand and output are growing. Domestic demand is still growing fast. The 
growth  in  Venezuela  and  high  prices  for  our  major  export  products  continue  to  stimulate 
sales in the many companies that are focused on exports. I would expect GDP growth to lie 
between 5.8% and 7.7% in 2007 and then to moderate to about 5% in 2008. 
As for CPI inflation, it is now currently at 5.2%, but down from 6.3% in April. This rise in our 
inflation in the first months of 2007 was in part due to a variety of special factors. Poor crops 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2007
as a result of the El Niño weather condition caused a sharp rise in the price of certain foods 
during the early months of the year, particularly in perishable farm products. Then there was 
a boom in food exports to Venezuela that pushed up prices within Colombia for meat, eggs 
and chicken, among other items. Also important was the growing demand for food worldwide. 
Part of high global food demand is due to the use of certain foodstuffs to produce bio-fuels, a 
phenomenon sparked by high oil prices and the incentives offered by some governments to 
produce alternative sources of energy. 
As a whole food prices were responsible for nearly 70% of the rise in total CPI inflation over 
2007! Table 1 breaks this down further into the different factors. Close to 73% of the rise in 
total CPI price inflation up to August of this year is attributed to the impact of food exports to 
Venezuela. For their part, the prices of foods affected by El Niño, which were the  primary 
driving  force  pushing  up  inflation  until  a  few  months  ago,  are  now  a  factor  pushing  down 
inflation. Over the period as a whole, international food prices have acted to push down on 
inflation but given recent rises in world market prices they could be a source of inflationary 
pressure going forward. But then there is still 28% which we attribute to domestic demand. 
 
And  the  higher  inflation  was  not  just  in  food.  Annual  non-food  inflation  went  from  3.6%  in 
June 2006 to 4.3% by August of this year. The average of the three core inflation indicators 
used by the Banco de la República increased from 3.7% to 4.9% during the same period. 
The behavior of a series called “non-tradable goods excluding food and regulated prices” is 
particularly worth noting, with an annual price increase of 4.8% at December 2006 and 5.6% 
at present, including a major build-up in the months of July and August. All of this suggests 
that  while  the  special  food  price  factors  were  important,  there  was  also  an  underlying 
demand-push pressure on consumer prices. 
Inflation expectations for the short-term exceeded the target range. This too was important. If 
left  to  rise  further,  they  could  have  fed  the  inflationary  process  and  be  reflected  in  wage 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 3
negotiations, in company pricing policies, and in decision-making on financial markets. If not 
dealt with early on, high inflation would build up and force a more costly adjustment later on. 
The orientation of monetary policy 
III.  
Before I go on to interpret this data and to explain how we responded, let me remind you of 
the objective of monetary policy in Colombia. We aim to achieve low and stable inflation. For 
this year, the operational target is inflation between 3.5% and 4.5% but by the midterm we 
aim to keep inflation to within 1 percentage point of 3%. The objective of low, stable inflation 
is  to  provide  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  But  we  recognize  that  monetary  policy 
must also help to stabilize resource utilization in the economy near its average or long-term 
level  as  long  as  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  to  the  inflation  target.  The  challenge, 
therefore, is to define an interest rate level for the central bank that is conducive to meeting 
the quantitative target for inflation and does its best to keep resource utilization close to its 
long-term  level.  The  aim  is  to  prevent  the  economy  from  either  overheating  or  cooling  too 
much. 
As shown earlier, inflation in Colombia rose during first four months of 2007 and although it 
has fallen back it is still above the center of the target range. Only a portion of this increase is 
due  to  temporary  agricultural  supply  conditions  attributed  to  El  Niño  weather.  Demand 
shocks that threatened persistent hikes in future inflation and imbalances that can jeopardize 
the sustainability of economic growth have been responsible for the rest. 
Other evidence revealed an excess of demand above supply in Colombia, which, although 
moderate,  is  still  visible.  The  various  statistical  techniques  used  to  analyze  the  difference 
between actual and potential output (the GDP gap) all suggest the former exceeds the latter 
by somewhere between 1 to 2.5 percentage points. Most of the capacity indicators are close 
to historically high levels. 
Another very straightforward piece of evidence is by how much our current GDP growth rates 
lie above historical averages. This year, the annual growth rate during the first semester was 
7.6%, which is the highest for the first 6 months of a year since we have had quarterly data at 
our disposal. A situation where economic growth surpasses its historic average and the GDP 
gap that keeps positive represents a serious risk of inflation. 
This  demand  pressure  is  also  visible  in  our  imports.  Nominal  imports  in  dollars  have 
increased at an average annual rate of 34% since 2006. This is much higher than the 7.7% 
average growth observed since 1994. Nominal  exports in dollars have soared as well, but 
less than imports. This means the current account deficit has risen every quarter since 2006. 
In summary, our challenge in the second half of 2006 and the first of 2007 was to deal with 
inflationary demand. Since April 2006, our monetary policy response has been to raise the 
Banco  de  la  República’s  intervention  interest  rates  by  325  basis  points.  As  of  May  2007, 
these hikes have been supplemented with a 24% average marginal reserve requirement on 
liabilities in the banking system. 
What I want to emphasize is that in situations such as the job of keeping inflation close to a 
well – defined target is the same as keeping growth on a sustainable path. There was no 
trade-off. The growth rate of 11% in domestic demand during the first quarter of 2007 was 
too high. Had we let demand continue to grow at high rates, it would have meant not only 
excess  inflation,  but  a  worsening-quality  and  more  risky  investment,  as  well  as  an 
unsustainable current account deficit. 
Let me also assure you that my colleagues and I at Banco de la República and in other areas 
of the government are very much aware that for growth to bring lasting benefits, it must be 
sustainable. We have public support for this goal. There is greater recognition on the part of 
the  Colombian  public  that  we  must  avoid  repeating  the  damaging  pattern  of  boom  and 
recession. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2007
The early evidence is that our preemptive and counter-cyclical actions have been working. 
Credit is becoming more expensive and is not expanding as quickly. The same can be said 
of  the  growth  in  monetary  aggregates.  Both  series  are  plotted  in  Chart  3.  People  see  a 
central bank that is making the right decisions and continuing in its effort to place inflation 
and inflation expectations on a path that is consistent with the targets that have been set. All 
of this will surely result in a more moderate increase in domestic demand, inflation that is on 
target, and an economy that is growing at a sustainable pace. 
 Financial market turbulence and the Colombian economy 
IV.  
I would like now to discuss something that is I am sure on all your minds: the recent financial 
market turbulence triggered by problems in the US sub-prime lending market. We can never 
ignore  the  fact  that  the  Colombian  economy  is  affected  by  economic  developments 
worldwide. This turbulence on international financial markets as of September has added to 
the uncertainty about the future of the economy worldwide and also for Colombia. 
However,  we should also recognize that this has happened after a sustained sequence of 
strong global growth. World growth is estimated to have stayed above 4% since the turn of 
the century and to have reached 5.4% in 2006. These rates are well above the average of 
3.6%  from  1970  to  20051.  This  strong  growth  has  meant  that  both  private  and  public 
institutions worldwide have accumulated substantial reserves to draw on. 
I am sure that the causes of the turbulence are well known to all of you. What is of prime 
interest is their eventual impact on the Colombian economy. 
Financial turbulence is passed through to countries like Colombia through different channels. 
The following are the main ones: i) through changes in growth in the United States and in the 
world economy, and particularly in our most important trading partners; ii) through the drop in 
international prices for major export products and in the prices of imported goods (terms of 
trade); iii) through an increase in risk premia; iv) through changes in the direction of monetary 
                                                 
1  
IMF World Economic Outlook, 2007 I. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 5
policy rates in the United States and in other advanced economies; and v) through changes 
in interest rates on government bonds in the industrial countries. 
So  far,  all  we  can  say  about  the  impact  of  the  international  financial  turbulence  on  the 
Colombian economy is that there was an important initial impact but most of that was quickly 
reversed: i) the Colombian peso depreciated 13.8% between July 15 and September 12 but 
then appreciated by 7.6% to September 26th; ii) the country-risk premium increased from 97 
to 204 basis points from July 15th to September 13th but fell back to 147 basis points by 
September  26th;  and  iii)  interest  rates  on  TES  2020,  the  country’s  most  liquid  domestic 
government  bonds,  rose  by  75.1  basis  points  from  July  15th  to  September  13th  but  since 
then recovered 40 of those basis points. 
In truth, we have as yet no idea how long the effects of the international financial turbulence 
on the real economy will last, or how strong they will be. But what we do know is that, over 
the  years,  Colombia  has  constructed  a  policy  and  institutional  framework  that  makes  the 
economy  more  resistant  to  negative  external  shocks.  This  policy  framework  includes  an 
independent  central  bank  that  has  lowered  inflation,  allowed  exchange  flexibility,  and 
accumulated large amounts of international reserves. It also includes a government that has 
made  it  a  policy,  in  recent  years,  to  reduce  the  public  debt  as  a  share  of  GDP  and  has 
changed the currency composition of its debt to the point where nearly 65% is denominated 
in pesos (internal debt) and 35% in foreign currency (external debt). 
And  then  our  financial  system  is  in  good  shape.  It  is  deeper:  the  growth  rates  for  assets, 
deposits, and loans in our banking sector recently reached historic highs. And at the same 
time it is more solid: during this rapid expansion, solvency ratios have remained well above 
the minimum capital asset ratio (9%). Loan portfolio quality (measured by the percentage of 
risky loans) has improved steadily too, on average. 
Of course, there are important risks to be addressed by financial institutions and authorities 
alike.  As  we  argued  in  our  recent Financial  Stability  Report,  the  rapid  growth  in consumer 
lending  is  one  concern.  The  undiversified  nature  of  the  portfolio  of  our  non-bank  financial 
institutions  is  another.  We  also  argued  that  now  is  a  good  time  to  continue  to  make 
improvements in our regulations. Although these improvements would strengthen us further, 
there is no doubt that we are in better shape with respect to financial stability than when we 
faced international financial market volatility in the past. 
Also from the point of view of our balance sheets, it is positive that our current account deficit 
has  been  mostly  funded  by  foreign  direct  investment.  The  level  of  private  sector 
indebtedness  does  not  seem  excessive.  In  historical  terms,  there  is  less  currency  and 
maturity mismatches in balance sheets. 
Finally,  headway  is  being  made  in  integrating  us  further  with  world  trade  through  various 
means, one of the most important being bilateral trade agreements. 
A  strong  framework  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies  means  that  the  Colombian 
economy  can  better  absorb  changes  in  the  international  economy,  be  they  temporary 
turbulence  or  more  lasting  adjustments.  Let  me  remind  you  that  our  inflation  targeting 
scheme  allows  us  to  be  flexible  and  discretionary  in  how  we  respond  to  shocks  such  as 
these. 
But  in  exchange  for  this  flexibility  in  our  instruments,  we  must  keep  fixed  on  three 
commitments. The first is our monetary policy objective: we must try and keep inflation close 
to its target path without letting the output gap fluctuate excessively. The second is to explain 
our actions, so the private sector can plan accordingly. The third commitment is on the part 
of our partners in the government to support this effort with an appropriate fiscal policy and 
financial supervision. This strategy should help with whatever awaits us on the road ahead. 
Of course, we will continue to monitor developments carefully. But we should not let events 
on international financial markets distract us unnecessarily from these three commitments. If 
we perceive a further threat to inflation, we should act preemptively to avoid reaching a point 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2007
where we would have to deal with high domestic inflation, a larger current account deficit and 
higher international market spreads. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
In conclusion, the Colombian economy has grown very strongly in 2007 as it did in 2006 and 
2005. The growth was not just in consumption. Private investment, especially in machinery 
and equipment, and exports have increased strongly too. We can now surely say that our 
productive capacity has recovered from the recession of the late 1990s. 
But we are also aware that we must not let domestic demand rise too far above productive 
capacity.  This  would  create  inflation  pressure.  In  my  review  of  the  data,  I  concluded  that 
although much of inflation was due to temporary fluctuations in food prices, there was also 
some underlying demand pressure. Evidence from a wide variety of other data corroborated 
that domestic demand was growing too fast. Excess demand would mean not just inflation 
but that imports were stimulated to feed a large current account deficit. Thus the rises in our 
interest  rates  since  April  2006  have  been  aimed  both  at  containing  inflation  pressure  and 
keeping our economy on a sustainable path. 
I discussed some of the likely channels through which the recent turbulence in international 
financial markets could come to affect us in Colombia: through international demand for our 
exports,  through  changes  in  terms  of  trade,  and  through  market  interest  rates.  I  also 
reminded you of the key strengths in our policy framework. We have an independent central 
bank that keeps firm on its objectives; a government that acts to keep public debt to within 
sustainable  limits,  and  we  have  a  financial  supervisory  authority  that  improves  and 
strengthens our regulatory framework. If we keep to this, we should be well protected against 
whatever lies ahead. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 7
