Caleb M Fundanga: Financial sector challenges and progress in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Information 
Exchange Forum on Sources of Finance, Lusaka, 10 December 2007.  
 the 
towards 
financial  deepening,  wealth  creation  and  reducing 
• Mr Chairman 
• Representatives of International Financial Institutions 
• Chief Executives and representatives of Financial Institutions 
• Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
I am greatly honoured to be given an opportunity to make some remarks at this forum. I wish 
to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participants  gathered  here  today,  particularly  those  who 
have  travelled  from  outside  the  country.  I  hope  that  you  will  not  only  have  fruitful 
deliberations  but  also  find  time  to  explore  the  beautiful  scenery  and  experience  the  warm 
hospitality that Zambia has to offer. 
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, this forum is more than timely as Zambia is working 
tirelessly 
levels  of 
unemployment. In order to achieve this, affordable financial services should be available to 
the  majority  of  businesses.  In  fact,  the  forum  has  come  at  an  opportune  time  when  the 
economy has shown signs of macroeconomic stability and growth. 
The  financial  sector  in  Zambia  is  considered  relatively  under  developed.  In  spite  of  this 
status,  post  independence  governments  have  always  recognised  the  importance  of  the 
financial sector to national economic development. This is the reason why the activities of the 
sector had up until 1992 been controlled by the state. Since then, the financial sector has 
been liberalized while simultaneously strengthening the regulatory framework. 
Concerned with the limited contribution of the financial sector to economic development, the 
Government  devised  and  formulated  policy  mechanisms  for  addressing  a  number  of 
identified obstacles within the framework of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper  (PRSP) 
whose implementation started in 2002. In line with the PRSP framework, the World Bank and 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  undertook  an  assessment  of  the  financial system  through 
the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) which was complimented by our own 
review. 
Some of the principle areas of concern identified included: 
• 
Low financial intermediation with limited access to financial services, especially for 
the rural and peri-urban population and the low-to-middle income earners; 
Poor credit culture in the market; 
Multiple and potentially conflicting roles of the government in the financial sector; 
Weak  regulatory  framework  for  non-bank  financial  institutions,  insurance  and 
pension funds; 
Undeveloped money and capital markets; and 
Limited long-term development and housing finance. 
• 
• 
In recognition of the strategic importance of the financial sector to the country’s development 
and  poverty  reduction  efforts,  the  Zambian  government  launched  the  Financial  Sector 
Development  Plan  (FSDP)  in  2004  to  address  weaknesses  that  had been  identified  in  the 
financial sector. The FSDP is therefore a comprehensive strategy that is aimed at achieving 
a  financial  system  that  is  sound,  stable  and  market-based,  that  would  support  efficient 
resource mobilization necessary for economic diversification and sustainable growth. 
 BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
in  order 
to  support  efficient  resource  mobilization  necessary 
The  financial  sector  weaknesses  are  being  addressed  through  a  public  and  private  sector 
partnership.  The  implementation  structure  is  chaired  by  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury  at 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  National  Planning  with  the  secretariat  function  responsible  for  the 
coordination of activities based at the Bank of Zambia. 
Mr Chairman, the goal of the FSDP is to have a financial system that is stable and market-
based 
for  economic 
diversification and sustainable growth. A number of reforms have already been undertaken 
under  this  plan.  For  instance,  a  Credit  Reference  Bureau  has  been  established  and  we 
expect it to be operational in the coming year. In addition, studies have also been taken to 
comprehend the constraints to broader access financial services. 
One of the outputs of the FSDP has been a market knowledge study called Finscope Zambia 
which is a nationally representative survey of the use of, and demand for, financial services. 
It provides insights into how consumers source their income and manage their financial lives. 
This is the first time a survey like this has been conducted in Zambia and provides valuable 
information for players in the financial market. 
The  survey,  which  was  conducted  in  2005,  notes  that  very  few  Zambians  use  the  formal 
financial  sector.  The  report  reveals  that  most  Zambians  prefer  to  invest  in  non-financial 
instruments such as a business, livestock, land or agriculture equipment. 
Mr Chairman, the year 2006 marked the eighth consecutive year of positive real growth in 
output  while  inflation  declined  remarkably  to  single  digit  level  of  8.2%.  During  this  period, 
investment  was  strong,  particularly  in  the  mining,  tourism,  construction,  transport  and 
agricultural  sectors.  This  set  a  good  basis  for  further  favourable  economic  growth  in  the 
medium to long-term. Increased private sector investment, particularly in the mining sector, 
contributed to this growth. 
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, Zambia’s external position has also shown remarkable 
improvements  with  the  trade  surplus  rising  to  US  $1,176.0  million  in  2006  from  US  $10 
million in 2005. Similarly, the current account deficit as a percent of GDP (excluding grants) 
reduced to 2.3% from 11.8% during the same period. This outturn was mainly attributed to 
high receipts from increased copper exports. Debt relief and increased budget support from 
cooperating partners also helped strengthen the external position. 
Mr  Chairman,  the  financial  system  has  exhibited  continued  stability  in  the  last  eight  years 
with  the  banking  sector  recording  an  average  annual  growth  of  more  than  27%  in  total 
assets. Similarly, the deposit base has recorded an annual average growth of 28% over the 
same  period.  This  is  evidence  of  rising  economic  activities.  However,  the  increase  in  the 
deposit base alone can not fully support the enormous need for access to affordable loan-
able funds in the economy. 
I  must  mention  here  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  that  financial  markets  in  Zambia  are  still 
developing.  With  respect  to  money  market  developments,  commercial  banks  lending  rates 
have been declining but not at the rate as inflation or treasury bill rates. Commercial banks 
nominal average lending rate declined from 33.9% in December 2005 to 27.6% in December 
2006  and  stood  slightly lower  at  27.3%  in  February  2007.  This  is still on  the  high  side  for 
most entrepreneurs. However, there are positive indications from commercial banks due to 
the growing confidence in the economy and lower lending rates are therefore expected given 
the current environment of low inflation. 
Mr. Chairman, in the Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs) sector, institutional growth has 
continued to be a challenge. The number of NBFIs supervised by the Bank of Zambia has 
increased in the last 6 years, by 15% from 52 in 2001 when a specialized NBFIs department 
was  established,  to  60  today.  The  establishment  of  this  specialised  department  was  in 
response to: 
• 
the expansion of the NBFIs sector; 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
 the increased innovation in the sector; and 
the increase in the number of NBFIs supervised by BoZ after amendments to the 
Banking and Financial Services Act (BFSA) in 2000. 
The increase in the number of new entrants in the NBFI sector has been due to the stability 
in  the  macro-economic  environment  in  general  and  the  financial  sector  in  particular.  To 
illustrate this further the BOZ receives on average about 7 applications per quarter, mainly 
from bureaux de change. 
This  is  also  being  driven  by  the  growing  demand  for  finance  by  both  public  and  private 
investors in this sector. In the recent past for instance, a private leasing company received 
structured finance of US$10 million (or approximately K38 billion at today’s exchange rate) 
while the Development Bank of Zambia also issued a corporate bond of K68 billion (which is 
just under US$18million). Increased participation in both the money and capital markets by 
non-bank financial institutions with proposals for issuance of other corporate bonds are also 
under current consideration. 
Mr Chairman, some of the key sectors with potential investment include agriculture, mining, 
manufacturing, tourism and energy. 
Mr. Chairman, given all these developments which I have cited, one can tell that there are 
enormous possibilities for the financial sector in Zambia. In this regard, our expectation, at 
the Bank of Zambia, is that the financial sector should take a leading role in facilitating further 
developments  in  the  areas  which  I  have  discussed.  However,  during  our  interactions,  key 
players in the financial sector have informed us that they have a limited capacity to provide 
the required services in this regard. 
This  forum  has  therefore  been  organized  and  arranged  by  the  Bank  of  Zambia  to  bring 
together  Zambian  financial  sector  players  and  international  financial  players  who  have  an 
interest to see that Zambia takes its rightful place in the world economy. Our expectation is 
that  after  this  forum,  we  shall  see  the  emergence  of  an  interactive  and  symbiotic  alliance 
between International and Zambia financial institutions whose goal will be to provide financial 
services that will uplift the well-being of the Zambian populace at large. This sounds like a 
difficult task to achieve but it is my conviction that it is better to begin a step towards this 
direction rather than waiting for it happen in future. 
On a lighter note, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me remind you that the Soccer World Cup to be 
hosted  by  South  Africa  in  2010,  has  attracted  increased  demand  in  the  construction  and 
tourism sectors in the whole Southern African Region. Zambia needs to take advantage of 
this and invest heavily in the tourism industry to benefit from the event; particularly that it has 
a vast number of national parks and the Victoria Falls, one of the seven natural wonders of 
the world. Obviously this can only be done if there is long term partnerships between local 
financial institutions and International financial institutions like the ones invited here today. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
