Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: TARGET2-Securities gains from integrating 
the European post-trade infrastructure – the case for T2S 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the IEA conference on the ECB’s proposal for TARGET2-Securities, Dublin, 
30 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here today at the Institute of European Affairs (IEA) to share with you my 
vision for the TARGET2-Securities (T2S) initiative as part of the integration of the European 
settlement industry for the benefit of market participants. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here,  because  the  IEA  plays  a  particularly  important  role,  as  an 
independent  opinion-former,  in  fostering  European  debate  and  thoroughly  analysing  and 
communicating  the  need  to  integrate  the  currently  fragmented  European  post-trade 
infrastructure for securities and the benefits of such integration. For us, the ideal solution is 
for T2S to act as a single European backbone offering settlement services for all domestic 
and  cross-border  securities  transactions  in  central  bank  money.  I  will  now  explain  our 
reasoning in this regard.  
The aim of T2S is to make cross-border securities settlement transactions across Europe in 
central bank money as secure, efficient and cheap as domestic settlement transactions are 
today.  Consequently,  T2S  will  represent  a  genuine  opportunity  to  achieve  costs  which  are 
among  the  lowest  in  the  world,  benefiting  financial  participants.  For  example,  Europe  is 
comparable  to  the  United  States  in  terms  of  its  economic  size.  But  whereas  firms  in  the 
United States operate in a single, large domestic post-trade environment with one supplier of 
post-trade services regardless of where the trade is effected, in Europe firms have to operate 
across many smaller, national markets and bear the higher costs of connecting to all of these 
markets either directly or via expensive intermediaries. As a result of this lack of integration, 
Europe  lags  way  behind  the  United  States  in  terms  of  both  the  volume  and  cost  of 
transactions. The cost gap is particularly large for cross-border transactions, with estimates 
suggesting that the difference can be as much as several hundred per cent.  
The Eurosystem takes the view that today’s challenges are best tackled by involving market 
participants in solving the current economic and financial gaps. The Eurosystem is acting as 
a market catalyst and playing a unique facilitation role, bringing together market participants 
to create a truly integrated European financial market. The Eurosystem continues to play an 
active role in the payment industry by providing – in the form of TARGET2, which went live 
just  last  week  on  19  November  –  borderless  core  infrastructure  for  real-time  settlement  in 
central bank money.1 Further support for the single market will come from the streamlining of 
collateral management systems through the CCBM2 (Collateral Central Bank Management) 
project.  
T2S will build on the newly released TARGET2 system and bring payments associated with 
securities settlement together with pure cash settlements across the European Union.  
The  Lisbon  agenda  clearly  demonstrates  that  not  only  must  Europe  do  better,  it  can  do 
better. We can say that we want Europe to be the best and most secure place to issue and 
trade  securities  and  that  we  want  it  to  be  the  most  competitive  economy  in  the  world. 
However, Europe lacks a common post-trade “plumbing” system, whereas the United States 
                                                 
1   TARGET2  went  live  on  19  November  for  the  eight  countries  (Austria,  Cyprus,  Germany,  Latvia,  Lithuania, 
Luxemburg, Malta and Slovenia) in the first wave. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
created such a system years ago. T2S joins other European initiatives, such as the Code of 
Conduct  and  the  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive  (MiFID),  in  helping  to  fulfil  the 
objectives set out by the Lisbon agenda for the provision of better services to issuers and 
investors. We firmly believe that T2S will speed up market integration and foster competition. 
The T2S settlement system will act as a driver to promote harmonisation within the European 
securities industry, creating opportunities for cost savings and allowing market participants to 
select and choose post-trade partners irrespective of their location within the single market. 
The impact of T2S on harmonisation is already being felt, building on valuable work by the 
CSDs.  The  ICSDs’  experience  in  bringing  together  several  national  CSDs  has  created 
valuable  impetus  in  this  respect.  The  next  speaker  will  also  contribute  to  this  debate  by 
highlighting the advantages of such harmonisation.  
The Eurosystem, inter alia through the T2S project, will play a leading role in working with 
market  participants  to  harmonise  market  practices  at  the  European  level  for  the  benefit  of 
those  participants.  This  work  is  likely  to  remove  even  more  barriers  of  the  kind  already 
identified by the Giovannini Group, as well as helping users to identify the irreducible costs of 
unresolved  barriers  in  the  new  efficient  borderless  settlement  environment.  This  work  will 
also increase the pressure for swift action to harmonise practices that do not constitute pure 
settlement activities, especially in relation to corporate activities, taxes, laws and regulations.  
T2S  will  harmonise  the  real-time  life  cycle  management  functionality  for  settlement 
instructions. T2S will also harmonise the settlement model and will offer daily real-time and 
night-time  cycle  modules.  Market  participants  will  therefore  follow  one  common  set  of 
harmonised  settlement  procedures  irrespective  of  whether  they  are  settling  securities 
domestically or cross-border. 
T2S  will  provide  a  neutral,  borderless,  core  infrastructure  crystallising  the  gains  from 
harmonisation and providing support for competition between service-providers in the post-
trade industry for securities. This will foster the changes required in intermediation between 
issuers and investors by providing impetus for financial market participants’ development of a 
competitive, efficient and secure European financial market.  
Furthermore, T2S will also create a single pool of assets within Europe, essentially all of the 
securities held by participating CSDs, exchangeable for each other via central bank money at 
low  cost,  in  real  time  and  in  an  extremely  reliable  settlement  system.  Market  participants 
across Europe will therefore be able to pool all of their securities in one system, just as cash 
is now pooled in TARGET2, without the need to distribute and allocate securities and central 
bank money within several independent national platforms. This will increase the efficiency of 
collateral management and reduce market participants’ collateral and/or liquidity needs. T2S 
will  therefore  have  the  effect  of  reducing  market  participants’  costs  and  contributing  to  the 
optimal  allocation  of  investment  opportunities.  This  will  also  allow  for  the  faster  re-use  of 
securities, as well as central bank money – again, for the benefit of market participants. The 
use  of  TARGET2  and  T2S  will  eliminate  the  risk  currently  associated  with  cross  border 
settlement,  thereby  providing  for  efficient  and  stable  intermediation  between  buyers  and 
sellers within the capital market segments. 
These  new  features  will  therefore  create  valuable  new  options  for  commercial  and 
investment banks as regards the management of their collateral and the optimisation of their 
funding costs. The indications given by market participants suggest that this is likely to lead 
to  very  significant  reductions  in  costs.  This  will  feed  through  to  increased  trading  activity, 
reduced trading spreads and lower service prices, thus improving welfare. 
Europe  will  benefit  from  T2S.  Commercial  service-providers  will  benefit  from  the  level 
playing-field  that  a  common  platform,  harmonised  rules  and  practices  and  reduced 
complexity will bring. Issuers will benefit from lower capital costs. Investors will benefit from 
better returns. In a nutshell, the CSDs and their users will benefit from the overall economic 
efficiency of the securities settlement industry.  
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
We  know  that  the  success  of  the  project  will  depend  on  its  ability  to  satisfy  the  needs  of 
stakeholders.  For  this  reason,  our  objective  is  to  enhance  the  comprehensive  user 
requirements  supplied  by  stakeholders  by  means  of  the  next  market  consultation  process 
due  to  take  place  over  the  coming  months.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  ECB  is  listening 
carefully to the views of the market, which is another reason why I am here today: to listen to 
your views and suggestions. We want to stay in close contact with market participants.  
The  forthcoming  public  consultation  will  commence  on  20  December,  and  the  market 
participants  will  have  three  months  in  which  to  provide  any  additional  comments  and 
suggestions they may have regarding the T2S user requirements.  
The finalisation of the T2S user requirements is a central element of this project, but it is not 
the only one. We are now embarking on a second phase work stream investigating the legal 
issues arising from the T2S project and looking at the future governance structure of T2S.  
I would like to finish my remarks today by saying a big “thank you” to all of the stakeholders, 
individuals  and  institutions  working  with  the  Eurosystem  on  the  T2S  project  for  their 
openness, hard work and support. We know that T2S can become a reality, we know that 
T2S will be good for Europe, and we know that T2S should be implemented in cooperation 
with market participants. 
With  T2S,  there  will  no  longer  be  a  need  for  cross-border  settlement  of  securities  across 
Europe;  instead,  there  will  just  be  one  domestic  securities  settlement  for  the  whole  of  the 
single market.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
