Rundheersing Bheenick: Banking in Mauritius – a central banker’s 
viewpoint  
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the Launch 
Ceremony of AfrAsia Bank Limited, Port Louis, 2 October 2007. 
This is the transcript of the impromptu remarks of the Governor. Footnotes have been added to provide context 
for some of the issues which would have been obvious to the original audience. 
 I am delighted to be here this evening in such distinguished company for several reasons. 
It is the first time that I, as Governor, have given a banking licence to a new operator. It is 
normal therefore that I should take some pride in the launching of its operations this evening. 
I am also delighted that AfrAsia Bank is the first of the three banks, which were granted a 
licence in principle just before I assumed office, to get going. I hope that the fact that it is first 
out of the stalls does not mean that the other two must tarry too long in the starting stalls and 
that they would soon be joining the race to give the other established 19 banks in Mauritius a 
good run for their money. And that is exactly what our consumers expect. 
We as regulator, together with my colleagues from the Financial Services Commission, can 
only  take  pride  in  the  fact  that  there  are  more  and  more  people  who  are  knocking  at  our 
doors  and  asking  for  a  licence  to  operate  in  our  financial  sector.  It  is  a  sign  that  our 
jurisdiction is respected locally and internationally. 
I arrived this afternoon, barely a few hours after the Chairman of this bank, after attending a 
meeting where I am happy to say that Mauritius had pride of place1. People showed great 
interest in setting up shop here and were asking questions about us. They believe that we 
have a serious team in government; they believe that we have people here who know what 
they  are  doing;  they  believe  that  the  currency  is  stable  and  that  this  country  has  a  bright 
future. 
And that, I think, is what banking is all about. In a country where there is no confidence there 
is no banking. Banking is built on trust. Banking is built on the future. 
Our colleagues from AfrAsia Bank have taken a very long time before they applied for a bank 
licence.  They  just  told  us  that  it's  more  than  a  century  since  Groupe  Mon  Loisir,  the  main 
promoters, have been in business here. So it makes me wonder why they took so long. After 
all, The Mauritius Commercial Bank has been here for more than one and a half centuries. 
But better late than never! 
Having started late, the promoters of the new bank that we are launching this evening have 
taken  care  to  put  all  the  potential  for  growth  that  they  can  get,  all  the  possible  source  of 
competitiveness that they can find on their side. That's why they have searched far and wide 
from Australia, South Africa, Singapore, India and Canada2 to get the best talents they can 
find to buttress their team to ensure that “Bank Different3” is not just an empty slogan, that 
                                                 
1   Standard Bank Emerging Financial Markets Conference 2007, Cape Town. Mauritius made headlines on the 
eve  of  this  conference  by  ranking  first  in  the  Mo  Ibrahim  Index  which  rates  governance  in  Africa.  It  made 
headlines again the very next day by ranking first in the Global African Competitiveness Index of the World 
Bank and the International Finance Corporation. 
2   The company has shareholders from Mauritius and South Africa; Board Directors from Mauritius, South Africa, 
Singapore and India. The Chief Executive Officer is Canadian and the software provider is Australian. 
3   This is the slogan unveiled by AfrAsia Bank at the launching ceremony. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 1
“Bank  Different”  actually  means  something  that  will  be  a  win-win  not  only  for  the  bank’s 
promoters but also for the consumers of banking and financial services here in Mauritius. 
So, I am delighted to be here for all these reasons. I am delighted because it means more 
competition.  I  am  delighted  because  there  will  be  more  pressure  on  banks  to  revise  their 
spreads  to  give  still  better  value  to  all  our  economic  operators  in  Mauritius.  We  want  our 
island  to  be  internationally  competitive.  That's  the  only  way  to  us  to  survive.  With  scarce 
natural resources, and with only our brain power and skills going for us, we have to make 
sure that we are efficient. 
The Minister of Finance, I am sure, was delighted to hear about the excellent profit record of 
the  banking  community,  which  Mr  Arnaud  Lagesse,  Chairman  of  AfrAsia  Bank,  has  been 
talking about earlier on. This must be giving the Minister some ideas for his next budget! 
We  have  nothing  against  profits;  we  encourage  banks  to  make  profits  and  we  hope  that 
AfrAsia  Bank  will  become  very  profitable,  very  quickly.  Because  if  there  is  one  thing  that 
Central Bankers do not like, it is insolvent banks! 
Just ask Mr Mervyn King about what's happening right now in England and he will tell you 
that it is largely because one particular business model, followed by one particular operator – 
Northern Rock – which did not prove to be resilient to some shocks arising from some distant 
markets that he is having a such tough time. 
What I want to say, is that your business model is your business and the business of your 
directors, your Chief Executive and your shareholders. It's up to you to ensure that you are 
profitable. “Bank Different”, yes, but Bank Prudent as well. “Bank Prudent, Always!” is what I 
say. 
We, at the Central Bank, have put rules and guidelines in the interest of the wider jurisdiction. 
We have to protect the consumer, the borrower and the lender as well. We want to have an 
efficient  financial  sector  that  can  be  benchmarked  internationally.  We  want  a  clean 
jurisdiction. 
We are too small a jurisdiction to be able to afford a crisis like Northern Rock. 
Banking is about risks. You must take risks but you must be aware of the risks that you are 
taking. The Central Bank may not know the risks, but you as bankers know your clients. We 
look at systemic risk but the risks of your bank, the threats to your business model, that's 
your business. 
We intend to allow the market to operate fully, whether it's the interbank market or the foreign 
exchange market. May, I draw your attention to the fact that we have not been intervening on 
the foreign exchange market lately inspite of pressures to do so. Our policy at the Bank is to 
intervene  only  if  we  are  faced  with  excessive  volatility.  We  cannot  go  against  economic 
fundamentals. We are certainly not averse to market-supporting interventions. But we have 
no other specific targets to achieve. 
May I conclude my remarks with the hope that AfrAsia Bank will build on the competence of 
all its partners including Loita Capital Partners, whom we welcome to our shores and to our 
financial jurisdiction. I hope that it will build on the long and rich history of Groupe Mon Loisir, 
within  this  historic  setting  which  served  as  head  office  for  one  of  our  old  colonial  trading 
houses. This building has a very special cachet and its own atmospherics and with it, AfrAsia 
Bank acquires an instant history! May it serve it well. 
I wish AfrAsia Bank the very best of success. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2007
