Christian Noyer: Building on Euro area achievements to prepare for 
enlargement  
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  2007  Annual 
Conference  on  Macroeconomic  and  Economic  Policy  Issues,  Bank  of  Latvia,  Riga, 
10 October 2007.  
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to address this conference hosted by the Latvijas 
Banka.  
Having just passed the European Union 50th anniversary, it is an appropriate time to reflect 
upon  the  essence  and  future  of  this  extraordinary  endeavour.  Never  before,  in  the  whole 
history  of  mankind,  have  democratic  nations  pursued  and  reached,  through  peaceful 
cooperation,  such  a  close  degree  of  interdependence,  involving,  in  many  crucial  areas, 
deliberate pooling of sovereignty. Of course, the process has not been without difficulties and 
tensions,  many  of  which  are  still  apparent  and  acute.  Of  course,  numerous  challenges 
remain.  But,  for  the  first  time  in  more  than  a  thousand  years,  Europe  is  at  peace  and 
prosperous,  with  democratic  regimes  everywhere.  This  is,  by  historical  standards,  an 
exceptional achievement.  
The whole process of European integration was based on a strong intuition: by sharing the 
instruments and policies underpinning economic prosperity, European nations would create 
an  irreversible  situation  of  interdependence  and  solidarity  where  conflicts  and  wars  of  the 
past would become impossible. The creation of the Euro area is the natural consequence of 
this  original  intuition.  It  results  both  from  a  political  vision  and  an  economic  and  financial 
necessity. The process of monetary cooperation was launched as a response to the potential 
financial and economic instability stemming from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. 
It met with many obstacles and went through several crises. At some point, it came close to 
being abandoned altogether. But today, the Euro is alive and well: since 2002, it has been 
the sole currency with legal tender in all countries of the Euro area, providing more than 300 
million  of  European  citizens  with  a  new,  practical  unifying  symbol  as  well  as  many  direct 
economic benefits. 
Before addressing the Euro area enlargement issues let me first elaborate on the successes 
and challenges of monetary integration in Europe. Enlargement should both preserve these 
successes and help handling the challenges.  
The  first,  and  most  obvious  achievement  of  the  Euro,  is  price  stability.  Over  the  last  five 
years,  inflation  has  stayed  broadly  in  line  with  the  price  stability  objective  set  by  the 
European Central Bank, i.e. inflation below but close to 2% over the medium-term. Gone are 
the days when European citizens had to worry about the purchasing power of their savings. 
This  stability  goes  beyond  the  behaviour  of  prices.  Inflation  expectations  themselves  have 
been  remarkably  stable,  including  during  the  recent  period  when  oil  prices  jumped  to  new 
highs. This, by itself, illustrates the credibility achieved by the Eurosystem.  
Second, the ECB’s clear priority of price stability has reduced the risk premium incorporated 
in long term interest rates. Bond yields have, consequently, been low by historical standards, 
a phenomenon which has substantially facilitated private investment. This in turn, will not fail 
to have a highly positive effect on growth.  
A third benefit of the Euro is the removal of exchange rate risk and transaction costs for intra 
Euro  area  trade.  This  has  promoted  trade  integration  among  Euro  area  countries  without 
diverting trade with other countries. Indeed, it appears that business cycles tend to be more 
and  more  synchronized  over  time,  an  evolution  which  allows  for  greater  efficiency  and 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 1
sustainability  of  the  common  monetary  policy.  This  shows  that  monetary  union  is  a  self 
sustaining process: real convergence is to some extent a result, as much as a precondition 
of economic integration.  
Another benefit of the Euro is the boost it gives to financial integration in Europe. In many 
segments,  European  financial  markets  have  reached  the  depth  and  liquidity  which,  up  to 
now,  were  the  preserve  of  dollar  markets.  This  stimulates  productive  investment,  helps  in 
restructuring and, more generally, allows a better allocation of savings and sharing of risks. 
The  current  market  turmoil  is  a  clear  test  for  this  achievement  and  while  the  problems 
affecting the Euro markets have been comparable to those affecting the other major markets, 
the  strength  of  the  Euro  shows,  to  some  extent,  that  it  has  become  a  safe  haven  in  our 
globalized financial world.  
The Euro is becoming extremely attractive, as a vehicle, a transaction, an investment and a 
reserve  currency.  As  you  may  know,  as  central  bankers,  we  remain  neutral  as  far  as  the 
internationalisation of the Euro is concerned. We are neither encouraging, nor discouraging 
the  process.  But,  as  a  citizen,  I  cannot  help  and  feel  proud  of  having  one  the  two  main 
currencies in the world.  
These achievements are the fruits of a long term process of reforms and credibility building, 
but they are not carved in marble. Looking at the many challenges we are facing we could 
even  wonder  if  monetary  integration  is  really  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  My  answer  is 
positive and I am strongly optimistic about the future for the Euro, because we have a clear 
agenda in order to handle these new challenges.  
A first challenge is related to globalisation that exerts pressure on industrialised countries as 
the competition of new players in the global market increases. In that context, the rapid and 
thorough implementation of the Lisbon agenda is essential, since it will pave the way to a 
knowledge-based economy and hence improve Europe’s competitiveness.  
A  second  challenge  is  related  to  current  account  imbalances  in  some  member  states:  the 
disconnection  between  national  saving  and  investment  is  welcome  to  the  extent  that  it 
facilitates  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital.  But  persistent  imbalances  may  reveal 
competitiveness problems. Since deficit countries can no longer make use of devaluations to 
improve their competitiveness, as they sometimes did in the past, they need to improve the 
whole structure of their economies. And if one member of the monetary union improves his 
competitiveness through structural reforms, the others have to follow through. This process 
may lead to a “virtuous cycle” of reforms improving the whole competitiveness of the Euro 
area.  
The  ageing  of  Europe’s  population  is  another  important  common  challenge  faced  by  all 
industrialised countries but which is especially affecting our continent. In that context, it is all 
the  more  essential  to  address  current  fiscal  imbalances  before  the  budgetary  impact  of 
ageing  sets  in.  This  will  need  to  be  done  through  continuing  efforts  to  reform  the  welfare 
state – notably by enhancing its efficiency and effectiveness. Reforms should not merely aim 
at overhauling our countries pension systems, but might also be directed towards increasing 
labour force participation rates.  
These  new  challenges  require  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  and  further  broad 
structural reforms, some of which have been already engaged in most countries.  
Confronted  with  major  trends  in  demographics  and  global  economic  integration,  the 
overriding goal of policymakers should be to strengthen the resilience of our economies to 
shocks.  
Further reforms remain to be undertaken in order to improve the smooth operation of goods 
and  labour markets.  In both  cases,  ill-conceived  protection  mechanisms  have  often  turned 
into rigidities that hold back growth. Indeed, reaching a high growth potential in knowledge-
based economies requires new forms of flexibility and enhanced adaptability:  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2007
  In goods markets, monopolistic rents, which are rarely justified, should be reduced, 
hence favouring R&D, free entry and exit.  
On the labour market, reforms should aim at protecting the persons, rather than the 
jobs.  Professional  mobility  can  be  accompanied  without  blocking  changes,  while 
further  progress  can  be  made  at  improving  risk  sharing  among  employers  and 
employees and fostering education.  
The gains from taking such steps are only reaped in the long run, while the costs are paid in 
the  short  run.  In  addition  the  gains  can  be  seen  as  small  from  an  individual  point  of  view 
because  widespread  across  a  large  number  of  agents,  while  the  costs  are  more  visible, 
concentrated  on  fewer  beneficiaries  who  lose  their  position.  This  means  that  the  reforms 
have to be well explained and well designed. 
Besides, a healthy public finance situation is seen as one of the prerequisites for the success 
of structural reforms: the degrees of freedom are also limited in that respect. In this regard, 
modernising public administrations can be a key element to ensure control over expenditure 
and budgetary consolidation.  
Appropriate  monetary  policy  has  a  limited,  although  essential,  role,  insofar  as  it  can  help 
create favourable conditions for reform by insuring a stable price environment and therefore 
reducing overall uncertainty.  
Taking  into  account  the  achievements  and  the  prospects  for  further  reform  in  the  present 
Euro  area,  what  are  the  challenges  facing  the  New  Member  States  in  the  process  of 
convergence and what are the prospects for a successful Euro area integration?  
In contrast with some gloomy predictions made ten years ago, the Euro is a success story. 
Far from being a closed Club, the Euro area is open and has a true calling for covering all the 
EU members, in so far as they fulfil the convergence criteria. Indeed, adopting the Euro can 
be  seen  as  a  legal  obligation  for  all  EU  members  once  they  have  fulfilled  the  Maastricht 
convergence criteria.  
Monetary union is an on-going process. Starting in 1999 with 11 members, the Euro area has 
regularly expanded. On the 1st of January 2001, Greece joined the Euro area. More recently, 
on the 1st of January 2007, Slovenia was the first of the New Members States which entered 
into the EU since 2004 to adopt the Euro; this brought the current number of members of the 
Euro area to 13. Two more NMS – Cyprus and Malta – will join the monetary union in 2008.  
At this stage, the relevant question for the new EU member states is thus not whether but 
when to join the Euro area. The answer of this question is clear: the New Members States 
have to achieve strict and sustainable fulfilment of the  Maastricht criteria whose economic 
rationale is very strong.  
Why strict and sustainable? I see three main reasons:  
- 
not only to guarantee the credibility of the Euro (which is, in itself, in the interest of 
entrant countries themselves who will adopt this currency as their own);  
but  also  to  ensure  equality  of  treatment  between  all  entrants,  who  have  to  be 
applied, over time, the same entry criteria;  
and, last but not least, to avoid the emergence of disequilibria after entry requiring 
painful adjustments, as shown by the Portuguese situation. Sound macroeconomic 
conditions have to be guaranteed before and after accession. Joining the Euro area 
does  not  guarantee  convergence  in  development  levels.  National  institutions  and 
policy remain crucial after entry.  
  The Maastricht criteria encompass: limited inflation differential vis-à-vis the best performing 
EU member; stability of the nominal exchange rate with the Euro; sound fiscal accounts; and 
low long term interest rate spread vis-à-vis the best performing EU member states in terms of 
price stability.  
BIS Review 115/2007 
 3
They must be satisfied simultaneously for a country to be able to join the EMU. Regarding 
participation in the ERM II, it is not a mere two-year “waiting room” before the Euro. It is a 
“training  room”  for  full  implementation  and  assimilation,  by  all  economic  agents,  of  sound 
policies. Therefore the criteria defined in the Treaty must be fulfilled, not just once, but with a 
good  track  record  and  with  good  prospects.  In  this  regard,  entrant  countries  should  pay 
specific attention to their current account deficits, which are referred to in the Protocol on the 
convergence criteria, because they have to be sustainable in order to ensure a smooth stay 
in ERM II and a good competitive position later in the monetary union.  
The  economic  rationale  of  the  criteria  is  clear:  membership  of  a  monetary  union  entails 
abandoning monetary policy as a country specific adjustment tool. Diverging inflation rates 
become  quickly  unsustainable  both  because  they  create  strong  real  exchange  rates 
movements  within  the  area  and  different  real  interest  rates  at  the  national  level.  In  this 
context  more  inflation-prone  countries  would  have  too  low  real  interest  rates  leading 
eventually to credit booms, domestic demand overheating, and loss in competitiveness and 
external  deficits.  Furthermore,  in  the  absence  of  an  independent  monetary  policy  at  the 
national level, fiscal policy becomes the main adjustment tool. In this context, fiscal criteria 
were  designed  in  order  to  assess  the  ability  of  the  government  to  conduct  sound  fiscal 
policies.  
Achieving strict and sustainable fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria involves in my view three 
elements. Sound fiscal and monetary policies are the minimum requirement in order to meet 
the nominal criteria. However, meeting the nominal criteria is not sufficient to assess that the 
economy of the candidate country is ready for monetary integration.  
The second element, a sufficient advancement in the process of real convergence, is related 
to  the  assessment  of  sustainability.  It  results  from  standard  economic  analysis  that  fast 
growing  economies  require  a  higher  level  of  real  interest  rates  to  remain  on  a  sustainable 
path. Monetary policy in the Euro area is designed for advanced economies and would be 
inappropriate  for  less  developed  economies.  Indeed,  a  premature  entry  would  imply  a 
downward shock on interest rates and other policy parameters such as reserve ratios. This 
would  generate  supply/demand  imbalances,  credit  booms  and  asset  or  consumer  prices 
inflation resulting in financial vulnerabilities and deteriorating competitiveness.  
It  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  the  third  element  relates  again  to  the  advancement  in 
structural reforms: these are preconditions for ensuring viable economic development inside 
a monetary union. Such reforms are necessary in order to enhance flexibility, thus giving the 
economy the necessary adjustment capacity required in a monetary union. The key role of 
structural policies naturally includes the conduct of fiscal policy reforms (tax, pensions, and 
social security) and investments in public goods (infrastructure, education, healthcare, etc.) 
that have to be completed before entry in order to provide enough leeway for fiscal policy to 
serve as a stabilisation instrument inside the monetary union.  
The  New  Member  States  that  have  joined  the  EU  since  2004  have  made  considerable 
progress in nominal and real convergence. Recovering from historic episodes of economic 
contraction, hyperinflation and exchange rate depreciation, these economies have recorded 
gradual macroeconomic stabilisation characterised by disinflation, high rates of GDP growth 
and 
institutional 
improvements  spurred  by  EU-accession,  increased  trade  and  financial  integration  with  the 
EU contributed to a rapid catching-up. Indeed, the year 2006 was the year with the highest 
GDP growth for the region since the beginning of transition.  
Today, the New Member States face the challenge of maintaining stability and sustainability 
of the catching-up path. Stability requires macroeconomic policies avoiding the accumulation 
of  imbalances.  Sustainability  implies  that  past  rates  of  high  economic  growth  could  be 
maintained in the future. To some extent, economic performance in the past decade could 
partly be related to a cyclical recovery after an initial slump. The recent dynamics were also 
generated  by  the  massive  reorganisation  and  privatisation  of  the  economy  after  the  fall  of 
rate  appreciation.  Sound  macroeconomic  policies, 
real  exchange 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2007
communism.  This  process  triggered  large  FDI  inflows  providing  both  financial  means  and 
technological transfer. Today privatisation is almost complete and one has to look for new 
engines pushing forward the catching-up process.  
Currently, I see three main risks that have to be addressed as priorities by policy-makers:  
(i) 
increased  financial  vulnerabilities,  in  relation  with  fast  credit  growth  and  mounting 
external imbalances ;  
rising inflation pressures which hurt external competitiveness; and  
the challenge of ensuring high future potential growth. .  
(ii) 
(iii) 
This third challenge belongs to the long-run as future economic developments will need to 
feed  productivity  growth  beyond  the  dynamics  of  catching-up,  through  technological  and 
production process innovation. It is however a present concern to the extent that recent signs 
of increasing labour market shortages and decreasing FDI inflows question the capacity to 
maintain GDP growth at the high levels recorded in the past.  
Addressing  these  risks  and  challenges  will  require  the  conduct  of  prudent  macroeconomic 
policies insuring short-term stabilisation, with fiscal authorities avoiding pro-cyclical loosening 
and  generous  spending  policies,  and  monetary  authorities  preserving  price  stability  and 
guaranteeing financial stability. However, macroeconomic policies alone are not sufficient to 
improve the long-term growth potential: they are aimed at fostering a stable and transparent 
business  environment,  but  have  to  be  supplemented  by  the  implementation  of  structural 
policies  designed  to  enhance  labour  market  participation,  labour  mobility,  competition  in 
goods market, investment in education, R&D and infrastructure.  
It appears very clearly that the challenge of a stable and sustainable path for the catching-up 
process is closely interlinked with the challenge of a successful integration in the Euro area. 
For  that  purpose,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  New  Member  States  themselves  to  be  patient 
while  accelerating  structural  reforms  in  order  to  meet  both  these  challenges.  Euro  area 
accession will come in due course as the well deserved reward for the efforts of each country 
in  creating  the  conditions  of  its  own  long-term  economic  prosperity.  I  look  forward  to  such 
accessions. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 5
