Ignazio Visco: An ageing population – solutions from financial markets 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
Conference  “Pension  Planning  in  Italy  and  the  Netherlands  –  Challenges  for  Public  Policy 
and Financial Markets”, Rome, 25 October 2007. 
In part this speech reflects views advanced in Visco (2006) and in a report prepared for the Deputies of the Group 
of  Ten  in  September  2005  by  a  group  of  experts  that  I  chaired  (Group  of  Ten,  2005).  I  have  received  useful 
suggestions from Daniele Franco and Fabio Panetta and I would especially like to thank Pietro Tommasino for his 
assistance and comments. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Italy is an ancient country, rich in history, art and culture. It also has one of the most rapidly 
ageing  populations  in  the  world.  We  have  all  heard  about  the  Medici  family,  whose  most 
illustrious member, Lorenzo the Magnificent, was not only a great politician and statesman, 
but also a patron of the arts and a poet. To Italians of my generation he is best known for 
these  verses:  “Quant’è  bella  giovinezza,  che  si  fugge  tuttavia!  Chi  vuol  esser  lieto,  sia:  di 
doman non c’è certezza”, that is, in a charming English translation, “Youth is sweet and well, 
but  doth  speed  away!  Let  who  will  be  gay,  tomorrow,  none  can  tell”.1  Lorenzo  was  only 
twenty years old when he succeeded his father as the dominant force in Florence, embarking 
on a remarkable political career that would make him the arbiter of the balance of power in 
Italy.  And  he  was  just  forty-three  when  he  died,  the  same  year  that  Columbus  discovered 
America.  
Today we live much longer lives, but no less uncertain ones: indeed, “tomorrow, none can 
tell”. Living longer, especially if we are in good health and have the resources to enjoy it, is 
certainly  a  positive  development.  Since  in  all  probability  we  are  not  descended  from  the 
Medici family, or one of similar wealth, we  cannot afford Lorenzo’s hyperbolic discounting, 
which borders on moral hazard. We must, instead, plan for our future. This is especially so 
as  the  demographic  changes  we  are  experiencing  pose  serious  challenges  for  our  public 
finances and the working of labour markets. These certainly include the need for the reform 
and adaptation of our pension systems. Indeed, the “pay-as-you-go” (PAYG) public pension 
system  that  still  covers  most  of  the  Italian  population  was  devised  at  a  time  when  life 
expectancy was lower and fertility rates were higher. While a major reform of the public pillar 
was  made  in  1995  and  refined  over  the  last  decade,  the  development  of  private  pension 
saving  is  now  particularly  important.  The  percentage  of  people  enrolled  in  private  pension 
plans is still low, and the pool of assets managed by pension funds is still very small.  
Demographic trends 
2.  
The  last  hundred  years  or  so  have  seen  a  spectacular  rise  in  average  life  expectancy  in 
today’s  high-income  countries.  Very  considerable,  if  less  spectacular,  progress  has  also 
been  observed  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  For  a  large  part  this  can  be  ascribed  to  the 
exceptional fall in infant mortality. However, in the last half a century there has also been a 
remarkable  increase  in  life  expectancy  at  old  age.  This  secular  rise  in  longevity  has  been 
accompanied more recently by lower fertility rates, with the result that the world population is 
now  ageing  very  rapidly.  This  is  not  only  the  case  for  the  OECD  countries  but  for  several 
emerging economies as well, most notably China. 
                                                 
1   From Lorenzo de’ Medici (il “Magnifico”), Trionfo di Bacco e Arianna, 1490 (trans. by Lorna de’ Lucchi in An 
Anthology of Italian Poems 13th-19th Century, A.A. Knopf, New York, 1922). 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 1
The  unprecedented  rise  in  longevity  has  affected  Italy  perhaps  even  more  than  other 
countries  and  mortality  rates  at  older  ages  have  dropped  very  sharply.  Between  the  early 
1930s and 2004, life expectancy for males has increased by 6.2 years at the age of 60, 4.7 
years at the age of 70 and 2.9 years at the age of 80; for women, it has improved even more, 
by  9.7,  7.6  and  4.6  years.  Life  expectancy  has  increased  more  in  absolute  terms  for  the 
relatively  younger  ages,  so  that  the  shape  of  the  population  pyramid  is  progressively  and 
significantly becoming more “rectangular”. These changes have occurred extremely rapidly in 
recent decades: about two thirds of the increase in life expectancy of males and about one 
half that of females took place after 1980.  
There  are  reasons  to  believe  that  even  these  striking  figures  may  underestimate  the  true 
improvements.  For  example,  life  expectancy  is  usually  calculated  using  the  age-specific 
mortality rates observed today, instead of estimating them on a cohort-by-cohort basis.2 This 
may be one of the reasons for the systematic under-prediction of the number of the elderly, 
especially  the  oldest  old.  New  and  more  sophisticated  projection  methods  have  been 
proposed recently. They appear to have produced significant improvements in projection, but 
life expectancy gains still seem to be somewhat under-predicted.3  
Even if there is consensus that life expectancy will continue to rise in the future (most likely 
by one to two years per decade), we must therefore acknowledge that there is still a high 
degree of uncertainty about future longevity. Moreover, lags occur in the production, adoption 
and  disclosure  of  mortality  tables.  In  particular,  cross-country  variations  in  mortality 
assumptions used by company pension schemes appear at times far larger than the profiles 
of their members warrant.4 Indeed, as the 2005 G10 report concluded: “Regulators should 
promote transparent disclosure of mortality and disability projections and pension actuaries 
should  determine  the  extent  to  which  these  projections  reflect  actual  plan  experience  and 
how  they  model  and  allow  for  the  uncertainty  surrounding  these  estimates  in  their  funding 
strategies” (p. 66). 
Demographic changes may cause systematic deviations in the number of deaths from their 
expected values. Unlike random variations around a fixed known mortality probability, this is 
a collective longevity risk that cannot be diversified across the individuals of a given cohort 
as  it  affects  all  of  them  in  the  same  way.  More  sophisticated  hedging  mechanisms  are 
therefore needed, possibly involving the public sector. Indeed, longevity risks are faced not 
only by company pension schemes but by public programmes as well.  
In Visco (2006) a rough estimate of the risk facing the Italian pension system was computed 
by considering the extra pension payments that individuals aged 50 years and older would 
receive  if  they  lived  longer  than  expected  (assuming  that  most  of  the  cost  of  reforms  to 
correct  this  effect  would  be  borne  by  younger  individuals).  The  same  percentage 
improvements  observed  in  life  expectancy  between  1990  and  2002  were  projected  from 
2005 forward, with the result that the cost of such a shock would be about 10 per cent of the 
present value of pension liabilities under the current system. This would amount to 22 per 
cent of 2005 GDP, with an average annual flow of about half a percentage point of GDP for 
the next decade, and one percentage point in the 2020s and 2030s.  
All  this  clearly  points  to  a  need  for  better  and  more  timely  projections.  At  the  same  time, 
because projections are surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty, pension systems should 
be designed to be robust to uncertainty. They should also be resilient to the economic and 
political pressures that demographic changes are likely to engender. 
                                                 
2   See also Morcaldo (2007). 
3   See Lee and Carter (1992) and Tuljapurkar, Li and Boe (2000). 
4   See Cass Business School (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2007
to  be 
frequently  and  automatically  updated 
As  far  as  public  pensions  are  concerned,  the  introduction  of  notional  defined  contribution 
(NDC)  pension  systems  in  a  number  of  countries,  including  Italy,  goes  in  this  direction.  In 
principle, NDC systems can be designed to calculate pension benefits taking macroeconomic 
and demographic developments automatically into account. However, regardless of the very 
long  transition  period,  the  Italian  pension  scheme,  in  the  form  it  was  introduced,  differs  in 
some important respects from the prototype of an NDC system. The benefit rules were not 
designed 
for  demographic 
developments and the rate of return on workers’ contributions (equal to the rate of growth of 
nominal GDP) apparently does not grant the actuarial balance of the system at least in the 
short-to-medium run.5  
Several  changes  have  been  agreed  recently  between  the  government  and  the  social 
partners.  While  some  of  the  new  rules  are  in  line  with  the  NDC  philosophy  (for  example, 
parameters  should  be  updated  every  three  years  instead  of  every  ten  and  preliminary 
negotiations  with  social  partners  will  no  longer  be  needed),  others  are  more  difficult  to 
understand (for instance, granting some categories of workers a specific pension benefit-to-
wage ratio). 
to  account 
Demographic change and pension systems 
3.  
All pension systems imply a redistribution of real resources from active workers to retirees. 
While in PAYG systems this is implemented through taxes and social security contributions, 
in  funded  systems  it  is  achieved  through  capital  markets,  as  pensioners  use  the  assets 
accumulated in their working years to provide for their needs once retired.6 In both cases, the 
goods  and  services  consumed  by  both  active  workers  and  retirees  are  produced  by  the 
labour of the former. In a funded system, however, saving and accumulated assets should be 
greater, leading in principle to a larger amount of resources available.  
An expected increase in longevity results in higher old age dependency ratios and narrows 
the  range  of  possible  changes  to  pension  system  designs,  regardless  of  the  institutional 
arrangements  for  intergenerational  redistribution.  Possible  measures  include:  (i)  increasing 
payroll contributions; (ii) reducing pension payments relative to per capita GDP; (iii) raising 
the  retirement  age;  and  (iv)  increasing  current  saving  in  order  to  pre-fund  greater  future 
pension  expenditures.  This  last  would  require  both  an  increase  in  public  saving  (reducing 
budget deficits and raising the share of capital expenditure) and an expansion of the private 
pillar. 
Some of these options have the normative appeal that the current workforce shares part of 
the  burden  with  future  taxpayers.  In  particular,  policies  to  raise  the  age  at  retirement  and 
increase current savings seem preferable, at least for Italy, given that in the future people will 
not only live longer but will also be active and healthy longer.7 Moreover, such policies are 
likely to increase potential GDP and this will help to alleviate the financial consequences of 
ageing.  
                                                 
5   Morcaldo (2007). 
6   The often overlooked fact that the returns achieved in a funded system depend on demographic developments 
has been highlighted among others by Mirrlees (1997) and the Pension Commission (2004). See also Visco 
(2002). 
7   Unfortunately,  this  does  not  mean  that  health-related  expenditures  will  be  less  burdensome.  On  one  hand, 
scientific and technological progress in the medical field will probably make more disease curable and lead to 
higher overall expenditures. On the other hand, a large part of medical expenditures is in any case incurred in 
the very last years of one’s life.  
BIS Review 124/2007 
 3
All in all, there is a growing consensus among experts and policy-makers that lengthening 
the average working life and increasing pre-funding are essential to any credible strategy to 
meet the challenges of ageing.  
To increase the effective age of retirement, it is important to reduce the disincentives to work 
embedded in social security rules. PAYG systems are often not neutral with respect to the 
retirement decision. Indeed, in many social security systems workers’ pension wealth (i.e. the 
discounted  value  of  future  pension  payments)  decreases  with  age  at  retirement,  generally 
because of the weak linkage of benefits to lifetime contributions. The NDC system introduced 
in Italy in 1995 should offset this distortion, as benefits depend on past contributions and on 
expected longevity at retirement. However, the new system is being phased-in very slowly. 
Other potential interventions relate to the labour market, for example offering broader training 
opportunities to older employees, increasing flexibility in age-earnings profiles and improving 
on employment arrangements.  
If  we  enlarge  our  framework  to  account  for  uncertainty  and  move  beyond  the  distinction 
between  funded  and  unfunded  pension  schemes,  a  second  distinction  comes  to  the  fore, 
namely that between defined contribution (DC) and defined benefit (DB) systems. The two 
distinctions are independent of one another: unfunded schemes, such as that introduced in 
Italy in 1995, may well place longevity or even market risks directly on workers; and funded 
systems may shield workers from risks, placing them on the employer. 
These two alternative institutional arrangements allocate the risk of unexpected changes in 
longevity  in  very  different  ways,  although  upon  closer  examination  the  differences  appear 
less  pronounced.  Under  a  DC  system,  workers  bear  the  risk  that,  prior  to  retirement,  an 
upward  revision  in  the  expected  longevity  of  their  generation  would  increase  the  cost  of 
purchasing  an  annuity  at  the  moment  of  retirement.8  The  risk  that  an  individual’s  post-
retirement longevity will turn out to have been underestimated is instead left on those who 
sell annuities. This risk can be decomposed in two components: (i) the risk that the insured 
will live longer than the rest of her/his cohort (this is a proper insurance risk, which by its very 
nature  cancels  out  if  the  pool  of  policies  is  big  enough);  and  (ii)  the  risk  that  the  average 
longevity of an entire cohort will prove to have been underestimated (this is an aggregate risk 
that cannot be easily diversified away). Of course, a large part of the aggregate longevity risk 
is likely to be shifted back from insurers to workers via (possibly excessively) high annuity 
prices,  and in  practice  these  high  prices  are  a  key  reason  why  many  people  prefer  not  to 
annuitize. The result is that, in a fully DC system, the insured must cope with longevity risk 
on their own. While, in principle, farsighted agents should respond to risk by working longer 
and/or by saving more, such virtuous responses are often impeded by institutional obstacles 
(labour  market  rigidities,  financial  market  incompleteness)  and  by  bounded  rationality  or 
myopia.9  Indeed,  the  existing  private  DC  schemes  are  often  perceived  by  households 
(especially those of slender means) as too risky and too complex (and perhaps too costly).  
DB schemes, by contrast, are meant to protect workers against aggregate longevity risk, but 
uncertainty about future improvements in life expectancy would affect these systems too. In 
fact,  an  unexpected  increase  in  longevity  would  necessitate  either  increasing  payroll 
contributions or the public debt. And in either case the burden would be borne entirely by the 
younger generations. In other words, high longevity risk would translate into high “political” 
risk: pension promises might not be honoured, as the intergenerational pact on which they 
rest might prove socially and economically unsustainable, as well as intrinsically unfair.  
                                                 
8   Of course, even if he/she chooses not to annuitize, there will be an unexpected decrease in the ratio between 
the level of consumption after retirement and consumption before retirement.  
9   As reported by Choi et al. (2001), in a survey of employees 68 per cent of respondents complained that they 
save too little for retirement, 24 planned to raise their contributions in the future, but only 3 per cent among 
them actually did so. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2007
Occupational  DB  pension  plans  are  designed  to  protect  employees  from  longevity  (and 
investment) risks, placing the consequences of any actuarial imbalance on the employer. In 
this case too, however, workers would be ultimately exposed to longevity risk. The difficulties 
of recent years are instructive as to possible future developments: questionable investment 
decisions and adverse financial market developments have opened up a worrisome “funding 
gap”,  increasing  the  present  value  of  liabilities  more  than  total  assets.  As  a  result,  many 
sponsors  have  closed  DB  funds  to  new  workers  or  ceased  accepting  further  contributions 
from those already enrolled. In some cases, workers have suffered from the default of the 
plans. 
To sum up, the great uncertainty surrounding longevity projections creates problems both in 
DC  systems  (where  individuals  and  households  are  left  alone  to  bear  longevity  as  well  as 
market  risks)  and  in  DB  systems  (where  entitlements  guaranteed  by  the  state  and  by 
corporate sponsors might prove unsustainable).  
The  demand  for  some  form  of  DB  pension  schemes  is  nonetheless  very  strong.10  This 
presumably  reflects  investors’  reluctance  to  bear  longevity  risk  and  investment  risk,  and 
suggests that, while it may not be possible to avoid transferring at least part of these risks 
from  the  public  pension  system  or  employers  to  workers  and  households,  some  form  of 
capital or performance guarantee could significantly stimulate investors’ demand for private 
pension  products  –  provided  that  more  accurate  asset/liability  management  practices  are 
introduced and supervisory oversight is strengthened.  
On  the  supply  side,  longevity  bonds  should  definitely  be  encouraged,  recent  failures 
notwithstanding. The market for long-dated bonds is also too small relative to the potential 
demand  from  institutional  investors.  The  duration  of  public  debt  in  most  countries  is  quite 
short  (at  about  5  years)  and  the  lack  of  public  benchmarks  discourages  potential  private 
issuers.  There  is  also  a  shortage  of  long-term  and  inflation-linked  bonds:  the  potential 
demand exceeds supply at least threefold.11 One could also think of macro-swaps between 
the pension fund and the health care industries, to exchange their exposure to longevity.  
Finally,  as  asymmetric  information  and  market  incompleteness  cannot  be  completely 
eliminated, governments could step in, acting as insurers of last resort at least for the risk of 
very large unexpected increases in aggregate longevity. This is a further reason for reducing 
their role as providers of insurance that could be readily purchased in financial markets. 
The development of private pensions in Italy  
4.  
Since the mid-1990s in Italy the PAYG system has been in a lengthy phase of transition from 
a standard DB system to a new NDC system.12 From the very start of the reform process it 
was clear to policy-makers and experts alike that, in order to achieve an adequate level of 
retirement benefits, the new public pillar had to be supplemented by a well developed private 
pillar. The latter consists in two components, occupational and personal pension plans, both 
voluntary and of the DC type. 
The development of the private pension pillar witnessed an acceleration in recent years. One 
of the goals of the system has been to induce workers to divert contributions from the so-
called TFR (a severance payment scheme where worker’s contributions are retained by the 
employer and earn a rate of return of 1.5% plus 75% of the inflation rate) towards private 
pensions. In order to achieve this objective, the new system includes an automatic enrolment 
                                                 
10   The introduction of “hybrid products”, which share characteristics of both DB and DC schemes, is also often 
suggested.  
11   See Visco (2006). 
12   See Franco (2002). 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 5
provision,  whereby  workers  are  enrolled  in  the  pension  scheme  6  months  after  they  are 
hired, unless they explicitly choose to remain in the TFR scheme. It also significantly reduces 
the tax burden on private pension savings.  
Starting from January 2007, the end-of-period capital accumulated over contributors’ working 
lives is subject to a proportional tax rate that is equal to 15 per cent but can go down to 9 per 
cent depending on the length of the investment period;13 in comparison, the lowest personal 
income  marginal  tax  rate  is  23  per  cent.  Our  calculations  show  that  the  new  Italian  ETT 
system  (Exempt,  Taxed,  Taxed)  is  considerably  more  favourable  than  the  EET  system 
prevailing abroad.14
The tax benefits of the new system are particularly valuable for high-income workers – with 
high marginal personal income tax rates – and for young workers, who can benefit from the 
favourable  tax  regime  for  a  longer  accumulation  period.  For  example,  over  a  30-year 
accumulation period the new tax treatment would allow a low-income worker to increase the 
value  of  his/her  end-of-period  capital  by  about  24  per  cent  relative  to  an  otherwise 
comparable portfolio of financial assets; for high-income workers, the tax benefit would rise 
to a hefty 70 per cent.15
Of  course,  these  tax  benefits  should  not  be  offset  by  high  costs  and  fees  charged  to 
investors. In Italy, these costs vary substantially across funds, but on average they are still 
relatively  high.  Recent  analyses  show  that  the  total  yearly  costs  of  occupational  funds  − 
which  include  management  fees,  administrative  costs  and  the  fees  paid  to  the  custodian 
bank  −  average  about  0.60  per  cent.  For  open  pension  funds  and  insurance  products  the 
total costs and fees are even higher  − 1.4 and 2.6 per cent on average, respectively. The 
expansion  of  the  net  asset  value  of  pension  funds  may  well  reduce  these  costs,  due  to 
economies  of  scale.  However,  the  process  is  likely  to  be  slow  and  could  be  insufficient  to 
lower the level of fees significantly. To speed up and reinforce the process, an increase in 
competition  in  the  asset  management  industry,  fostered  by  domestic  and  international 
competitors, will be necessary.  
In  order 
fees  and  other  product 
characteristics  is  also  crucial.  This  would  allow  workers  to  choose  the  funds  and  products 
best matching their needs. In this respect, the fact that employers’ contributions cannot be 
transferred out of occupational funds limits workers’ mobility and restrains competition in the 
asset management industry, with potentially significant adverse effects on workers’ welfare. 
Moreover, to improve governance and reduce agency problems between investors and fund 
managers,  the  separation  between  asset  management,  auxiliary  services,  and  consulting 
services should be pursued.  
The results achieved so far by the new system in terms of participation in private pension 
funds  are  fairly  encouraging.  According  to  COVIP  (the  supervisory  authority  for  pension 
funds), excluding the workers who have adhered to pension plans via tacit consent, in the 
first six months of 2007 the number of workers participating in some form of supplementary 
pension scheme rose from 3.3 to 4.3 million. In the same period, the number of participating 
private sector employees rose from 1.8 to 2.7 million.  
to  enhance  competition, 
transparency  about 
full 
                                                 
13   Longer periods imply lower tax rates. 
14   In ETT (Exempt, Taxed, Taxed) systems, workers’ contributions to pension funds are tax-exempt, while the 
other  two  components  of  the  pension  scheme  (the  returns  earned  by  the  pension  funds  during  the 
accumulation phase and the end-of-period capital) are taxed. In contrast, in EET systems (Exempt, Exempt, 
Taxed)  the  first  two  components  are  tax-exempt  while  the  end-of-period  capital  is  taxed.  The  comparison 
between the two systems depends crucially on the tax rates applied in each stage. The main advantage of the 
Italian ETT system is represented by the very low tax rate on the end-of-period capital (see Cesari, Grande 
and Panetta, 2007).  
15   See Cesari, Grande and Panetta (2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2007
There is nonetheless ample room for improvement, as the percentage of enrolled workers 
remains relatively low. In fact, at the end of June membership rates were equal to only 22 per 
cent for private sector employees and 28 per cent for occupational funds. As a result of the 
low  membership  rates  and  the  short  life  of  the  system,  the  pool  of  assets  managed  by 
pension funds is still very small: in 2005 it amounted to 3 per cent of GDP, against an OECD 
average of 88 per cent. Since then it is likely to have increased by only a few percentage 
points. In the Netherlands, the leading country in Europe, pension fund assets are 125 per 
cent of GDP.16  
The  lag  that  distinguishes  our  country  primarily  reflects  insufficient  information  and 
awareness about the need to supplement public pensions with private schemes, but it is also 
due to workers’ low levels of financial education. The lack of solid trust in the functioning of 
financial markets is also a factor. But how can we stimulate the growth of this sector?  
One  critical  issue  is  information.  Despite  the  efforts  recently  made  by  the  government, 
surveys show that Italian workers are still not adequately informed on their future pensions. It 
is  therefore  crucial  to  provide  workers  with  additional  information  about  their  accrued  and 
perspective  pension  rights,  both  in  the  public  and  in  the  private  pillar.  An  example  of  the 
benefits  of  transparent  and  clear  information  on  the  individual  rights  stemming  from  the 
public  system  is  offered  by  the  Swedish  experience,  where  every  year  workers  receive 
information on their past contributions and the rates of return granted by the system on such 
contributions.  Valuable  additional  information  could  include  estimates  of  the  final  pension 
benefits under various macroeconomic and demographic scenarios.  
Another  issue  that  deserves  closer  examination  is  the  potential  benefit,  in  a  phase  of 
transition  of  the  public  pillar  towards  a  DC  system,  of  expanding  the  different  types  of 
guarantees offered on the performance of pension funds. In the current framework, pension 
funds are required by COVIP to offer an investment line that guarantees the nominal value of 
invested capital in order to be eligible to collect the contributions of those who have enrolled 
tacitly.  Simulations  and  developments  in  the  markets  show  that  the  costs  of  offering  a 
broader range of guarantees would not be prohibitive: for example, even with conservative 
assumptions on market volatility, a capital guarantee in real terms over a 10-year investment 
horizon  would  cost  0.7  per  cent  on  a  yearly  basis.17  Guarantees  that  are  conditional  on 
particular  events  (such  as  long-term  unemployment  or  illness)  would  imply  a  significantly 
lower cost. A low-volatility regime such as the one that has prevailed in recent years would 
further reduce the cost of guarantees.18  
Yet another way to reduce the costs that workers attach to the shift from the TFR scheme to 
pension funds would be to allow them to go back to TFR if they changed their mind, although 
there should be limits on the exercise of such an exit option. Empirical evidence shows that 
workers’ choices are often backward-looking and are affected by herding behaviour. These 
two factors could determine excessive movements in and out of different investment vehicles 
and might lead to an unjustified increase in the costs borne by investors. 
Customers should not be overloaded with difficult investment choices: the timing and size of 
contributions and the allocation of assets could be fixed by default rules, allowing a limited 
menu of options; life-cycle products should be developed to allow portfolio rebalances in line 
with the changing risk profile of workers as they age.19 Simplicity and cost-effectiveness are 
crucial  if  we  want  to  increase  retirement  savings  among  those  who  most  need  them.  At 
                                                 
16   See OECD (2006). 
17   The details of the simulation are reported in Cesari, Grande and Panetta (2007). 
18   Although the recent financial turmoil resulted in a marked increase in market volatility, in most markets and 
asset classes current volatility is still well below the pre-2004 levels.  
19   See Boeri et al. (2006) and Merton (2006). 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 7
present, enrolment is particularly low among younger workers, women, and small business 
employees.  In  2005,  the  membership  ratio  of  younger  workers  (aged  from  14  to  34)  was 
below  8  per  cent;  that  of  women  was  11  per  cent;  that  of  employees  of  small  businesses 
(fewer 50 employees) was less than 5 per cent.  
It  is  also  well  known that  adverse selection  on  annuity  markets  plays a  possibly  important 
role in limiting their development. In Italy the fraction of pension capital that is mandatorily 
transformed  into  an  annuity  at  retirement  is  at  present  equal  to  50  per  cent  of  the  total 
capital. An increase in this fraction could perhaps be considered.  
Finally, we should not overlook the fact that annuities are the classic answer to longevity risk, 
but by no means the only one. In reality, they make sense for people whose financial wealth 
is sufficient to buy them a significant income. As it may take time to accumulate sufficient 
levels of financial wealth until private pension schemes reach maturity, we should remember 
that real estate is often for households both a currently consumed asset and a major savings 
vehicle.  Since  housing  wealth  constitutes  60  per  cent  of  Italian  households  total  wealth, 
which  is  quite  high  compared  with  other  high-income  countries,  instruments  which  help 
elderly  people  to  extract  liquidity  from  real  estate  in  an  efficient  manner,  such  as  reverse 
mortgage contracts, should become more widespread than they are today. 
Conclusions 
5.  
Several thousands of years after the Age of the Patriarchs and the Bible saying that God had 
put a limit of 120 years to human lives, we still do not know whether that will be the biological 
limit to the human life-span. It is clear, however, that we are now approaching it at a very fast 
pace. It is also clear that in the last decades longevity projections have been systematically 
downward biased. This has produced an aggregate longevity risk, one that we will most likely 
continue to live with.  
Ageing  populations  require  reform  efforts  at  all  levels.  In  Italy,  not  only  has  there  been  a 
major reform of the dominant public pension system, with a long transition period and many 
adjustments,  but  important  steps  have  been  taken  towards  developing  an  efficient  private 
pension  pillar.  It  will  take  time  for  a  private  system  to  be  an  adequate  complement  to  the 
public  system,  but  the  road  is  clearly  indicated  and  we  must  continue  looking  for 
improvements in information, competition, asset management and supervision. To cope with 
individual  and  aggregate  longevity  risks,  it  seems  inevitable  to  me  that  we  must  aim  for  a 
better balance between these two pillars of our pension system. 
References 
Boeri, T., L. Bovenberg, B. Coeuré, B. and A. Roberts (2006), Dealing with the new giants: 
rethinking the role of pension funds, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 8, ICBM-CEPR, 
Geneva.  
Cesari,  R.,  G.  Grande,  and  F.  Panetta  (2007),  “La  previdenza  complementare  in  Italia: 
caratteristiche,  sviluppo  e  opportunità  per  i  lavoratori”,  Banca  d’Italia  Occasional  Papers, 
No. 8. 
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B.C. Madrian, and A. Matrick (2001), “Defined contribution pensions: 
plan rules, participant decisions, and the path of least resistance”, NBER working paper No. 
8655. 
Franco,  D.  (2002),  “Italy:  a  never-ending  pension  reform”,  in  M.  Feldstein  and  H.  Siebert 
(eds.), Social Security Pension Reform in Europe, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.  
Group of Ten (2005), “Ageing and pension system reform: implications for financial markets 
and economic policies”, Report prepared for the Deputies of the Group of Ten by a group of 
8 
 BIS Review 124/2007
experts  chaired  by  I.  Visco,  in  Financial  Market  Trends,  OECD,  Paris,  November 
(Supplement 1).  
Lee, R.D. and Carter, L. (1992), “Modelling and forecasting the time series of US mortality”, 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September.  
Merton  R.C.  (2006),  “Observations  on  innovation  in  pension  fund  management  in  the 
impending future”, PREA Quarterly, Winter.  
Mirrlees,  J.  (1997),  “The  economic  consequences  of  ageing  populations”,  Philosophical 
transactions of the Royal society, Vol. 352. 
Morcaldo, G. (2007), “Pensioni: necessità di una nuova riforma”, Banca d’Italia, mimeo.  
OECD (2006), Pensions markets in focus, No. 3, October.  
Pensions  Commission  (2004),  Pensions:  Challenges  and  Choices,  Stationery  Office, 
London.  
Tuljapurkar, S., Li, N. and Boe, C. (2000), “Is there a universal pattern of mortality decline? 
Evidence and forecasts for the G7 countries”, Nature, vol. 405 (789).  
Visco, I (2002), “Ageing populations: Economic issues and policy challenges”, in H. Siebert 
(ed.), Economic Policies for Aging Societies, Springer, Berlin. 
Visco, I. (2006), “Longevity risk and financial markets”, keynote speech to the 26th SUERF 
Colloquium, Lisbon. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 9
