Stanley Fischer: Recent developments in the Israeli economy; future 
paths of the IMF and the World Bank 
Speech by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the IMF-World Bank 
annual meetings, Washington DC, 22 October 2007. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  distinguished  Governors,  Mr.  Rodrigo  de  Rato,  Managing  Director  of  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Mr.  Robert  Zoellick,  President  of  the  World  Bank  Group, 
delegation members, colleagues and former colleagues, ladies and gentleman: 
These meetings take place not only at a challenging time in the international economy, but 
also at a time of unexpected changes in the leadership of both the Bank and the Fund. I will 
use this opportunity to discuss the futures of each of these two great institutions. But let me 
start with recent developments in the Israeli economy.  
The Israeli economy 
1.  
The Israeli economy has been growing at an average annual rate of more than 5 percent, 
since  2004.  In  2007,  inflation  is  expected  to  be  within  the  target  range  of  1-3  percent  per 
year.  The  budget  should  end  the  year  close  to  balance.  The  balance  of  payments  is  in  a 
surplus  of  between  4  and  5  percent  of  GDP,  and  foreign  direct  and  financial  investments 
continue  to  flow  into  the  economy.  Controls  on  capital  flows  have  been  removed 
progressively  over  the  last  fifteen  years,  and  the  capital  account  is  essentially  totally 
liberalized. The exchange rate floats freely and the Bank of Israel has not intervened in the 
foreign exchange markets since 1997.  
Fiscal discipline has reduced the share of government spending in GDP from 52 percent in 
2003  to  44  percent  this  year.  Fiscal  discipline,  together  with  privatizations  and  sustained 
growth, has reduced the debt to GDP ratio from more than 100 percent in 2003 to a level 
expected to be about 82 percent at the end of this year – a level that is still too high but that 
is expected to continue to decline. Growth has reduced the unemployment rate, from more 
than 11 percent in 2003 to about 7.5 percent at present. This has been accompanied by an 
increase  in the  participation  rate,  which  is  very  low  in  Israel.  The  poverty  rate  –  a  relative 
measure  in  Israel  –  is  beginning  to  decline  but  more  needs  to  be  done  to  improve  the 
standard of living of the poorest members of the population.  
The impressive achievements of the Israeli economy are due in part to the global boom, but 
also  to  improved  economic  policies  based  on  the  understanding  that  the  only  way  to 
sustainable growth, particularly for a small economy, is to pursue market-based policies and 
to embrace the possibilities that globalization offers. At present we are working on a new and 
modern central bank law that will clearly define the independence of the Bank of Israel, while 
increasing its accountability and transparency. 
The  problems  of  our  economy  can  be  solved  only  with  continuing  growth  and  policy 
discipline, mutually reinforcing elements of success. They are also more likely to be solved in 
an environment in which the prospects for peace with our neighbors continue to improve. 
The Fund  
2.  
As Managing Director de Rato steps down, we thank him for his many contributions that will 
bear  fruit  in  the  coming  years,  including  the  Strategic  Review  of  last  year,  the  work 
summarized  in  this  year's  Policy  Agenda  Report,  and  the  ongoing  work  on  representation 
and voice. This agenda defines the major challenges that face incoming Managing Director 
Dominique Strauss-Kahn. 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 1
A great deal has been written about the problems confronting the Fund as it reassesses its 
role  in  the  rapidly  changing  global  economy  of  the  twenty  first  century.  The  problems  are 
there, but we need to remind ourselves that they are the problems of success, not failure. As 
many  here  can  testify,  it  was  exciting  to  be  here  when  the  Fund  was  at  the  center  of  the 
global financial storm of the 1990s and early in this century. It may be less interesting, but it 
is certainly more impressive to be present in an era of unprecedented global growth – growth 
based  on  the  Fund's  approach  of  integration  into  the  global  economy  –  as  the  increasing 
economic  weight  of  developing  countries,  especially  of  China  and  India,  transforms  both 
economic and political relations among nations.  
What will be the role of the Fund in the future? Article I (i) of the Articles of Agreement, states 
as the first purpose of the Fund, "To promote international monetary cooperation through a 
permanent  institution  which  provides  the  machinery  for  consultation  and  collaboration  on 
international monetary problems". This is the essential role of the Fund. Even if on some far-
distant day, financial crises become only a historical memory, this function will remain central 
to the Fund, for there is no other organization with the legitimacy of the Fund, with its global 
membership, with both finance ministries and central banks involved, that can fulfill that role. 
No less important, time and again the superb staff of this institution has risen to the challenge 
of implementing the wishes of its member countries.  
That  is  to  say:  the  Fund's  fundamental  strength  is  that  it  is  the  central  global  financial 
institution for consultation on international monetary (and financial and economic) problems, 
with  the  capacity  to  implement  the  conclusions  of  those  consultations  among  its  member 
countries.  
Second, firm surveillance over the global economy and over its member countries is vital to 
the  Fund's  role.  The  new  Decision  on  Bilateral  Surveillance  adopted  in  June  this  year 
emphasizes surveillance over policies – particularly exchange rate policies – that influence 
the stability of a country's external accounts, and the need to deepen further the integration 
of  financial  sector  issues  in  surveillance.  In  the  words  of  the  Managing  Director's  policy 
agenda  report  for  this  meeting,  surveillance  needs  to  "characterized  by  greater  clarity, 
candor, evenhandedness, and accountability" with the concept of external stability serving as 
an organizing principle. The emphasis on candor and evenhandedness is particularly to be 
welcomed:  surveillance  will  not  be  successful  in  influencing  a  country's  policies  if  it  is  not 
seen to be applied candidly and equally to all countries, large and small, rich and poor.  
In addition, surveillance needs to be timely. Surveillance matters not only because it helps 
member governments improve their policies, but no less because it informs a wider public. 
Therefore publication should be speeded up. In the age of emails and the internet, there is 
no good reason why Article IV reports should not appear within a month of the conclusion of 
the staff’s visit to the country. It is also desirable that the Fund increase its use of interim 
reports, as has been done in the publication of quarterly WEO forecasts. 
Third, the Fund needs to maintain its financial capacity to help members deal with financial 
crises.  A  decade  ago  we  may  have  thought  that  financial  crises  among  the  industrialized 
countries were a thing of the past. After the events of this summer, we can no longer think 
that.  We  should  all  be  grateful  that  improvements  in  economic  management  and  the 
strengthening of financial systems in emerging market and developing countries have kept 
this  crisis  away  from  them.  But  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  Fund  will  once 
again have to lend to member countries facing the threat of serious economic instability, as a 
result either of their own actions or of contagion. The owners of the Fund need to ensure that 
it be in a position to help when needed. 
Fourth: if the Fund is to retain its legitimacy, it needs to reform its governance to give the 
rising nations a greater share. The problem with percentage shares is that they have to add 
up to 100. This means that if the emerging and developing nations are to have a larger role, 
the  industrialized  nations  have  to  have  a  lesser  role  in  determining  its  decisions.  It  is  that 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2007
simple. It is also clear that the governance/quota problem will not be solved without resolving 
difficult issues about the representation of Europe in the Fund.  
For lack of time, I pass over quickly two other issues: the income of the Fund, and the Fund's 
role  in  poorer  member  countries.  As  emphasized  in  a  recent  paper  by  Jack  Boorman,  the 
Fund's  income  needs  to  be  fitted  to  its  role,  and  not  vice  versa.  With  regard  to  poorer 
member countries, the Fund, in close collaboration with the World Bank, needs to continue to 
be involved in working with them. After all, its claim to legitimacy depends on its being and 
being seen as a global institution. In this regard, it will probably be necessary to increase the 
basic vote by more than agreed upon at least year's Singapore meeting.  
There  is  much  to  be  done,  and  we  wish  incoming  Managing  Director  Strauss-Kahn  every 
success as he takes over leadership of the Fund.  
The Bank 
3.  
President Zoellick has set out his vision for the Bank in his October 10 speech at the National 
Press  Club  and  his  October  21  Note  to  the  Development  Committee.  The  vision  is 
appropriately ambitious. It deserves the strong support of the membership.  
The overall vision is to contribute to an inclusive and sustainable globalization – to overcome 
poverty, enhance growth with care for the environment, and create individual opportunity and 
hope. To do that, the President sets out six key strategic themes: 
 
• 
Overcoming  poverty  and  spurring  sustained  growth  in  the  poorest  countries, 
especially in Africa; 
Helping rebuild post-conflict and failing states; 
Producing an appropriate business model to help middle income countries meet their 
development goals;  
Fostering regional and global public goods; 
Promoting development and economic opportunities in the Arab world; 
Developing  the  role  of  the  Bank  as  “the  knowledge  bank”,  a  brains  trust  of  applied 
experience. 
  As they should, these themes clearly reflect the needs and wishes of a wide range of the 
developing and emerging market member countries of the Bank. The goals implied by the 
themes  will  not  be  achieved  easily.  Indeed  it  is  fashionable  to  emphasize  the  failures  of 
development  over  the  past  fifty  years,  the  many  countries  where  per  capita  income  has 
declined, the persistence of poverty and of hunger. It is right to emphasize the problems that 
remain to be solved. But we should also from time to time recognize that this has been a 
remarkably successful decade for the developing countries, that many African countries are 
now growing at rapid rates, and that in Asia, nearly 40 percent of the world’s population is 
seeing  sustained  growth  at  unprecedented  rates.  In  the  process,  the  world  is  being 
transformed. 
We wish President Zoellick every success in achieving the goals he has set out for the World 
Bank – goals that as they are attained will help bring the fruits of economic development to 
people and to nations who do not yet share in the historic global transformation now under 
way. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 3
