Jean-Claude Trichet: Global capital – surrender of national policies? 
Lessons from the recent events in credit markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  17th 
Frankfurt European Banking Congress “Global Capital – Threat or Salvation?”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 23 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let  me  start  off  with  one  general  remark:  The  present  significant  market  correction  with 
episodes of turbulences should not come as a surprise to us. The ECB, as well as the other 
central banks, has issued warnings in the past on the global phenomenon of under-pricing of 
risks. In many respects the present episode can be interpreted as bringing to the forefront 
anomalies and structural deficiencies which we have identified earlier. 
While  it  is  too  early  to  make  a  full  assessment,  I  believe  there  are  some  first  provisional 
lessons which can already be drawn at the current stage.  
A lesson that can be drawn is that the growing complexity of instruments has to be 
monitored very closely. Structured credit markets are exposed to valuation problems, 
which make the market very vulnerable to a shift in investor sentiment. 
In  the  absence  of  reliable  market  prices,  instruments  need  to  be  valued  by  models.  But 
estimates  which  the  models  produce  are  highly  sensitive  to  underlying  assumptions. 
Mounting losses in residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS) backed by US sub-prime 
loans  have  seemed  to  trigger  a  wide  loss  of  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  underlying 
assumptions and therefore in the valuation of structured credit products more generally. This 
apparently has set a vicious circle in force in which heightened uncertainty about the future 
value of complex assets and rising risk aversion caused many investors to withdraw from the 
market.  Prices  dropped  massively,  and  investors  incurred  large  unexpected  losses, 
contributing to further pressure to sell.  
A  second  lesson  that  can  be  drawn  is  that  structured  credit  markets  provide  a 
pressing example of the need to increase transparency in financial markets.  
That the market disruption spilled over into interbank markets can be explained by another 
key shortcoming of structured credit markets, namely the opacity of exposures of financial 
institutions to complex instruments and off-balance sheet vehicles. This lack of transparency 
about exposures of other banks exacerbated counterparty risk concerns, impairing the well 
functioning  of  interbank  markets.  In  periods  of  turbulences,  whatever  the  origin  of  those 
turbulences, opacity and absence of transparency are a recipe for propagation of turmoil and 
generalised contagion. 
Third, the recent events have stressed again the particular role rating agencies play in 
structured credit markets. 
The growing complexity of instruments has clearly induced some investors to overly rely 
on ratings. This is the more risky as ratings in structured finance are not yet as much tested 
as  those  of  corporate  issuers.  Some  investors  may  also  have  misinterpreted  the  risk 
dimensions covered by a rating. Against this background there is probably scope to improve 
the information content of ratings and to make the monitoring process more transparent. It 
also needs to be investigated further to what extent conflicts of interest may have arisen for 
rating  agencies  in  their  credit  risk  assessment  of  structured  credit  instruments.  Several 
international fora are currently looking at those issues. 
Fourth,  the  turmoil  has  revealed  some  challenges  for  the  liquidity  management  of 
banks. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
Banks,  including  those in  continental  Europe, have  increasingly  relied  on  secured  funding, 
both  via  securitisation  and  off-balance  sheet  vehicles.  This  has  rendered  them  more 
vulnerable  to  a  sudden  disruption  of  structured  credit  markets.  Let  me  recall  that  the 
regulatory  framework  requires  EU  banks  to  have  policies  and  procedures  for  the 
measurement and management of net funding positions on an ongoing and forward-looking 
basis  and  have  in  place  contingency  funding  plans.  In  this  context,  recent  events  have 
demonstrated  that  banks  need  to  further  strengthen  their  liquidity  risk  stress-tests, 
encompassing  for  example  scenarios  such  as  a  protracted  closure  of  a  broad  range  of 
securitisation  markets  and  the  drawing  of  contingent  liquidity  obligations  by  commercial 
paper  programmes.  Moreover,  those  elements  should  also  be  incorporated  into  their 
contingency  funding  plans.  The  ECB,  together  with  the  ESCB  Banking  Supervision 
Committee, is carrying out work on this important topic. 
Indeed, the current turmoil has underscored the importance of robust liquidity management 
by banks, as well as the need for supervisory approaches which keep pace with structural 
market  developments.  Many  initiatives  with  a  view  to  addressing  issues  and  risks  arising 
from the recent financial market turbulence that go into the right direction have already been 
launched, both at the international level, namely by the Financial Stability Forum, and at the 
EU level, with the ECOFIN agreeing to a roadmap for action by 2008, and also by the private 
sector. They must be pursued now with even stronger impetus. In this respect, co-ordination 
at  the  global  level  should  be  ensured.  In  closely  interlinked  financial  markets,  any  policy 
measure should be agreed to and consistently applied at the international level.  
Fifth,  in  the  same  vein,  there  is  a  need  to  reflect  carefully  on  the  “originate-and-
distribute” business model.  
The  period  ahead  is  likely  to  provide  a  first  material  test  of  changing  banking  business 
models and the increased reliance on secured funding. Although currently profitable and well 
capitalised,  many  banks  will  experience  income  and  credit  losses,  which  may  trigger  a  re 
assessment  by  some  of  them  of  the  suitability  of  the  so-called  originate-and-distribute 
business model. The current episode has also shown that the transfer of credit risk outside 
the banking sector may ultimately not be effective. This is related with reputational and other 
concerns, which induce banks to take credit risk back onto their balance sheets. 
Sixth, with respect to our own crisis mitigation tools, a lesson that we can draw at this 
stage  is  that  the  operational  framework  of  the  Eurosystem  has  proved  able  to  cope 
with stressed market conditions. 
So  far,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  able  to  manage  the  turmoil  in  an  effective  and  flexible 
manner. Two ingredients of its operational framework have been particularly important: 
The  first  is  the  clear  separation  between  on  one  hand  the  ECB’s  management  of  the 
aggregate liquidity conditions and on the other hand the setting of its monetary policy stance, 
which is signalled by the minimum bid rate in main refinancing operations. This separation 
has been extremely valuable under present circumstances. Looking ahead, and in line with 
its  previous  communications  and  actions,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  steer  very  short  term 
interbank rates close the minimum bid rate. 
The  second  ingredient  is  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework.  The  broad  list  of  eligible 
assets has ensured that a broad range of counterparties could access the credit operations 
of the Eurosystem during the turmoil. This has helped counterparties to effectively mitigate 
funding liquidity risk when interbank markets stopped functioning properly. As a side effect, 
the acceptance of ABS in the sizeable refinancing operations has allowed to address also 
asset  refinancing  needs  of  counterparties  effectively.  This  has  certainly  contributed  to  a 
better functioning of the money market since counterparties know that they can turn to the 
Eurosystem to refinance these assets.  
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
And finally the ongoing process of significant market correction which we experience 
since August should trigger a very deep and candid review in all the areas which have 
a substantial influence on the functioning of the global financial markets. 
This review process should concentrate on what could be done to promote financial stability 
and to diminish to the maximum extent possible the elements of procyclicality that may be 
inbuilt in a large number of fields. 
The financial stability forum, which has been set up by the G7, under the proposal of Hans 
Tietmeyer, to draw the lessons of the Asian crisis, is in an ideal position to identify the areas 
where appropriate improvements could be introduced. 
I  encourage  very  strongly  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  all  the  Committees  that  are 
actively working at a global level, including the Basel Committee, to draw all the lessons of 
the present turbulences and to examine the situation without any complacency. 
In my view no single area should be put aside from this review which should concentrate on 
the  ways  and  means  to  foster  financial  stability,  prevent  propagation  of  disturbances  and 
contagion, improve risk management at all levels, and diminish procyclicality, in particular, in 
the domains of accounting rules and accounting practices of rating agencies, of supervisory 
banking rules – the first duty being to implement globally Basel II which is largely superior to 
Basel  I  –  including  harmonisation  of  liquidity  rules  and  requirements,  of  supervisory 
insurance rules, of market supervisory authorities regulations, of regulated and non regulated 
private  institutions  (whether  highly  leveraged  institutions  or  so-called  S.I.V.  and  conduits), 
and of market practices. 
This  does  not  mean  necessarily  dramatic  changes  of  rules  and  overloading  of  new 
regulations.  I  am  of  the  firm  opinion  that  voluntary  code  of  best  practices,  the  set  up  of 
voluntary “Principles” and the working out of voluntary benchmark best practices are most of 
the time preferable to the addition of new layers of rules and regulations. 
But we have, in any case, the duty to be effective in working out the lessons of the present 
market correction. This is no time for complacency in any respect. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
