Ardian Fullani: Monetary policy strategies for small economies 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the VII Annual Conference 
of  the  Bank  of  Albania  “Monetary  Policy  Strategies  for  Small  Economies”,  Tirana, 
6 December 2007. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to open the proceedings of the 7th Conference of the Bank of Albania. 
On behalf of the institution and myself I take this opportunity to welcome all participants. I am 
confident that the following two days will instigate debate and discussion on key central bank 
issues.  
This year’s main topic will focus on the classical function of a central bank: “monetary policy”. 
Institutional framework, decision making process, monetary transmission efficiency and other 
issues  related  with  financial  markets,  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  will  make 
interesting topics of discussions from our esteemed speakers.  
I am confident that our panellists are well-known senior experts; therefore, on behalf of the 
institution I would like to thank them heartily for accepting to share with us their views and 
findings.  
Given that the proceedings of the Conference will extensively cover theoretical models and 
countries experiences as well I would like to briefly present the evolution of our central bank 
during the last three years.  
To  our  pleasure  the  enhancement  of  analytical  and  modelling  capacities  of  the  Albanian 
institutions  has  been  widely  recognized  yielding  a  greater  ownership  in  our  medium  run 
economic and financial development programs.  
Since  the  beginning  of  transition  most  of  these  programs  have  been  designed  and 
implemented under the setup of IMF conditional support programs. Even the current policy 
setup is designed under such program. We currently believe this is the final one which gets 
IMF financial support, implying that our economy is matured and that Albania is on the right 
track. After many hardships of transition, the Albanian authorities should have full ownership 
in the medium-term development programs of our country. This is the reason why the Bank 
of Albania has quite for long been engaged in a comprehensive process of scrutinizing and 
choosing the best options. 
The  year  which  is  coming  to  an  end  marked  another  important  chapter  in  this  context.  In 
contrast  to  the  previous  two  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  further  deepened  its  cautious 
research of all aspects characterizing the present and future of monetary policy.  
It has been quite for a long time that the central bank has publicly announced its efforts in 
assessing objectively and professionally the future of the Bank of Albania monetary policy. 
These were not sporadic efforts but part of a process which initiated three years ago with the 
only objective of finding the answers to the following questions: 
Should  we  move  to  another  monetary  policy  regime?  What  regime  would  be  the  most 
appropriate one?  
I believe you share the same opinion with me that finding the answers to the aforementioned 
questions is not an easy thing. This is not a plain mechanical action. 
In  the  last  three  years  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  involved  in  an  intensive  process  of 
assessment,  analysis  and  conclusions  for  the  future  of  monetary  policy.  And  we  have  not 
been alone throughout this process.  
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
Together with other Albanian institutions – first and foremost with fiscal authorities, different 
European and regional central banks, other international financial institutions and academia, 
we have tried to identify the most suitable monetary policy regime to be adopted.  
During  the  last  three  years,  we  have  been  tossing  ideas  and  scrupulously  studying  the 
details  of  a  fully  fledged  inflation  targeting  regime.  Based  on  the  current  features  and 
expected  developments  of  the  financial  markets,  we  believe  the  inflation  targeting  regime 
provides the best policy choice for the future.  
A relatively long history of low inflation, constant soundness of the macroeconomic situation, 
stable  and  sound  banking  system,  free  floating  exchange  rate,  a  suitable  institutional 
framework, fiscal consolidation are important factors that have convinced us on the potential 
success  of  inflation  targeting  regime.  However,  we  are  aware  that  there  is  still  a  lot  to  be 
done in this context, in particular as far as monetary transmission mechanism and financial 
market efficiency are concerned.  
Furthermore,  under  a  relatively  rapid  and  considerable  development  of  the  Albanian 
economy  we  are  sure  that  the  advantages  a  complete  and  independent  monetary  policy 
framework provides are larger in size than the disadvantages. Therefore, the currency board 
has not been considered a possible option for the future.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  current  operational  targets  (quantitative  limits  on  net  assets  of  the 
Bank of Albania and the banking system), or the so-called performance criteria, which are 
part of today’s decision-making, might not be able to preserve their binding power after the 
expiration of the conditional agreement with the IMF in 2008. These intermediate objectives 
may be replaced by a concrete and transparent objective such as the inflation rate, which 
provides a more direct communication of monetary policy decisions in economy in order to 
achieve the main target of the Bank of Albania. Consequently, summarizing what has been 
previously  said  we  have  identified  the  inflation  targeting  regime  as  our  best  choice  versus 
currency board and monetary targeting. Another argument which supports our choice is that 
various  internationally  recognized  experts  have  compared  the  current  setup  of  monetary 
policy to an implicit inflation targeting framework.  
Furthermore,  we  believe  this  regime  will  provide  a  better  platform  for  harmonizing  the 
monetary policy with the fiscal one, implying that the fiscal authority will seriously commit to 
support the proposed setup.  
To  this  purpose,  we  invite  the  Albanian  Government  to  reach  a  consensus  on  the  key 
objectives  of  both  policies,  monetary  and  fiscal,  adopting  the  convergence  criteria  as  a 
strategic goal.  
Success in this endeavour requires Albania, among other things, not only continuity on the 
path of sound macro policies but even strengthening them further. This means a monetary 
policy focused on maintaining price stability and a prudent fiscal policy which will ensure that 
Albania’s  deficits  and  debt  ratios  are  sustainable  and  at  low  levels  to  increase  the 
attractiveness to international investors. Put differently pursuing a monetary policy focused 
on price stability and a prudent fiscal policy, will no doubt reduces Albania’s risk premium. 
The benefit of this achievement will be felt throughout the economy. 
To support my idea I have to tell you one fresh news. Yesterday Albania succeeded to sell 
internationally a seven year fixed rate bond in Lek. This was not a result of a toss of coin, but 
a reflection of international confidence in the Albanian economy and its macro policies. This 
confidence should increase in 2008, 2009 and beyond. 
Regardless of the monetary policy regime it is to be said that the chances for this setup to be 
successful are greater under a developed financial market, which understands properly the 
monetary  policy  signals  and  transmits  them  adequately  to  the  economy.  Monetary  policy 
efficiency implies the financial market efficiency.  
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
This issue has been part of my earlier discussions; however I would like to highlight that only 
recently we have taken concrete steps which will improve certain financial market segments.  
We  have  currently  tried  to  adopt  a  set  of  measures  which  will  facilitate  the  reformation 
process  of  the  financial  market  by  further  deepening  it.  In  more  concrete  terms,  the 
Government securities market and the interbank market have been most particularly under 
our special focus.  
After several consultations with all actors in place we decided to come up with a package of 
initiatives and priorities during 2008 whose purpose is to establish incentives and minimize 
risks in the Albanian financial market: 
- 
Broadening  and  deepening  the  base  of  participants  in  the  Government 
securities market 
Reducing the interbank market risk  
Enhancing the interbank market efficiency  
Establishing the delivery versus payment system 
Starting from January 2008 we will increase the investors’ base, eligible to directly invest in 
the auctions of Government bonds. We believe it will increase the competition while so-far 
this was a privilege enjoyed by the banking system.  
- 
So  far,  the  banking  system  has  applied  limits  on  the  amounts  it  can  lend  in  the  interbank 
market.  Therefore,  we  are  working  on  introducing  a  new  law  on  repurchase  agreements, 
which will enable the risk-free conduct of repurchase agreements among commercial banks.  
- 
In order to minimize the payment settlement risk and facilitate the intermediation in all types 
of transactions involving collateralized loans, repurchase agreements and outright purchase 
and sale of Government papers, we are working to put into practice the principle of delivery 
versus payment system.  
- 
In collaboration with the Ministry of Finance we have agreed on less frequent Government 
treasury bills auctions. Moreover the size to be issued in each auction schedule will increase. 
This less frequent auction schedule will increase the number of transactions in the interbank 
market  for  the  period  in-between  the  two  auctions  as  banks  will  try  to  reduce  the  costs  of 
liquidity.  On  the  other  hand  it  will  limit  the  opportunity  of  banks  to  be  liquid  based  on 
distributing  their  treasury  bills  investment  and  consequently,  they  will  seek  other  market 
options such as the interbank market.  
- 
Being convinced that the monetary policy may be efficient through transparency the Bank of 
Albania  aims  to  introduce  in  the  first  half  of  2008  the  “prime  rate”  to  the  set  of  orientation 
rates used by commercial banks.  
Regardless  of  the  measures  to  be  adopted  I  would  like  to  say  that  other  financial  market 
segments  need  to  come  along  with  us  in  this  challenge.  I  have  to  say  that  the  financial 
intermediation role of other financial institutions is weak and it has no substantial influence on 
the  intermediation  and  reallocation  of  financial  funds  in  economy.  I  think  today’s  reality 
provides a lot of room for making the capital market reactive. According to our estimates, the 
number of major companies certified by well-known international auditors is ever-increasingly 
becoming larger.  
Further to my speech I would like to focus on another priority of the Bank of Albania, that of 
financial stability. It holds true that macroeconomic stability is crucial and precedes all other 
important  economic  and  financial  developments.  Without  macroeconomic  stability  there  is 
neither growth, nor foreign investment or reallocation; consequently there is no development.  
However, macroeconomic stability  without financial stability  would be  a utopia; it would be 
like a non-standing bridge. This is the reason why we have been paying special attention to 
Introducing the prime rate 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
financial  stability  throughout  2007.  The  recent  developments  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
loans must serve as an excellent reminder of the never ending surprises which from time to 
time cause a lot of turmoil for the financial market stability. Moreover this episode once more 
highlights the necessity for more harmony between monetary policy and financial stability. I 
want to make clear that by financial stability I do not assume only the absence of a financial 
crisis.  First  and  foremost  it  implies  a  functional  and  efficient  financial  system  in  its 
intermediation role.  
I  personally  believe  that  too  tight  regulations  truly  minimize  all  the  risks,  but  on  the  other 
hand they might not always be conducive to sustained growth.  
Therefore,  the  real  challenge  we  are  facing  is  to  find  an  optimal  balance  between 
deregulation,  which  promotes  market  forces  and  financial  innovations,  and  negative 
consequences of possible market failures and financial crises.  
Obviously, this optimal balance is hard to be actualized in the daily practice. Therefore more 
empirical studies need to be made, which I believe is one of the main priorities of the newly 
established Financial Stability Department.  
However, I would like to underline that as a supervisory authority we have been very prudent 
during the present year, considering among others the rapid growth of credit portfolio in the 
last 2-3 years. I take this opportunity to inform the banking system and the public at large that 
starting from January 2008 the Credit Registry will begin to operate.  
Special  attention  has  been  paid  to  strengthening  banking  supervision,  in  particular  to  that 
part which relates to the governance of commercial banks. Moreover, we have required more 
transparency from the banking system and a more accountable relationship with the public. 
The  continuous  improvement  of  human  capacities  involved  in  internal  control  and  risk 
management has for a long time been a concern for the Bank of Albania. With reference to 
the  latter  I  would  like  to  underscore  that  we  have  already  identified  three  greatest  risks 
whose  presence  would  have  severe  consequences  on  the  financial  stability.  I  have  to  say 
that this group of risks characterizes the whole region; consequently there is a lot of room for 
cooperation in this context.  
Credit risk  
1  
Credit risk directly relates to the boom of credit to economy in the last years. Although the 
statistics indicate that the share of non-performing loans is low, prudence is required. We all 
do know that the rating and re-rating methods may be a tool in the hands of banks to keep 
the reality away from the truth. The entrance of big international foreign groups puts upward 
pressure on the other banking operators attempt to compete for borrowers which may often 
deteriorate the credit portfolio quality. Moreover, let us not forget that the companies’ balance 
sheets lack transparency which makes another issue for this matter. To conclude I would like 
to  say  that  the  current  developments  in  the  real  estates  market  may  potentially  have  a 
negative  impact.  A  considerable  rise  in  prices  when  real  estates  account  for  about  80  per 
cent of the collateral may have a negative impact in case there is a sudden fall of prices in 
the fixed assets market.  
Exchange rate risk 
2 
As of November 2007 outstanding credit is shared by 70 per cent of foreign currency credit 
and 30 per cent in the local currency. It is my impression that the figures are similar to the 
whole  region.  Extending  credit  in  foreign  currency  to  borrowers  with  income  in  national 
currency means that a sudden exchange rate depreciation could threaten their capacity to 
repay.  
4 
 BIS Review 146/2007
3 
Contagion risk resulting from the presence of big banking groups throughout 
the region 
Currently we are all witnesses of a large-scale penetration of some big international banking 
groups  throughout  our  region.  This  development  has  obviously  been  welcome  as  it  has 
provided a better and more efficient allocation of free assets in economy. However, I believe 
that more prudence is required in this context. A disturbing issue for the parent bank or a 
concern of one of its branches in the region may cause turbulences for the fact that these 
banking groups have large market shares. Moreover, host-host supervision-related concerns 
have not been covered by the Basle standards which makes the whole situation even more 
complex.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  our  work  has  been  guided  by  a  simple  but 
progressive philosophy which has aimed at: 
- 
- 
- 
Establishing sound and operating structures; 
Concluding and improving the legal and regulatory base; and 
Absorbing  qualified  and  professional  human  capacities  to  cope  with  the  future 
challenges.  
I  express  my  belief  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  fully  capable  to  have  the  full  ownership  of 
designing and implementing the monetary policy. 
Dear participants,  
I tried to give a short overview of our work in the last years. I am sure than the speakers’ 
presentations  and  discussions  in  this  conference  will  help  us  to  better  understand  certain 
issues and provide the answer to several questions.  
I  truly  believe  all  the  participants  will  be  active  by  bringing  and  focusing  on  new  aspects, 
different experience and alternative perspectives to our viewpoints. 
I wish you good proceedings. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 5
