Goh Chok Tong: Staying ahead of the Asian curve  
Speech by Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister of the Republic of Singapore and Chairman 
of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  Barclays  Asia  Forum,  Singapore,  1  November 
2007. 
 I extend a warm welcome to all of you, especially to those who have not come to Singapore 
in recent years. I would also like to thank Barclays for organising this Asia Forum as well as 
this  weekend’s  Singapore  Open.  I  hope  the  Singapore  Open  will  grow  in  prestige  as  you 
expand your presence in Singapore and Asia. 
Singapore’s  economic  growth  rates  in  the  past  few  years  have  surprised  many,  including 
ourselves. We did not expect to be able to consistently achieve growth rates of above 6% per 
annum  as  we  are  a  mature  economy.  Yes,  we  have  remade  our  economy  but  the  good 
growth was also due to the buoyant world economy and a surging Asia. Singapore’s future 
growth will depend not only on our own efforts but also on our ability to anticipate trends in 
our external environment and stay ahead of the curve. 
This  morning,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  how  we  see  developments  in  Asia  and  the 
challenges before us. 
Political outlook 
Let me start with the political outlook. 
I believe that Asia will remain stable and the regional environment conducive to growth. 
Post-9/11, the world had to adjust to new insecurities posed by terrorism. In Southeast Asia, 
some radical Muslim groups tried to turn the region into an Islamic caliphate through terrorist 
acts, including suicide bombings. This threat remains, despite recent successes by security 
agencies  in  foiling  attacks  in  Indonesia  and  elsewhere.  However,  the  extremists  will  not 
succeed  in their  political  and  religious  goals.  More  importantly,  although  terrorist  acts  may 
disrupt  our  economy,  its  impact  pales  in  comparison  to  the  structural  shifts  in  the 
international order led by the re-emergence of China and India. 
China’s reach is now global, in search of friends, influence, markets and resources. India is 
also seeking to expand its links and influence abroad. The US and Japan will try to co-opt 
India  as  a  countervailing  weight  to  China.  But  India,  while  seeking  to  balance  its  relations 
with all three, will preserve its own independence. Both China and India will compete but they 
will be careful not to collide. Both desire stability for their continued growth. 
Japan has adopted a more conciliatory foreign policy under Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda. 
He  has  eschewed  controversial  issues  such  as  visits  to  the  Yasukuni  shrine.  He  will 
endeavour to cultivate ties with China and India while staying steadfast with the US. 
Nonetheless, there are several potential wildcards in the region. 
First, the road to denuclearising the Korean Peninsula remains long and difficult. 
Second,  cross-strait  relations  between  Taiwan  and  Beijing  are  entering  a  critical  phase. 
Beijing is concerned that in the run-up to the Taiwan Presidential Election in March next year, 
President Chen Shui Bian may make one last throw of the dice which may compel China to 
act. How the US handles this issue will be crucial in maintaining stability across the strait. 
Third, Myanmar cannot return to the status quo ante after the government’s crackdown on 
monk-led protests. Instability in Myanmar can affect its immediate neighbours and hurt the 
reputation  of  ASEAN.  National  reconciliation  and  an  agreement  on  phased  changes  and 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 1
power sharing is the only way to prevent another widespread protest, which may end up in a 
bloody uprising to bring about change. Therefore, ASEAN and Singapore, and so too China 
and  India,  fully  support  the  mission  by  the  UN  Secretary  General’s  Special  Advisor,  Mr 
Ibrahim Gambari, to help the various parties in Myanmar work towards genuine dialogue and 
compromise. However, this compromise is not so easy to achieve. Myanmar’s military rulers, 
the many ethnic groups and the political players deeply distrust one another. The rulers are 
also  highly  suspicious  of  the  outside  world.  This  psyche  of  distrust  was  borne  out  of  the 
violent and divisive history of Myanmar after World War II, its complex national make-up of 
many diverse ethnic groups and, until the recent agreements on ceasefire, the fighting with 
insurgents. There is no quick and easy solution. Negotiations will be long and complicated. 
We will need to give Mr Gambari some time to start the process and make patient progress. 
Asia’s rising share in world GDP 
However, Myanmar and the other flashpoints I have mentioned are unlikely to derail Asia’s 
growth.  There  is  a  sense  of  déjà  vu  that  this  is  Asia’s  century.  The  statistics  speak  for 
themselves. 
In 1980, Asia accounted for just 19% of global GDP in PPP terms. Today, it is 36%, almost 
doubled. By 2020, it is expected to reach 45%. 
For many of you, figures on global wealth held by High Net Worth Individuals in Asia-Pacific 
may be more interesting. The region now accounts for 23% of global wealth held by these 
individuals. Merrill Lynch forecasts that Asia-Pacific’s annual growth rate in private wealth will 
be 8.5%, and that this wealth will reach US$12.7 trillion by 2011. 
The  region  has  learnt  well  from  the  devastating  experience  of  the  1997  Asian  Financial 
Crisis. Asian Governments have since built up their foreign reserves, reined in Government 
debt, strengthened their financial systems, and made their exchange rates more flexible. 
Lessons from sub-prime crisis 
Nonetheless, the current sub-prime crisis shows that we cannot afford to be less than vigilant 
in the financial industry. There are some lessons we can learn here. 
First,  a  major  reason  why  Asia  has  escaped  the  sub-prime  crisis  relatively  unscathed  is 
because  it  has  not  yet  moved  into  sophisticated  structured  credit  financing  in  a  big  way. 
However, I believe that Asia should press on with its efforts to develop their capital markets 
in order to complement the banking system and improve the robustness and efficiency of its 
financial system. 
Second,  as  we  pursue  financial  sector  development,  we  will  also  see  more  sophisticated 
products  coming  to  the  fore.  Market  players  and  regulators  alike  must  refine  their 
understanding of the attendant risks; in particular, how shocks may be transmitted through 
such  products.  We  must  then  develop  tools  to  manage  such  risks.  Indeed,  much  of  the 
recent financial dislocation stemmed from opacity in the distribution and pricing of risks for 
derivative  products.  The  key  lessons  include  the  need  to  monitor  off-balance  sheet 
exposures and to institute better management and supervision of liquidity risks. Addressing 
these  issues  will  not  be  easy  as  we  must  avoid  imposing  excessive  regulatory  burden  on 
market players or stifling financial innovation. 
Third, as growing inter-dependence is a reality, the central bank, the financial regulator and 
the guardian of the public purse must work in close coordination. They must also work with 
key counterparts in other jurisdictions. One key issue which requires particular attention is 
the  establishment  of  crisis  management  and  resolution  frameworks  to  minimise  systemic 
fallout should financial institutions run into trouble. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2007
Other challenges to sustained growth 
Looking ahead, Asia faces other challenges to sustained growth. 
First, global financial imbalances pose political and economic risks. Large capital inflows into 
Asia  have  resulted  in  excessive  growth  in  money  and  credit  in  several  countries,  thus 
creating inflationary pressures and asset bubbles in the stock and housing markets. At the 
same time, there are concerns that Asia’s large trade surpluses are based on undervalued 
exchange rates which have given Asia an unfair competitive advantage. While there is little 
justification for such concerns, they may result in protectionist responses from the US and 
the EU. A related development is that more countries in Asia and the oil-rich countries are 
establishing sovereign wealth funds to invest their excess reserves. The US and Europe may 
react nationalistically over the prospect of losing their strategic assets to foreign sovereign 
investors.  Asia  therefore  needs  to  work  with  G7  countries  and  multilateral  institutions  to 
address  these  policy  and  political  challenges  posed  by  global  financial  imbalances  and 
sovereign wealth funds. 
Second,  Asia’s  rising  affluence  has  been  accompanied  by  increasing  income  disparity.  By 
and large, this is not a case of the poor getting poorer. But because the rich gets richer faster 
than  the  poor,  the  widening  income  gap  may  nevertheless  erode  social  unity  and  political 
stability which are the very pre-requisites of growth. 
Third,  unrestrained  economic  growth  often  leads  to  environmental  degradation.  With 
heightened global consciousness over global warming, Asia will have to find ways to grow 
rapidly  and  sustainably.  It  has  to  address  problems  like  inefficient  energy  use,  carbon 
emissions  and  depletion  of  natural  resources  like  water  supplies  and  agricultural  land. 
However, the responsibility is not Asia’s alone. Maintaining ecological sustainability requires 
global initiatives, advances in technology, and changes in policies and consumption patterns. 
To  its  credit,  China  is  serious  over  environmental  issues.  The  recent  17th  CCP  Congress 
reaffirms Chinese leaders’ pursuit of “harmonious development”. It also explains why Premier 
Wen Jiabao agreed readily to my proposal that Singapore and China jointly build an eco-city 
in China – a city where people, economic activities and the environment co-exist in harmony. 
We are in the process of choosing a non-agricultural site which lacks water, so that the eco-
city there could be a model for China’s new cities. 
Priorities of ASEAN 
Southeast Asia is an important piece of the regional structure and will play its part. Later this 
month, the ASEAN and East Asia Summits will be held in Singapore. Singapore, as ASEAN 
Chair,  has  identified  climate  change  and  the  environment  as  key  agenda  items.  This  will 
sustain  the  momentum  of  discussions  on  such  issues  until  the  December  UN  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change Meeting in Bali. In practical terms, Singapore and Malaysia 
are  working  with  neighbouring  Indonesian  provinces  to  tackle  peat  land  fires  and  develop 
sustainable land-clearing practices. 
While Myanmar will no doubt grab media attention at the ASEAN Summit, it will not be the 
most important story for ASEAN. Of greater importance is the fact that ASEAN leaders will 
sign a politically-binding declaration to establish an ASEAN Economic Community by 2015. 
ASEAN  will  evolve  into  a  single  market  and  production  base  with  free  flow  of  goods, 
services, investment and skilled labour. ASEAN, with its half a billion people and a combined 
GDP of more than US$1 trillion, will then be a competitive investment proposition. ASEAN 
leaders will also sign the landmark ASEAN Charter which will transform ASEAN into a more 
cohesive, effective and rules-based organisation. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 3
Singapore: remaking itself 
As  Asia  rises,  Singapore  will  not  content  itself  with  being  lifted  by  the  rising  tide.  It  will 
continuously  remake  itself  –  strengthening  the  hull,  refitting  with  a  more  powerful  engine, 
refurbishing the interior, acquiring new knowledge and learning new skills. 
To  reduce  dependence  on  the  global  electronics  cycle,  we  have  built  strong  growth 
momentum in areas such as financial services, tourism and biomedical sciences. Our growth 
will increasingly stem from knowledge- and innovation-intensive activities. 
This  necessitates  more  investment  in  human  resource  development  and  the  creation  of  a 
workforce capable of keeping up with the demands of new economic activities. Singapore is 
therefore planning to build a fourth publicly funded university. 
Concurrently,  we  are  enhancing  our  connectivity  with  our  major  economic  partners  and 
increasing  our  economic  space  through  FTAs.  We  have  FTAs  with  11  countries,  including 
the US, India, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand. Negotiations are underway 
for  11  more,  including  agreements  with  China  and  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council  (GCC). 
These FTAs will enable investors and businesses to leverage on Singapore to reach out to 
our FTA partners. 
We will press on to develop the financial sector. We are already an important centre for asset 
management and the trading of financial products like foreign exchange and derivatives. We 
have made good progress in developing as the regional hub for innovative equity products, 
business trusts, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and project finance. We envision Singapore 
as  a  centre  of  excellence  for  financial  training,  education  and  research.  Hence,  we  are 
deepening  specialist  capabilities  in  fields  such  as  risk  management,  financial  engineering 
and actuarial science. 
In growing our financial sector, we are mindful of industry concerns over the sharp increase 
in office and housing rentals and the growing waitlists for places at international schools. We 
are actively addressing these concerns. 
Finally, Singapore is sprucing up its image as a vibrant, eclectic city with a thriving nightlife 
and arts scene. We know the importance of an attractive living environment for Singaporeans 
and  foreign  investors.  We  will  take  a  holistic  approach  to  become  a  more  cosmopolitan 
society, a place that is clean, safe and fun for people from all over the world who can make a 
contribution to Singapore. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the growth of China and India has energised Asia. Challenges remain but I see 
none which is insurmountable. All countries here share an interest in maintaining stability in 
the region and want to focus on economic development to give their people a better life. For 
Singapore, we are optimistic and are confident that we can stay ahead of the curve. 
I wish all of you a fruitful Asia Forum and an enjoyable stay in Singapore. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2007
