Philipp Hildebrand: Financial stability – objectives and challenges for 
central banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Bank of France, Fondation Banque de France, Centre for Economic 
Policy Research (CEPR), Paris, 30 November 2007. 
 I  am  honored  and  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  participate  in  this  distinguished  conference 
hosted  by  the  Banque  de  France  and  CEPR.  Allow  me  to  thank  Governor  Noyer  and  his 
colleagues  for  their  hospitality.  My  objectives  today  are  to  discuss  why  central  banks  are 
interested in financial stability and address some of the challenges that central banks face 
during the ongoing market turbulence. Unfortunately, the market turbulence is not behind us. 
It is therefore difficult to draw conclusive lessons. As a result, much of what I have to say is 
tentative  by  nature.  Naturally,  I  would  be  pleased  if  some  of  my  remarks  ultimately  spark 
some interest for future research amongst the many academics here. 
Financial  stability  is  not  a  new  topic  for  central  banks.  In  many  ways,  central  banks  were 
created to strengthen the stability of the financial system. Lender of last resort facilities and 
banking supervision essentially constitute a tandem response to the fact that banks – which 
are by design leveraged institutions – have periodically proven to be prone to crises. Such 
crises  can  lead  to  sharp  contraction  of  credit and  thus cause  or  augment  costly  economic 
downturns.  
Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  are  therefore  deeply  and  historically  linked. 
Nonetheless, it is evident that most central banks devote far greater resources to financial 
stability  related  issues  than  they  did  twenty  years  ago.  One  indicator  of  this  heightened 
interest in financial stability is the number of Financial Stability Reports that are now routinely 
published.  Currently,  more  than  40  central  banks  publish  a  Financial  Stability  Report  on  a 
regular  basis.  Interestingly,  most  central  banks  have  intensified  their  work  on  financial 
stability issues during a period in which the global financial system can be said to have been 
robust. During the past few years, the overall conditions in the global financial system have 
been  described  by  many  observers  as  "as  good  as  it  gets".  The  financial  system  was 
apparently very resilient and able to absorb a series of significant shocks. Meanwhile, recent 
research  suggests  that  in  the  past  two  decades  systemic  risk  in  banking  has  increased  in 
both the US and the euro area.1  
Indeed, systemic risk seems to have re-emerged quite suddenly when, after August 9, many 
of the world’s money markets dried up and a wide range of risk indicators leaped to higher 
levels. It should be noted here that many central banks, market participants and other market 
observers  saw  the  re-pricing  of  risk  as  an  inevitable  and  necessary  adjustment  after  a 
prolonged period of excessive risk taking. As it turns out, the re-pricing of risk did not occur in 
a  benign  manner.  For  almost  four  months  now,  important  segments  of  the  global  credit 
market have been subject to severe stress. In many ways, the situation is deteriorating. As 
we meet, it is unclear when and how we will be able to return to calmer financial waters.  
Today  I  want  to  begin  by  discussing  why  central  banks  care  about  financial  stability.  In  a 
second part, I will try to draw some preliminary lessons for central banks from the current 
market dislocation. As I said at the outset, the credit crisis is unfortunately still unfolding and 
its future course is uncertain. Naturally, therefore, we face a lot of questions to which there 
                                                 
1   See for example P. Hartmann, S. Straetmans and C.G. de Vries, 2006, “Banking system stability: A cross-
Atlantic perspective,” in M. Carey and R.M. Stulz (eds), The Risks of Financial Institutions, The University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago. 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 1
are no clear answers. For the purpose of today’s discussion, I will confine my remarks to the 
following  two  issues:  The  first  one  addresses  the  question  of  the  optimal  degree  of 
transparency with regard to central bank liquidity operations; the second one investigates the 
implications  of  unusually  high  risk  premia  in  short-term  interest  rates  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy.  
Why do we care about financial stability? 
1.  
Why does a central bank like the Swiss National Bank care about financial stability? After all, 
as is the case in a number of other countries, the Swiss central bank does not have a legal 
mandate to supervise and regulate banks. In Switzerland, the supervision and regulation of 
banks has traditionally been the responsibility of a separate independent authority, the Swiss 
Federal  Banking  Commission  (SFBC).2  So,  where  does  the  attention  to  financial  stability 
come from? Let me offer you two straightforward reasons, followed by one that is perhaps 
slightly more subtle.  
First, in an advanced sophisticated economy, monetary policy would be severely challenged 
without a stable financial system and in particular without a stable banking system. Central 
banks depend on a functioning network of banks to conduct monetary policy operations. In 
theory monetary policy could be conducted without banks. For instance, we could increase 
liquidity by dropping currency from the proverbial helicopter.3 Surely, doubts are justified as 
to  whether  this  would  be  as  effective  as  conducting  auction-based  repo  transactions  with 
robust banks.  
Second, a stable financial system with solid banks is of great importance for the development 
and  growth  of  the  economy.  In  Switzerland,  for  instance,  the  financial  sector  contributes 
nearly 15% to GDP and is therefore the most important industry in the economy. 4 Moreover, 
according  to  a  recent  study,  the  financial  sector  in  Switzerland  has  in  recent  years 
contributed  as  much  as  50%  to  economic  growth.5  The  financial  sector  also  provides 
essential inputs and services to all other industries. Here, I am thinking primarily of the banks 
that  provide  credit  and  liquidity  to  private  households  and  firms.  The  devastating 
consequences  of  an  unstable  banking  system  have  been  demonstrated,  for  instance,  by 
Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  in  a  series  of  seminal  papers  about  the  Great 
Depression.6
A  third  and  perhaps  more  subtle  reason  why  we  as  central  bankers  care  about  financial 
stability relates to the role of central banks as lenders of last resort. Due to their monopoly as 
issuers of money, only central banks can provide a virtually unlimited amount of liquidity in 
times of distress. This fact inevitably confronts central banks with potentially large liabilities. 
In order to limit the risks to ourselves and ultimately to the economy as a whole, we have 
strong incentives to limit the size of these potential liabilities. Moreover, we want to limit the 
probability that these potential liabilities materialize in the first place. Simply put, through our 
lending of last resort function, we provide disaster insurance to banks. In return, we want to 
                                                 
2   The SFBC was founded in 1934. This was at least in part a response to the banking problems experienced 
during the Great Depression, which affected Switzerland particularly hard. 
3   See Milton Friedman, 1969, The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays.  
4   Comparative GDP figures are difficult to obtain. Nevertheless, comparing the banking sector’s total assets with 
total GDP provides some clue about the banks’ importance. In Switzerland, the ratio of total banking assets to 
GDP is 10%, in the US 1%, in the UK 3%, in Germany 3%, and in Japan 2%. 
5   SECO, 2006, "Kunjunkturtendenzen Winter 2006/07", page 48. 
6   See Ben Bernanke, 1981, “Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession”, American Economic Review 71, 155-159, 
or  Ben  Bernanke,  1983,  “Nonmonetary  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  in  the  Propagation  of  the  Great 
Depression”, American Economic Review 73, 257-276. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2007
make sure that banks take appropriate precautions to prevent the occurrence of disasters. It 
is well known that those protected by insurance policies can have lower incentives to prevent 
damages than those who remain unprotected. One of our goals, therefore, is to counter this 
so-called “moral hazard” risk. 
More generally speaking, central banks are concerned with a broad range of market failures, 
of  which  moral  hazard  is  just  one  prominent  example.  Other  market  failures  include 
coordination  problems  between  market  participants.  The  classic  examples  of  such 
coordination  problems  are  bank  runs,  where  the  mere  belief  that  a  bank  faces  insolvency 
problems  will  render  the  bank  insolvent  –  even  though  it  may  be  fundamentally  sound. 
Another  important  source  of  market  failures  are  externalities.  For  instance,  in  case  of  a 
banking  crisis,  a  large  part  of  the  costs  of  the  crisis  are  borne  by  households  and  firms. 
These costs are not fully taken into account by banks when they determine their risk profile. 
To banks, it is: “Tails I win, heads you lose.” As a result, banks’ profit-maximizing risk choices 
are typically not socially efficient. There can therefore be an inbuilt tendency for “excessive 
risk taking”.7
These reasons as to why financial stability is important have always been on the minds of 
central bankers. As I said at the outset, the focus on maintaining the stability of the financial 
system is certainly not new. What is new, however, is the fact that we now call it “financial 
stability”.  Moreover,  a  few  central  banks  have  received  more  explicit  legal  mandates  with 
regard to financial stability. In the case of the Swiss National Bank, the new Central Bank Act 
of 2004 gives us an explicit mandate to “contribute to the stability of the financial system”8
I trust that the current growth of central bank activities in the area of financial stability is not 
the whimsical product of underutilized central bankers. It is plausible that the establishment 
of the ECB and the corresponding loss of the monetary policy function for the national central 
banks in the Eurosystem have contributed to an increasing focus on financial stability issues. 
But  there  are  certainly  other  recent  developments  that  have  contributed  to  the  increasing 
attention  central  banks  are  giving  to  financial  stability.  Let  me  highlight  three  such 
developments.  
Since the 1970s, coinciding with the deregulation of financial markets and the acceleration of 
globalization,  the  frequency  of  banking  crises  has  dramatically  increased.  During  the 
decades before the 1970s, the financial system enjoyed a period of extraordinary stability. 
Since  then,  however,  most  countries  have  experienced  severe  banking  problems  or  even 
widespread crises. Prominent examples include the banking crises during the early 1990s in 
the Scandinavian countries or in Japan.9 Figure 1 summarizes the worldwide occurrences of 
banking problems. All countries that are shaded dark gray have experienced banking crises 
between  1980  and  1996.10  The  light-gray  shaded  countries  have  had  significant  banking 
problems. As you can see, there are only a few white spots on the world map. These are 
often countries which lack a meaningful banking system. Some of these white spots probably 
shouldn’t be white. For instance, Switzerland experienced a significant banking crisis during 
the early 1990s.  
                                                 
7   See,  for  instance,  Kose  John,  Teresa  A.  John,  and  Lemma  W.  Senbet,  1991,  ”Risk-Shifting  Incentives  of 
Depository Institutions”, Journal of Banking and Finance 15, 895-915. 
8   Other  examples  include  the  ECB,  which  has  the  task  of  contributing  “to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies 
pursued  by  the  competent  authorities  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the 
stability of the financial system.” (Article 105(5) of the Maastricht Treaty). In the UK, the Bank of England was 
formally  charged  with  the  responsibility  for  the  “overall  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole”  by  the 
Chancellor in a letter to the Governor on 20 May 1997. 
9   See,  for  instance,  Aslı  Demirgüç-Kunt,  and  Enrica  Detragiache,  2005,  “Cross-Country  Empirical  Studies  of 
Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey”, World Bank Working Paper No. 3719. 
10   Taken  from  Charles  Goodhart,  Philipp  Hartmann,  David  Llewellyn,  Liliana  Rojas-Suárez,  and  Steven 
Weisbrod, 1998, Financial Regulation. Why, how and where now? Routledge, London. 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 3
The way in which central banks conduct monetary policy has also had an important impact 
on  the  increasing  attention  central  banks  give  to  financial  stability.  As  you  know,  it  has 
become best practice for central banks to conduct monetary policy with the aim to achieve a 
more or less clearly defined inflation target.11 In the process, monetary policy has become 
closely  linked  to  price  stability,  defined  by  a  given  headline  or  core  inflation  measure.  To 
prevent too narrow a focus and to avoid having to ignore relevant developments outside the 
immediate  realm  of  inflation  measured  by  CPI  or  core  inflation  measures,  focusing  on 
financial  stability  potentially  constitutes  an  important  additional  leg  for  monetary  policy  to 
stand  on.  Obviously  this  is  a  vast  and  complicated  subject.  I  have  no  doubt  that  much 
research  will  be  devoted  to  the  question  of  the  role  of  financial  stability  in  formulating 
monetary policy in the years to come.12 In the banking industry, the consolidation process of 
recent  years  has  produced  some  very  large  and  often  highly  complex  financial  institutions 
with truly global reach. They are often “systemically relevant”. In other words, problems at 
one  of  these  institutions  can  potentially  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  the  entire  financial 
system  which,  in  turn,  could  cause  great  economic  dislocation.  As  a  consequence,  these 
institutions are deemed by many to be “too big to fail”. In essence, the market assumes that 
such institutions would likely be bailed out in the event of a severe crisis. This assumption 
can be inferred from the premium that rating agencies attribute to large banks. All else equal, 
large banks get a better credit rating than small banks.13 The emergence of very large and 
highly complex banking institutions therefore undoubtedly poses a new challenge for central 
banks. It is therefore not surprising that central banks have become more active in the area 
of financial stability. As a side note, let me also mention that the need for central banks and 
supervisors  to  intensify  their  cooperation  –  both  nationally  and  internationally  –  is  another 
consequence of the growing importance of large and complex internationally active financial 
institutions.  
2.  
Observations about tentative lessons from market turmoil 
Issues regarding transparency 
2.1.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  an  attempt  to  draw  some  tentative  lessons  from  the  current  market 
strains.  The  first  regards  transparency.  A  substantial  body  of  academic  research  has 
contributed to making central banks much more transparent in recent years.14 Transparency 
has become a hallmark of modern central banking and rightly so. Transparency is an integral 
part of how an independent and potentially powerful institution like a central bank guarantees 
                                                 
11   Ernst Baltensperger, Philipp Hildebrand, Thomas Jordan, 2007, "The Swiss National Bank's monetary policy 
concept – an example of a 'principles-based' policy framework", Swiss National Bank Economic Studies No. 3. 
12   This argument is closely related to the discussion about the role of monetary policy in the presence of asset 
price  bubbles.  See,  for  instance,  Michael  Mussa,  “Asset  Prices  and  Monetary  Policy”,  in:  W.  Hunter,  G. 
Kaufman,  and  M. Pomerleano (eds.), 2003,  Asset price bubbles: The  implications for  monetary, regulatory, 
and international policies. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 41-50; Stephen. G. Cecchetti, Hans Genberg, 
John  Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani, 2000, "Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy", Geneva Reports on the 
World Economy 2, CEPR and International Center For Monetary And Banking Studies.; or Otmar Issing, 2002, 
"Monetary  Policy  in  a  Changing  Environment",  Contribution  to  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  on  Rethinking 
Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
13   See Bertrand Rime, 2005, “Too Big to Fail”, The Financial Regulator 10, 47-51. 
14   See  Alan  Blinder,  2002,  "Through  the  Looking  Glass:  Central  Bank  Transparency",  Center  for  Economic 
Policy  Studies.  Working  Paper  No.  86;  Michael  Woodford,  2005,  "Central  Bank  Communication  and  Policy 
Effectiveness"  NBER  Working  Paper  No.11898;  Otmar  Issing,  2005,  "Communication,  transparency, 
accountability: monetary policy in the twenty-first century," Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March, 
65-83; or Alan Blinder, Charles Goodhart, Philipp Hildebrand, David Lipton, and Charles Wyplosz, 2001, “How 
do central banks talk?”, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 3, ICMB Geneva. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2007
its  accountability  in  a  democratic  society.  Moreover,  we  have  learned  that  transparency 
renders monetary policy more effective and helps achieve low and stable levels of inflation.15  
Many  central  banks  have  augmented  transparency  beyond  a  clearly  stated  inflation 
objective,  the  publication  of  inflation  reports  or  published  minutes  of  board  meetings.  For 
example,  central  bank  reporting  now  typically  includes  the  publication  of  detailed  data  on 
monetary policy and liquidity operations.  
Most academics make a good case that more transparency is always better than less. Yet 
there are a few critics. Fed Governor Frederic Mishkin, for instance, argues that central bank 
transparency  has  gone  too  far.  Mishkin's  verdict  is  related  to  transparency  about  the 
monetary policy strategy of a central bank. As he puts it: "Transparency is a virtue, but like all 
virtues it can go too far".16 In light of recent experiences, I wonder whether we have gone too 
far in improving transparency with respect to central banks' actions as liquidity providers.  
More specifically, the events of the last few months arguably raise the question of whether 
we should distinguish between transparency in normal times and in times of crisis. Let me 
illustrate  this  point  by  a  recapitulation  of  the  developments  surrounding  the  Bank  of 
England’s  liquidity  support  to  Northern  Rock.  Northern  Rock  had  apparently  been  facing 
some  institutional  deposit  outflows  for  a  few  days  in  September  2007.  But  the  run  on  the 
bank only started when the emergency liquidity assistance of the Bank of England became 
public,  incidentally  by  way  of  a  news  report  from  the  BBC.17  The  outflows  stopped 
immediately after the U.K. Treasury issued a blanket deposit guarantee. The Northern Rock 
case  is  a  reminder  of  the  importance  that  psychology  plays  in  times  of  crises.  As  central 
banks,  we  need  to  consider  carefully  to  what  extent  instant  transparency  with  regard  to 
liquidity operations may end up being counterproductive. Let me add here that this is a very 
complex issue. I am not arguing that the evolution towards greater transparency in central 
banking should be reversed. Indeed, perhaps we need greater ex ante transparency such as 
clearly  stated  conditions  and  eligibility  criteria  associated  with  central  bank  liquidity 
provisions.  Undoubtedly,  ex  post  transparency  about  potential  liquidity  support  measures 
must also be guaranteed. But in the midst of a crisis, it may well be beneficial and desirable 
for  central  banks  to  have  some  flexibility  with  regard  to  how  they  communicate  regarding 
potential liquidity operations.  
Implications of volatile risk premia for the conduct of monetary policy 
2.2. 
My  second  tentative  lesson  directly  relates  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  recent 
market strains are unusual because confidence or rather the lack of confidence plays such 
an  important  role.  Clearly,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  regarding  valuations  of 
complex credit instruments. Moreover and arguably more importantly, banks realize that they 
are facing or could face large contingent liabilities. They are therefore doing everything they 
can to protect their balance sheets.  
In  essence,  banks  are  hoarding  liquidity  and  are  reluctant  to  lend  money  in  the  interbank 
market  beyond  the  very  short  term.  As  a  result,  a  substantial  and  highly  unusual  risk 
premium has emerged in the interbank market. The risk premium in the interbank market has 
generally driven up the 3-month LIBOR which serves as the reference rate for the pricing of 
                                                 
15   Georgios  Chortareas,  David  Stasavage,  and  Gabriel  Sterne,  2002,  “Does  it  pay  to  be  transparent? 
International  Evidence  from  Central  Bank  Forecasts”,  Review  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis, 
July/August, 99-117. 
16   Frederic S. Mishkin, 2004, “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?”, NBER Working Paper No. 10829, 
p. 25.  
17   In fact, the Bank of England would have preferred to act covertly, but the market abuses directive prevented 
this (http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2007/sep/21/14). 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 5
credit.  At  the  same  time,  interest  rates  on  risk-free  securities  such  as  Government  notes 
have declined. The result is a significant increase in the TED spread (the difference between 
an uncollateralized interbank loan and the risk free rate of the same maturity).  
With the 3-month LIBOR rising, central banks faced an important monetary policy decision. 
In countries where the official target rate is a central bank rate, for instance, the euro zone, 
the 3-month LIBOR became increasingly disconnected from the official target rate (typically a 
repo  rate  of  two  weeks  or  less).  As  you  can  see  from  Graph  1a,  the  ECB  held  its  official 
target rate (the two-week repo rate) constant and therefore tolerated an increase in the 3-
month LIBOR. It is currently about 70 bp above the repo rate of the ECB; this spread is now 
more than twice as large as it was in the first week of August. The Bank of England also held 
the official rate constant throughout the market turbulence. As you can see from Graph 1b, 
the initial increase of the 3-month sterling LIBOR was slightly more pronounced than the one 
for the euro. Currently, the difference between the 3-month LIBOR and the official target rate 
is roughly equivalent for the two currencies.  
In  the  case  of  Switzerland,  where  the  official  target  rate  is  the  3-month  LIBOR  rate,  the 
emerging risk premium meant that the official target rate was driven higher immediately after 
the  turmoil  began  in  early  August.  You  can  see  this  is  Graph  1c.  Due  to  a  significant 
reduction in the short-term repo rate of the SNB, the 3-month LIBOR has since receded to 
about the level of the first week of August.  
As you know, the Federal Reserve has lowered the Fed Funds rate in two steps by 75 basis 
points to a target level of 4.5%. As a result and as you can see in Graph 1d, after the first cut 
in the Fed Funds, the 3-month LIBOR fell somewhat below the level of August 9. After the 
second rate cut the 3-month LIBOR declined further. Nonetheless, the spread between the 
Fed Funds rate and the 3-month LIBOR remains significantly larger than in July.  
These  illustrations  demonstrate  that  when  there  is  a  sudden  jump  in  the  risk  premium 
embedded in the 3-month LIBOR, the way in which you respond to such a risk premium has 
important repercussions for the effective monetary policy stance. Let me illustrate this point 
with the example of John Taylor's acclaimed "Taylor rule"18. In generic terms, the Taylor rule 
is a simple monetary policy rule that prescribes how a central bank should adjust its official 
rate  in  a  systematic  way  in  response  to  changes  in  inflation  and  macroeconomic  activity 
(usually the output gap).19 While no central bank is relying solely on the Taylor rule, most 
central banks are deriving guidance from it in their monetary policy decisions.  
Assuming that the current turmoil has neither affected inflation nor the output gap the Taylor 
rule does not suggest a change in the official rate. In other words, the observed decoupling 
of  the  LIBOR  from  the  official  rates  would  have  to  be  ignored  in  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  So  far,  this  is  the  approach  followed  by  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  England.  If  one 
assumes that the level of the 3-month LIBOR plays a more important role in the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy than a one or two week repo rate, monetary policy makers 
may want to be flexible in times of turmoil. Adhering too closely to rules might not lead to an 
optimal  monetary  policy.  As  John  Taylor  has  said  himself,  "operating  the  rule  requires 
judgment and cannot be done by computer."20 Sorting out these unusual risk premia effects 
is  crucial  for  conducting  appropriate  monetary  policy  and  for  communicating  the  monetary 
policy stance to the public and to market participants.  
                                                 
18   John B. Taylor, 1993, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on 
Public Policy 39, December, 195-214. 
19   For a discussion of various types of the Taylor rule see Athanasios Orphanides, 2007, “Taylor Rules”, Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 18. Federal Reserve Board. 
20   Taylor, 1993, p. 198. 
6 
 BIS Review 141/2007
Conclusion 
3.  
Let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  that  much  of  the  central  banks'  motivation  for  their 
involvement in financial stability is rooted in their role as providers of liquidity in general, and 
of  emergency  liquidity  in  particular.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  to  be  recognized  that  central 
banks have a very limited arsenal of instruments to deal with crises situations. A change in 
the level of official target interest rate is in many ways a crude instrument that, in my view, is 
best deployed with a firm focus on trying to keep the economy where our statutory mandate 
tells us to keep it. This does not, of course, preclude a change in interest rates in the event of 
a crisis, but only to the extent that the risks from the crisis to the economy justify a change in 
policy.  
The current market turmoil is providing countless lessons to the industry as well as to the 
official sector. As time goes on, we will sort out what we are learning and set priorities. In my 
comments  today,  I  have  chosen  to  focus  on  two  observations  that  seem  to  me  to  offer 
important tentative lessons with regard to our own specific experience since early August. As 
I  said  at  the  outset,  I  am  very  much  looking  forward  to  reading  thorough  and  rigorous 
academic analyses on these and other topics once we gain some perspective on the current 
market turbulence.  
 
 
 
 7
BIS Review 141/2007 
 Figure 1: Banking problems worldwide, 1980-96. Source: Goodhart et al. (1998) 
Graph 1a: EUR Money Market
5
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
01.01.07 14.02.07 30.03.07 13.05.07 26.06.07 09.08.07 22.09.07 05.11.07 19.12.07
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2 W Repo
3 M Libor
Ted Spread (rhs)
Graph 1b: GBP Money Market
7
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
4
01.01.07 14.02.07 30.03.07 13.05.07 26.06.07 09.08.07 22.09.07 05.11.07 19.12.07
0
Base Rate
3 M Libor
Ted Spread (rhs)
  BIS Review 141/2007
 8 
 Graph 1c: CHF Money Market
3
2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75
1.5
01.01.07 14.02.07 30.03.07 13.05.07 26.06.07 09.08.07 22.09.07 05.11.07 19.12.07
1 W Repo
3 M Libor
Ted Spread (rhs)
Graph 1d: USD Money Market
30.03.07 13.05.07 26.06.07 09.08.07
22.09.07 05.11.07 19.12.07
Fed Funds
3 M Libor
Ted Spread (rhs)
6
5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4
01.01.07 14.02.07
  BIS Review 141/2007 
 0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
  9
