Vittorio Corbo: Recent trends and perspectives for the Chilean economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vittorio  Corbo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  Seminar 
“Business  and  Economic  vision  2007-2008”,  organized  by  Sofofa  and  Universidad  del 
Desarrollo, Santiago, 17 October 2007. 
 The insertion of the Chilean economy into global markets has implied that its economic cycle 
has been determined by a mix of domestic macroeconomic policies, world economic events 
and by idiosyncratic conditions, such as recent energy supply shocks. In recent years, the 
prominent  external  environment  for  the  Chilean  economy  has  been  favorable.  On  the  one 
hand,  a  rising  demand  and  high  prices  of  our  exports,  and  on  the  other  hand,  low  import 
prices  of  consumption  and  capital  goods.  In  addition,  firms  have  also  faced  favorable 
financing conditions. In this presentation I will start by discussing the outlook for the World 
Economy.  Next,  I  will  discuss  recent  trends  in  the  Chilean  economy  and,  finally,  some 
reflections on the conduct of monetary policy and the main risks we currently face. 
Perspectives of the world economy 
The  last  five  years  have  been  the  best  five-year  period  in  growth,  inflation  and  financial 
conditions that the World Economy has experienced in over 30 years. However, this scenario 
has been changing in the recent months. Although the turmoils in global financial markets 
that started in July have been reduced by the determined actions taken by the central banks 
of industrial countries, especially the Fed, risk aversion is still high, credit maturity has been 
reduced considerably and, except for prime firms, financial conditions have narrowed around 
the world. 
It is foreseen that turbulences in global financial markets will have effects on the perspectives 
of the world economic growth. In any case, this adjustment comes at a time in which most 
firms  and  the  banking  sector  around  the  world  are  on  solid  footing,  perhaps  with  the  sole 
exception of some economies in Eastern Europe. 
The  epicenter  of  this  trembling  is  in  the  United  States,  which  economy  already  was 
experiencing  an  important  adjustment  in  its  housing  market,  now  expected  to  be  more 
intense and extended as a result of the deterioration in the credit conditions that experiences 
its mortgage market. At the same time, the drop in US housing prices and the less favorable 
financial conditions faced by US consumers will affect the dynamism of private consumption. 
Although  the  deterioration  of  financial  conditions  has  no  direct  effect  on  prime  firms,  their 
economic  perspectives  have  been  negatively  affected  by  lower  dynamism  expected  for 
consumption  and  by  more  restrictive  financial  conditions  faced  by  their  consumers  and 
suppliers. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that the indicators of real activity of the 
third quarter have shown a surprising strength of the labor markets and consumption. 
In the Euro Zone and Japan, partial indicators show that the third quarter GDP growth has 
strengthened  after  the  contraction  of  the  economic  activity  in  Japan  during  the  second 
quarter. However, consumption is still weak in both zones and, especially in the Euro Zone, 
financial  conditions  have  also  been  deteriorated  with  potential  effects  on  consumption  and 
investment.  In  this  sense,  confidence  indicators  so  much  for  consumers  as  for  firms  are 
showing less favorable perspectives. 
Despite the still uncertain effects that the adjustment of global financial markets would have, 
projections  of  the  world  GDP  growth  have  already  been  reduced  (moderately).  It  is  not  a 
surprise that these reviews affect chiefly projected GDP growth of industrial economies. The 
World  Economic  Outlook,  presented  by  the  IMF  today,  reduces  the  forecast  for  World 
Economy growth for 2008, by half a percentage point, to 4.8%, with a forecast for the US 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
GDP  growth  of  only  1.9%.  In  the  same  report,  growth  projections  for  the  Euro  Zone  and 
Japan  are  also  corrected  downward  for  2008.  Corrections  for  emerging  economies  are 
marginal, particularly for China, India and Russia. 
In  spite  of  adjustments  in  global  financial  markets  and  of  reductions  in  the  GDP  growth 
perspectives  for  advanced  economies,  the  appreciation  of  stock  markets  in  emerging 
countries  is  surprising.  Apparently,  markets  have  anticipated  that  the  deceleration  of 
industrial  countries  will  have  reduced  the  effects  on  these  economies  and  their  financial 
conditions will not deteriorate as much. The reason is the combination of a higher risk premia 
and lower interest rates in industrial countries, as a result of flight to quality and expectations 
of lower monetary policy rates than previously expected so much for the US as for the Euro 
Zone. 
In  this  external  setting,  commodity  prices  have  remained  high  and,  particularly,  crude  oil 
prices are reaching record nominal levels in dollars. Besides, international prices of food are 
showing  a  rising  trend.  Accordingly,  emerging  economies  have  been  more  dynamic  than 
previously expected, contributing to worldwide GDP growth. Thus, China, India and Russia 
as a group explain more than a half of the world GDP growth during the first semester of this 
year. 
The Chilean economy 
Chile’s  current  framework  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies  and  institutions  has 
insulated the economy from the turbulences in international financial markets. In particular, 
the  fiscal  solvency  and  the  conduction  of  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  under  a 
floating exchange rate regime have increased the economy’s resilience to external shocks. 
Between July 19 and August 16 – the day before the Fed reduced its discounted rate in 50 
basis points and authorized the use of bonds supported by mortgages and collaterals – the 
Chilean peso depreciated slightly, the 10-year bond rates decreased and the stock exchange 
experienced one of the lowest falls among industrial and emerging economies. 
The  Chilean  economy  started  a  period  of  above-trend-growth  in  the  third  quarter  of  2006. 
This  growth  has  been  supported  by  expansive  domestic  macroeconomic  policies  and 
favorable external conditions. As a result, we estimate the GDP to reach its long-run trend 
level during the second quarter of this year. Partial indicators for the third quarter suggest 
that growth has slowed, and will be lower than expected in the September’s Monetary Policy 
Report (MPR). This has been mainly the result of the weak behavior of the natural resources 
sectors  (mining,  fishing  and  electricity,  gas  and  water)  because  of  supply  shocks  due  to 
technical problems in mining, and substitution of hydroelectric power with thermal generation 
based on oil. In addition, the manufacturing industry has slowed down surprisingly. We are 
yet  uncertain  as  to  the  causes  and  persistency  of  this  slow-down.  On  the  demand  side: 
private consumption is growing at close to 7% (yoy) while investment in fixed capital picked 
up  after  the  slow-down  of  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2006.  Partial  indicators  for  the 
third quarter show a moderate growth in investment and a slight reduction in consumption 
growth. Capital good imports are still growing fast, while investment in building construction 
is growing at around an annual rate of 5%.  
The  expansion  of  private  consumption  is  still  supported  by  a  solid  labor  market,  with 
employment growing at an annual rate of 3% and a seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate 
under 7%, the lowest since 1998. Financial conditions are also still favorable. The 10-year 
bond  interest  rates  are  low  and  the  annual  growth  of  monetary  and  credit  aggregates 
continue high, specially the growth of firm credit. At the same time, stock issuance up to the 
third  quarter  of  2007  is  higher  than  that  of  1996.  Notice,  however,  that  the  persistent 
weakness  of  expectations  indicators  and  the  effect  of  the  recent  increases  in  inflation  on 
families’ purchasing power imply a risk for private consumption growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
As  a  result  of  the  above,  the  GDP  and  aggregate  demand  growth  have  been  somewhat 
below the forecasts of the September 2007 MPR. There, the GDP growth forecast for this 
year was 5.75% to 6.25%, with a downward bias. The evidence accumulated so far, indicate 
that the GDP growth will be in the lower part of the range. The turbulences in international 
financial markets could be affecting expectations of consumers and entrepreneurs. In fact, 
consumer expectations have worsened and the forecast of the GDP growth in expectation 
surveys has fallen. 
The most important development in recent months, however, has been inflation. Inflation has 
picked  up,  reaching  annual  rates  of  5.8%  in  September,  both  for  total  CPI  and  core  CPI 
(which  excludes  perishable  foods,  energy  and  regulated  tariffs).  This  surprising  rise  of 
inflation has been influenced by unusual (and simultaneous) increases in the prices of food 
items, given rises in their foreign similes and harsh weather conditions in Chile. These high 
prices have not only persisted but also intensified in the last months. Additionally, electricity 
power  rates  have  also  increased,  as  a  result  of  natural  gas  restrictions  coming  from 
Argentina, and the replacement of hydro by oil-based electrical generation. 
Rising inflation due to a food price shock is a problem affecting many emerging economies 
such as Brazil, China, Mexico and South Africa. In turn, the impact of this food price shock 
on inflation in industrial countries has been smaller, because the share of food items in the 
CPI basket is lower in high-income economies. 
As a result of these price shocks, now it is foreseen that projected annual inflation will be 
above  those  published  in  the  last  MPR.  In  line  with  inflation,  short-term  inflation  forecasts 
have  also  risen.  However,  long-run  inflation  expectations  are  still  anchored  at  3%.  This 
reflects  the  confidence  of  economic  agents  in  the  Central  Bank’s  commitment  with  the 
inflation target, and the transitory character of the recent hike in inflation.  
The  different  measures  of  trend  inflation  have  also  been  rising  during  the  last  months, 
following the rising perishables prices and the reduction of the output gap (effective minus 
potential  GDP)  as  observed  up  to  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.  At  the  same  time,  the 
growth rate of wages shows increases in recent months (except in August). In addition, the 
Chilean peso has appreciated in nominal and real terms during the last month. 
These changes in the inflationary front have been the main concern of the Central Bank of 
Chile  in  the  design  of  monetary  policy,  considering  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  inflation 
around  3%  most  of  the  time,  with  a  tolerance  range  of  +/-1  percentage  points.  Given  this 
objective, the monetary policy has been adjusted to avoid persistent deviations from 3% due 
to  the  second-round  effects  of  supply  shocks  or  the  widening  output  gap.  This  is  why  the 
Board increased the monetary policy rate in 25 basis points in July, August and September 
2007, to a current level of 5.75%. In September, due to the turbulences in global financial 
markets and their possible consequences on the Chilean GDP growth, the Board decided to 
change  the  upward  bias  in  the  monetary  policy  rate  to  a  neutral  bias.  This  was  then 
confirmed in the monetary policy meeting of October, when the Board decided to maintain 
the monetary policy rate and remarked that future trends would depend on new information 
and  its  implications  on  inflation  forecasts.  This  time  the  Board  added  that  the  future  of 
monetary  policy  would  depend  on  developments  of  the  World  Economy,  the  eventual 
propagation  of  the  inflationary  shock  to  other  prices,  wage  trends,  medium  and  long-term 
expectations of inflation, and the evolution of the output gap. 
The market has also adjusted its expectations on the future course of the monetary policy, 
given  both  the  news  on  the  internal  inflationary  front  and  the  expected  evolution  of  the 
worldwide  GPD  growth.  As  a  result,  financial  prices  have  internalized  the  fact  that  the 
monetary policy rate will increase another 25 basis points during this year and another equal 
increase during 2008. In contrast, most of the market analysts who participate in the monthly 
survey  of  inflation  expectations,  expect  an  additional  increase  of  25  basis  points  for  the 
whole period from now until the end of 2008. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 3
The recent evolution of the exchange rate deserves to be specially mentioned. The Chilean 
peso  has  appreciated  against  the  US  dollar  in  the  last  few  weeks,  reflecting,  in  part,  the 
depreciation of this last currency in international markets. This in turn has been the result of 
the  monetary  impulse  to  compensate  for  narrowing  financial  conditions  in  the  developed 
markets and the necessary adjustment of the current account imbalances among the main 
economic  areas.  This  phenomenon  has  stressed  international  financial  markets  and  is  a 
main concern among the economic authorities in industrial countries, especially in the Euro 
Zone. In Chile, the appreciation of the Chilean peso reduces profits in those tradable sectors 
that have not been able to adjust their prices in dollars. However, it is important to mention 
that, thanks to the combination of a fiscal policy, anchored to a structural fiscal surplus and 
that  saves  transitory  income,  and  the  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  with 
floating exchange rate regime, the appreciation of the Chilean peso with respect to the US 
dollar has been one of the lowest among countries all around the world, since the beginning 
of the US dollar depreciation in international money markets in February 2002. 
By  contrast,  multilateral  measures  of  the  real  exchange  rate  have  shown  a  lower 
appreciation of the Chilean peso, both due to fundamentals (the important improvement of 
the terms of trade) and financial factors that are not easy to quantify. All in all, the effective 
real  exchange  rate  is  slightly  lower  than  the  average  of  the  last  15  years,  in  spite  of  the 
important improvement in terms of trade. Again, the fiscal and monetary policies followed by 
the Chilean authorities have prevented a higher real appreciation of the Chilean peso and 
have minimized possible effects as the Dutch disease, i.e., a transitory overvalued currency 
associated to unsustainable expenditures. 
Nevertheless,  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the  Central  Bank  authorities  are  continuously 
monitoring the evolution of the real exchange rate considering changes in fundamentals. In 
particular,  the  Central  Bank  is  always  ready  to  use  the  available  instruments  to  avoid 
negative effects on the Chilean economy derived from sudden and erratic movements in the 
real exchange rate. 
Final remarks 
In the last few months, the Chilean economy has faced different shocks, demanding special 
monetary  policy  attention  so  as  to  fulfil  the  obligation  of  ensuring  price  stability,  as  it  was 
enacted in the Constitutional Law of the Central Bank of Chile. This objective is a necessary 
condition to achieve sustainable growth at a rate around its trend. 
The  main  risks  currently  being  considered  by  the  Central  Bank  are:  (1)  an  eventual 
propagation of food and energy price shocks to inflation dynamics, in the context of a closing 
output  gap  and  transitory  high  inflation  rates.  This  propagation  could  be  materialized  via 
rising wages, due to wage CPI indexation and a reduced unemployment rate; or via rising 
medium and long-run inflation expectations that significantly could diverge from the inflation 
target; (2) larger adjustments in global financial markets, with more severe consequences for 
world  growth  and  commodity  prices;  (3)  signs  of  more  rapid  moderation  of  internal  GDP 
growth dynamism, beyond expected. 
In  particular  taking  into  account  these  risks,  the  Central  Bank  continues  conducting  the 
course of monetary policy according to its constitutional mandate to safeguard price stability. 
Yves Mersch: Recent financial market developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  50th 
anniversary of ACI Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 12 October 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2007
 Since my first invitation to an ACI event as a speaker a few months after assuming my first 
mandate 9  years ago, the markets  have undergone many  turbulent sequences, although I 
could not detect a correlation between market upheavals and my regular appearance at ACI 
events.  Let me  therefore  thank the  Luxembourg  chapter for  inviting  me  again  today.  I  feel 
honoured. 
After a first ripple in the first quarter of this year and an increasing number of central banks 
pointing to the need to reprice certain risks (I gave a warning in that respect at a conference 
by the European Institute in Washington in April) the market reaction over the last couple of 
months witnessed what needs to be seen as a basically healthy reaction to mispricing. This 
reaction  however  was  accompanied  by  the  unpleasant  effects  of  a  crisis  of  confidence 
among the participants of the global credit markets prompting central bank intervention. 
Since I agreed to speak about the turbulence in financial markets, many actions have been 
taken and a policy agenda for drawing the lessons is emerging. 
Allow me therefore briefly to highlight the main events, before commenting on the experience 
we  acquired  inside  the  Eurosystem  during  these  weeks  and  months  with  our  elaborate 
toolbox of instruments and operations. 
I will conclude with some tentative lessons to be drawn in terms of transparency, valuation, 
market functioning and supervisory framework adjustment. 
At this stage of collecting evidence, I will not dwell on the macroeconomic consequences of 
this  turbulence  which  took  place  against  the  background  of  a  strong  performance  of  the 
global economy. The momentum of past dynamics still outweighs potential downward risks to 
the baseline scenario. 
What happened in the markets 
I. 
If many expected turbulence, the specific features and the transmission mechanisms were 
less clearly anticipated. 
Many  were  barking  up  the  wrong  tree:  Hedge  funds  and  private  equity  were  not  the  main 
culprits but suffered. 
Let me sum up the unfolding of events in 6 points: 
1. 
Credit spreads reach record lows in the first half of 2007. 
The combination of relatively low interest rates for a long period of time, the trend to 
lay off credit risk out of balance sheets and to securitize and an increasing focus on 
short-term returns have led to a strong demand for credit risk, especially from non-
bank  investors.  As  a  result  credit  spreads  fell  to  all-time  lows,  leading  to  a  mis-
pricing  of  credit  risks.  Additionally,  many  investors  relied  greatly  on  credit  rating 
agencies  for  the  valuation  of  complex  financial  instruments  and  their  use  as 
collateral. 
Strong economies and higher commodity prices were fuelling expectations of 
tighter monetary policy before the crisis started. 
In  the  first  half  of  the  year  the  economic  situation  proved  to  be  very  robust.  Most 
major central banks were normalising interest rates. Strong demand for commodities 
put upward pressure on prices so that interest rates were rising in the first half of the 
year. 
Mortgage  rate  re-settings  at  higher  interest  rate  levels  caused  delinquency 
rates to rise, most pronounced in the sub-prime mortgage market.  
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 5
4. 
5. 
6. 
This led to losses in the hedge fund sector and increasing difficulties in finding a fair 
value price for structured deals. Moreover, investment funds experienced difficulties 
in  NAV  pricing,  resulting  in  the  temporary  closures  of  some  funds.  Asset-backed 
securities with high credit ratings have proved not to be as sound, nor as liquid as 
they  appeared.  Some  of  those  structured  investment  vehicles  or  conduits  were 
extensively leveraged and strongly dependent on short-term funding. In the absence 
of liquidity, sponsoring banks had to fund off-balance-sheet vehicles from their own 
balance sheet. This led to de-leveraging and forced asset sales.  
Higher default rates caused the first bankruptcies in the US and credit spreads 
started to rise. Risk aversion spread to all asset classes. 
Forced sales to cover margin requirements saw volatility rise sharply (VIX doubled 
from  15  to  30  %).  The  unwinding  of  riskier  positions  caused  stock  markets  to  fall 
(Stoxx50 -11 %) and carry trades were liquidated (EURJPY fell from 169 to 152, a 
10  %  appreciation).  As  markets  fell,  margin  requirements  rose  further.  The 
uncertainty about the pricing of some instruments added additional pressure.  
As the credit crisis spread further short-term liquidity evaporated.  
Short-term funding in the interbank market became unavailable, causing casualties 
amongst banks and funds. In Europe, IKB and Landesbank Sachsen were rescued 
from insolvency. Northern Rock followed later.  
Funding in the primary market was impossible for banks. Trading in the secondary 
market stopped, with the exception of government issues.  
The effective shut-down of the refinancing pipeline left banks to rely on short-
term funding from central banks.  
Neither  primary  issues  nor  short-term  papers,  such  as  ABS  or  ABCP,  could  be 
placed in the market. Banks hoarded liquidity in order to be safe from unexpected 
outflows  or  the  unknown  extent  of  write-downs.  Because  the  usual  market 
refinancing possibilities were blocked banks relied on highly rated collateral for their 
funding and the liquidity provided by the central bank.  
The spread between EONIA and three-month Euribor rose to the highest level ever 
at 70 bps and has remained high. Unsecured trading in the money market beyond 
one week effectively ceased to exist. 
Central bank reaction function 
II. 
As  liquidity  retracted  first  from  the  credit  markets,  then  money  markets,  intermediation 
vanishing,  central  banks  had  to  move  in:  to  restore  orderly  market  conditions;  ensure  the 
integrity  of  monetary  transmission  channels,  and  to  ensure  financial  stability  or  prevent  a 
systemic crisis.  
In view of the confidence crisis among market participants, due to uncertainty about financial 
individual exposures, the issues at stake were: 
1) 
2) 
to have money market rates evolve close to the policy rates; 
to address the term structure problem to the extent that it was threatening the first 
issue;  
and  thirdly  to  address  the  distributional  problem  of  liquidity  among  market 
participants for reasons of financial stability. 
3) 
The somewhat more complex and elaborate toolbox of the Eurosystem proved very valuable 
in this respect. 
- 
this applies to the instruments used to provide liquidity: the MRO and LTRO 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2007
2. 
3. 
4. 
 this applies to minimum reserve features 
this  applies  to  the  number  of  counterparties  with  direct  access  to  central  bank 
money 
this applies finally to the range of eligible collateral 
- 
Let me say a word about each of these features of the Eurosystem operational framework: 
1. 
At moments of term structure difficulties and shortening of the liquidity constraints, it 
is of advantage to have both: one-week and three-month liquidity providing tenders 
conducted weekly and monthly. Fine tuning operations and extraordinary additional 
tenders,  according  to  standard  procedures,  allowed  a  commensurate  response 
within a familiar context, rather than adding to prevailing uncertainty by introducing, 
in an emergency context, untested new facilities, instruments or procedures. 
In monetary policy operations, the Eurosystem grants direct access to liquidity to a 
large  number  of  credit  institutions.  All  euro-area  institutions  subject  to  minimum 
reserve  requirements  and  which  fulfil  the  relevant  contractual  or  regulatory 
arrangements  applied  by  their  respective  NCB,  may  access  the  standing  facilities 
and/or participate in open market operations based on standard tenders. At the end 
of August 07, 1 676 counterparties had access to the open market operations, 2 809 
to the facility, and 2 141 to the marginal lending facility. 
The  combination  of  relatively  high  reserve  requirements  at  2%  and  the  monthly 
averaging  principle  allowed  banks  to  dip  into  their  reserves  to  meet  their  liquidity 
needs. 
This  averaging  principle,  which  grants  the  banks  more  flexibility  in  meeting  their 
reserve requirements, is conducive to more orderly market conditions. 
Since  the  start  of  EMU  in  January  1999  the  ECB  has  been  providing  its  (weekly) 
refinancing to the euro area banking system based on the concept of a benchmark 
allotment. This benchmark allotment is defined by the ECB as the allotment amount 
which allows counterparties to smoothly fulfil their reserve requirements until the end 
of  the  day  before  the  settlement  of  the  next  MRO,  when  taking  into  account  the 
aggregate liquidity need of the banking system. 
The  Eurosystem  accepts  a  wide  range  of  collateral  to  underlie  its  operations, 
including marketable and non-marketable assets.  
The  Eurosystem  has  put  in  place  a  single  framework  for  eligible  collateral,  which 
covers  marketable  and  non-marketable  assets  that  fulfil  euro  area-wide  eligibility 
criteria.  
As far as marketable assets are concerned, there are four liquidity categories: The 
first  and  best  category  is  made  up  by  central  government  debt  instruments,  the 
second  by  jumbo  covered  bonds,  agency,  and  local  or  regional  government  debt 
instruments, the third by covered and uncovered bank bonds and the fourth by asset 
backed securities.  
There are two types of non-marketable assets that are accepted as collateral: credit 
claims  and  non-marketable  retail  mortgage-backed  debt  instruments.  Although 
different levels of haircuts are applied to the different categories, one might say that 
the Eurosystem also allows banks to use collateral easily where either the interbank 
Repo markets are less liquid (such as in category 3+4) or where there is even no 
interbank Repo market at all (such as for non-marketable assets). 
Banks have the choice to use more or less liquid assets as collateral, a facility which 
constitutes  a  big  advantage  in  critical  liquidity  conditions  such  as  those  currently 
experienced by market participants.  
BIS Review 120/2007 
 7
Some recent figures:  
The available eligible marketable collateral amounts to EUR 9 trillion. 
While  the  amount  submitted  to  the  Eurosystem  nearly  reached  11%  of  all  eligible 
collateral by 31 August 2007 (nearly EUR 1 trillion), around 6% is effectively used to 
collateralize outstanding credit operations with the Eurosystem. 
By  the  end  of  2006,  uncovered  bank  bonds  had  become  the  largest  single  asset 
class  put  forward  in  Eurosystem  operations  (31%),  surpassing  government  bonds 
for the first time (21%). ABS have also shown a steady growth, reaching 11.4 % of 
all  collateral  submitted  by  the  end  of  2006,  and  19%  by  the  end  of  August  2007 
(+4% in August 2007). 
The year 2007 has also shown a steady increase in the use of credit claims, which 
by end of July 2007 represented roughly 10% of all assets submitted as collateral to 
the Eurosystem. Even though handling procedures for credit claims are sometime 
more cumbersome, counterparties show an increasing interest for this asset class 
with very low opportunity cost. 
The bottom line of these figures is that the increasing use of lower opportunity cost 
collateral shows that a growing number of counterparties are becoming more active 
and efficient in managing their collateral, and thus their liquidity. 
Finally,  the  recent  market  turmoil  provided  tangible  evidence  that  the  collateral 
framework of the Eurosystem is broad enough to ensure that counterparties do not 
face collateral shortages, even in difficult situations. 
Where do we stand today? 
The  degree  of  uncertainty  concerning  risk  –  where  is  it?,  how  much?,  at  what  price?  –  is 
declining  with  every  forthcoming  disclosure.  Some  asset  classes  have  already  fully 
recovered their risk appetite.  
Bank profits will be impacted, but their capacity to absorb adverse developments has also 
been strengthened by buoyant results over the last years. 
However, we are not back to normal yet, especially in the unsecured interbank term money 
market.  We  are  not  fully  safe  from  a  low  probability  but  potentially  high  impact  negative 
event. 
Before drawing some tentative lessons, let me add that there is no trade-off between liquidity 
provision and monetary policy, with its primary objective of maintaining price stability to which 
we are resolutely attached. 
Key issues 
III. 
At the international and at EU level a tentative agenda is emerging around 4 axes for further 
examination. 
First: Transparency 
Enhance transparency for investors, markets and regulators (including improvements at the 
level of data reporting). Credit risk transfer has facilitated the dispersion and sharing of risks 
across  the  financial  markets,  thus  potentially  enhancing  their  efficiency  and  stability. 
However, the recent market turbulence confirmed concerns about the risks stemming from 
the lack of transparency as to where the risks ultimately reside in the financial system, and in 
particular if those risks have been acquired by market participants that can properly manage 
them.  The  existing  reporting  requirements  of  the  banking  sector  did  not  allow  for  a  full 
8 
 BIS Review 120/2007
assessment  of  banks’  exposures  to  the  structured  products,  leading  to  the  absence  of 
accurate and timely information. 
Are Basel II requirements sufficient concerning the sponsoring by banks of SPV? 
Is bank disclosure of securitization operations, and exposures to SIV adequate? 
Questions  also  arise  in  relation  to  the  functioning  of  markets  for  complex  financial 
instruments. 
How  to  inform  the  individual  investor  when  there  are  difficulties  in  measuring  risk  in 
structured finance products and valuate them? 
In this category of improved transparency, I shall also mention the need to implement ESCB-
CESR standards for payment and settlement including ICSDs and large custodians in order 
obtain more information on intraday market liquidity. 
Second: Valuation 
More work is needed on standards to ensure reliable valuation of assets particularly of those 
assets where markets are potentially illiquid in time of stress. At the same time compatibility 
with international financial reporting standards must be assured. 
Third: Market functioning 
I  have  to  mention  first  the  assessment  of  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies,  their  small 
number,  the  transparency  of  their  rating  methodology,  possible  conflicts  of  interest  in 
particular as regards structured finance instruments. Excessive exclusive reliance on credit 
ratings  by  investors  without  carrying  out  due  diligence  or  conducting  further  own  risk 
assessment is a problem as well. 
The road map also includes a reflection on the consequences of the originate and distribute 
model of banks for credit markets. Does it induce wrong incentives?  
A  last  item  in  this  list  relates  to  non-regulated  debt  markets  and  mortgage  markets,  which 
might deserve a hard look in the light of recent experience. 
Finally: The regulatory framework 
Above  all,  liquidity  risk  management  relating  to  complex  structured  products  needs  to  be 
investigated.  We  need  a  wider  concept  of  concentration  risk  including  wholesale  and 
interbank  markets  as  well  as  intragroup  exposures.  We  have  to  look  at  warehousing  and 
pipeline  risk,  deal  with  possible  regulatory  incentives  to  move  risk  off  balance  sheet  into 
SPVs. 
We have to assess the links between the regulated and the non-regulated part of the system, 
including  the  optimal  perimeter  of  supervision.  Special  purpose  investment  vehicles  and 
conduits were used as off-balance sheet investment vehicles. These were prone to liquidity 
mismatches between their assets and liabilities, causing contingent credit and liquidity lines 
to be drawn on banks, and resulting in an increased demand for money market liquidity. 
Closer examination of procyclical effects of credit market developments and the treatment of 
risk embedded in structured products held for trading is also warranted.  
The Deposit Guarantee Schemes, in the light of recent events, also need to be revisited. This 
is  a  piece  of  advice  I  would  most  urgently  give  to  the  authorities  of  this  country  with  its 
unfunded DGS. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 9
Last but not least 
If  there  is  one  major  lesson  recent  market  developments  have  clearly  shown,  it  is  the 
shortcoming of a prudential framework which sidelines the central bank. 
Cooperation at international level is only as good as cooperation at domestic level. Liquidity 
issues  cannot  be  segmented  between  an  FSA  and  a  central  bank  with  no  contacts  of  an 
institutional nature. 
With this personal remark for domestic consumption I thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS Review 120/2007
