Y V Reddy: Forex reserves, stabilization funds and sovereign wealth 
funds – Indian perspective  
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Golden  Jubilee 
Celebrations  of 
India,  Mumbai, 
8 October 2007. 
the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers’  Association  of 
 Shri Sridharan, Chairman, FEDAI, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am happy to be here today with the members of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association 
of India, popularly known as FEDAI in the industry. FEDAI completes 50 years in 2008 and 
the  Reserve  Bank  and  FEDAI  have  shared  a  unique  and  symbiotic  relationship  all  these 
years. Since the beginning of the reforms, FEDAI has partnered with the Reserve Bank to 
ensure adoption of best practices in the profession of foreign exchange dealing. FEDAI also 
plays a very important role as a communication channel between the Reserve Bank and the 
banks authorised to deal in foreign exchange. FEDAI continues to provide valuable insights 
in this vital segment of our financial markets. 
I  am  happy  that  on  the  occasion  of  its  Golden  Jubilee  Celebrations,  FEDAI  is  releasing  a 
monograph on its 50 years’ history and a brochure on foreign exchange facilities, which will 
assist  resident  individuals  who  access  these  facilities.  This  is  also  expected  to  provide 
greater  understanding  and  awareness  among  the  Authorised  Dealers’  branch  level  staff 
dealing with customers and enhance the quality of customer service. The topic for the panel 
discussion today is pertinent in the current context and we in the Reserve Bank look forward 
to obtaining a feedback of these discussions.  
There has been, in the recent past, a growing interest in the magnitudes and working of what 
may be broadly characterized as national foreign asset funds. Despite several overlapping 
features,  they  broadly  consist  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  stabilization  funds  and 
sovereign  wealth  funds.  While  these  funds  have  the  characteristics  of  being  in  the  public 
sector, the motives for establishment, sources of funding and institutional arrangements for 
managing  them  vary  considerably  though  there  is  a  great  degree  of  consensus  on  these 
aspects  as  far  as  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  concerned.  While  there  are  difficulties  in 
generalizations in regard to these funds, other than foreign exchange reserves, due to the 
sheer  variety  and  complexities  of  features  and  arrangements  in  different  countries,  it  is 
essential  to  appreciate  the  broad  characteristics  of  these  funds,  in  view  of  their  growing 
importance in global financial flows. For the purpose of today’s talk, “funds” would refer to 
Stabilisation  Funds  and  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds  (SWFs)  that  are  to  be  considered 
separately  from  the  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Management  of  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves is subject to international best practices and disclosure standards and traditionally 
vests with the central banks or monetary authorities of the country. The distinction between 
Stabilisation Funds and SWFs is not very clear in practice but, for analytical purposes, such 
a distinction is useful. 
The  accepted  definition  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  includes  external  assets  that  are 
readily available to and controlled by monetary authorities for direct financing of payments 
imbalances, for indirectly regulating the magnitude of such imbalances through intervention 
in foreign exchange markets to affect the currency exchange rate, and/or for other purposes. 
To  meet  this  definition,  reserve  assets  need  to  be  liquid  or  marketable  foreign  currency 
assets that are under the effective control of, or “useable” by, the reserve manager and held 
in the form of convertible foreign currency claims on non-residents. The management of the 
foreign  exchange  reserves  is  typically  the  preserve  of  the  central  bank  or  the  monetary 
authority of the country. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 1
Stabilization  Funds,  or  commodity  funds,  are  augmented  mainly  by  “windfalls”  from 
commodity exports, more commonly petroleum. These funds may invest in a wider range of 
assets  than  those  in  which  the  central  bank  would  invest  the  foreign  exchange  reserves. 
However,  considerations  of 
liquidity  and  moderate  risk  are  also  relevant  because 
Stabilization Funds may be drawn upon when such “windfalls” disappear and contingencies 
warrant. A Stabilization Fund is designed primarily to achieve medium-term macroeconomic 
stabilization objectives, arising out of domestic economic and financial effects of volatility in 
export earnings. However, if there are sustained “windfalls” on export front and consequently 
there is no draw down of funds, a Stabilization Fund may be converted into an endowment 
fund as done by Norway by rechristening the Petroleum Fund as Government Pension Fund.  
SWFs  generally  refer  to  special  purpose  investment  vehicles  created  to  manage  national 
savings to generate higher returns. The non-commodity SWFs are usually carved out of the 
official  reserves  of  a  country.  Countries  having  large  balance  of  payments  surpluses  have 
been  able  to  transfer  excess  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  such  investment  vehicles. 
Typically,  countries  that  have  set  up  SWFs  have  surplus  on  the  current  account  due  to 
“windfall” or sustained current account surpluses, and usually a fiscal surplus as well.  
Consistent  with  their  objectives,  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  generally 
deployed in low-risk liquid assets. Typically these reserves are invested in debt instruments 
representing  sovereign/sovereign-guaranteed  liability,  in  deposits  with  other  central  banks, 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  supranationals  and  with  highly  rated  foreign 
commercial banks. In some circumstances official foreign exchange reserves are also used 
as a tool of domestic liquidity management by way of forex swaps. 
Stabilization Funds are normally expected to constitute a macro hedge against a sharp fall in 
the export receipts from commodities that are mainly exported. They are set up primarily to 
insulate the budget and the broader economy from excess volatility, inflation, Dutch disease, 
etc.,  by  smoothening  revenues  flowing  to  the  budget  i.e.  saving  during  a  revenue  windfall 
and dis-saving during a price slump.  
SWFs seek returns over and above that required to preserve the real value on a sustainable 
basis. SWFs attempt to invest in a wide spectrum of high yielding assets, for example, longer 
term government bonds, agencies and agency-backed securities, corporate bonds, equities, 
commodities,  real  estate,  private  equity,  hedge  funds,  etc.  The  investment  horizon  is 
extended so as to enable sharing of wealth across generations or to achieve other long-term 
objectives. To illustrate, the Economist of September 29-October 5, 2007 refers to the SWFs 
as “The new Rothschilds” and sub-titles the write up as “State-run funds are pumping money 
into the financial sector”.  
Whatever might be the medium-term or long-term objectives of Stabilization Funds or SWFs, 
they could be utilized as official reserves as they are either under the control of the monetary 
authority or can be made available to the monetary authority in case of need. Hence, these 
funds  are  sometimes  described  as  “quasi  reserves”.  It  is,  therefore,  useful  to  view  all  the 
three as components of national foreign asset funds.  
In  most  countries,  the  allocation  of  roles  and  responsibilities  of  agencies  overseeing  the 
foreign  exchange  reserve  management  function  are  explicitly  stated  in  the  laws  and 
guidelines governing the reserve management entity. While it is usually the central bank or 
the  monetary  authority  which  is  entrusted  with  the  task  of  management  of  the  foreign 
exchange reserves, in some countries, where foreign exchange reserves are owned by the 
government, management responsibilities between the central bank/monetary authority and 
government  are  clearly  spelt  out  and  disclosed.  As  custodians  of  the  official  reserves,  the 
central banks are accountable to their governments or central legislatures even if the degree 
of autonomy of the central banks varies from country to country. In addition, central banks, 
by virtue of their relationships with international organizations, like the International Monetary 
Fund  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  benefit  by  sharing  best  practices  in 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2007
reserves  management,  in  particular,  and  central  banking  in  general,  all  of  which  greatly 
contribute to fostering transparency and stability in the international financial system. 
In contrast to the foreign exchange reserves, Stabilisation Funds and SWFs may or may not 
be  subjected  to  such  rigorous  accountability  and  transparency  tests,  internally,  by  the 
governments  concerned.  The  main  reason  for  lack  of  clarity  is  that  global  benchmarks  for 
disclosure are yet to evolve, to which they may be expected to conform. 
Even as the size of the official sector reserves and the stabilization/sovereign wealth funds 
has  grown  considerably  in  recent  years,  fundamental  issues  like  what  really  constitutes 
“international reserves” are yet to be settled. It is universally accepted that, to be included as 
part of the international reserves, the foreign assets of the Stabilization Funds / SWFs should 
be easily available to the monetary authorities in the form of liquid foreign currency claims on 
non-residents. In simple words, if the assets are part of the balance sheet of the central bank 
and  fulfill  certain  other  criteria,  then  they  are  to  be  treated  as  international  reserves.  If, 
however, the same assets are held by a long-term fund, which is a separate corporate entity, 
then  they  may  not  be  reckoned  as  part  of  the  international  reserves  from  liquidity  point  of 
view. However, since these assets are either under the control of central banks or can be 
made available to central banks, it cannot be said they are not available when needed as 
reserves.  
Basically,  all  foreign  asset  funds  are  owned  by  the  public  sector  and,  depending  on  the 
country  context,  these  are  allocated  among  the  Stabilization  Fund  and  SWF.  It  is  not 
uncommon  for  a  part  of  a  wealth  fund  to  be  created  out  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  or 
Stabilisation  Funds.  Much  depends  on  a  view  being  taken  about  the  “windfall”  gains 
component  due  to  commodity  prices  justifying  a  Stabilisation  Fund  and  the  transferring  of 
commodity wealth into a more permanent flow of income for future generations. SWFs may 
also  be  carved  out  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  to  have  a  special  focus  on  enhancing 
returns  by  accrediting  more  flexibility.  The  choices  between  and  allocations  among  these 
vehicles of foreign assets in public sector are thus essentially a matter of domestic policy. In 
this  context,  analytically  it  will  be  useful  to  address  the  links  with  fiscal  policy,  in  terms  of 
rules governing inflows and outflows form fiscal to these funds. Similarly, there could be links 
with monetary policy when the funds are carved out of foreign exchange reserves held by the 
central bank. The investment policies of the funds are perhaps most critical from the point of 
view of public policy. In all cases, it is reasonable to presume that, being part of public sector 
assets, the funds would be subject to the appropriate standards of governance, transparency 
and  accountability.  However,  there  may  be  legitimate  concerns  in  case  such  a  fund  is 
observed to be operating in a non-transparent manner or with predominantly non-commercial 
considerations.  
It  is  argued  that  some  of  the  asset  funds  are  similar  to  hedge  funds  and  they  themselves 
invest in hedge funds, thus inviting regulatory concerns similar to those pertaining to hedge 
funds. The major issue is whether there should be a presumption in favour of or against a 
foreign public sector vis-à-vis a foreign private fund. The critical issue relates to standards of 
governance and transparency that are adopted by such funds and the extent of comfort that 
investee countries have in this regard.  
The  role  of  central  banks  in  the  establishment  and  operations  of  these  funds  cannot  be 
ignored.  In  some  cases,  central  banks  advise  the  government  in  the  design  and 
establishment  of  Stabilisation  Funds  or  SWFs.  In  some  other  cases,  they  also  operate  as 
fund managers, but subject to formal principal-agent agreements. In a few cases, the central 
bank  creates  a  separate  unit  within  itself  to  manage  a  fund.  In  view  of  the  expertise  and 
credibility, involvement of a central bank in such funds to a significant extent appears logical. 
In India, under the RBI Act, 1934, the Reserve Bank of India has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of managing the country’s foreign exchange reserves. The Reserve Bank also 
consults the Central Government on important matters relating to the management of foreign 
exchange  reserves.  It  follows  the  internationally  accepted  measures  of  compilation  and 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 3
dissemination  of  data  relating  to  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  Reserve  Bank  has 
voluntarily opted for IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) that enjoins upon it 
adherence to internationally accepted best practices in this regard. In 2004, after a review of 
the main policy and operational matters relating to management of the reserves, including 
transparency  and  disclosure,  the  Reserve  Bank  decided  to  compile  and  make  public  half-
yearly  reports  on  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  bringing  about  enhanced 
level of disclosures. These reports are being prepared with reference to the positions as of 
31st March and 30th September each year, with a time lag of about 3 months. Again with a 
3-month  lag,  the  Reserve  Bank  places  on  its  website  sources  of  accretion  to  foreign 
exchange reserves. In addition, the Reserve Bank has been disclosing its risk management 
policy with regard to foreign exchange reserves in its “Annual Reports” for the past several 
years. To summarize, the country’s foreign exchange reserves are managed according to the 
law;  the  Reserve  Bank  adheres  to  the  internationally  best  practices  of  measuring  the 
reserves  and  data  dissemination  standards;  and  the  Reserve  Bank  follows  appropriate 
prudential norms in the management of the foreign exchange reserves. 
However, of late, there have been suggestions that India should consider setting up a wealth 
fund on the lines of either a Stabilization Fund or a SWF. As mentioned, the objectives of 
establishing  Stabilization  Funds  are  to  mainly  smoothen  the  revenue  flows  arising  out  of 
volatility in commodity export proceeds. India's export basket is diversified and does not have 
a dominant “exportable” natural resource, which might bring “windfall” gains. Further, India 
has  experienced  consistent  current  account  deficits,  barring  a  modest  surplus  for  a  few 
years.  Hence,  creating  a  Stabilisation  Fund  may  not  be  justified  on  the  basis  of  current 
situation.  SWFs  are  generally  created  amidst  current  account  surpluses  when  the  foreign 
exchange reserves attain a level higher than what is perceived as “adequate”. If we follow 
this  global  experience,  consideration  of  an  SWF  for  India  may  ideally  await  “more 
comfortable current account” and “significantly improved fiscal” situations.  
It is sometimes argued that in the context of significant growth in foreign exchange reserves 
in recent years, the portion of the reserves that is in excess of a certain recommended level 
may  be  carved  out  and  invested  separately  for  maximizing  returns.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
necessary to view the concept of “excess reserves” from several angles, including from the 
perspective of possible real sector shocks to the current account and the nature of capital 
flows.  India  is  vulnerable  to  shocks  on  account  of  oil  price  and  fluctuations  in  food  grains 
production, which is still largely dependent on monsoon conditions. Additionally, a large part 
of  the  capital  flows  are  portfolio  flows  and  a  significant  component  of  Foreign  Direct 
Investment  is  in  the  nature  of  private  equity  or  for  acquisition  of  existing  firms  and  not  in 
greenfield  projects.  In  a  sense,  therefore,  capital  account  shocks,  which  would  be 
independent  of  the  economic  fundamentals  of  the  country  or  domestic  macroeconomic 
environment, cannot be fully ruled out. 
Concluding remarks 
To sum up, it is necessary to recognize that Stabilisation Funds and SWFs are playing an 
increasingly  important  role  in  global  capital  flows.  The  operations  of  these  funds  have 
generated  considerable  interest  among  the  policy  makers  and  central  banks.  India  has  a 
stake in the on-going debate by virtue of its increasing importance in the global capital flows. 
More  generally,  in  India,  we  have  been  seeking  comfort  in  respect  of  the  nature  of 
investment  associated  with  capital inflows  through  hedge  funds  channels  and  participatory 
notes.  Similar  issues  could  also  be  relevant  in  respect  of  private  equity  flows.  While  it  is 
essential to recognize the public sector nature of the Stabilisation Funds and SWFs that may 
be  investing  in  India,  it  is  also  useful  to  study  the  evolving  global  practices  of  investee 
countries’ approaches to these funds.  
At  this  moment,  as  mentioned  in  the  foregoing,  circumstances  in  India  do  not  seem  to 
warrant  a  serious  consideration  of  establishing  either  a  Stabilisation  Fund  or  a  SWF. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2007
However,  if  and  when  such  a  consideration  is  given,  it  would  be  essential  to  put  in  place 
sound governance, transparency and accountability standards that would provide necessary 
comfort  to  the  domestic  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  and,  additionally,  to  the  investee 
countries.  
I would like to thank the organizers for giving me the opportunity to share some of my views 
on a subject of emerging importance and in regard to which we have just begun the learning 
process.  
I wish the FEDAI’s Golden Jubilee Celebrations a grand success. 
On the occasion of FEDAI's Golden Jubilee, I have the pleasure of presenting to FEDAI, on 
behalf  of  RBI,  a  set  of  Commemorative  Coins  brought  out  on  the  occasion  of  the  50th 
Anniversary of India's Independence. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 5
