Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy and the Riksbank’s communication 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Swedbank, Stockholm, 8 October 2007. 
 Introduction 
In  recent  decades  there  has  been  a  clear  trend  for  central  banks  to  strive  for  greater 
openness in their monetary policy. Central banks are now publishing an increasing amount of 
background material in the form of analyses and forecasts for inflation and other economic 
developments. The number of countries introducing explicit inflation targets is also growing. 
Something  that  is  being  discussed  to  an  increasing  extent,  but  which  not  so  many  central 
banks have dared to carry out yet, is the publication of the central bank’s own forecast for its 
policy  rate1.  At  the  beginning  of  this  year  the  Riksbank  decided  to  take  this  step.  The 
purpose  was  to  become  even  more  open  and  clear  regarding  the  way  we  conduct  our 
monetary policy.  
I will begin today by discussing this new system and how it affects our communication. I will 
also  give  some  reflections  on  the  experiences  of  the  two  occasions  on  which  we  have 
published  our  own  interest  rate  path  in  connection  with  the  Monetary  Policy  Reports 
published in February and June this year. I will then conclude with a few words on the most 
recent monetary policy meeting in September. 
The Riksbank’s communication with an own interest rate path  
Advantages of an own interest rate path 
What are the advantages of publishing our own forecast for the repo rate? One advantage is 
that monetary policy can be more easily evaluated. This is particularly important given the 
Riksbank’s  independent  position  and  the  requirements  made  of  us  from  a  democratic 
perspective. A second advantage is that it becomes easier to explain monetary policy and it 
then has the prerequisites to become more efficient. This is because monetary policy largely 
acts  through  the  expectations  of  future  interest  rates  which  it  gives  rise  to,  rather  than 
through  the  current  repo  rate.  Good  explanations  give  an  increased  understanding  and 
thereby a better opportunity for us to steer expectations. Let me explain this further. 
Easier to evaluate and compare  
Firstly to the question of evaluating our forecasts and comparing them with those made by 
others. Are our forecasts for inflation and the real economy accurate? How do our forecasts 
differ from those of other analysts? While our forecasts were based on the assumption of an 
unchanged repo rate (up to the end of June 2005) it was in principle impossible to answer 
such  questions.  The  purpose  of  the  forecasts  then  was  to  analyse  how  economic 
developments and inflation would look if we did not change the repo rate. It was a simple 
way of explaining whether or not the repo rate needed to be changed. But at the same time it 
meant that the forecasts could not be expected to be particularly accurate. 
The assumption of an unchanged repo rate was in most cases unrealistic and also made it 
difficult to produce consistent forecasts. This was one of the reasons why we changed over 
                                                 
1   At present the central banks in Iceland, Norway, New Zealand and Sweden publish their own paths for the 
policy rate. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 1
in  autumn  2005  to  basing  our  assessments  on  the  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  would 
develop in line with market expectations. But although this was a more realistic assumption, 
it was still the case that the forecasts did not necessarily reflect the Riksbank’s assessment 
of  the  most  probable  economic  development.  This  is  because  market  expectations  do  not 
necessarily agree with the interest rate path the Riksbank considers to be most appropriate. 
Now that our analyses are based on our own path for the repo rate, they describe the course 
of events we are actually expecting to see. This has several advantages. For one thing, it is 
possible  to  say  something  about  how  accurate  our  forecasts  have  been  and  how  well  the 
Riksbank has done its job. And for another thing it will also be easier to internally evaluate 
and improve the models and methods of working used as a basis for our forecasts. Finally, it 
makes it more worthwhile to compare our picture of the economy with the picture painted by 
other forecasters. 
Reasoning and considerations made clearer 
The second advantage of an own interest rate forecast is that it becomes easier to show why 
we believe in a particular policy and how we reason when we make our decisions. We will 
have  a  better  internal  base  for  making  decisions.  In  addition,  if  we  manage  to  succeed  in 
communicating how we see the driving forces behind economic developments and also the 
objective and effects of monetary policy, it will also be easier for others to assess how new 
information will affect the future development of the repo rate. 
If it becomes clearer to the general public and financial market agents how we view future 
interest  rate  developments,  this  will  give  us  better  tools  for  influencing  expectations  of  the 
future repo rate. By affecting expectations of short-term interest rates, we as the central bank 
can also indirectly affect interest rates with a slightly longer duration, which in turn increases 
the  effect  of  monetary  policy.  As  I  said,  monetary  policy  largely  works  by  influencing 
expectations of future repo rates. 
When  we  based  our  forecasts  on  market  expectations  of  the  repo  rate  we  could  only 
indirectly  express  our  view  of  the  interest  rate path  by  commenting  on  market  pricing.  For 
several reasons this was not very clear. One reason is that there is no clear-cut method for 
measuring expectations of the repo rate on the basis of market pricing. Different securities 
differ  from  one  another  with  regard  to  duration,  credit  risk  and  liquidity,  which  makes  the 
calculations  complicated.  Different  calculations  give  different  results  without  any  of  them 
being clearly better than the others. 
Another reason for the lack of clarity was that market expectations could change quickly. It 
was  therefore  sometimes  perceived  as  unclear  which  expectations  we  meant  when  we 
commented  on  whether  market  expectations  were  reasonable.  This  gave  rise  to  some 
criticism for unclear communication in 2005 and 2006. Using our own forecast for the repo 
rate removes the risk of being misunderstood for this reason. 
Experiences so far of our own interest rate path 
My impression is that the comments on the new system of publishing our own path for the 
repo  rate  have  largely  been  positive,  although  there  has  also  been  some  criticism.  With 
regard to our concrete forecasts for the repo rate, the discussion has become livelier and we 
have  heard  more  criticism.  On  the  two  occasions  so  far  when  we  have  presented  a  new 
assessment the monetary policy decision to raise the interest rate to 0.25 percentage points 
has indeed been anticipated and hardly been questioned. But our forecasts regarding future 
developments have surprised some market agents. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2007
The Riksbank’s forecast was a surprise in February 
The path for the repo rate that we presented in February was lower than the expectations 
that could be detected in the market pricing at that time. It was also lower than the average of 
the  interest  rate  forecasts  made  by  other  forecasters.  However,  there  were  considerable 
differences between the different market analysts. Some had views relatively close to ours, 
while others differed substantially. 
But our view of inflation prospects and what they entail for the repo rate had not changed to 
any  great  extent  in  February  compared  with  the  previous  monetary  policy  meeting  in 
December 2006. We also expressed this attitude in speeches given in the weeks prior to the 
February  meeting.  When  we  presented  our  own  interest  rate  forecast  for  the  first  time  in 
February some analysts showed considerable surprise. 
Using  our  own  interest  rate  forecast  enables  us  to  explain  more  fully  how  we  viewed 
developments in the Swedish economy during the forecast period, and what demands this 
made of monetary policy. Our assessment was that cost pressures in the Swedish economy 
would not be overly high. Productivity has been high in recent years and is one important 
reason why inflationary pressures have been low. We were assuming that productivity would 
increase slightly more slowly when employment began to pick up and that wage increases 
would  be  slightly  higher  as  it  became  more  difficult  for  firms  to  recruit  employees  with  the 
right competence. 
But  inflation  was  still  low  and  although  the  forecast  was  based  on  cost  and  inflationary 
pressures rising during the forecast period, our assessment was that this would occur at a 
moderate  pace.  We  therefore  concluded  that  it  would  be  sufficient  to  have  a  fairly  limited 
raise in the repo rate in the future. But to emphasise that forecasts are uncertain, we also 
published  uncertainty  bands  for  the  repo  rate  and  for  GDP  growth  and  inflation.  Or  as  we 
usually  say,  the  interest  rate  path  is  a  forecast,  not  a  promise.  The  uncertainty  was  also 
illustrated with some alternative scenarios, where we among other things examined how the 
forecast for the repo rate would be affected by a more rapid increase in wages. For the first 
time, we wrote in detail about these problems of monetary policy considerations in our report 
and to mark this the Inflation Report changed its name to the Monetary Policy Report. 
During the spring new information was received, which to some extent made us revise our 
assessments. The labour market situation looked to be tighter than expected, partly because 
the  supply  of  labour  was  not  increasing  as  much  as  we  had  expected.  The  new  wage 
agreements signed in the labour market were slightly higher than both we and many other 
analysts  had  anticipated.  At  our  monetary  policy  meeting  in  May,  we  Executive  Board 
members were unanimous that the repo rate needed to be raised in total more than we had 
previously  thought.  But  we  did  not  yet  have  a  complete  picture  of  the  central  wage 
negotiations  and  I  personally  did  not  consider  the  change  to  be  so  large  that  there  was 
reason to move more quickly and raise the interest rate already in May. An own repo rate 
forecasts allows us to discuss in a natural way the timing of future interest rate changes. But 
in May we did not publish any new interest rate forecast and our communication was limited 
to a qualitative assessment. 
New surprise in June – but in the opposite direction 
Prior to the meeting in June, we received the National Accounts figures for the first quarter. 
These  showed  that  productivity  had  developed  much  more  weakly  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year  than  we  had  anticipated.  The  labour  supply  was  also  still  lagging  behind  the 
assessment  we  had  made,  which  indicated  that  the  labour  market  had  tightened.  This  of 
course changed our assessment of how quickly cost pressures could rise and we revised up 
our forecast for the repo rate by an average of around one half a percentage point in relation 
to the February one. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 3
The differences between our forecast and market expectations were small over the coming 
year,  but  our  interest  rate  forecast  was  still  lower  than  market  expectations  in  the  longer 
term.  Despite  this,  implied  forward  rates  rose  over  the  entire  forecast  period  by 
approximately  0.15  percentage  points  when  we  published  our  forecast.  Market  reactions 
were thus actually stronger than in February. 
But why were market reactions so strong in June? 
Of course, we have no interest in creating major fluctuations in the financial markets through 
our decisions and our communication. It is therefore important to us to understand why the 
market reacted the way it did. This is a natural part of the work on making communication as 
clear as possible.  
One reason for the rise in interest rates in June was that international interest rates rose on 
the day we published our interest rate decision. Swedish interest rates do not only react to 
the Riksbank's actions; they are also very dependent on interest rate developments abroad. 
This applies in particular to longer durations. Our estimate is that around one third of the rise 
in the Swedish two-year interest rate on 20 June is explained by the fact that interest rates in 
Europe  rose.  But  the  shorter  the  duration,  the  more  importance  the  expectations  of  the 
Swedish repo rate will normally have and the less importance the international interest rate 
developments will have. 
It is difficult to draw any reliable conclusions with regard to why the reactions were so strong 
in connection with the June meeting. One possible explanation is that some market analysts 
may have expected the Riksbank to make a more cautious upward revision to our interest 
rate path than we actually did. This is despite the fact that they themselves were assuming 
that the interest rate would be raised by roughly the same in the short term and actually by 
more in the longer term. 
One  indication  that  this  is  a  correct  interpretation  is  that  some  analysts  criticised  us  for 
having revised the interest rate path more than could normally be expected in such a short 
time.  There  were  also  arguments  in  some  of  the  market  analyses  published  prior  to  our 
meeting in June that we would be forced to revise up our interest rate path in several stages 
during the autumn. 
Another  possible  explanation  is  that  it  was  due  to  misunderstanding.  The  reactions  and 
comments  regarding  a  couple  of  our  speeches  in  the  early  summer  indicated  that  some 
analysts perceived them in a way that was not intended. The speeches were interpreted as 
though they pointed forwards although we had provided information on changes in our way 
of  signalling  and  said  that  we  did  not  intend  to  make  any  forward-looking  comments  that 
would provide clues regarding the next interest rate decision. 
Some concluding reflections on communication 
The fact that our message had not entirely come across is partly due to some market agents 
not understanding what we actually had communicated. But it is also partly because we have 
not  been  sufficiently  clear  in  our  communication.  I  believe  this  is  quite  simply  a  learning 
process. We at the Riksbank and those we want to communicate with – the general public, 
journalists and market analysts – must learn to understand one another. 
In this respect we will try to improve. One step in this direction is the decision to name the 
Executive Board members in the minutes of the meetings. In this way it is possible to follow 
how  each  member  has  reasoned.  A  further  step  that  we  recently  decided  on  is  to  also 
publish  forecasts  for  the  repo  rate  and  a  small  number  of  key  variables  at  the  monetary 
policy meetings held between the publication of the Monetary Policy Reports. If, for example, 
we had published a new interest rate path in May, I believe that the market would have been 
less surprised in June.  
4 
 BIS Review 112/2007
However,  I  think  it  is  unavoidable  that  a  central  bank  sometimes  surprises  analysts  when 
publishing its own forecast for the policy rate. The future is uncertain and different analysts 
may  at  times  have  vastly  differing  perceptions  of  economic  developments.  Publishing  a 
forecast for the repo rate means that the central bank more clearly reports its view of future 
developments  than  with  earlier  more  mechanical  assumptions  of  the  interest  rate.  At  the 
same time it means that the central bank to a greater extent risks being exposed to criticism. 
Even if this is the case, it is my firm opinion that it is better to go the whole way and publish a 
forecast for the repo rate. The advantages of an own interest rate path clearly outweigh the 
disadvantages. 
We will not normally give any signals regarding the way we will vote on the next interest rate 
decision  other  than  in  connection  with  the  monetary  policy  meetings.  This  means  it  will 
become more important to try to understand the way we reason and how we estimate the 
driving forces behind inflation and growth. What we will contribute is forecasts for the most 
important variables, combined with individual clarifications by the respective members. If one 
understands  our  way  of  thinking,  one  has  in  total  all  the  information  needed  to  be  able  to 
form a good impression of coming interest rate decisions. 
The interest rate decision in September 
Let me move on to the stance I took at the most recent monetary policy meeting around a 
month ago. I, like the rest of the Executive Board, then voted to raise the repo rate by 0.25 
percentage points. At the same time, my assessment was that the forecast for the repo rate 
that  we  made  in  June  still  appeared  reasonable.  Today  I  shall  return  to  why  I  made  this 
assessment. 
Increased uncertainty abroad… 
On the whole, my view in September was that international growth was good and had not 
changed  significantly  since  June.  But  this  does  not  prevent  the  view  of  growth  in  some 
individual  countries  having  changed  in  important  respects.  In  September  our  assessment 
was  that  growth  would  be  lower  than  we  had  expected  in  June,  in  the  United  States  in 
particular,  but  also  in  Europe.  At  the  same  time,  developments  were  slightly  stronger  in  a 
couple of our neighbouring countries and in several emerging markets. 
However, the international risk outlook had changed gradually in connection with the rising 
unrest in the financial markets. The change in the risk outlook largely originated in the United 
States. There the problems in the housing market had worsened and according to several 
statistics house prices in the United States fell on average, measured as an annual change. 
The  question  we  asked  ourselves  at  the  September  meeting  was  to  what  extent  the 
problems would spread and slow down activity in the rest of the US economy. 
The unrest in the international financial markets in the wake of the US subprime crisis has 
also led to an increase in the price of risk, which means for instance that it has become more 
expensive  to  borrow.  In  this  way  the  effects  can  be  compared  to  the  effects  of  tighter 
monetary policy. But apart from the changed pricing, the uncertainty has also led to greater 
caution in general. This also has a certain dampening effect on economic activity. 
In Sweden, the effects of the unrest in the financial markets have been more limited than in, 
for  instance,  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States  and  Germany.  Over  the  past  weeks 
there  appears  to  have  been  some  stabilisation.  But  the  US  mortgage  market  may  present 
further  surprises.  If,  for  instance,  house  prices  were  to  fall  more  than  expected,  this  could 
once  again  increase  the  unrest  in  the  markets  and  lead  to  rising  interest  rates  and  falling 
stock prices, not only in the United States. In a slightly longer perspective, this can also slow 
down growth in the US economy and even have contagion effects in Europe and the rest of 
the world. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 5
…but strong developments here at home 
If one looks at developments in the Swedish economy, our assessment in September was 
that it was actually stronger than in June. Here the labour market and productivity deserve 
special  attention.  These  are  two  of  the  most  important  factors,  which  determine  how  cost 
pressures and thereby inflation will develop. 
It was clear in September that the labour market had tightened further. The increase in the 
number of persons employed had been around as large as we were expecting in the June 
Report. However, the number of people in the labour force had not increased at the same 
rate  we  expected  then.  This  meant  that  unemployment  was  also  lower  than  we  had 
predicted. 
Given these signs of a tighter labour market, it was fairly reasonable to believe that wages 
would increase more rapidly in future than they had done in previous years. But we could 
note  that  this  was  not  yet  visible  in  the  statistics.  The  picture  painted  by  the  National 
Mediation  Office’s  statistics  shows  very  moderate  increases.  But  as  I  pointed  out  at  our 
September meeting, it is probable that this picture will change when the new central wage 
agreements signed in the spring begin to make their mark in their respective sectors. And 
just as for developments in the labour market as a whole, this is something we follow closely. 
As I have just noted, it is now clear that an increasing number of people are working. It is 
normally  the  case  that  when  many  new  people  obtain  work  towards  the  end  of  an  upturn 
phase  of  the  economic  cycle,  the  work  is  a  little  less  efficient,  that  is,  productivity  growth 
declines. And this is just what we have seen during the first half of this year. The fact that this 
would  happen  is  something  we  have  foreseen  for  a  long  time,  although  not  that  it  would 
happen as soon and as quickly as it actually has. 
This has also led to the forecast for productivity for the whole of 2007 being lowered as early 
as  June.  But  I  did  not  see  any  reason  to  change  the  forecast  for  productivity  for  coming 
years; my assessment was still that productivity would recover. This was because I viewed 
the  slowdown  in  productivity  as  temporary.  But  productivity  is  a  factor  that  is  difficult  to 
assess  –  there  is  a  risk  that  the  slowdown  will  be  prolonged  and  lead  to  stronger  cost 
pressures. This was one of the risk factors we noted in the June Monetary Policy Report. 
The  assessment  in  September  was  that  food  prices  would  contribute  to  higher  inflationary 
pressures than we had previously anticipated. If we look at how inflation has developed in 
recent months, the forecasts from June have been relatively accurate. In August inflation was 
actually completely in line with the forecast, although it had been slightly higher earlier in the 
summer than we had forecast in June. 
The  assessment  we  made  in  September  was  that  economic  activity  in  Sweden  actually 
looked slightly stronger than we had anticipated in June and that cost pressures had risen. 
We therefore decided to raise the repo rate to 3.75 per cent. This could in itself also motivate 
a slightly higher interest rate path. But uncertainty had increased as a result of the financial 
unrest  and  we  expected  this  to  lead  to  some  negative  consequences  for  growth  both 
internationally and in Sweden. This was why I concluded that it was still reasonable to count 
on roughly the same interest rate path as in June. 
But such considerations and deliberations are the final stage in a long process. For me and 
my colleagues on the Executive Board, the next opportunity for this will be at the monetary 
policy meeting at the end of this month. 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2007
