Su Ning: Bankcard services for farmers in Anhui Province, China 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Launching 
Ceremony and Press Conference of Bankcard Services for Farmers, Hefei, Anhui Province, 
12 October 2007. 
 task 
important 
to  accelerate 
Respected Vice Governor Mr. Huang Haisong, distinguished guests, friends from the media, 
ladies and gentlemen: 
Good morning! In this beautiful autumn season, I'm very pleased to attend the "Launching 
Ceremony and Press Conference of Bankcard Services for farmers in Anhui Province". The 
successful launch of the bankcard services for farmers is of great importance in the run-up of 
the 17th CPC Congress. On behalf of the People's Bank of China (PBC), I'd like to express 
our  warmest  congratulations  on  the  launch  of  the  farmers'  bankcard  services,  and  our 
sincere gratitude to Anhui Provincial CPC Committee, Anhui provincial government and other 
friends for your support to our work! Our thanks also go to all those comrades who devoted 
themselves to this endeavor. 
To strengthen the work in "agriculture, rural areas and farmers" and to steadily push ahead 
with  the  construction  of  a  new  socialist  countryside  is  a  necessary  requirement  for  the 
comprehensive implementation of the scientific approach to development and construction of 
a  harmonious  socialist  society,  and  an 
the  socialist 
modernization drive. The PBC attaches great importance to the rural financial system, and 
puts  it  high  on  our  agenda.  The  successful  launch  of  bankcard  services  for  farmers  is  an 
important  measure  for  the  PBC  in  its  efforts  to  implement  the  scientific  approach  to 
development and to serve the construction of a new socialist countryside; an effective means 
to speed up rural financial infrastructure construction and improve the  financial services in 
rural areas; and also a good way to support and guide rural financial institutions, rural credit 
cooperatives  (RCC)  in  particular,  to  accelerate  business  innovation,  uplift  rural  financial 
services and achieve a win-win situation.  
The launch of the bankcard services for farmers has two pre-conditions: first, large migrant 
workers  exporting  provinces  (autonomous  regions  or  municipalities);  second,  sound  RCC 
integrated  systems.  Based  on  these  two  conditions,  the  PBC  launched  the  service  in  13 
provinces  or  municipalities,  enabling  a  large  number  of  migrant  workers  to  access 
convenient, expedient and secure bankcard services, hence becoming quite popular among 
migrant workers and generating good socio-economic benefits. Now we are delighted to see 
that Anhui province has completed the preparatory work! This marks a new step forward for 
Anhui's rural financial development. 
When  promoting  the  bankcard  services  for  farmers,  PBC  sub-branches  made  careful 
preparations; banking regulatory bureaus at provincial and municipal level actively rendered 
support to various card issuing institutions; China Union Pay and RCCs overcame difficulties 
and  exhibited  impressive  team  spirit.  I  hope  that  all  concerning  parties  can  build  on  the 
success  and  rapid  switch  the  focus  of  work  onto  improving  the  operations,  increasing 
business volumes and serving migrant workers well. 
First,  recognize  the  importance  of  farmers'  bankcards  and  improve  our  work  in  earnest 
manner.  All  parties  concerned  shall  fully  recognize  the  importance  of  bankcard  service  for 
farmers, see the "big picture", fulfill their responsibilities and do their job well. 
Second, take effective measures to improve the service quality. Card-issuing banks should 
activate  all  ordinary  debit  cards  for  this  service,  and  determine  a  reasonable  service  fee; 
improve business training and other aspects related to transaction vouchers; and do a good 
job in consulting and claims settlement. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 1
Third,  standardize  services  and  strengthen  risk  management.  All  parties  concerned  shall 
conform to regulations on account management, cash management, bankcard management 
and anti-money laundering. RCCs should take rigorous measures to ensure the safety and 
confidentiality of data transfer during bankcard transactions. 
Fourth,  actively  promote  the  service.  All  parties  concerned  should  undertake  multi-layer, 
multi-dimensional promotional campaigns in accordance with The Guidelines Concerning the 
Promotion of Bankcard Services for Farmers in 2007.  
I  believe,  under  the  care  and  support  of  Anhui  provincial  government,  PBC  branches  and 
sub-branches, various card-issuing institutions, banking regulatory bureaus at various levels, 
China Union Pay and RCCs, the special bankcard services for farmers in Anhui province will 
become a complete success! 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2007
