Seong-Tae Lee: Increasing capital flows among countries and monetary 
policy effectiveness 
Opening address by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Governor and Chairman of The Bank of Korea, at 
the 15th Central Banking Seminar, Seoul, 18 September 2007. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me extend a warm welcome to all of you, central bankers gathered from around the world 
to attend the Bank of Korea's "Central Banking Seminar". I would especially like to express 
my deep gratitude to our keynote speaker Dr. Mark Spiegel, vice president and director in the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
This seminar, now in its 15th year, is held to allow the sharing of diverse experiences and 
ideas  relevant  to  major  monetary  policy  issues.  At  the  same  time,  we  hope  it  serves  to 
broaden relationships among central bankers. 
The theme of this year's seminar, "Increasing Capital Flows among Countries and Monetary 
Policy",  is  likely  to  be  of  great  interest  to  us  all.  It  is  very  closely  related  to  the  recent 
international financial market environment, in which price variables are showing heightened 
volatility triggered by the turmoil in the US sub-prime mortgage market. 
The impact of the increase in cross-border capital flows 
Cross-border  capital  flows  have  increased  very  rapidly  this  decade,  bolstered  by  the 
development  of  information  and  communication  technology,  the  progress  of  financial 
innovation,  and  the  integration  of  the  global  economy.  The  scale  of  cross-border  capital 
transactions, including those in bonds and shares and direct investment, increased almost 
threefold  between  2002  and  2005,  from  about  2  trillion  US  dollars  to  some  6  trillion  US 
dollars. 
This  expansion  of  international  capital  transactions  has  brought  us  a  number  of  beneficial 
effects. 
First of all, it has acted to heighten the vitality of the global economy by allowing investors to 
disperse investment risk and borrowers to reduce their costs of capital. 
It  has  also  helped  bring  about  an  upgrading  of  the  financial  markets  of  emerging  market 
countries as well as developed countries, in conformity with global standards. 
The meltdown of the US sub-prime mortgage market is of course having a great impact on 
international financial markets. However, in contrast to the case during the Asian currency 
crisis of the late 1990s, there are now no nations experiencing severe difficulties. This is one 
example of how the financial systems of almost all countries have been further strengthened. 
On the other hand, we must not be blind to the negative aspects of these expanding capital 
flows. 
The economies of countries around the world have become closely interlinked through a web 
of  capital  transactions.  In  consequence,  economic  instability  in  any  one  country  now 
exercises much greater influence than in the past on the international financial markets and 
global  economy.  It  follows  that  in  a  small  open  economy  such  as  Korea,  domestic  share 
prices,  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  often  show  unstable  fluctuations  even  when 
domestic economic fundamentals remain strong. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
In addition, owing to the increased influence of overseas factors, the central bank's ability to 
control  major  policy  variables  such  as  interest  rates  has  been  weakened.  Accordingly,  its 
conduct of monetary policy has been made more difficult. 
In  the  case  of  Korea,  we  have  raised  our  policy  rate  seven  times  since  October  2005. 
Nevertheless, the scale of increase in our long-term interest rates has been limited, and our 
monetary stock has continued to expand at a higher-than-expected rate. These phenomena 
are associated with the greatly increased inflows of overseas capital in search of arbitrage 
profits. 
Policy tasks in response to the increase in cross-border capital flows 
With free flows of capital, the roles of the policy authorities in advanced countries and the 
world's leading financial institutions are extremely important in securing international financial 
market and global economic stability. 
In view of the immense influence of major advanced countries such as the US and Japan, 
their governments should have a sense of responsibility toward the global economy in their 
financial and economic policies. 
Major  investment  banks  and  other  international  financial  institutions  must  also  take  much 
broader views in their business activities. In the absence of global economic stability, it will 
be very difficult for them to expand their own business bases. 
Individual  central  banks,  for  their  part,  must  make  every  effort  to  ensure  monetary  policy 
effectiveness and financial market stability. To do so, they must build up their capacities for 
accurate analysis and forecasting of changes in international financial market conditions and 
of the effects on their domestic economies. 
Central  banks  in  every  country  should  also  endeavor  to  enhance  the  credibility  of  their 
monetary policies. Even though the influence of external factors over price variables is great, 
the channels of monetary policy can still operate effectively when the general public has firm 
confidence in monetary policy. 
Finally, of course, there is another very important task. Central banks should strengthen their 
international financial cooperation and construct a framework that allows them to cope jointly 
with the possibility of unstable international capital movements. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I anticipate that this seminar will provide a valuable forum for discussion of policy in response 
to the increases in cross-border capital flows. I look forward to lively debate here this week, 
drawing upon all of our various central banks' experiences in operation of policy. 
Bringing my remarks to a close, let me express my hope that this seminar will contribute to 
closer cooperation among our central banks, by fostering friendships among us. Though your 
days this week may be full, please spare a few moments to gain a taste of Korean culture 
and enjoy the beauty of the autumn season here. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
