Ardian Fullani: The convergence of economic systems and institutions 
of South East Europe towards the EU – a view from Albania 
Lecture by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at Bocconi University, Milan, 
10 October 2007. 
 Good Afternoon Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Dear Students, I am pleased to appear before you tonight. This is a fantastic occasion and I 
am delighted to share with you some of my thoughts and findings over my country and the 
Balkan region.  
Few words on Albania 
1.  
I would like to start my presentation by saying few words on my country, on its roots, on its 
past and its present.  
Albania is a small country placed in the Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea and 
Ionian Sea, between Greece, Macedonia, Kosovo and Montenegro.  
It  is  generally  recognized  today  that  the  Albanians  are  one  of  the  most  ancient  people  in 
southeastern  Europe.  All  indications  point  to  the  fact  that  they  are  descendants  of  the 
Illyrians. Authors of antiquity relate that the Illyrians were a sociable and hospitable people, 
renowned for their daring and bravery at war. Illyrian women were fairly equal in status to the 
men, even to the point of becoming heads of tribal federations. The land of Illyria was rich in 
minerals  –  iron,  copper,  gold,  silver  –  and  Illyrians  became  skillful  in  the  mining  and 
processing of metals. They were highly skilled boat builders and sailors as well; indeed, their 
light,  swift  galleys  known  as  liburnae  were  of  such  superior  design  that  the  Romans 
incorporated them into their own fleet as a type of warship called the Liburnian. 
The  famous  Roman  orator  Cicero,  astonished  by  the  beauty  of  Apollonia  named  it  in  his 
Philippics,  magna  urbs  et  gravis  –  a  great  and  important  city.  In  the  first  century  B.C., 
Octavian Augustus studied philosophy there until he heard news of Caesar’s murder in the 
Senate and went on to become the next Roman emperor. 
More  than  thousand  years  after,  Skanderbeg’s  stronghold  in  the  mountain  town  of  Kruja, 
became  highly  significant  to  the  Albanian  people,  as  it  strengthened  their  solidarity,  made 
them  more  conscious  of  their  national  identity,  and  served  later  as  a  great  source  of 
inspiration  in  their  struggle  for  national  unity,  freedom,  and  independence.  Skanderbeg’s 
military successes evoked a good deal of interest and admiration of the Papal state, Venice 
and Naples, themselves threatened by the growing Ottoman power across the Adriatic.  
Whoever discovered Albania (decided to visit Albania was marveled by its beauty and the 
spirit  of  its  inhabitants.  World  figures  were  usually  so  moved  that  the  name  of  Albania 
became eternal in their masterpieces of art.  
Albania has a reputation as a land of great natural beauty and romantic remoteness. These 
two characteristics have made it all the more attractive, mysterious, forbidding, challenging, 
or exasperating to outsiders, be they travelers, scholars, diplomats, or merchants. Many of 
them  have  referred  to  it  as  the  "Switzerland  of  the  Balkans"  or  as  the  "rock  garden  of 
southeastern Europe." On the other hand, the country's uncommon isolation from the world, 
arising generally from its rugged, mountainous terrain, has led foreigners to speak of it as 
"the Tibet of Europe" or as a country more mysterious than central Africa.  
The great eighteenth-century British historian, Edward Gibbon, speaking of Albania, said that 
it is "a country within sight of Italy, which is less known than the interior of America."  
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
The  remoteness  and  isolation  of  the  country  became  practically  legendary  and  all  too 
frequently gave rise to reports and descriptions of the land and of the people – even in books 
and  encyclopedias  –  that  were  closer  to  legends  than  to  reality.  Perhaps  because  of  its 
romantic  remoteness  and  other  reasons,  Albania  has  exerted  a  continuous  fascination  on 
artists,  including  poets,  playwrights,  composers,  and  more  recently  film  makers  and 
producers of television programs.  
Shakespeare set his comedy Twelfth Night in Illyria – the name by which Albania was known 
in ancient times. Lord Byron, who visited southern Albania in 1810, wrote some stirring lines 
about her landscape in his poem “Childe Harold”.  
Morn dawns: and with it stern Albania's hills... 
   Robed half in mist, bedewed with snowy rills.  
In  Mozart's  comic  opera  “Cosi  fan  tutte”  the  principal  male  characters,  Ferrando  and 
Guglielmo, appear for the most part as two "Albanian noblemen" in clever scheme to test the 
love of their fiancés.  
I was trying to bring a bit flavor of my country across centuries. Being a crossroad, the main 
gate from east to west, today Albania represents an important actor whose solely role is to 
provide peace and stability in the region.  
Albania through transition 
2.  
For many decades Albania was cut off from other European countries, including the Central 
and Eastern European ones because of its extreme economic centralization and adherence 
with  the  principle  of  self-support.  Transition  brought  about  a  structural  change  in  the 
principles of economic philosophy. The market forces took over the distribution of economic 
resources  and  the  reduction  of  existing  economic  imbalances.  This  process  resulted  in 
increased  unemployment,  reduced  output  and  consumption,  while  prices  of  consumption 
goods increased over 100 percent. Foreign reserves disappeared almost instantly under the 
pressure  of  reduced  output  and  drastic  devaluation  of  domestic  currency.  Meanwhile  a 
relatively  large  and  growing  stock  of  foreign  did  not  stop  the  declining  trends.  Public 
confidence dived and many Albanians emigrated mostly in neighboring countries. Financial 
situation deteriorated at a fast pace as well. Monetary policy as we know it was inexistent for 
Albania did not have a modern central bank.  
Early  structural  reforms  focused  on  cutting  the  subsidies  for  insolvent  state  owned 
enterprises; massive price liberalization; privatization process; land reform; and provided the 
necessary incentives for the rapid macroeconomic consolidation of 1993-1995. During ‘90s 
Albania’s  path  has  been  quite  disordered  scoring  one  of  the  most  unique  transitory 
experiences.  It  was  an  experiment  a  trail  and  error  by  everybody.  It  was  a  quest  to 
understand  and  the  role  and  position  in  this  new  market  economy;  to  rediscover  the 
incentives of the private initiative and the risk that embodied in economic decision making. 
Along  this  process  Albanian  society  established  the  foundations  of  the  macroeconomic 
consolidations  that  started  with  the  new  millennium  and  accession  to  EU  has  scored 
significant progress. For a long period of time the economy has grown around 6 % percent 
annually,  contributing  to  an  upward  trend  of  GDP  per  capita  reaching  around  2.500  euro. 
Inflation  has  been  quite  stable  within  our  target  band  2-4  %  supported  by  responsible 
Monetary and Fiscal policies. 
Further structural reforms improved the functioning of the market economy. Privatization of 
big and medium enterprises, the privatization of former public banks, the modernization of 
legal  framework  and  many  other  important  reforms  contributed  to  such  impressive 
performance of Albanian economy.  
In the last years I believe the country has made a substantial progress in its way towards 
European Union. After wasting our chances during ‘90s I believe we are in the right track and 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
personally I’m confident that the distance to our final destination, Brussels is getting shorter 
day after day. The coming years are of a vital importance in adhering to EU as far as Albania 
is preparing itself to move with its own feet. The current agreement with IMF will finish at the 
end of 2008. I hope that Acquis Communautaire will become external driving forces guiding 
our country toward the European Family. 
Bank of Albania 
3.  
Albania  had  its  first  central  bank  institution  in  1913.  It  was  founded  as  an  outcome  of  the 
agreement  of  the  Ismail  Qemali  government  with  some  representatives  of  an  Austrian-
Hungarian  bank  group  and  of  the  Banca  Commerciale  Italiana.  The  Institution  did  not  live 
long due to the outbreak of the First World War and it was not before the year 1925 that the 
bank’s  activity  started  under  the  name  of  the  National  Bank  of  Albania.  During  the  years 
1944-1992,  it  was  named  State  Bank  of  Albania,  which  at  that  time  exercised  both  the 
functions of a central bank and those of a commercial one and only after 1992 the two-tier 
system  is  established  and  Bank  of  Albania  starts  performing  the  functions  of  a  modern 
central  bank.  Based  on  a  parliamentary  law  it  has  the  attribute  of  the  monetary  and 
supervisory authority of the country.  
The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  It 
seems that this way Bank of Albania has solved the dilemma of choosing the key objective of 
monetary policy in favor of price stability will contribute to sustainable growth and to generate 
equilibrium in the labor market over long term period. 
From  the  historic  prospective,  since  the  early  stages  of  transition  we  adopted  a  monetary 
targeting regime. The choice was made believing in the Friedman’s postulate that Inflation is 
wherever  and  always  a  monetary  phenomenon.  Direct  control  on  money  growth,  credit 
growth and interest rates were the operational tools of monetary policy aiming at the control 
of money supply, which served as the intermediate objective.  
A free floating regime of exchange rate was chosen to match the monetary targets. Other 
forms  of  exchange  rate  regimes  were  never  discussed  due  to  lack  of  adequate  foreign 
exchange  reserves  and  therefore  the  incapability  to  support  a  fixed  rate  of  domestic 
currency.  In  addition  the  floating  regime  was  chosen  as  an  automatic  stabilizer  of  the  fast 
growing current deficits. Therefore the choice between different alternatives of stabilization 
program was conditioned (and easy). 
In  general  this  regime  has  resulted  successful  and  still  continues  to  be  the  operating 
framework of the monetary policy. I believe that its success was conditioned by low financial 
intermediation  and  under  developed  financial  markets  .  The  presumed  stable  relationship 
between money and transactions and permitted for confident monetary programming based 
on  the  Fisher’s  equation  of  exchange.  However,  as  the  efficiency  and  speed  of  financial 
intermediation  increased  and  financial  innovation  set  in  motion,  this  policy  setup  become 
obsolete.  Bank  of  Albania  moved  away  from  direct  control  on  money  in  favor  of  indirect 
control of money supply in the economy.  
In the context of reviewing our approach to monetary policy during the recent years we have 
dedicated  the  bulk  of  our  research  and  analytical  resources  to  better  understand  the 
relationship  and  causality  between  inflation  and  economic  factors  that  influence  it  in  the 
context  of  Albanian  economy.  For  most  of  this  period,  we  have  integrated  in  our  policy 
important  monetary  policy  elements  that  define  essential  characteristics  of  the  inflation 
targeting  regime.  Various  internationally  recognized  experts  of  monetary  policy  have 
compared  the  current  setup  of  monetary  policy  to  a  fully  fledged  inflation  targeting 
framework.  
During these recent years Bank of Albania has publicly announced a numeric objective of 3 
percent with a tolerance zone of plus minus 1 percent for inflation in the 12 coming months. 
In  addition,  weekly  repurchase  argument  rate,  the  key  policy  rate,  has  become  the  most 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
important instrument of monetary policy and signaling tool. Yet, we are still in the process of 
empirical investigation and quantification of the monetary transition channels, with particular 
focus on the efficiency of the inter-bank markets.  
Modestly but surely I have to admit that the efficiency of our monetary policy has increased. 
In general we are satisfied with the reaction of the interest rate behavior, which model the 
developments of the bank of Albania key rate with the appropriate lag structure. Moreover 
increased  and  more  efficient  communication  with  the  public  are  reflected  in  contained 
inflation expectations which are anchored to Bank of Albania announced numeric objective. 
We  are  happy  to  observe  that  results  of  consumer  and  business  confidence  as  well  as 
financial market expectations surveys indicate these trends. 
It is widely accepted that such results are outcome of our continuous attention toward ever 
lasting  improvement  of  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  on  which  Bank  of  Albania 
operates. Particularly, this stand for: independence, transparency and accountability. 
It  is  well  recognized  by  foreign  and  domestic  institutions  that  legal  and  real  independence 
status of Bank of Albania enjoys satisfactory standards. On the other hand we believe that 
independence represents a dynamic rather than a static process, therefore we have adopted 
contemporaneous  practices  of  communication  explaining  our  decisions  to  Albanian  public. 
This  process  is  embodied  in  the  continuous  improvement  of  the  monetary  policy  report, 
standard  communication  of  the  supervisory  board  monetary  policy  decisions,  improved 
analyses and research efforts, and last but not the least, intensive public activity of the Bank 
of Albania Governor, with various groups of interest across the country. Taken together these 
have  improved  public  understanding  and  expectation  building  for  current  and  future 
developments in inflation and economic activity. 
Our approach to communication has further improved our accountability and has resulted in 
increased credibility and authority within Albanian public. 
During  the  past  2-3  years  we  have  increased  our  ownership  in  the  short  and  medium  run 
economic  and  financial  development  programs.  Since  the  beginning  of  transition  the 
economic  program  has  been  designed  and  implemented  under  the  setup  of  IMF  support 
programs. The current program will end in 2008. Starting from 2009, the Bank of Albania and 
other  Albanian  authorities  will  have  full  ownership  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
financial and monetary policies. In the meantime our relationship with IMF will continue under 
Article IV, moreover the IMF assistance will be considered a welcomed secondary factor.  
In  such  contest  bank  of  Albania  has  been  working  together  with  important  Albanian 
institutions,  first  and  foremost  with  fiscal  authorities,  different  European  Central  Banks, 
international financial advisories and academia to identify the new regime of monetary policy. 
The new regime must be efficient in the light of recent changes in financial markets and most 
importantly must provide good anchors for monetary policy and its sovereignty.  
Please allow me to briefly describe the major characteristics of what we think will become the 
new regime. 
Monetary policy regime 
A. 
As I already mentioned we have been working on the new regime for more than two years. 
During this period we have been tossing ideas and scrupulously studying the details of a fully 
fledged  inflation  targeting  regime.  As  you  might  well  understand,  we  are  getting  ready  to 
launch the new regime at the beginning of 2009. Our analyses show that, considering the 
current  features  and  expected  developments  of  the  financial  markets,  inflation  targeting 
provides  the  best  policy  choice  for  the  future.  A  relatively  long  history  of  low  and  stable 
inflation, efficient monetary policy, sound banking system, free floating exchange rate, fiscal 
consolidation  and  last  but  not  the  least  a  suitable  and  reliable  institutional  framework,  are 
important  factors  that  have  convinced  us  on  the  potential  success  of  inflation  targeting 
regime. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
Institutional framework 
B.  
The harmonization of monetary and fiscal policy will continue to be a challenge. I believe that 
long run success and real independence of monetary policy is gained in the well functioning 
of this simultaneous relationship. Albanian Constitution and the current Bank of Albania Law 
grants  the  responsibility  of  monetary  policy  design  and  implementation  exclusively  and 
without  equivoque  to  the  Bank  of  Albania.  We  believe  that  such  legal  framework  and 
Albanian  society  aspirations  and  commitment  toward  Maastricht  criteria’s  of  convergence 
provide essential assurance for future compliance of monetary and fiscal policy.  
Financial market efficiency 
C. 
Albania  is  a  small  open  economy  and  relatively  highly  euroized.  In  general  the  financial 
markets  are  characterized  by  low  trade  volumes  and  interest  rate  volatility.  This  situation 
represents a high concentration in assets and liabilities in the banking system as well as a 
very  limited  supply  of  financial  instruments  in  domestic  currency.  In  this  respect,  we  have 
been very aggressive to prepare and introduce a new set of rules for operational framework. 
The  new  regulation  aims  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  inter-bank  borrowing  market,  it 
targets thinking on the margin behavior of the banks by reducing the frequency of treasury 
bills  auctions,  rearranging  required  reserves  regulation  and  introducing  a  prime  rate.  Our 
objective is to have this package operative by the beginning of 2008.  
Financial stability 
D.  
This  process  has  progressed  with  the  increase  of  the  banking  activity.  However  I  have  to 
admit  that  increase  and  consolidation  of  the  banking  activity  is  accompanied  by  a  rapid 
growth  of  credit  to  economy.  This  rapid  credit  growth  has  become  the  challenge  of  the 
moment. However I believe that efficiency and soundness of financial system is a dynamic 
process  and  a  continuous  challenge.  Frequently  this  challenge  might  generate  from 
international financial markets too. Globalization of financial markets has increased the risk 
of contagion. The recent developments in the sub-prime mortgage loans, must serve as a 
excellent  reminder  of  the  never  ending  surprises,  which  make  the  trade  off  between 
monetary policy and financial stability a difficult balance. 
I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  by  financial  stability  I  do  not  assume  only  the  absence  of  a 
financial crisis, but a well functioning financial system that performs well its functions. I think 
too  tight  regulations  that  definitely  minimize  all  the  risks  are  not  conducive  to  sustained 
growth.  Therefore  the  real  challenge  for  which  we  are  working  hard  is  to  find  an  optimal 
balance between deregulation which promotes market forces and financial innovations and 
negative consequences of possible market failures and financial crisis. 
Balkan region: trends and major characteristics 
4.  
Dear students, 
The rest of my discussion will provide few remarks on the developments of the South East 
European region. I will briefly comment on the common problems and characteristics of the 
region and voice my opinion upon possible direction of progress and convergence in policies.  
Recently  the  Governors  of  the  Region  have  been  increasingly  concerned  regarding  the 
issues related with banking system activity, market efficiency, financial stability, risk exposure 
and of course the role of central bank.  
All this discussion is structured by the context of regional aspirations for EU integration.  
Not only because I’m a Governor but also due to my own philosophy I have come to believe 
that  there  could  not  be  real  political  cultural  and  social  integration  without  a  reasonable 
financial integration. I share the same opinion with other European sensibilities on the values 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 5
and  importance  of  consolidation  of  democratic  society  and  embrace  of  new  social  and 
cultural mentalities. Regardless I sincerely think that the process of transformation that has 
changed our societies since the fall of the Berlin wall is irreversible. The real question is how 
long  this  process  will  take  to  be  complete.  I  believe  that  laying  down  solid  foundations  for 
efficient  allocation  of  financial  support  and  financial  intermediation  will  significantly  shorten 
this process. This will also provide the necessary infrastructure framework for the integration 
objectives and will supplement this process with the support of private initiative.  
On the other hand, a developed and financially integrated region will be more attractive for 
foreign  strategic  investors,  opening  up  the  path  toward  regional  development  projects, 
particularly infrastructure, labour market, real estate ones where region’s banks might be the 
financing and co-financing ones.  
If  I  would  have  been  asked  to  say  with  simple  word  how  I  understand  the  convergence 
process  my  answer  would  be  very  simple:  The  convergence  means  a  set  of  performance 
criterion and structural reforms benchmarks. This means that each country should adopt the 
standards  stemming  from  the  Acquis  Communautaire  and  different  international  codes 
(Basle’s  II)  combined  with  energetic  steps  in  improving  economy,  society,  culture  and 
environment as well. I think this is a MUST for promoting financial market efficiency in the 
entire Region.” 
Allow me to summarize financial system in the region along the following characteristics: 
- 
The system is dominated by commercial banks. Financial intermediation role of 
the other financial institutions is weak. The insurance industry in most countries of 
the  region  is  quite  small  and  underdeveloped.  Traditionally  poor  governance, 
inadequate  risk  management  practices  and  lack  of  consumer  confidence  have 
limited  total  assets  held  by  these  institutions,  in  the  same  time  limiting  to  some 
extent  the  possibility  to  present  a  source  of  systemic  risk  to  the  financial  sector. 
However this sector’s rapid expansion in some countries including Albania calls for 
the development of an adequate legal framework for conducting insurance business 
and the strengthening of the supervisory framework. Other financial intermediation 
such as leasing activities have grown sharply in the last years (Serbia, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina)  representing  an  important  source  of  funding  source  for  fixed 
investment and for small and medium-size enterprises. Micro credit institutions have 
a  significant  presence  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  being  mostly  established  with 
donor funds but over the last years having shifted their funding source toward bank 
loans. Consolidation into larger credit unions would be a viable method to be able to 
offer  larger  loans  and  provide  more  banking-like  services.  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP) calls for further strengthening of the underlining of the 
supervisory framework, even though unified supervision under a single supervisory 
agency  was  considered  premature.  Capital  and  money  markets  are  small  or 
nonexistent. At this stage of development it is necessary that the policy of regulatory 
institutions should focus on enhancing infrastructure and governance. 
Banking system in the region is close 100 percent privately owned, with clear 
dominance of foreign capital. The banking system in the region amounts from 40 
percent of total assets to GDP in Macedonia to 119 percent of total assets to GDP in 
Croatia  and  is  dominated  by  private  foreign  owned/joint  ventures  banks.  The 
privatization of large state owned banks has been completed in all countries, except 
Serbia and representing approximately only 38 percent of total capital in the banking 
system  respectively.  The  system  is  dominated  by  a  restricted  number  of  big 
European  banks  that  have  set  presence  across  all  countries  in  the  region.  Lately 
there is evidence of increasing interest of other banking groups as well.  
Increased  financial  intermediation  of  the  recent  years  has  lead  to  a  rapid  credit 
expansion.  This  trend  reflects  increasingly  deep  financial  integration  with  EU 
Member  States  and  supports  rising  trade,  investment  flows,  and  institutional 
  6 
 BIS Review 119/2007
strengthening. The expansion of the financial sector and inflows of foreign savings 
can strongly support real convergence. However, increasing credit to GDP ratio in 
all  countries,  ranging  from  23  percent  in  Macedonia  to  76  percent  in  Croatia  also 
raises  the  concerns  for  a  possible  credit  boom.  There  are  some  important  trends 
worth  being  noted:  Credit  composition  is  dominated  by  consumer  credit  and  less 
oriented to enterprises; Credit/deposit ratio has steadily increased indicating banks 
willingness  to  extend  their  lending  activity  at  a  faster  pace  than  the  growth  of 
savings. However, the average of credit/deposit ratio of the region is still below the 
level  of  the new  EU  member;  Lending  is  mostly  in  foreign  currency  as a  result  of 
high  euroization  of  the  economies  and  lower  interest  rates  in  foreign  currency; 
Another  structural  change  in  credit  portfolio  relates  to  the  upward  trend  towards 
longer-term  lending,  which  at  least  in  three  countries  of  the  region  (Albania, 
Macedonia and Bosnia & Herzegovina) consisted of 50 percent or more than total 
lending;  The  spread  between  interest  rates  of  deposits  and  credits  remains  high. 
There  are  several  explanations 
lack  of  efficiency  and 
competitiveness among banks, high premium risks of the economies in the transition 
period,  collateral  problems,  legal  system  obstacles  etc.  However,  it’s  worth 
mentioning that the spread between deposit interests and credits has declined in the 
recent years, as a result of increased competition in the banking system. 
this  such  as 
to 
Despite these characteristics must be admitted that the share of the banking system in the 
economy is relatively small by European standards. The total of banking assets measured as 
percentage  of  GDP  shows  that  our  region  lags  behind  when  compared  to  developed 
economies.  Meanwhile  prudential  measures  indicate  problems  with  the  credit  portfolio 
quality,  and  the  speed  of  growth  could  be  beyond  what  is  generally  accepted  sound.  The 
risks that usually accompany fast credit growth could soon exerting pressures on monetary 
policy and financial stability.  
In my opinion the low financial and real economic integration among countries in the region 
constitutes as well as international financial markets constitutes another major problem in the 
region.  The  problem  could  become  more  severe  if  you  were  to  keep  in  mind  the  very 
integrated ownership structure of banking system in the region. 
Cross-border  lending  and  borrowing,  or  other  forms  of  international  financial  flows  are  still 
relatively insignificant. With the stabilization of the economy and the rescheduling of debts, 
the countries together with their financial sectors have started to be gradually integrated in 
the international markets. Sovereign ratings given for these countries have accompanied and 
accelerated in some cases these developments. While the financial sectors, and particularly 
commercial  banks,  have  strengthened  their  international  ties  and  have  been  gradually 
integrated  in  the  international  financial  markets,  the  competitiveness  from  cross-border 
banking activities remains still restricted. Cross-border lending activity increased slowly in the 
countries of the region. However, even in this field there is room to move more quickly. The 
foreign capital penetration in the countries I refer to is still low and mainly reflects the inability 
of our financial systems to facilitate the absorbing of foreign investments in our economies.  
Finally,  considering  the  above  mentioned  trends  of  financial  intermediation  the  following 
region  specific  sources  of  risk  need  caution  scrutiny,  namely  credit  risk,  indirect  foreign 
exchange risk, and vulnerabilities associated with foreign branches entry.  
Credit risk 
- 
The  acceleration  of  credit  growth  rates  in  some  countries  of  the  region  is  warning  when 
associated with an increase in the NPL ratio. Unfortunately there are chances that the build-
up in credit risk may be underestimated The deterioration in quality of disbursed credit is not 
immediately apparent as the increase in the share of new loans can temporarily depress the 
reported  nonperforming  loans  (NPLs)  and  credit  quality  problems  typically  emerge  with  a 
delay. In the aftermath of deterioration in loan portfolio an increased risk of a credit crunch 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 7
emerges; when banks recognize the extent of the build up they may sharply cut or reverse 
lending growth. 
Specifically  the  domination  of  foreign  banks  in  the  region  may  possess  additional  risks 
associated with a possible credit crunch. As long as subsidiaries of foreign banks earn high 
profits, they have easy access to new capital from their headquarters given that they account 
for a small share of the loan book of their international banking group. If the build up in credit 
risk is underestimated, foreign banks will tend to set overambitious ROE targets. When the 
extent of underestimation is recognized, banks have to increase their provisioning rate in line 
with  their  upward  reassessment  of  credit  risk,  reducing  ROE  projections.  This  could  lead 
management  of  large  foreign  bank  groups  to  conclude  that  their  ambitious  ROE  targets 
cannot be met and curtail lending growth in response. 
The entrance of big international foreign groups puts upward pressure on the entire banking 
system  attempt  to  compete  for  borrowers.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that  credit  growth  is 
associated  with  lower  lending  standards,  enhanced  by  the  lack  of  financial  information 
available on potential borrowers that continues to be a problem in the region. As the FSAP 
for  Albania  indicates,  in  the  area  of  corporate  lending,  firms  balance  sheets  and  income 
statements  may  be  altered  to  avoid  taxes,  while  information  about  remittance  income  for 
individuals is imprecise and unverifiable. 
The  rising  real  estate  prices  in  the  region  have  also  encouraged  lending,  using  the  real 
estate as collateral to a great extent. As real estate prices continue to rise, this could lead to 
an  over-extension  of  credit,  and  if  the  real  estate  market  becomes  more  speculative  and 
more  leveraged  through  bank  loans,  a  decline  in  demand  can  cause  a  fall  in  real  estate 
prices, causing both collateral to fall in value, and the ability of borrowers to pay to decline. 
Thus, there is a greater need for authorities to monitor development in real estate prices and 
warn against possible asset bubbles, while the collateral needs to be less homogenous. 
Risks associated with the foreign exchange 
-  
As  a  result  of  large  financial  assets  euroization  in  all  countries  of  the  region,  the  foreign 
exchange rate fluctuations are an important source of vulnerability. Stress tests in almost all 
countries  suggests  that  there  is  limited  exposure  of  banks  balance  sheets  to  the  direct 
exchange rate risk as banks are able to hedge foreign currency loans wit FC deposits and 
sources from their parent banks. However, the dominance of loans either denominated in or 
linked  to  the  euro  to  borrowers  with  income  in  national  currency  means  that  sudden 
exchange rate depreciation could threaten their capacity to repay. 
Vulnerabilities associated with foreign branches entry and domination 
-  
Turning  to  the  issue  of  opening  of  the  banking  sector  to  foreign  investors,  specific  issues 
need  considerable  attention  by  supervising  authorities.  The  recently  conducted  Financial 
Sector  Assessment  Program  in  Serbia  listed  several  benefits.  Attracting  funds  from 
households that may be reluctant to deposit with domestic banks, providing new sources of 
funding  for  domestic  credit,  introducing  new  financial  products  and  credit  instruments, 
reducing the influence of vested interests, and enhancing competition by buying state banks 
and increasing the number of players. 
However,  in  presence  of  externally  generated  and  domestically  generated  shocks  the 
banking  system  in  the  countries  of  the  region  can  be  vulnerable  to  lower  profitability,  less 
willingness on the part of the banking group to provide capital, and, ultimately, generate a 
credit  crunch.  Among  the  external  shocks  were  listed  rises  in  euro  zone  interest  rates, 
adverse shocks to one or more of the countries of origin of the foreign banks, and contagion 
from an adverse shock elsewhere in the CEE region altering investor perceptions regarding 
the domestic economy. On the other hand domestic shocks such as declining margins from 
foreign  banks  fighting  to  gain  market  share,  and  lowering  of  credit  portfolio  induced  by  a 
8 
 BIS Review 119/2007
weakening economy or an unexpected domestic political event could  have large  effects in 
the presence of less adequate risk management in the context of foreign owned banks rapid 
expansion and increasing euroization of financial assets. 
Policies to mitigate financial vulnerabilities: constraints and challenges 
5.  
In some cases supervisory authorities (Serbia, Croatia) have recurred to less market oriented 
macro  prudential  measures  to  contain  credit  growth.  While  credit  controls  create  the 
incentive to route lending through less regulated non-bank intermediaries, the imposition of 
such  credit  controls  in  Bulgaria  and  Croatia  was  accompanied  by  a  jump  in  cross-border 
loans. 
Watson (2007) argues that prudential policy needs to allow for the fact that foreign-owned 
financial institutions, with a majority of assets in most cases, have deep pockets in terms of 
capital  and  liquidity.  Thus,  prudential  tightening  may  not  be  able  to  be  transmitted  to  a 
significant part of the banking sector but it may affect only smaller locally-owned banks.  
It  follows  from  our  discussion  that  the  supervisory  authorities  may  gain  by  the  increasing 
transparency in financial markets which will allow consumers and other bank borrowers to be 
more  aware  of  the  risks  inherent  in  foreign  currency  borrowing.  Efforts  to  enhance  this 
transparency  could  be  encouraging  or  requiring  banks  to  discuss  exchange  rate  risks 
explicitly with borrowers before contracts are signed. On the other hand there is a need to 
discuss with banks means of assessing the risks arising from foreign currency denominated 
loans  and  adjust  existing  loan  classification  schemes  or  provisioning  if  warranted  (FSAP 
recommendation for Albania). 
Monetary policy is constrained by the degree to which policy instruments are able to transmit 
into  the  economy.  A  tightening  of  policy  interest  rates’  effect  may  be  constrained  even  in 
floating  rate  or  adjustable  peg  regimes.  A  moderate  tightening  of  policy  may  not  be  very 
effective  in  slowing  the  economy  because  of  the  high  degree  of  euroization  and  the 
uncertainty associated with the final effect of exchange rate changes in balance sheets and 
the real economy. 
Many of the above issues require a significant degree of co-ordination between home and 
host authorities that can help fill supervisory gaps, given the very high levels of foreign bank 
ownership.  In  the  process  of  improving  the  regulatory  base,  standards  set  by  international 
institutions and especially the ECB are crucial in orienting regulators. 
Concluding remarks 
6.  
The all region is going under a political, economical and social consolidating process. Now a 
day politicians, decision makers, analysts, almost everyone is stating the EU accession as 
the main priority, the top challenge for the next coming years.  
How far are we? That’s a difficult question. 
Many times I looked behind my shoulders to see how far we have come. It is indeed a long 
way, full of ups and downs. Along this way we have scored positive developments as well as 
few  setbacks.  Yet  it  has  been  a  road  toward  progress.  However  the  modern  attitude  of 
central banking requires a forward looking approach. It is for this reason that in my public 
appearances  have  always  stressed  the  vital  importance  of  the  integration  process  and 
related issues. The success of this process will depend first and foremost by our attempts 
and dedication. There is only one way to get closer to the finish line. That requires waking up 
every  morning  with  a  European  mentality,  and  try  with  all  our  efforts  to  make  this  dream 
come true. We all agree with the idea of not decorating our home with Fendi furniture whilst 
our roof is not yet fully covered.  
BIS Review 119/2007 
 9
I  personally  believe  our  societies  are  becoming  mindful  on  their  efforts  towards  European 
standards. We all understand the need for reforms, the need for stronger growth, the need 
for macro stability, the need for regional cooperation, the need for political stabilization and 
peace among the different nations of the region.  
Therefore as my very last sentence I would envisage the need for greater reforms, greater 
efforts towards democracy and market economy.  
In this respect, I would like to quote myself in Bosnia-Herzegovina, three weeks before “I see 
enormous  possibility  for  cooperation  and  policy  coordination  in  the  direction  of  information 
sharing, institution building, modification of the legal infrastructure and lobbying in European 
structures. Facing these problems in group rather than separately will allow to benefit and 
embrace the positive effects of “economies of scale”. I also invite the ECB and EC to explore 
the possibility of adopting a “party” treatment for the entire SEE region, by adopting a specific 
program for a specific group of countries”. It might even sound overly optimistic I see this as 
a mutual beneficiary relationship. The region, on its account, does provide several important 
advantages: labor markets are positioned right in the middle between  Asian countries and 
new EU members; sufficient investment opportunities in real estate and infrastructure as well 
as high return on capital; it counts more than 20 million people and represents a fantastic 
touristic  attraction  as  a  product  of  an  interesting  combination  of  different  climates  with 
diversified geographical features and multi ethnic and cultural traditions.  
I think that means in real terms economic stability and sound long term regional geopolitical 
solution.  
Thanking you for your attention I’m ready to take several questions. 
10 
 BIS Review 119/2007
