Ben S Bernanke: John Taylor’s contribution to monetary theory and 
policy 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  System,  to  the  Conference  on  John  Taylor’s  Contribution  to  Monetary 
Theory  and  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  Dallas,  Texas  (via  videoconference), 
12 October 2007. 
 It is a privilege for me to open this conference dedicated to our colleague and friend, John 
Taylor.  John's  influence  on  monetary  theory  and  policy  has  been  profound  indeed.  That 
influence has been manifest in undergraduate lecture halls and graduate seminar rooms, in 
the best research journals, and in the highest ranks of government. His ability to crystallize 
important  analytical  insights  and  apply  them  to  policy  issues  is  unsurpassed.  Indeed,  in  a 
speech  a  few  years  ago,  I  noted  three  concepts  named  after  John  that  are  central  to 
understanding our macroeconomic experience of the past three decades--the Taylor curve, 
the Taylor rule, and the Taylor principle (Bernanke, 2004). I'd like to take a few minutes to 
review John's career and impressive body of work.  
After receiving his Ph.D. from Stanford nearly thirty-five years ago, John began his career as 
an assistant professor at Columbia University. Even in those early years, John revealed his 
interest  in  applying  the  analytical  tools  of  economics  to  practical  policy  issues.  He  took  a 
leave of absence from academia in 1976-77 to serve on the staff of the Council of Economic 
Advisers. I suspect that the circumstances of the mid-1970s intensified John's motivation to 
help improve economic performance through sound policymaking. 
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, John published a number of highly influential papers, 
including:  "Conditions  for  Unique  Solutions  in  Stochastic  Macroeconomic  Models  with 
Rational  Expectations,"  "Estimation  and  Control  of  a  Macroeconomic  Model  with  Rational 
Expectations," "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," and "Solution and Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models." (As you can tell, 
John  has  always  had  a  penchant  for  catchy  titles.)  Beyond  its  important  technical 
contributions,  this  work  showed  that  the  insights  and  methods  of  the  rational  expectations 
revolution  could  be  applied  to  models  with  sticky  wages  and  prices.  That  observation  has 
proved enormously influential in subsequent policy research. 
The rational expectations revolution helped to kill the idea of a long-run tradeoff between the 
levels of inflation and unemployment. However, John's analysis showed that, in the presence 
of  aggregate  supply  shocks,  attempts  by  monetary  policymakers  to  reduce  the  volatility  of 
inflation over time could be associated with higher volatility in unemployment, and vice versa. 
John's  visual  depiction  of  this  policy  tradeoff  has  come  to  be  known  as  the  Taylor  curve. 
Interestingly,  John's  work  anticipated  the  possibility  that  improvements  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  or  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  economy  could  result  in  a  shift  of  the 
Taylor  curve--that  is,  a  change  in  the  ability  of  policy  to  smooth  both  inflation  and 
employment.  And 
the  Great  Moderation--a 
simultaneous reduction in the volatility of inflation and the volatility of real economic activity--
has  occurred  in  the  United  States  and  in  many  other  economies  over  the  past  quarter-
century. 
Over the course of the 1980s, John continued his work on rational expectations issues and 
monetary policy and macroeconomics more generally. He also began to broaden his focus to 
matters  of  international  economics.  He  developed  a  multi-country  rational  expectations 
econometric model--a truly ambitious undertaking, especially in light of the limited computing 
capabilities of the era. By this point in his career, John had firmly established his reputation 
as a leader in the profession. 
indeed,  what  economists  have  dubbed 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 1
In 1989, John became a member of the first President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers. 
During the next four years, he played a key role in shaping the Administration's positions on 
macroeconomic,  fiscal,  international  finance,  and  trade  issues.  The  U.S.  economy  was 
entering a difficult period at that point. Among other problems, significant pressures on bank 
balance  sheets  were  beginning  to  emerge  that  would  damp  economic  growth  for  the  next 
several  years.  While  dealing  with  the  serious  economic  issues  of  the  time,  John  and  the 
other  members  of  the  Council  simultaneously  produced  an  impressive  manifesto  for 
policymaking. They developed a rules-based approach to the conduct of monetary and fiscal 
policy and published it in 1990 in the Economic Report of the President. 
That  essay  laid  the  foundation  for  what  is  perhaps  John's  most  well-known  contribution  to 
economics--the  simple  description  of  the  determinants  of  monetary  policy  that  eventually 
became  known  as  the  Taylor  rule.1  John's  analysis  triggered  an  avalanche  of  studies 
examining  the  stabilization  properties  of  Taylor  rules  in  the  context  of  macroeconomic 
models.  Other  work  investigated  the  ability  of  variants  of  the  Taylor  rule  to  describe 
empirically the actual course of monetary policy in the United States and in other economies. 
The  Taylor  rule  also  embeds  a  basic  principle  of  sound  monetary  policy  that  has 
subsequently been referred to as the Taylor principle.2 According to this principle, when a 
shock causes a shift in the inflation rate, the central bank must adjust the nominal interest 
rate  by  more  than  one-for-one.  This  ensures  that  the  real  interest  rate  moves  in  the  right 
direction to restore price stability. The Taylor principle provides essential guidance for central 
banks  on  how  to  anchor  long-run  inflation  expectations  and  foster  stable  growth  and  low 
inflation.  
Ever  since  its  inception,  John  has  emphasized  that  the  Taylor  rule  should  not  be  applied 
mechanistically. The world is far too complicated for that. But he has argued that such rules 
can  serve  as  useful  benchmarks  for  the  practical  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  fact, 
policymakers  at  the  Federal  Reserve  and  many  other  central  banks  do  routinely  consult 
various policy rules as they make judgments on the appropriate stance of monetary policy.  
After a decade back at Stanford, John was called again to Washington by President Bush--
this time the current President Bush. He served as Under Secretary for International Affairs 
at the U.S. Treasury from 2001 through 2005. Our economy faced severe challenges during 
that  period--the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  a  recession  and  the  threat  of  deflation, 
corporate governance scandals, and economic issues posed by the conflicts in Afghanistan 
and  Iraq.  Suffice  it  to  say,  John  earned  his  stripes  as  the  leader  of  the  "Global  Financial 
Warriors." As detailed in his book of the same title, John worked extensively on the financial 
reconstruction  of  Iraq  and  on  the  development  of  financial  tools  for  fighting  terrorism.  The 
Treasury Department recognized his efforts in 2004 with its Distinguished Service Award and 
in 2005 with the Alexander Hamilton Award for leadership in international finance.  
After  his  stint  at  Treasury,  John  returned  once  again  to  the  less  tumultuous  life  of  a 
professor, ensconced in his offices at Stanford University and the Hoover Institution. I'm sure 
that, in between teaching and guiding the work of graduate students, he will continue to offer 
insightful commentary on monetary policy and other economic issues. And doubtless he will 
also continue to do pathbreaking research. Indeed, with our appetites whetted by the Taylor 
                                                 
1  
The number "two" and its inverse, one-half, played a key role in this rule:  The benchmark setting for the 
federal funds rate would be 2 percent, plus the current rate of inflation, plus one-half times the gap between 
current inflation and 2 percent, plus one-half times the output gap. 
This  principle  originally  became  apparent  through  numerical  simulations  of  macroeconomic  models  with 
rational  expectations  (including  Taylor's  multicountry  model);  refer  also  to  Bryant,  Hooper,  and  Mann 
(1993). The phrase "Taylor principle" was introduced by Woodford (1999), who demonstrated this principle 
analytically in a stylized New Keynesian model.  
BIS Review 115/2007
2  
2 
 rule, principle, and curve, we now look forward to the Taylor dictum, the Taylor hyperbola, 
and maybe even the Taylor conundrum.  
Before closing my remarks, I would like to express my appreciation to President Fisher and 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for hosting this conference. It is a terrific opportunity for 
celebrating John's contributions to monetary theory and policy. The papers on the program 
testify to the breadth and depth of John's work. I wish I could be there with you today to listen 
to the presentations and participate in the discussions. However, I know that you will have a 
productive  and  collegial  gathering  over  the  next  two  days.  And  I  wish  all  of  you--but 
especially my friend and colleague John Taylor--all the best in your endeavors. 
References 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). "The Great Moderation." Remarks at the meetings of the Eastern 
Economic Association, February 20, Washington, D.C. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040220/default.htm 
Bryant, R., Hooper, P. and Mann, C., (1993). Evaluating Policy Regimes: New Research in 
Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 
Woodford, M., (2001). "The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy." American Economic 
Review, 91(2), pp. 232-237. 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 3
