José Manuel González-Páramo: The role of information and 
communication in central bank policy – the experience of the recent 
financial turmoil 
Keynote address by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  SUERF  Conference  on  “Tracking  Financial  Behavior: 
Where do Macro and Micro Meet?”, Milan, 3 December 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1  
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  speak  at  this  prestigious  SUERF  conference  today.  As  a 
policy-maker at an institution with responsibilities in both the areas of statistics and market 
operations,  I  am  particularly  pleased  to  see  that  much  high-quality  work  is  being  done  to 
improve  and  deepen  our  understanding  of  financial  activity.  The  recent  turmoil  in  financial 
markets has reminded us of the importance of timely access to accurate and comprehensive 
information on financial events as well as of the need to ensure that financial development 
and innovation are accompanied by advances in financial statistics. 
Let me take the liberty to narrow my intervention from the rather general issues suggested by 
the programme to the more specific subject of the role of information and communication in 
the recent financial turmoil, particularly for the implementation of monetary policy.  
Information asymmetries  
When  talking  about  information  in  the  context  of  the  financial  turmoil,  a  key  dimension  of 
interest  regards  the  role  of  informational  asymmetries  in  the  money  markets  (though  I  will 
often  refer  to  the  euro  money  market,  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  issue  of  information 
asymmetries  and  adverse  selection  equally  applies  to  money  markets  in  other  currency 
areas).  Indeed,  during  the  current  turmoil  widespread  uncertainty  about  the  distribution  of 
exposures  to  sub-prime  losses  across  financial  institutions  has  led  to  the  inability  of 
distinguishing sound from unsound financial institutions, almost bringing inter-bank trading to 
a halt in August.  
The  disruptions  to  inter-bank  trading  were  compounded  by  banks’  uncertainty  about  their 
own  liquidity  needs  reflecting  various  factors:  (1)  difficulties  in  tapping  market  funding 
sources (particularly the US dollar-denominated asset-backed commercial paper market), (2) 
larger  than  anticipated  recourse  by  investment  funds  to  committed  credit  lines,  and  (3)  at 
least for some banks, uncertainty about the possible need to take over struggling off-balance 
sheet conduits and structured investment funds.  
Although the interventions by the ECB have since had a stabilising effect on the euro money 
market rate at the very short maturities and, more generally, this market has recovered some 
of the lost ground, lack of confidence among commercial banks continues to restrict trading 
activity  and  inflate  counterparty  risk  premia  (particularly  in  the  unsecured  term  money 
market).  
The persistence of difficulties in the term money market, despite the existence of sufficient 
aggregate euro liquidity, points to an important limitation for public policies (and expectations 
about such policies) in the current environment, namely that central banks cannot and should 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Ulrich Bindseil, Cornelia Holthausen, Isabel von Koppen-Mertes, Flemming Würtz and 
Alessandro Calza for their valuable input and contributions, and to Giacomo Caviglia and Pedro Teixeira for 
useful comments. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
not  be  expected  to  solve  the  more  fundamental  problems  of  commercial  banks  and  credit 
markets.  
Through their liquidity management policies, the ECB and other central banks can certainly 
ease some of the liquidity difficulties faced by banks, but they cannot certainly restore the 
efficient  functioning  of  the  term  money  market.  The  current  difficulties  in  this  market  will 
subside  only  when  banks  regain  confidence  in  each  other  and  the  uncertainty  about  their 
own liquidity needs diminishes. This is likely to occur only when enhanced transparency and 
more  extensive  disclosures  are  made  available  to  market  participants,  investors  and 
regulators by both banks and non-regulated entities, thereby dispelling the current state of 
perceived opaqueness and uncertainty.  
The market turmoil and available information 
Let  me  now  address  another  key  aspect  of  information  during  the  recent  turmoil.  Policy-
makers  normally  work  under  conditions  of  partial  and  incomplete  information.  However, 
policy-making  becomes  significantly  more  challenging  at  times  of  market  stress,  when 
historical  regularities  cannot  be  entirely  relied  upon,  while  increased  volatility  blurs  the 
information content of market variables and other indicators.  
In periods of stress, analytical tools that under normal conditions provide valuable inputs into 
the information set available for policy decisions may at least to some extent lose their utility. 
And although comparisons with previous episodes of turmoil may add historical perspective 
and provide benchmarks for policy actions, spells of financial tensions often resemble each 
other only to a limited extent. Indeed, when thinking about the dynamics of financial turmoils 
and  crises,  one  is  tempted  to  recall  the  Ana  Karenina’s  opening  that  “All  happy  families 
resemble one another, but each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”  
Indeed, the current turmoil has been “unhappy” in its own way. From its origin in the relatively 
small  sub-prime  segment  of  the  US  market  for  mortgage  loans  to  its  somewhat  unusual 
dynamics  of  transmission  (for  instance,  the  fact  that  the  current  turmoil  initially  manifested 
itself in the difficulty for banks, mainly European, to obtain short-term liquidity in the US dollar 
market),  a  number  of  factors  have  set  this  episode  of  turmoil  apart  from  previous 
experiences. 
Thus, during the current turmoil we have been less able to rely on standard analytical tools 
and conventional information sets, particularly in the area of liquidity management.  
To illustrate this point, let me briefly recall how our liquidity policy normally works. In normal 
times, the ECB calculates each week the expected liquidity needs of the banking sector and 
publishes  an  estimate  of  the  “benchmark”  amount  of  liquidity  needed.  This  benchmark  is 
calculated  under  the  assumption  that  banks  prefer  to  fulfil  their  reserve  requirements 
smoothly by holding, in aggregate terms, the same level of current account holdings with the 
central  bank  on  each  day  of  the  reserve  maintenance  period.  The  ECB  then  provides  an 
amount of liquidity close to the “benchmark” in its weekly liquidity operations (the so-called 
“main refinancing operations”).  
This pattern of liquidity provision has functioned well in the past, when it has succeeded in 
delivering  short-term  money  market  rates  close  to  the  target  rate  corresponding  to  the 
announced monetary policy stance. However, since 9 August when the tensions in financial 
markets first spilled over to the short-term euro money market, an increase in precautionary 
demand  for  liquidity  and  a  change  in  the  temporal  pattern  of  liquidity  demand  within  the 
reserve maintenance periods have altered the behaviour of banks, temporarily rendering the 
assumptions underlying the “benchmark” computations less realistic.  
As a result, while maintaining entirely unchanged the structure of its operational framework 
(a  testimony  to  the  flexibility  and  resilience  of  this  framework),  the  ECB  has  somewhat 
departed  from  the  regular  patterns  of  liquidity  provision  that  it  normally  follows  in  order  to 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
steer the very short-term money market rates. Thus, in order to satisfy the banking sector’s 
demand for liquidity buffers on particular days and for fulfilling reserve requirements earlier in 
the  maintenance  period,  the  ECB  has  (1)  occasionally  provided  liquidity  to  the  market 
through  exceptional  operations,2  and  (2)  it  has  changed  the  time  patterns  of  liquidity 
provision within the reserve maintenance period.  
In addition, from the start of the market turmoil the ECB has intensified its communications 
with market participants so as to indicate its alertness and readiness to act in order to reduce 
the volatility of the very short term interest rates around the target rate and to contribute to 
the smooth functioning of the money market. For instance, last Friday we published a press 
release pointing out that the ECB’s Governing Council has noted that market participants are 
concerned about conditions in the euro money market in connection with the upcoming end 
of  the  year;  and  announcing  the  decision  to  lengthen  the  maturity  of  the  main  refinancing 
operation settling on 19 December 2007 to two weeks so that it matures on 4 January 2008. 
In this refinancing operation, we will aim to satisfy the banking sector’s liquidity needs for the 
entire two week period, covering both the Christmas holidays and the end of the year.  
This  example  provides  a  good  illustration  of  the  importance  that  the  ECB  has  attached  in 
recent  months  to  intervene  in  money  markets  through  a  combination  of  flexible  liquidity 
management operations and regular communications.  
And, of course, the need to communicate more frequently has also reflected the deviation 
from  standard  liquidity  management  practices.  By  extensively  communicating  about  future 
refinancing operations and the general orientation of our liquidity policy, we have aimed to 
facilitate and accelerate the process of learning by banks about how we intend to implement 
monetary policy under the current conditions of market stress. 
Challenges for monetary policy implementation under stress 
As  I  will  explain  below,  the  current  turmoil  has  also  confronted  us  also  with  more  general 
communication  challenges,  but  let  me  first  elaborate  on  some  of  the  challenges  that  our 
liquidity management policy has faced during the recent turmoil. 
In  normal  times,  the  soundness  of  a  central  bank’s  operational  framework  and  the 
experience of both the central bank and market participants ensure that the implementation 
of monetary policy works smoothly. However, as I mentioned earlier, under stress conditions 
some of the principles usually guiding the implementation process may function differently. In 
this  respect,  particularly  important  for  a  central  bank  is  the  case  of  changes  in  the 
determinants of short-term interest rates.  
In normal times, the behaviour of the overnight rate is fairly well understood. In a system with 
reserve requirements, the possibility to average reserve holdings over a maintenance period 
supports  a  stabilization  of  short-term  interest  rates,  because  day-to-day  fluctuations  of 
liquidity conditions can be smoothed out over the remainder of the period. Expected liquidity 
conditions on the last day of the maintenance period, when averaging is no longer possible, 
anchor interest rates of that day, and – via the so called “martingale hypothesis” – also of the 
preceding days.  
The present turmoil shows, however, that at times of stress, the strength of the martingale 
hypothesis  may  weaken.  Interest  rates  may  no  longer  be  necessarily  linked  to  liquidity 
                                                 
2  
In particular, the ECB has helped to overcome market disruptions by temporarily supplying liquidity, first via a 
sequence of four overnight fine-tuning operations; then via increased allotment amounts in the weekly main 
refinancing operations and, subsequently, also via two supplementary longer term refinancing operations, the 
renewal of which has been subsequently announced. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
conditions on the last day of the maintenance period as banks do no longer regard reserve 
holdings across different days of the maintenance period as substitutes.  
Implementing  monetary  policy  in  these  conditions  can  be  challenging  for  a  central  bank, 
especially since it can not use its regular procedures for estimating the demand for liquidity – 
not least in the absence of any relevant empirical references. This is the main reason why 
the ECB conducted the very first of its fine-tuning operations during the turmoil (on 9 August) 
through  a  fixed  rate  tender  with  pre-announced  full  allotment.  At  that  point  in  time,  it  was 
assessed that the market was in a better position than the ECB to judge which amount would 
bring interest rates back to the desired level. To some extent, the resulting amount was taken 
as  guidance  for  successive  allotments  carried  out  in  the  format  of  variable-rate  tenders, 
which were reduced in size, in parallel with a temporary easing of tensions at the shortest 
end of the money market term structure. 
More generally, at times of market stress, a central bank has to operate in an environment 
characterized by an extreme level of unrest, in which interest rates are much more volatile 
than  usual,  and  the  martingale  property  loses  its  power  to  tie  interest  rates  to  the  desired 
level. In such conditions, central banks can act quickly only if they have access to timely and 
accurate  information.  Indeed,  differences  in  the  speed,  frequency  and  magnitude  of 
interventions by central banks during financial turbulences can be due not only to structural 
distinctions in the banking sectors or in the operational frameworks and policy principles of 
the central banks, but might more simply reflect differences in information sets. 
Let me at this point briefly recall some of the main sources of information of interest for the 
Eurosystem in the current turmoil.  
Market intelligence. Over the last few months we have extensively used market information 
and activated our regular communication channels with the banking and financial industry. 
Particularly useful in this context has been the work of the Money Market Contact Group, a 
discussion forum on issues related to euro money market gathering representatives of the 
central banks of the Eurosystem and of the commercial banks from all over Europe. Since 
the  outbreak  of  the  financial  tensions,  this  Group  has  solidly  worked  to  gather  and  share 
information on developments in the euro area money market and has also provided us with 
useful feedback on the effect of the ECB’s money market operations.  
Statistical information. The ECB has also benefited from the wealth of harmonised area-wide 
financial, banking and monetary statistics that the Eurosystem has developed over the last 
decade as well as from the recently released quarterly integrated accounts. In addition, very 
useful information has been collected through surveys (notably, the Bank Lending Survey).  
Information exchanges with other central banks. During the current turmoil information has 
been  extensively  shared  and  discussed  within  the  central  banking  community  on  a  wide 
range of issues, from very technical and operational to more policy-relevant considerations. 
Especially at the onset of the tensions, the consultations among the relevant central banks 
were very intense and particularly useful to assess the extent of the turmoil accurately and 
rapidly. 
Information exchanges among European authorities. During a market turbulence like the one 
we have recently witnessed, it is crucial to assess in a timely and comprehensive fashion the 
implications  of  the  turmoil  for  the  banking  and  financial  industry  and,  ultimately,  for  the 
economy  as  a  whole.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  responsible  public 
authorities,  notably  central  banks  and  supervisors,  have  the  adequate  procedures  and 
infrastructure in place to share the relevant information among them. This is necessary for 
assessing, determining and calibrating the appropriate policy measures, as those taken by 
the Eurosystem to address the market turbulence.  
All in all, the turmoil has confirmed a number of strengths in our information-exchange and 
statistical  arrangements.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  revealed  some  information  gaps  and 
weaknesses that will need to be addressed once we draw the main lessons of the current 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2007
turmoil. Indeed, it has been suggested that insufficient information has been the main reason 
why  problems  originating  from  the  relatively  small  sub-prime  segment  of  the  US mortgage 
market have had such widespread consequences.3
For  instance,  the  turmoil  has  revealed  information  gaps  related  to  the  valuation  of  illiquid 
complex structured products or the assessment of the concentrations among various types of 
collateral  –  including  sub-prime  –  within  structured  finance  securities.  Besides,  the  turmoil 
has shown that there is a need for credit rating agencies to provide also information on the 
liquidity  risks  associated  with  structured  investment  products.  In  addition,  the  turmoil  has 
confirmed  that  the  significant  lags  in  the  release  of  some  statistics,  for  instance  those  on 
integrated accounts, reduce our ability to use them in real time. 
Challenges for communication under stress 
As I mentioned earlier, implementing monetary policy under stress poses special challenges 
for communication. Indeed, following deviations from the standard practices and the setting 
in motion of a learning process, central banks must re-establish a “reputational equilibrium” 
with  their  counterparts.  In  fact,  the  reason  why  in  normal  times  the  martingale  property 
delivers interest rates close to the policy rate is to a large extent because market participants 
have  learned  to  form,  over  a  long  period  of  time,  correct  expectations  about  the  central 
bank’s liquidity policy. And, at the same time, market reactions to its open market operations 
are somewhat predictable for the central bank.  
However, once the usual pattern of liquidity provision is broken, it is difficult for the market to 
converge quickly to a new behavioural equilibrium since an adequate level of confidence and 
knowledge needs to be first restored on both sides. Through communication and renewed 
predictability  in  its  liquidity  policy,  a  central  bank  can  though  succeed  in  restoring  such 
equilibrium. 
Let  me  now  move  to  two  –  less  operational  –  challenges  that  we  have  faced  in  the 
communication of our interventions during the present turmoil: (1) the “moral hazard” critique; 
and (2) the need to underscore the distinction between liquidity management and monetary 
policy. 
The moral hazard critique 
Some observers have recently criticised recent measures by central banks, including those 
taken by the ECB, on the grounds of moral hazard considerations. According to these critics, 
by  reacting  to  the  financial  market  tensions,  central  banks  may  contribute  to  “bailing-out” 
those who have triggered the tensions through excessive risk taking.  
It is true in my view that moral hazard issues need to be taken into account very seriously 
when  central  banks  decide  on  measures  to  support  the  financial  system  in  a  situation  of 
market turmoil. Of course, any such support policy, if anticipated, will be taken into account 
when banks establish their risk management frameworks for “tail” events.  
Still,  one  cannot  generally  conclude  from  this  that  central  banks  should  not  re-act  and 
support  the  system  in  the  case  of  severe  tensions.  To  rigorously  analyse  moral  hazard 
issues relating to financial crisis management by central banks, one first needs to distinguish 
between different but interrelated types of policy interventions. The reason for this is that the 
possible  effects  on  incentives  of  different  measures  can  be  very  diverse.  However,  this 
differentiation has often been missed when criticising central bank actions on the grounds of 
moral hazard considerations.  
                                                 
3   A.  Giovannini  and  L.  Spaventa  (2007),  “Subprime  lessons:  fix  the  information  gap”,  5  November  2007, 
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/690. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 5
Let me distinguish briefly between four possible types of central bank measures: 
First, moral hazard issues have been raised in relation to the case in which the central bank 
lowers its key policy rate in response to financial turmoil. It has been argued that, if central 
banks  lower  interest  rates  at  a  time  of  market  corrections  and  declining  asset  prices, 
economic agents may believe that the policy-makers are prepared to use monetary policy to 
support asset price valuations in order to prevent market downturns. If such belief becomes 
widespread, investors are likely to engage in excessive risk-taking behaviour, thereby sowing 
the  seeds  of  future  financial  crises.  In  addition,  if  central  banks  are  perceived  to  assign 
higher  priority  to  supporting  asset  prices  than  to  safeguarding  price  stability,  inflation 
expectations may be adversely affected and even become disanchored.  
Let  me  say  clearly  that  I  consider  a  situation  in  which  the  central  bank  would  reduce  its 
interest rate with a view to strengthening asset prices and banks’ balance sheets as purely 
hypothetical and, in the case of the Eurosystem, simply unthinkable. This is a situation that 
would obviously open up issues of moral hazard and that no central bank committed to price 
stability would ever contemplate.  
This  discussion  reminds  me  of  a  famous  article  by  Alan  Blinder,  the  former  Fed  Vice-
Chairman.4 He notes that academic economists are always concerned about the inflationary 
bias  problem,  that  is  the  fear  that  central  bankers  may  be  constantly  tempted  to  engineer 
inflation  surprises  in  order  to  achieve  sustained  short-term  employment  gains,  without 
realising  that  in  the  long  run  they  would  simply  create  higher  inflation.  Blinder  reassures 
these concerns by observing that “during my brief career as a central banker, I never once 
witnessed  nor  experienced  this  temptation”.  Let  me  then  borrow  Blinder’s  words  and  use 
them to reassure the concerns of those who believe that we might be tempted to temporarily 
forgo our commitment to price stability out of worries about financial market developments: 
this is a temptation that neither I nor my colleagues at the ECB’s Governing Council have 
ever experienced. 
At the same time, a different issue is when financial turbulences develop into a fully-fledged 
crisis and eventually affect growth prospects, therefore lowering the level of the short term 
interest rate considered to lead to price stability in the medium term. I find it difficult to see 
any  moral  hazard  issue  arising  from  this  type  of  central  bank  action.  Losses  of  individual 
banks stemming from imprudent risk management will not be suppressed by such a lowering 
of  central  bank  key  policy  rates.  Adjusting  the  monetary  stance  as  a  reaction  to 
macroeconomic developments, so as to achieve the ultimate goals of monetary policy, can 
never be rejected on the basis of moral hazard considerations. 
Second, moral hazard issues have been seen in the context of aggregate liquidity injections 
through open market operations. I am not entirely sure that I see the moral hazard dimension 
in these measures.  
In times of money market tensions, inter-bank interest rates may move to levels above the 
target rate set by the central banks, if the profile of the liquidity supply by the central bank is 
unchanged. Therefore, it is natural for a central bank to re-adjust the profile of liquidity supply 
to demand in order to stabilise short term inter-bank rates around their target.  
In  this  regard,  let  me  already  hint  at  a  point  that  I  will  discuss  later,  namely  the  need  to 
distinguish  between  monetary  policy  stance  and  monetary  policy  implementation.  In  other 
words, we need to distinguish clearly between: (1) on the one hand, the task of defining and 
communicating the target level for short term interest rates, and (2) on the other hand, the 
task of achieving this level in the inter-bank market.  
                                                 
4   Alan  S.  Blinder  (1997)  “What  central  bankers  could  learn  from  academics  –  and  vice  versa”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, 11(2), pp. 3-19. 
6 
 BIS Review 143/2007
Moreover, taking into account the fact that the Eurosystem has not increased the supply of 
liquidity, but has only adapted the profile in terms of maturity and timing in the course of a 
reserve  maintenance  period,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  re-alignment  of  market  rates  with 
central bank target through open market operations cannot contain losses of individual banks 
stemming from imprudent risk management. Rather these liquidity policy measures should 
be seen as a continuation of the practice in normal times to align liquidity supply with liquidity 
demand,  the  only  exception  being  that,  under  the  current  circumstances,  it  has  not  been 
possible to estimate the latter by means of the regular liquidity analysis.  
Third, concerns about moral hazard issues have been raised in the case of a reduction of the 
penalty  rate  associated  with  the  recourse  to  a  central  bank  borrowing  facility,  such  as  the 
discount  rate  or  the  marginal  lending  rate.  The  case  there  for  moral  hazard  is  not  entirely 
obvious to me at least as long as (1) such a reduction is a measure used to steer short-term 
inter-bank rates close to the target level and (2) as long as the rate of the borrowing facility is 
in any case close to the target rate – e.g. one percentage point or less – so that a reduction 
has no substantial impact on the profit and loss accounts of banks. In this regard, the recent 
money market tensions have confirmed the importance for the effective liquidity management 
of banks of enjoying unimpeded access to borrowing facilities.  
The  fourth  potential  moral  hazard  issue  is  a  widening  of  the  set  of  eligible  collateral  in  a 
central bank’s monetary policy operations. Admittedly, this type of measure could have moral 
hazard implications, particularly (1) if the general widening of the collateral set in fact targets 
a small number or, say, even a single bank under liquidity stress, which is rich in the specific 
type of additional collateral; and (2) if the central bank offers facilities, for instance a standing 
borrowing  facility,  to  effectively  refinance  such  collateral.  This  type  of  action  invites  moral 
hazard as it may indeed be decisive to establish whether the single bank fails or not, while at 
the  same  time  sparing  to  the  banks’  management  and  shareholders  the  substantial  costs 
associated with resorting to real emergency liquidity assistance.  
Therefore,  a  widening  of  the  collateral  set  accepted  for  monetary  policy  purposes  should 
probably only be considered if this measure would substantially help a significant number of 
banks and if the set of assets were very narrow. In this case the lack of collateral obviously 
seems to be more of a systemic issue, and the central bank should consider taking action. 
In this respect, let me underscore two features of our collateral framework that have served 
us  well  in  the  recent  period.  First,  access  to  funding  is  available  to  a  broad  set  of 
counterparties.  And  second,  the  Eurosystem  –  whilst  requiring  high-quality  standards  – 
accepts  a  broad  range  of  public  and  private  fixed-income  securities,  as  well  as  non-
marketable assets. Hence, sufficiency of collateral has not been an issue for the Eurosystem, 
even at the peak of the refinancing needs during the turmoil.  
Finally, moral hazard is a potential issue in individual banks’ emergency liquidity assistance. 
But  here,  it  is  up  to  the  central  banks  and  supervisors  to  ensure  that  in  particular  senior 
management  and  equity  holders,  and  possibly  debt  holders,  pay  a  sufficient  price  for  the 
rescue.  This  issue  has  been  discussed  at  length  in  the  literature,  the  bulk  of  which 
convincingly argues that moral hazard issues can be taken into account in a satisfactory way 
in the design of the rescue mechanism.  
So,  to  conclude  on  the  moral  hazard  topic,  I  would  say  that,  in  order  to  draw  meaningful 
conclusions,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the  very  different  possible  types  of 
financial  crisis  management  measures  available  to  central  banks.  When  assessing  and 
choosing  among  these  different  measures,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  the 
implications  for  both  the  central  bank  and  for  its  counterparties,  including  the  future 
incentives of the latter, in order to achieve, overall, the most efficient allocation of resources.  
BIS Review 143/2007 
 7
Separation of liquidity management and the monetary policy stance 
Finally, a frequent focus of our communication during the turmoil has been the importance of 
distinguishing  between  interventions  related  to  liquidity  management  and  changes  in 
monetary policy stance.  
It  is  very  important  for  the  public  to  understand  that  the  implementation  of  technical 
measures  related  to  liquidity  management  during  the  current  turmoil  has  been  completely 
separated from any considerations on the monetary policy stance. Contrary to the occasional 
public perception, these operations have had no effect on the overall liquidity supply to the 
banking  sector.  Overall,  the  amount  of  liquidity  provided  within  the  various  maintenance 
periods since the start of the turmoil has remained unchanged. Instead, the liquidity provision 
has been to some extent simply brought forward in time within each period, thereby simply 
representing a shift in the time path of liquidity supply within the reserve maintenance period.  
Also, it is important to understand that the interest rates at which the fine-tuning operations 
and  the  supplementary  longer  term  refinancing  operations  were  settled  contain  no 
information  on  the  future  monetary  policy  stance,  since  the  ECB  acted  as  a  rate  taker  in 
these operations.  
The  need  to  understand  the  difference  between  technical  liquidity  provision  measures  and 
changes to the monetary policy stance is particularly important in the current environment, 
since  the  turmoil  in  money  markets  has  occurred  at  a  time  of  increasing  concerns  about 
rising 
this  context, 
misunderstandings  about  the  purpose  of  our  liquidity  interventions  might  adversely  affect 
inflationary expectations.  
inflationary  pressures  and  deteriorating  outlook 
inflation. 
for 
In 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasising  that  the  recent  market  developments  have  stressed  the 
importance for policy-makers to have access to timely and accurate information on financial 
developments, and to set up mechanisms that facilitate the smooth and rapid exchange of 
information  among  market  participants,  central  banks  and  other  authorities.  The  recent 
turmoil has also highlighted the importance of effective communication for central banks, in 
order  to  provide  guidance  about  the  principles  informing  their  liquidity  management 
interventions  under  market  stress  conditions,  and  to  dispel  undesirable  misunderstandings 
about the reasons why these interventions are taken. 
We are only starting to draw lessons from the recent financial turmoil, but we can pretty sure 
that the need to fill information gaps and enhance market transparency will figure prominently 
among them. Events like this conference can prove of great help for the purpose of defining 
more precisely those gaps and to show the way forward. 
Thanks very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 143/2007
