Savenaca Narube: Fiji’s financial system – sound and more efficient 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official opening of Westpac’s Nakasi Branch, Suva, 21 November 2007. 
 Ms Margaret DeVeau, Head of Retail Sales and Service 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good evening 
It is my pleasure to be here this evening at the opening of Westpac’s Nakasi branch. 
I take this opportunity to congratulate Westpac for the opening of its 16th branch in Fiji.  
This year, I had the privilege to officiate in several functions concerning financial institutions. I 
was  in  Denarua  in  September  for  the  opening  of  the  Westpac  branch  there.  Earlier  in  the 
year,  I  participated  in  the  launching  of  Westpac’s  American  Express  Credit  Card  in  Suva. 
Only two nights ago I was at the opening of the new offices of Credit Corporation. And today, 
I am at Nakasi for the opening of Westpac’s newest branch. I am running out of new things to 
say at these functions! And I am told that this is not the end of it. I understand that there may 
be  another  Westpac  branch  opening  in  downtown  Suva  in  2008.  And  Bank  South  Pacific 
intends to open their Nadi branch early in the New Year. 
These new branches seem to come in waves. It is a reversal of what happened about ten 
years ago when commercial banks were closing branches and agencies and we have been 
asked a few times why that happened. But it is a welcomed reversal. These are excellent 
signs of the bank’s confidence in the financial system and the country. It is also an excellent 
development for customers allowing them closer access to banking services. 
Financial system 
Today, I have decided to talk only about the financial system and leave the economic policies 
and projections to the Budget Address on Friday. 
We  all  appreciate  the  important  role  that  the  financial  system  plays  in  the  economy.  It 
basically allows money to go around from producers to wholesalers, from savers to investors 
and  from  customers  to  retailers.  Needless  to  say,  this  intermediation  role  is  extremely 
important  to  the  cash  flows  of  businesses  and  individuals.  The  financial  system  therefore 
needs to be sound so everyone has the highest confidence in its operations. It also needs to 
be efficient so we can exchange money as quickly as we can and in the most cost effective 
manner. 
A  sound  and  efficient  financial  system  is  also  important  for  investors  and  savers.  Savers 
would only put their money in banks if they are confident that it will be there when they need 
it. In turn, the banks will lend this money to the borrowers when they are certain that it will get 
repaid. So at the end of it all, money goes around and everyone is happy.  
When we examine our financial system in these terms of soundness and efficiency, we can 
see that we have come a long way in the last ten years. 
Fiji voluntarily subjected its financial system to a Financial Sector Assessment Program by a 
joint  International  Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank  Mission  in  2006.  This  comprehensive 
study  while  pointing  out  several  improvements,  confirmed  that  Fiji’s  financial  system  is 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
sound. With the implementation of these recommendations, we can look ahead confidently to 
a  financial  system  that  is  even  more  versatile  in  Fiji.  This  augurs  well  for  businesses, 
investment and growth. 
At  this  stage,  I  wish  to  clarify  that  the  Reserve  Bank  regulates  and  supervises  only  the 
financial institutions that we licensed. These currently include commercial banks, insurance 
companies, credit companies and foreign exchange dealers. We have added the Fiji National 
Provident  Fund  to  the  list  since  2003.  The  key  intention  of  this  supervision  is  to  protect 
depositors, the policy holders, members and the financial system as a whole. 
There  are  some  finance  companies  that  we  do  not  license  and  we  do  not  therefore 
supervise. We have put out an advertisement to this effect. We advised the public to exercise 
caution when investing with finance companies that are not licensed by the Reserve Bank. 
The Bank will take appropriate legal action against unlicensed finance companies that are 
found to be carrying out banking business in Fiji. Banking business is generally defined as 
accepting deposits from the public. 
One  key  issue  that  we  monitor  closely  in  our  supervision  is  the  quality  of  the  financial 
institution’s  loan  book  together  with  the  provisioning  level  that  they  have  allowed.  I  am 
pleased  to  say  that  despite  the  economic  downturn  this  year,  the  quality  of  the  industry’s 
assets remains intact with more than adequate provisioning. At the same time credit growth 
has slowed markedly. This is again good from the point of financial stability and soundness. 
Efficiency  on  the  other  hand  very  much  depends  on  modernisation,  technology  and 
competition. We have seen several initiatives in technology and modernisation on both the 
individual bank level and the industry wide level. At the individual bank level, we now enjoy 
modern banking services like EFTPOS, internet and phone banking and ATMs. We can also 
send  money  anywhere  in  the  world  electronically.  In  these  areas,  I  am,  glad  to  say  that 
Westpac has been at the forefront of bringing them to Fiji. 
On the industry wide front, the Reserve Bank has recently launched FIJICLEAR which is a 
real time automated payment system. This would improve efficiency in making and receiving 
payments.  FIJICLEAR  also  help  safeguard  financial  stability.  Customers  using  FIJICLEAR 
for  payments  will  have  their  funds  delivered  the  same  day  compared  with  3  to  6  days 
required to clear cheques. I urge you all to use FIJICLEAR and you can discuss this further 
with your commercial bank. 
On competition, this obviously is harder to measure. We can only look at the signs taking into 
account  that  our  market  is  relatively  small.  We  now  have  stronger  credit  institutions  which 
provide  their  own  brand  of  credit.  It  is  also  interesting  to  see  that  that  changes  in  interest 
rates by one bank leads to other banks doing the same thing. Some financial institutions do 
not wish to compete on prices but on other things like services. Customers are now able to 
compare fees and charges. I am therefore of the general view that the financial system has 
become more competitive in the last ten years. 
Another issue that we keep a close eye on is the liquidity in the financial system. By liquidity 
we mean the amount of money that banks have which they have yet to lend out. This amount 
obviously fluctuates from day to day. We  would not like to keep this too tight as that may 
adversely affect the bank’s individual operations. At this time, liquidity is at an all time high at 
over $300 million. We have deliberately allowed this to rise since we have a credit ceiling in 
place.  But  it  is  obviously  too  high  and  we  would  be  reviewing  this  liquidity  level  when  we 
review the credit ceiling early in the New Year. 
When  it  comes  to  lending  or  deposits,  interest  rate  is  an  important  factor.  With  the  high 
liquidity that we have, interest rates have come down. They are now back at the same level 
they  were  in  2005  and  in  some  cases;  the  rates  are  lower  than  in  2005.  And  I  wish  to 
acknowledge  that  on  several  occasions  Westpac  was  the  first  commercial  bank  to  reduce 
their lending rates. We do not see any upward pressure on interest rates in the foreseeable 
future. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
We are also interested in the products that the banks introduce into the market. Here we see 
that there have been some very good developments in Fiji. Deposits as well loan products 
have increased to cater for the diversified needs of the customers. Westpac again has been 
at the forefront of such developments. 
One product that we are keen to push is the Export Finance Facility where eligible exporters 
can access bank loans at low interest rates. Unfortunately, for some reason, it has not been 
used much by exporters and the banks. Westpac came to us suggesting some changes to 
the  facility  and  I  thank  them  for  the  initiative.  We  have  therefore  introduced  most  of  the 
changes  that  they  suggested  and  we  hope  that  these  changes  will  make  the  facility  more 
attractive and facilitate the growth in exports – which we sorely need to improve our balance 
of  payments  position.  I  encourage  you  to  talk  to  your  bank  commercial  bank  or  the  Fiji 
Development Bank about this facility. 
There were two Cabinet decisions recently that pose considerable interests to the industry. 
We heard that Cabinet has approved the establishment of a Financial Services Ombudsman 
Scheme.  There  are  several  countries  like  New  Zealand  and  Australia  that  has  such  a 
scheme and we can learn from their experiences in the operation and the funding of their 
Ombudsman. When properly set up, this Ombudsman Scheme should help both customers 
and bankers settle disputes in a timely and efficient manner. 
We  have  also  heard  that  Cabinet  has  also  approved  the  establishment  of  a  Financial 
Services  Commission.  We  certainly  look  forward  to  government  discussing  this  rather 
complex issue further with all stakeholders. 
Westpac Nakasi 
Let me turn to the branch that we are opening this evening. I am pleasantly surprised at the 
development happening in Nakasi. I know the locality very well as I used to live here in the 
early eighties. In fact, the apartment that we stayed in was at this very site that this complex 
has  been  built.  There  was  only  the  Gulab  supermarket  and  cinema  at  that  time.  Now,  we 
have major supermarkets and shopping centers that have set up in this area. I am sure that 
this growth will continue into the future. 
I am therefore pleased that a commercial bank has decided to establish a branch in this busy 
part of the Suva-Nausori corridor. It makes good business sense for Westpac to establish a 
branch here. Westpac is the only bank branch for kilometers in any direction. Your customers 
must  be  glad  that  they  don’t  have  to  travel  far  towards  Suva  or  Nausori  for  their  banking 
services. 
I am told that this is a fully-fledged branch which offers a dynamic business centre complete 
with an interview room and a separate business teller’s area. The new branch will cater not 
only  for  businesses,  but  also  residents,  visitors  and  workers  of  the  surrounding  business 
area. The branch services will include international money transfer service, MoneyGram.  
The Nakasi branch, like the Port Denarau one, has a modern look and feel and even features 
a  telephone  and  Internet  Banking  kiosk  in-branch  for  customers  who  wish  to  access 
Westpac’s Internet or telephone banking services. 
Westpac has a long and proud history, serving the Fiji Islands for the last 106 years. The 
Bank of New South Wales, Westpac’s forerunner is Fiji’s longest continuing bank as well as 
the first Australian bank to open a branch in Fiji on 12 August 1901. It has grown from a 3-
staff operation in 1901 to an operational network of 19 banking (branch and agency) sites 
offering a full range of retail, commercial and corporate products. 
We can all agree that Westpac has played a valuable role in advancing Fiji’s financial system 
and also its economic development through its services, innovative products and the latest 
banking technology. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 3
Concluding remarks 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  John  Cashmore  and  Ms  Margaret  DeVeau  for  their  kind 
invitation.  Westpac’s  recent  progress  has  been  interesting  with  their  association  with 
MoneyGram, American Express as well as the opening of 2 branches within 3 ½ months with 
another one in the pipeline soon. 
I again congratulate John, Margaret and the Westpac Team on the opening of the Nakasi 
branch in Fiji. I also wish Westpac all the best in its future endeavours. 
Official opening 
I now have much pleasure in declaring this Nakasi branch of Westpac open. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2007
