Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Payments and monetary and financial 
stability 
Opening remarks by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European Central Bank, at a joint European Central Bank/Bank of England conference on 
“Payments and Monetary and Financial Stability”, Frankfurt am Main, 12-13 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure to welcome you to this conference and I am grateful that I can do so also in 
the name of the Bank of England. The idea of the joint conference was born at one of our 
regular bilateral meetings and it is wonderful to see the idea come to fruition. 
You  may  wonder  why  we  have  put  payments  first,  and  monetary  and  financial  stability 
second.  This  is  not  only  because  payments  are  at  the  root  of  a  functioning  (or  not 
functioning)  financial  system;  payments  also  require  a  thorough  understanding  of  the 
economics of banking, money, financial markets, industrial organisation, and regulation. The 
diversity of theoretical and policy issues in this field is also reflected in the conference that I 
have the pleasure of opening this morning.  
Historical overview 
Considering  the  historical  evolution  of  interbank  settlement  arrangements  and  central 
banking  functions  may  help  to  understand  why  central  banks  evolved  as  the  natural 
candidates for taking the responsibility for financial and monetary stability.1 Indeed, I would 
argue  that  the  reason  lies  in  the  key  role  central  banks  played  in  payment  systems.  In  a 
world with many banks, it is inefficient for every agent in the economy to have an account 
with each and every bank. One solution is for each bank in the economy to have an account 
with  all  the  other  banks  and  to  net  obligations  bilaterally  with  them.  In  a  world  with  many 
banks, this will tend to result in an inefficiently large number of interbank accounts. A more 
efficient  solution  is  for  a  hierarchy  of  banks  to  develop,  with  banks  at  the  bottom  of  the 
hierarchy  having  accounts  with  correspondent  banks  in  its  upper  tier,  which  in  turn  have 
accounts with banks at the apex of the hierarchy. These banks at the top of the hierarchy 
were naturally and literally “central” banks. Indeed, there is plenty of historical evidence that 
hierarchical structures evolved naturally in a free-banking environment without the need for 
the  state  to  superimpose  and/or  guarantee  a  “settlement  institution”  at  the  apex  of  the 
hierarchy. One example is in fact the Bank of England.  
The status of a central bank at the top of the hierarchy derived also from the fact that it was 
perceived to be “safe” – that is, an institution with a large capital base, holding high-quality 
assets. Such a central bank would also need to be concerned about its own soundness. This 
led the central bank to be careful about to whom it should provide settlement accounts and to 
monitor these banks. In addition, it also had to weigh carefully the advantages of providing 
lender-of-last-resort assistance to the banking system to avoid a drop in its revenue stream 
against the risk of lending to an insolvent institution and making a loss that could decrease its 
capital  base  and  threaten  its  reputation  as  the  supplier  of  the  ultimate  settlement  asset. 
Similarly, central banks had a natural interest in ensuring the ability of the banking sector as 
a whole to meet the public’s demand for liquidity. The reason for this is that if it allowed a 
                                                 
1   For  further  details  see  Stephen  Millard  and  Victoria  Saporta  (2005):  Central  banks  and  payment  systems: 
Past, present, and future. See also Ben Norman, Rachel  Shaw  and George Speight (2006): The history  of 
interbank settlement arrangements: exploring central banks’ role in payment systems. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 1
solvent commercial bank to fail as a result of a bank run, it would only aggravate the situation 
and this could ultimately result in a more general run on the banking system and ultimately 
on itself. As a result, financial stability became a concern for central banks. Moreover, for the 
central  bank  as  the  provider  of  the  ultimate  settlement  asset,  it  was  also  important  to 
maintain  monetary  stability.  In  particular,  if  the  central  bank  printed  more  and  more  of  its 
banknotes without a corresponding increase in the demand for them, the notes would fall in 
value relative to those of other banks. Eventually, central bank money would no longer be 
seen  as  “safe”  and  this  would  undermine  the  confidence  in  and  acceptability  of  the 
settlement asset. 
This  brief  historical  overview  demonstrates  that  the  development  of  the  core  functions  of 
central banks – monetary and financial stability – has been closely linked to their role in the 
provision of the ultimate settlement asset in the payment system. It is therefore important for 
central banks to have a thorough understanding of how these links work. Let me share some 
thoughts with you in this regard. 
Payment systems, monetary policy and central bank actions in the recent financial 
market developments 
Central banks provide liquidity for different purposes.2 To achieve their primary objective of 
price  stability,  monetary  authorities  supply  base  money  to  the  economy.  By  matching  the 
demand  for  base  money  with  the  supply  that  they  control,  central  banks  steer  short-term 
interbank interest rates, which, via the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, have an 
impact on the price level.  
Another  objective  of  central  banks  is  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  payment 
system.  Central  banks  provide  intraday  liquidity  to  bridge  the  timing  mismatch  between 
banks’  incoming  and  outgoing  payments  during  the  day.  This  not  only  facilitates  intraday 
liquidity management of banks, but also makes payment gridlocks less likely and therefore 
contributes to financial stability.  
Payment systems clearly matter for monetary policy. Monetary policy implementation today 
means steering short-term interest rates. If you are the treasurer of a bank and plan for the 
end-of-day  settlement  of  your  accounts,  uncertainty  about  whether  expected  incoming 
payments will actually be received is obviously a major issue. It does not make an immediate 
difference  if  expected  incoming  payments  are  at  risk  for  payment  system  reasons,  or 
because the payments may not have been initiated. In both cases, the treasurer will need to 
look  for  alternative  funding,  and  if  there  are  no  internal  buffers,  will  turn  to  the  interbank 
market for overnight funds. There, the treasurer will be ready to pay a premium and will thus 
bid  up  rates.  If  uncertainty  about  incoming  payments  generally  increases  and  affects  all 
banks, be it for payment system or other reasons, banks will all tend to enter the interbank 
market  on  the  buy  side  and  will  bid  up  the  overnight  rate  accordingly.  This  is  a  monetary 
policy issue and will imply the need for the central bank to inject excess reserves into the 
system  to  bring  interest  rates  down  again.  While  payment  system  disruption  may  hence 
potentially  have  an  impact  on  monetary  policy,  central  banks  have  found  ways  of 
safeguarding price stability, while at the same time ensuring the smooth functioning of the 
payment system. This is achieved by drawing a clear line between providing intraday liquidity 
for payment system purposes and providing credit for monetary policy implementation.  
Let me therefore turn briefly to these two types of liquidity provision by central banks. Central 
banks need to define the conditions under which they provide these two types of liquidity. In 
particular, they need to decide on the fee/interest they wish to charge and on the level and 
type of collateral they consider appropriate. Allow me to discuss briefly both features.  
                                                 
2   For further details see Charles M. Kahn (2006): Why pay? An introduction to payment economics. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2007
interest  rate 
Central  banks  typically  provide  intraday  liquidity  on  more  generous  terms  than  overnight 
credit.  Why?  To  answer  this  question,  consider  the  following  alternatives:  imagine  that 
central banks would only ask for interest when credit spans a weekend, then we would have 
intra-week credit. Or, more extremely, imagine that interest would be charged only for credit 
spanning the year-end. Or why don’t central banks require banks to settle every hour, such 
that every end of hour would be what today is an end of day, with credit bridging every end of 
hour being charged at the monetary policy interest rate.  
I think that the reason why central banks choose a full day as the demarcation line reflects in 
particular three considerations.  
First, economic projects have rarely, if ever, a lifetime of less than a day, so there is no need 
to impose positive interest rates at the appropriate policy level intraday from a transmission 
mechanism perspective. However, there may be projects with a lifetime of days or certainly 
months and weeks, such that lowering the frequency of settlement points to, say, annually 
would clearly create an artificial and harmful annual economic cycle and affect price stability.  
Second, increasing the frequency of points in time when banks need to settle, say to hourly, 
would  increase  liquidity  management  costs  of  banks  considerably.  Because  this  is  not 
needed  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  this  would  mean  a  waste  of  economic 
resources. 
Finally, central banks probably want to control the ability of banks over time to settle their 
accounts, and also banks are probably more comfortable to see that other banks settle their 
accounts with the central bank on a regular basis, as proof of their soundness. 
To sum up, the daily cut-off separating free central bank credit and credit against a monetary 
policy-related 
is  a  reasonable  convention,  reflecting  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism issues, convenience of banks’ liquidity management, and credit risk 
management considerations. It allows central banks to safeguard price stability, while at the 
same time ensuring the smooth functioning of the payment system.  
Turning  to  collateralisation,  it  is  important  to  note  that  in  the  past,  central  banks  often  set 
ceilings  for  intraday  and  overnight  credit  to  banks.  In  contrast,  today,  many  central  banks, 
including the Eurosystem, tend to provide unlimited access to both types of credit, but with 
the  need  to  provide  eligible  collateral.  This  reflects  first  that  unlimited  liquidity  facilities 
provide  banks  with  a  buffer  against  liquidity  shocks  and  thereby  contribute  to  financial 
stability. Second, it however also reflects the need for sound credit risk management by the 
central bank, which argues against unsecured lending, in particular at overnight and longer 
maturities.  
This framework – of unlimited access to intraday and overnight central bank credit against 
eligible collateral – implies that collateral availability becomes the ultimate liquidity issue for 
banks. As long as banks have sufficient eligible collateral for overnight or intraday credit, they 
have a buffer against liquidity shocks. Once a liquidity shock exceeds the eligible collateral, a 
major liquidity issue arises, and the bank may fail to fulfil its payment obligations, with all the 
serious consequences that this has for the bank itself and, via knock-on effects, potentially 
for the entire financial system.  
This  is  what  makes  collateral  availability  so  important  today  as  a  contribution  by  central 
banks to financial stability – again, both intraday, i.e. for payment purposes, and for overnight 
credit.  
Let me now turn briefly to the recent financial market developments, which involved, as you 
know, partially a shortage of credit, but eventually also a significant drying-up of liquidity. It 
was  not  a  failure  of  the  payment  system,  as  all  payment  systems  worked  smoothly. 
Nevertheless, let me say a few words here.  
The recent developments were triggered by a perception of higher credit risk originating from 
a perceived deterioration of the credit quality of assets held both by banks and by special 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 3
investment vehicles, with which banks were associated either through liquidity commitments 
or  reputation  issues.  The  situation  deteriorated  when  liquidity  buffers  of  banks  were  put 
under stress by the need to meet their liquidity commitments and to take on their balance 
sheet  assets  which  had  become  illiquid.  Then,  banks  also  became  unwilling  to  provide 
unsecured lending to other banks, in particular at longer maturities, because of uncertainty 
whether they would themselves obtain liquidity if needed. Once this stage was reached, the 
deterioration  of  liquidity  conditions  became  self-reinforcing,  and  turned  out  to  be  painfully 
durable, as can be seen for instance from the still exceptional three-month EURIBOR spread 
relative to three-month repo rates. 
What  could  central  banks  do  about  this?  First,  they  provided  extra  liquidity  through  open 
market operations. This not only contributed to bringing down short-term interbank rates to 
target  levels  again,  fulfilling  monetary  policy  implementation  purposes,  but  may  also  have 
contributed to supporting the willingness of banks to lend.  
Second,  accepting  that  availability  of  central  bank  eligible  collateral  is  the  ultimate  line  of 
defence against illiquidity for banks, many central banks widened the set of eligible collateral. 
For instance, the central banks of Canada and Australia took such actions, and also the US 
Fed clarified that it would accept certain instruments in its discount window. 
The  Eurosystem  was  not  forced  to  take  such  measures,  since  its  collateral  framework 
already foresees the acceptance of a very wide set of collateral. The Eurosystem framework 
specifies that this very wide range of collateral is accepted for all types of Eurosystem credit 
operations:  intraday  operations  and  monetary  policy-related  operations,  the  latter  including 
both access to standing facilities and open market operations. The wide and unified set of 
collateral  supports  both  the  smoothness  and  systemic  stability  of  intraday  and  overnight 
liquidity management of banks.  
Payment systems and financial stability 
The  global  financial  system  has  been  going  through  a  phase  of  major  structural  change, 
which may have several implications for payment systems and financial stability.3
First, we have witnessed the creation of new financial instruments and products to address 
market and credit risk, and in principle to enhance liquidity of financial assets. At the same 
time, the size of the financial sector in relation to the real economy has significantly grown. 
This suggests that the stability of the financial system has become more important for the 
real  economy.  Moreover,  there  has  been  a  growing  symbiosis  between  markets  and 
intermediaries. While intermediaries and markets have often been seen as alternative forms 
of  arranging 
Indeed, 
intermediaries such as banks have become increasingly reliant on markets as a source of 
income  and  for  their  risk  management,  through  their  hedging  operations.  Markets  in  turn 
have become increasingly dependent on intermediaries for the provision of market-making 
services  and  of  funding  liquidity.  This  structural  change  may  have  some  implications  for 
payment systems and market infrastructures, especially in periods of financial distress. One 
important implication is that more than ever before, the smooth functioning of the financial 
system is dependent on the assumption that the option to trade can be exercised even under 
stressed  market  conditions.  This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  development  of  markets 
and instruments which are actively traded or that are held in the expectation that, should the 
need  arise,  they  could  be  traded.  Moreover,  the  new  financial  environment  appears  to  be 
more reliant on the immediate availability of funding liquidity. Funding liquidity is critical for 
the orderly execution of trades and it can become scarce at times of distress, precisely when 
increasingly  complementary. 
relationships, 
they  are 
financial 
                                                 
3   For further details see Claudio E.V. Borio (2007): Change and constancy in the financial system: implications 
for financial distress and policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2007
it is most needed, as market participants cut credit lines and/or raise margin requirements to 
protect  themselves  against  counterparty  risks.  In  conclusion,  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system is also dependent on the assumption of ample market liquidity and, most critically, of 
the smooth functioning of the payment systems and market infrastructures.  
Second, the complexity of the financial system has greatly increased. This complexity applies 
not only to individual financial instruments, but also to the financial system as a whole. Its 
various segments have become more closely interconnected and the linkages across them 
more opaque. A new configuration of players in the financial system has led to a blurring of 
distinctions between different types of intermediaries, to greater consolidation, and to a rapid 
growth  of  new  financial  players  and  services.  Payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems 
naturally evolve in response to such financial market developments. As the number of new 
financial products is growing and existing markets are rapidly expanding, the infrastructure 
needs to be in the position to handle such developments. A good example is the evolution of 
clearing  and  settlement  arrangements  for  OTC  derivatives.  It  took  a  while  for  the 
infrastructure to adjust to the tremendous growth in OTC derivatives. Eventually, with support 
from central banks, the most pressing shortcomings began being addressed. Today, there is 
a  far  higher  degree  of  automation,  new  technical  processes  have  been  introduced,  and 
innovative  services  are  available.  The  infrastructure  for  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  will 
undoubtedly  continue  to  evolve.  Whatever  path  the  evolution  takes,  as  the  market 
infrastructure  moves  further  in  the  direction  of  centralised  processing  of  trades  and  post-
trade  events,  several  issues  will  assume  greater  importance.  First,  providers  of  essential 
post-trade  services  for  OTC  derivatives  should  provide  open  access  to  their  services  and 
should  aim  to  achieve  convenient  and  efficient  connectivity  with  other  systems.  Moreover, 
central  banks  and  supervisors  will  need  to  consider  whether  certain  existing  standards  for 
securities  settlement  systems,  central  counterparties  or  systemically  important  payment 
systems  should  be  applied  to  providers  of  clearing  and  settlement  services  for  OTC 
derivatives.  
Including  new  players  in  stress-testing  the  system  is  challenging  and  requires  cooperation 
and timely transparency. Many of these new players are non-banks. It is therefore important 
to look at the role of non-banks in payment and settlement systems. Payment, clearing and 
settlement services have traditionally been offered by banks and non-banks alike. The co-
existence of banks and non-banks raises some important regulatory questions. In fact, while 
there is a trend towards common regulatory standards, banks would typically argue that they 
are  subject  to  prudential  supervision  and  that  there  is  no  need  for  further  regulation.  In 
contrast,  non-banks  would  argue  that  common  regulatory  standards  should  apply  to  all 
relevant service providers in order to ensure a competitive level playing-field. In the end, the 
question is whether the approach to regulation should be based on functions or institutions. 
Finally,  the  globalisation  of  finance  has  resulted  in  the  expansion  of  cross-border  financial 
linkages. An implication of globalisation is that financial distress is more likely to have far-
reaching  cross-border  effects.  This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  tighter  cross-border 
linkages that have formed. Such effects are almost guaranteed if distress were to involve one 
of  the  global  players  that  operate  across  so  many  countries  and  underpin  the  smooth 
performance of so many markets. In fact, over 30 years ago, even the failure of a small bank 
active  in  FX  transactions  was  sufficient  to  have  significant  cross-border  ramifications  –  so 
significant as to act as a catalyst for the establishment of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision. The knock-on effects of distress at one of the current large global players would 
presumably be much bigger. 
Conclusions 
Let me briefly conclude, ladies and gentlemen. Central banking and payment systems are 
inextricably linked. Central banks all around the world are involved in payment systems and 
market  infrastructures  in  many  different  ways  owing  to  their  roles  and  responsibilities  in 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 5
relation to monetary policy and financial stability. Indeed, payment systems disruptions would 
not only affect financial stability, but may potentially also have an impact on monetary policy 
implementation. Central banks have found ways of safeguarding price stability, while at the 
same time ensuring the smooth functioning of the payment system, by drawing a clear line 
between  providing  intraday  liquidity  for  payment  system  purposes  and  providing  credit  for 
monetary policy implementation. Moreover, the sufficient availability of collateral is important 
today as a contribution of central banks to financial stability. 
The roles of central banks in the field of payment systems are changing in a number of ways 
as  a  result  of  progressing  globalisation,  increasing  complexity,  and  the  emergence  of  new 
players and services: 
• 
infrastructure  providers  and 
The  approach  of  central  banks  to  analysing  financial  stability  is  changing.  A 
comprehensive  view  of  the  key  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerabilities  facing  the 
payment systems and market infrastructures cannot be formed without taking due 
account of developments at the global level, such as the emergence of cross-border 
payment systems and offshore centres. Issues and questions relating to the location 
of  payment  systems  and  market  infrastructures  are  also  gaining  in  importance  for 
central banks.  
Central banks have started interacting and cooperating with new interlocutors and 
partners outside the banking area. Many new players and providers in the field of 
payment, clearing and settlement services are indeed non-banks with which central 
banks traditionally had little – if any – direct interaction.  
Central banks are increasingly concerned with the division of responsibilities and the 
allocation  of  risks  between 
their  clients.  The 
responsibility for the safety of a payment, clearing or settlement system rests largely 
with the system operator. However, to the extent that participants in the system can 
take action to reduce risks that may have a bearing on the system as a whole, they 
should be given incentives to do so. For example, the margining systems of central 
counterparties should give incentives to participants to trade prudently.  
Central banks are increasingly involved in cross-border cooperation and information 
exchange with other central banks and authorities contributing to financial stability in 
order to obtain a comprehensive picture of risks and vulnerabilities and to identify 
appropriate and effective mitigating policy actions.  
Central banks have been intensifying their efforts to produce consistent regulatory 
and  oversight  standards  on  a  cross-border  basis.  The  Core  Principles  for 
Systemically Important Payment Systems and the CPSS-IOSCO Recommendations 
for Securities Settlement Systems and Central Counterparties have been important 
steps in this direction. Against this background, some further work needs to be done 
on  the  harmonisation  of  the  oversight  framework  for  securities  clearing  and 
settlement in the European Union. The continuous absence of such a harmonised 
oversight framework generates a number of undesirable effects. However, after the 
recent ECOFIN decision, I am very optimistic that we will soon see the finalisation 
and  adoption  of  the  ESCB-CESR  recommendations  for  securities  clearing  and 
settlement. 
The relevance of collateral for liquidity issues has been clearly recognised by central 
banks. During the past ten years, central banks have – especially in the context of 
the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and other Basel committees – 
focused  jointly  their  attention  on  the  use  of  collateral  in  financial  transactions, 
     6 
 BIS Review 130/2007
including  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral.4  Cooperation  in  this  respect  is  very 
useful and, especially for emergency situations, I would think that central banks –by 
enabling the cross-border use of collateral – could make a positive contribution to 
financial stability.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now close my introductory remarks by once again welcoming 
you all and by thanking all of those who have been involved in preparing this conference, in 
particular Daniela Russo and Mark Manning.  
                                                 
4   CPSS report on “Cross-Border Collateral Arrangements”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, January 
2006. 
BIS Review 130/2007 
 7
