Toshihiko Fukui: Central banking under globalization 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  MAS  Lecture  2007, 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 15 November 2007. 
 I am very privileged to have been invited by the Monetary Authority of Singapore to deliver its 
2007  lecture.  I  have  seen  the  list  of  prominent  speakers  in  past  lectures,  and  I  am  much 
honored  to  follow  them.  My  topic  today  is  the  role  of  central  banks  in  the  context  of 
increasing economic globalization. 
Progress in economic globalization 
I.  
As globalization proceeds, cross-border trading of goods and services as well as funds and 
financial products has been increasing. Although this trend had been underway for at least 
half a century, the pace of increase seems to have accelerated in recent years.  
According  to  research  done  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  world  real  GDP 
increased by around 50 percent over the last decade (from 1996 to 2006), indicating a high 
growth rate. Over the same period, the volume of world trade almost doubled, representing a 
growth rate around 30 percent faster than that of world GDP. This means that international 
trade  in  goods  and  services  has  outperformed  the  expansion  in  the  world  economy.  Also, 
from 1994 to 2004, the growth in the global sum of overseas assets and liabilities outpaced 
that  of  world  GDP  by  around  50  percent,  and  this  can  be  considered  an  indication  of  the 
progress in financial globalization. 
The  rapid  pace  of  globalization  is  closely  related  to  advances  in  information  and 
communications technology (ICT) and strong growth in Asia and other emerging economies. 
The progress in ICT has further eased geographical limitations on cross-border transactions 
of  goods,  services,  and  financial  products.  Against  the  background  of  these  technological 
innovations,  emerging  economies,  with  their  abundant  supply  of  skilled  labor,  have 
established their position as global production bases. In addition, emerging economies are 
now  regarded  not  only  as  production  sites  for  manufacturers  but  also  as  locations  for 
software development centers or call centers for non-manufacturers. These economies are 
now being brought into the business process of supply-chain management by many firms. 
With the accumulation of purchasing power through this process, emerging economies have 
also increased their presence as markets with huge potential. In the meantime, their wealth, 
coupled  with  abundant  funds  accumulated  in  oil-producing  countries,  has  caused  a 
significant  increase  in  the  international  flow  of  funds.  This  has  in  turn  promoted  financial 
innovation such as the introduction of sophisticated financial products and the expansion of 
financial players such as managed funds.  
Development of the international division of labor and progress in financial innovation have 
fostered  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  thereby  contributing  to  world  growth.  World  GDP 
growth is likely to register around 5 percent this year, close to what we have been observing 
since 2003.  
Another  feature  of  current  world  economic  growth  is  a  reduction  in  the  amplitude  of 
fluctuations in the rate of growth and inflation. This is the so-called "Great Moderation," often 
cited by academics and economists. The stability in the world economy and prices became 
noticeable  after  the  Second  Oil  Crisis.  The  inflation  rate,  in  particular,  has  decreased 
substantially since the year 2000 in terms of its average in both industrialized countries and 
emerging economies, and has also been less volatile.  
The current situation of the world economy, where low inflation coexists with high economic 
growth,  seems  favorable  for  central  banks,  which  aim  to  achieve  stability  in  prices  and  in 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 1
economic activity. However, it is a regrettable truth that the job of central banks never gets 
easier, only more challenging. Let me now discuss some phenomena that have brought new 
challenges into being. 
Changes in the relationship between output and prices 
II.  
The  first  phenomenon  is  that  the  conventional  wisdom  regarding  the  relationship  between 
output  and  prices  is  becoming  increasingly  inapplicable.  In  technical  economic  terms,  this 
phenomenon  could  be  described  as  a  "flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve,"  and  there  is 
uncertainty  about  how  flat  the  curve  has  actually  become,  how  long  this  situation  will 
continue, and whether the relationship will eventually return to its previous state. 
This phenomenon has been observed in many industrialized countries, and I would like to 
outline the situation in Japan as an example. 
After  hitting  bottom  in  2002,  the  Japanese  economy  entered  the  phase  of  recovery, 
supported by strong external demand due to the expansion of overseas economies. In recent 
years, the annual growth rate has been around 2 percent, slightly higher than the economy's 
potential growth rate, and resource utilization, namely in labor and production capacity, has 
been increasing. However, upward pressure on prices has yet to rise markedly. The year-on-
year  rate  of  change in  the  consumer  price index  (CPI,  excluding  fresh food)  was  negative 
from fiscal 1998 through fiscal 2004, and has since been around 0 percent. 
I think this situation, where prices do not rise despite the steady growth of the economy, is in 
part due to changes in the environment surrounding prices and wages amid the progress of 
globalization.  Products  made  in  Japan  have  been  facing  fierce  competition  from  products 
imported  from  emerging  economies.  In  the  meantime,  Japanese  workers  have  been 
experiencing increased competition from their counterparts in emerging economies through 
growth in imports and direct investment. In the face of greater exposure to global competition 
and  capital  market  discipline,  Japanese  firms  have  continued  to  restrain  labor  costs  to 
increase corporate value, even under tighter labor market conditions. Meanwhile, employees 
in  most  cases  still  prefer  stable  employment  over  wage  increases  because  of  their  past 
experience  of  a  severe  employment  situation.  To  put  it  simply,  prices  are  becoming  more 
susceptible  to  global  factors,  while  the  sensitivity  of  prices  to  the  state  of  the  domestic 
economy has been declining. 
With these changes in the environment surrounding prices, the conduct of monetary policy 
has become increasingly difficult. In general, interest rate policy affects economic activity first 
and  then  influences  prices  through  changes  in  resource  utilization.  As  the  relationship 
between output and prices has changed and the conventional wisdom no longer applies, it is 
becoming more difficult for central banks to envisage how much change in the interest rate 
will be needed to bring about a desired change in the inflation rate. 
Since March last year, when the Bank of Japan terminated the quantitative easing policy and 
reinstated an interest rate regime, we have raised the policy rate at a moderate pace, even 
though the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has remained stable at around 0 percent. 
A factor behind this conduct of monetary policy is the changes in the relationship between 
economic activity and prices I have just discussed. With these changes, the pace of growth 
in Japan's economy needed to raise the inflation rate in a short period of time would have to 
be quite high. In addition, significant uncertainty remains as to the exact rate of growth that 
would  be  desirable.  Monetary  policy  aimed  at  such  a  high  level  of  growth  in  the  economy 
could bring about larger swings in the economy and risk the sustainability of the economic 
expansion. The alternative, safer and more prudent route is to focus on securing sustained 
economic growth and minimizing swings, generating a gradual rise in the inflation rate. 
In the NIEs and ASEAN economies, reductions in both the rate of inflation and its amplitude 
of fluctuations have also been observed. Given the relative openness of their economies and 
their  geographical  proximity  to  the  fast-growing  Chinese  economy,  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2007
economies seem to have been significantly influenced by ongoing globalization. Of course, 
the  attainment  of  price  stability  is  a  major  achievement  of  monetary  policy  conducted  by 
central banks in these economies with their main focus on prices since the Asian currency 
crises, and this has greatly contributed to the growth and stability of the global economy. 
If  I  may  add,  prices  of  international  commodities  such  as  crude  oil  have  recently  risen 
substantially despite the stability in prices on a global basis. This will inevitably impair terms 
of trade for oil-consuming countries, but what is important, in terms of the price situation, is 
its influence on inflation expectations. There is a risk of a rise in inflation expectations in the 
longer term under tight demand and supply conditions given that recent rises in commodity 
prices are due in part to continued high growth in the world economy, especially in emerging 
economies.  This  implies  that  the  Phillips  curve  may  shift  upward.  Although  inflation 
expectations so far seem generally contained in many countries, appropriate monetary policy 
designed to achieve price stability and sustained economic growth is becoming increasingly 
important. 
The conduct of monetary policy from a medium- to long-term perspective 
III.  
Next, I would like to take up the recent disruptions in global financial markets stemming from 
the  subprime  mortgage  problem  in  the  United  States.  Although  recent  events  could  be 
considered  from  various  points  of  view,  I  think  they  were  intimately  related  to  the  benign 
conditions of the world economy and financial markets that continued for many years under 
economic globalization, as I have just described. The crux of the problem, as I understand it, 
is that risk evaluation had become too lax under those benign conditions and this has led to a 
correction through market forces.  
If we look back historically, we can see many cases where excessive financial and economic 
activities  continued  for  a  certain  period  based  on  optimistic  profit  assumptions,  and 
eventually resulted in large fluctuations in economic activity and prices or in financial crises 
through a later reaction. The Great Depression of the 1930s, Japan's asset price bubble in 
the 1980s, the Asian currency crisis in the late 1990s, and the IT bubble of the early 2000s 
are  examples.  The  common  feature  shared  by  all  of  these  was  that  imbalances  in  the 
economy  and  prices  had  grown  under  seemingly  favorable  and  stable  conditions  in  the 
economy and prices. 
If  expectations  take  hold  that  a  low  interest  rate  environment  will  continue  indefinitely,  the 
rate for discounting expected future returns in the determination of asset prices will be likely 
to decline, bringing about a rise in asset prices. A similar situation could also come about as 
a result of optimistic assumptions about profits when an economy has enjoyed continuous 
high growth for a considerable time. For example, there was the rise of influential concepts 
such as "transformation to domestically led economic growth" in Japan during the 1980s and 
the  "Asian  miracle"  in  the  1990s  prior  to  the  Asian  currency  crisis.  These  concepts  led 
economic  agents  to  lower  their  awareness  of  risks  and  to  overestimate  their  future 
profitability.  
Given these dangers, it has become more important for us to respond to risks that may bring 
about  larger  swings  in  economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  longer  run,  since  central  banks 
have a mission to conduct monetary policy to achieve price stability in the medium to long 
term. To be more specific, it is essential to carry out careful assessment of risks that may be 
relatively unlikely to materialize but, if they did, would have a large impact on the economy 
and prices, such as an asset price bubble. It is also essential to assess financial conditions 
and inflation expectations that may influence the economy and prices in the medium to long 
term. 
I think such awareness is shared by most central banks, but policy frameworks differ on how 
to incorporate this in the actual conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 3
In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  current  monetary  policy  framework  was  introduced 
when  the  quantitative  easing  policy  framework  was  terminated  last  year.  Under  the  new 
framework, (1) we examine the most likely outlook for economic activity and prices for one to 
two  years  ahead,  and  (2)  we  assess  risks  considered  most  relevant  to  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy from a longer-term perspective.  
The  recent  disruptions  in  global  financial  markets  seem  to  show  that  under  the  continuing 
favorable  conditions  of  healthy  world  growth  and  low  inflation,  financial  imbalances  can 
accumulate, which will be followed by corrections, posing a risk to economic stability. In more 
general terms, recent events could be regarded as a reminder of the importance of progress 
in  which  financial  and  economic  activities  remain  in  harmony.  Recent  events  have 
strengthened my belief that it is important for a central bank to assess various factors that 
may have negative consequences for the situation of the economy and prices in the medium 
to long term. 
Market stabilization and central bank activities 
IV.  
Central  banks  can  also  learn  a  lesson  from  the  recent  market  disruptions  from  a  rather 
different  standpoint.  It  is  a  central  bank's  role  to  stabilize  the  market  when  it  is  under 
pressure.  The  recent  market  disruptions  occurred  when  there  were  growing  uncertainties 
about  the  location  of  risks  due  to  the  complexity  of  the  international  flow  of  funds  under 
economic globalization. Risks have been dispersed and re-accumulated in various markets 
through the medium of advanced financial products whose risks are not easy to evaluate. At 
the same time, given the wide range of financial players, including hedge funds and private 
equity funds, the identity of risk-taking parties and the scale of risks have become blurred, 
masking the nature of the risks the financial system is exposed to. 
The problem stemming from the rise in housing mortgage loan delinquencies has crossed 
the  Atlantic  to  the  European  markets  through  a  decline  in  the  credit  ratings  of  securitized 
products such as asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) with mortgage loans as collateral. 
With  uncertainty  regarding  the  location  and  the  scale  of  risks,  the  functioning  of  credit 
markets including securitized markets has deteriorated overall. Conditions in money markets 
in  the  United  States  and  European  countries  turned  volatile  because  of  increased 
counterparty risks among financial institutions, and central banks have aggressively supplied 
funds to these markets. 
The  Japanese  money  market,  however,  has  been  generally  calm,  with  our  policy  interest 
rate, the overnight call rate, remaining close to our target level. The most significant factor 
that kept the Japanese money market stable was the limited exposure of Japanese financial 
institutions to subprime mortgage-related products. The stability could also be attributed to 
the  ability  of  the  Bank  to  accurately  grasp  financial  market  situations  and  perform  money 
market operations, developed through a variety of past experiences including financial crisis. 
To  be  more  specific,  the  following seem  to  have  contributed:  (1)  an  accurate  grasp  of  the 
money market conditions through daily monitoring of transactions by market participants; (2) 
disclosure  of  information  concerning  money  market  operations  through,  for  example,  daily 
release of shortage and surplus of funds in the money market, both projections and actual 
results;  and  (3)  flexible  use  of  money  market  operation  tools  covering  maturities  from 
overnight to three months, depending on market conditions. 
These are part of our normal modalities of money market operations and nothing special. It is 
necessary  for  a  central  bank  to  accurately  grasp  the  daily  liquidity  needs  of  market 
participants  as  well  as  overall  market  conditions  because  monetary  policy  works  through 
influencing  money  market  conditions  and  the  behavior  of  market  participants.  In  addition, 
understanding each financial institution's soundness, thereby contributing to the soundness 
of the financial system, is an important element of central banking.  
4 
 BIS Review 133/2007
The  ability  to  closely  monitor  the  liquidity  condition  of  financial  institutions  should  be  finely 
honed in normal times. After all, a central bank is a "bank." Recent actions by central banks 
to  calm  market  turbulence  seem  to  have  highlighted  the  simple  fact  that  it  is  through  its 
banking business that a central bank plays a principal role. Faced with increasing complexity 
in  the  international  flow  of  funds,  which  may  bring  about  sudden  stress  in  the  working  of 
financial markets, it is becoming ever more important for a central bank to accumulate further 
knowledge about financial conditions through its daily activities. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
I  sometimes  describe  central  banking  in  terms  of  the  role  of  the  goalkeeper  in  a  football 
team. It is rare for goalkeepers to score a goal themselves, but what they do is support their 
teammates  in  their  efforts  to  score  by  defending  their  goal  from  the  enemy's  attacks.  In 
defense, it is vital to read the enemy's offensive strategy; in the conduct of monetary policy, it 
is essential to accurately assess the risk profiles of economic activity  and financial market 
conditions. When on the offensive, good teamwork is important; in monetary policy terms, it 
is  important  to  facilitate  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and  stimulate  innovation.  The 
dynamic progress of economic globalization brings with it challenges for central banks such 
as I have discussed today, but we intend to grapple with them and bring victory to the team 
by supporting players in the globalized economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 5
