Glenn Stevens: Central bank communication  
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Sydney 
Institute, Sydney, 11 December 2007. 
 This  evening  I  would  like  to  talk  about  central  bank  communication.  There  are  plenty  of 
people who probably think that “central bank” and “communication” are not expressions that 
are normally thought of as belonging together. Yet communication has become steadily more 
open, and more important, in the central banking world over the years. At one time, overnight 
interest rates used to be adjusted without announcement or explanation – “snugging” was a 
popular term of the late 1980s. The market would generally take a few days, and the general 
public  considerably  longer,  to  work  out  what  was  happening  when  monetary  policy  was 
changing. They usually had to wait longer again for an explanation of why it was changing. 
That is no longer the case. These days, central banks say they are moving the interest rate, 
and say why, very openly. This particular form of transparency was adopted quite early at the 
RBA,  back  in  1990,  under  Bernie  Fraser.  Not  only  do  they  announce  policy  changes  in  a 
forthright  fashion,  most  central  banks  set  out  their  detailed  assessment  of  economic 
conditions in published material. In a number of cases, they publish minutes of their policy 
discussions. Governors and others give speeches, appear before parliamentary committees 
and are frequently quoted by various commentators in the media. 
For central banks, historically quite discreet organisations, this is quite a change. I want to 
examine  the  reasons  behind  that  change,  and  the  case  for  openness.  I  want  also  to  talk 
about the limits of openness. Finally, I will elaborate a little on our own recently announced 
changes in this area. 
Why communicate? 
To begin with, it is worth asking the question: why do central banks communicate? 
There are at least two reasons. The first arises from the principle of accountability in an open 
and democratic society. The central bank is charged with some important responsibilities – 
maintaining the purchasing power of the nation’s currency, pursuing “full employment” and 
fostering stable and reliable financial and payments systems, among others. It is endowed 
with substantial powers – in the RBA’s case, to buy and sell financial assets, commodities, 
real property, to lend money and to make certain regulations – in fact, to do anything that 
could be thought to come within the remit of “central banking business”. 
It stands to reason that the central bank should expect to account for the way in which it has 
used  its  powers  to  pursue  its  statutory  goals.  The  framers  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  1959 
nearly 50 years ago very wisely placed the Parliament squarely in the centre of accountability 
arrangements. In recent times, the Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997 has 
required annual reporting of the relevant agencies, of which the Reserve Bank is one, but 
from the very beginning the RBA was required to issue an annual report to Parliament. 
Yet the requirements for more frequent communication have grown over the years. In part 
this  reflects  the  increased  development  of  capital  markets  and  the  speed  and  force  with 
which they respond to economic developments. Markets crave information, and the central 
bank’s assessment of the state of the economy is one part of the information set. 
In part, the demand for communication accompanies increased operational independence for 
central  banks.  When  the  central  bank  is  making  an  important  policy  decision  under  an 
authority  delegated  by  the  Parliament,  as  opposed  to  implementing  a  decision  made  by  a 
minister – and that is what we are doing in the case of monetary policy – there will naturally 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 1
be  an  expectation  for  accountability.  It  also  reflects  the  general  development  of  the 
community’s  expectation  to  be  more  informed  about  important  matters.  That  is  a  natural 
concomitant of a more affluent, educated and mature society. As such, it is something to be 
welcomed.  
There is also the role of the media. Our political leaders are expected to answer questions 
from  the  media  much  more  frequently,  and  across  a  much  broader  range  of  issues,  than 
once was the case.1 Some of this spills over onto other institutions, including corporations 
and central banks. The media is responding to market demand for information here, but as in 
any other competitive industry, media organisations are also seeking to create new markets 
by  supplying  more  intensive,  more  frequent  coverage  of  more  issues,  including  economic 
policy. 
The second rationale for more communication is the desire for more effective policy. Some 
policy  actions  have  as  much  effect  through  conditioning  expectations  as  by  constraining 
current behaviour. This is very  much true in the case of monetary policy. A change in the 
cash rate of modest size has only a pretty small impact on the economy. But expectations 
about a sequence of possible future interest rate changes can often be more powerful. What 
a central bank says, as much as what it does, affects those expectations. 
Even more important are expectations of future inflation. When people expect prices to rise 
rapidly, they bring forward purchases, put up their own prices, demand higher wages and so 
on.  That  helps  to  create  the  very  inflation  they  expect.  On  the  other  hand,  if  people  are 
convinced  that  inflation  will  be  contained  –  perhaps  because  they  believe  that  the  central 
bank  will  do  whatever  is  required  to  achieve  that  –  they  behave  accordingly.  In  that  case, 
their price setting, wage and purchasing behaviour helps keep inflation controlled. 
Expectations are more likely to be helpful in fostering economic stability when the public has 
a clear understanding of what the central bank’s goals are, how the central bank thinks the 
economy works and how in general terms it is likely to respond to various events, particularly 
pressure on inflation. That is why most central banks spend a good deal of time talking about 
their  objectives  and  their  policy  framework.  It  is  why  they  publish  exhaustive  analyses  of 
economic  conditions  and  offer  such  assessments  as  they  can  about  likely  future 
developments. 
Of course the world is highly uncertain, so central banks cannot spell out exactly what they 
would do in response to every conceivable scenario. There will always be the potential for 
some surprises. But if people understand the framework and the goals of policy, then their 
own response to that knowledge will usually be helpful in achieving the policy goal. Hence, 
communication is an important part of the policy process. 
How to communicate? And how much? 
So  much  for  the  rationale  for  communication.  What  are  the  channels  central  banks  use? 
There are several. 
Most  central  banks  have  a  program  of  publications.  Australia’s  central  bank  has  been 
publishing  the  Bulletin  every  month  since  1937.2  In  most  cases  central  banks  publish  the 
results of research of their staff. The views in these papers are those of the authors alone, 
but much of the research is part of the knowledge base available to the policy-makers and 
                                                 
1   They are also expected to respond to more media questioning than their counterparts in other democracies, 
as far as I can see. 
In  Australia,  it  was  a  recommendation  of  the  1935–1937  Royal  Commission  that  the  Commonwealth  Bank 
publish a regular statistical bulletin. The Reserve Bank took over this obligation after “separation” in 1960. 
BIS Review 147/2007
2  
2 
 hence is usually of interest to those seeking an understanding of policy issues. The RBA has 
been publishing Research Discussion Papers since the late 1960s. 
Over  the  past  15  years  or  so,  many  central  banks  have  upgraded  their  regular  economic 
reporting,  giving  a  more  in  depth  account  of  economic  conditions  with  a  more  analytical 
flavour.  In  some  countries  with  formal  inflation  targets,  these  are  called  “inflation  reports”, 
though  they  are  about  much  more  than  inflation.  These  documents  set  out  the  factual 
background  in  a  way  which  shows  how  policy  makers  account  for  economic  and  financial 
conditions in their decisions. In the process they usually reveal a good deal about how the 
central bank thinks the economy works – its “model”, if you will. 
In many, probably most, cases, these documents contain forward looking material. Forecasts 
for inflation (and often for other key macroeconomic variables), the assumptions on which the 
forecasts are based and the extent of uncertainty surrounding the forecasts are, to varying 
degrees, spelled out. A few central banks even publish a future interest rate path – albeit one 
heavily  conditioned  by  assumptions  which  are  almost  certain  not  to  be  realised,  for  one 
reason or another. 
The  RBA  has  progressively  upgraded  its  own  regular  report.  The  Statement  on  Monetary 
Policy appears in the mid month of each quarter. This is a very comprehensive treatment of 
the local and global economies, financial markets and considerations for monetary policy. It 
contains the Bank’s inflation forecast, a sense of the risks surrounding the forecast, and a 
discussion of the forces conditioning the outlook for the economy. It also offers an account of 
the policy decisions the Board has made in the preceding period.  
Central bankers give public speeches on issues of the day. In our case, we typically will take 
questions from the floor on such occasions as well. Sometimes the questions are even about 
the topic of the speech! The speeches, and the answers to questions, are routinely sifted by 
economists, the media and others for hints about the central bank’s intentions. That is not 
surprising,  though  sometimes  readers  are  remarkably  inventive  in  their  efforts  to  read 
between the lines. I have certainly marvelled at some accounts of what I am supposed to 
have  said.  Nonetheless,  these  occasions  do  give  the  central  bank  the  opportunity  to  talk 
about the issues it thinks are important, and to signal, if necessary, any changes to its view 
that might occur between the formal assessments of the economy appearing on the regular 
timetable. 
Central bankers make appearances in front of Parliamentary committees. As you may know, 
in  our  case,  the  Governor  has  been  appearing  twice  yearly  in  front  of  the  House  of 
Representatives Economics Committee for about a decade now. Other officials of the Bank 
appear  in  front  of  various  other  committees  as  appropriate.  These  hearings  give  elected 
representatives the chance to ask questions at length. They are a key part of accountability 
and  offer  a  useful  opportunity  for  communication.  They  can  also  play,  if  used  well,  an 
educative role, developing a better understanding of policy issues than would be achievable 
in many other fora. Of course, there is always the risk that in such sessions the questioning 
can tend to aim more at political point scoring. 
Public  communication  is,  however,  a  two  edged  sword.  For  every  occasion  when  there  is 
something important to say, there is another at which a central banker finds him or herself 
giving a speech, or releasing a formal document, which has little new to say on the economy, 
in an environment in which markets and observers already have a good understanding of the 
central  bank’s  assessment.  On  those  occasions  there  is  always  the  risk  that  further 
communication  will  inadvertently  dislodge  perfectly  sensible  expectations  –  which  is  one 
reason why speeches and documents are often, quite deliberately, a little on the unexciting 
side. Colour and movement are not necessarily useful in the central banker’s case. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  RBA  was,  for  a  long  time,  somewhat  ambivalent  about  the 
practice  adopted  by  some  other  central  banks  of  making  a  statement  of  reasons  for  the 
policy  decision  even  when  the  decision  is  to  leave  rates  unchanged.  While  a  decision  to 
change rates has for many years been accompanied by a pretty detailed explanation in our 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 3
case, a decision not to change rates often meant that we had little new information to impart. 
We adhered to the old adage “when you have nothing to say, keep your mouth shut”. 
These  reservations  were  valid.  But  an  increasing  number  of  other  central  banks  have 
managed to construct these statements and issue them regularly, without apparently doing 
much  harm.  More  importantly,  while  there  are  plenty  of  occasions  in  which  no  change  in 
interest  rates  is  widely  expected,  and  hence  perhaps  needs  little  explanation,  there  are 
others in which a no change decision does require careful explanation. 
Having  reflected  on  this  for  some  time  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  came  to  the 
judgement that the downside risks of such statements no longer outweigh the likely benefits. 
Accordingly, we have adopted the practice of issuing a short statement after every meeting, 
explaining  the  policy  decision,  whether  or  not  the  cash  rate  is  to  change.  The  first  “no-
change” statement was issued last week. 
Last week’s decision was a good example, in fact, of one where no change to the cash rate 
needed explanation. The statement noted the concern the Board had about the outlook for 
inflation, given the recent price data and the apparent strength in demand. It also noted that 
the outlook for the world economy looked a little weaker, and that trends in financial market 
pricing,  over  the  preceding  month,  were  likely  to  result  in  a  rise  in  borrowing  rates  for 
Australians.  In  other  words,  financial  conditions  were  shifting  in  the  right  direction  for 
containing  inflation,  even  without  a  further  adjustment  in  the  cash  rate.  Hence  the  Board 
decided to leave the cash rate unchanged, for the time being. 
In  a  further  change  to  communication  arrangements,  commencing  at  the  February  2008 
meeting, our statement will be made on the day of the meeting, at 2.30 pm, rather than the 
next  morning.  Any  change  in  the  cash  rate  will  still  take  effect  the  following  day.  This 
schedule  will  inform  the  markets  during  the  Australian  day,  but  will  limit  the  time  period 
between the decision being taken and it being publicly announced. The previous practice of 
delaying  the  announcement  until  9.30  am  the  following  day  was  originally  adopted  for 
logistical reasons, but they have long since disappeared. It is much better practice, and less 
risky, to announce the decision as promptly as possible once it has been made. 
Minutes and the limits to transparency 
That brings me to the one remaining area of central bank accountability and communication 
that  I  would  like  to  talk  about,  which  is  the  treatment  of  the  minutes  of  policy  making 
meetings. 
Practices  vary  in  this  area.  The  United  States  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  has  been 
publishing minutes for many years. It was prompted initially by Congressional pressure for 
more openness, but before long moved beyond minimum requirements to a fairly full set of 
minutes  including  voting  records  of  individual  members.  The  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary 
Policy Committee (MPC) is required by statute to publish its minutes. The MPC’s culture is 
expressly,  by  intention  of  its  creators,  one  of  individual  accountability.  Hence  the  minutes 
include voting records of the members, and it is not uncommon for a significant proportion of 
members  to  differ  from  the  majority  –  including  two  cases where  the  Governor  was  in  the 
minority. MPC members hold a second meeting, subsequent to the policy meeting at which 
the interest rate decision is taken, for the purpose of approving the minutes, which are then 
released prior to the next policy meeting. 
The European Central Bank, in contrast, does not publish minutes. One of the key reasons is 
that the presidents/governors of national central banks sit on the Governing Council of the 
ECB  but  are  required  to  make  decisions  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  as  opposed  to 
decisions that might suit the particular circumstances of their own countries. It is argued, not 
unreasonably,  that  publication  of  minutes  and  voting  might  prejudice  the  capacity  of  the 
national  governors  to  take  a  euro  area,  rather  than  national,  perspective.  The  ECB  does 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2007
make  additional  efforts  at  communication  of  other  kinds,  including  a  regular  press 
conference. 
Clearly there are views on both sides of this question, which reflect the different institutional 
arrangements across countries. This is why we have argued over time that, in the pursuit of 
the  optimal  degree  of  transparency,  it  would  not  make  sense  to  “cherry  pick”  the  high 
transparency aspects of every other system and assume that they should simply be grafted 
onto the Australian system. The nature of the Reserve Bank Board – a majority of whom are 
part-time  members,  drawn  from  various  parts  of  the  Australian  community,  but  seeking  to 
make decisions in the national interest as opposed to any industry, geographical or sectional 
interest – needs to be considered when thinking about disclosure practices. 
It  is  also  important,  I  think,  to  articulate  the  point  that  there  are  reasonable  limits  to 
transparency  in  any  system.  It  is  not  the  case  that  releasing  more  material  is  always,  by 
definition, going to lead to better informed public debate or better policy decisions. 
In  contemplating  the  release  of  minutes  of  meetings  in  particular,  and  the  form  any  such 
release might take, we need to balance a legitimate desire for information and accountability 
against the need to maintain a frank, open discussion at the meeting. At many meetings I 
have taken part in over the years, people have considered various arguments that ultimately 
were  found  to  be  unconvincing,  but  which  did  need  to  be  examined  in  the  interests  of 
reaching a balanced decision. People also change their minds in the course of a meeting – 
and one would hope that that happens occasionally, since one of the key benefits of a having 
meeting is to learn from and respond to the views of the other participants. It is unlikely that 
these  dynamics  of  a  meeting  could  be  sustained  if  every  utterance  were  disclosed.  The 
incentive could easily arise for people to be much more cautious in what they said, and to 
come  to  the  meeting  with  a  pre-written  statement,  rather  than  to  engage  in  a  genuinely 
interactive discussion. That would reduce the quality of the discussion and, ultimately, of the 
decision.  And  it  is  the  quality  of  the  decision,  after  all,  which  we  should  be  seeking  to 
maximise. 
What all of this means is that a decision to release minutes should not be taken lightly. Such 
documents  have  to  be  written  carefully,  taking  into  account  the  institutional  structure, 
including  the  nature  of  the  Board,  and  the  need  to  preserve  an  environment  of  candid 
discussion. 
RBA minutes 
That said, there is no reason why, with careful drafting, a set of minutes that strikes the right 
balance cannot be compiled. Indeed, for a while now, we have been writing the minutes in 
just that way. After discussion among the Board members, we recently decided that there is 
no  longer  a  strong  case  for  not  being  prepared  to  release  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy 
discussion. Accordingly, as announced last week, we will in future release the minutes of the 
monetary policy meetings with a lag of two weeks. The minutes from the November meeting 
were  released  last  Wednesday.  The  minutes  from  the  meeting  held  last  week  will  be 
released on December 18. In addition, with the agreement of the Board, I am releasing at 
this time on the website the minutes from all meetings since I have been the chairman of the 
Board (that is, commencing with the October 2006 meeting). 
Those  who  are  interested  to  read  these  documents  –  which  will,  outside  the  media  and 
economic  and  financial  professionals,  be  relatively  few,  I  expect  –  will  find  the  following 
features.  
First, there is an account of the main factual material available to the Board and the issues 
arising from that material that came up during their discussion. There is nothing particularly 
startling there – the information available to the Bank is pretty much known by everyone else. 
The material does not cover every single indicator the Bank tracks – there are too many. So 
if  your  favourite  statistic  is  not  mentioned,  that  doesn’t  mean  we  are  ignoring  it.  Equally, 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 5
those statistics that have been prominent in recent sets of minutes should not necessarily be 
seen  as  all-important  for  future  decisions.  The  Board  will  always  strive  to  form  a 
comprehensive  picture  of  the  whole  economy  in  assessing  the  economic  outlook  and  the 
prospects for achieving the inflation objective, and in coming to its decision. 
Second,  there  is  an  account  of  the  policy  discussion  that  occurs  towards  the  end  of  the 
meeting,  which  outlines  the  key  considerations  involved  in  the  decision.  Sometimes  these 
considerations  are  quite  straightforward.  On  other  occasions,  they  may  point  in  different 
directions  in  terms  of  their  implications  for  interest  rates,  in  which  case  the  Board  has  to 
make an “on balance decision”. The minutes will set out as clearly as we can the logic behind 
the decision. 
Third, there is a record of what the decision was – that is, what target cash rate the Bank is 
to maintain in the period until the next meeting. 
Readers  will  note  that  comments  are  not  attributed  to  individuals.  The  material  is  not  a 
transcript – indeed we do not keep a transcript – and it is not an edited version of some other 
set of more detailed minutes. No other record of the monetary policy discussion exists. The 
minutes do not attempt to provide a “blow-by-blow” description of every comment made. But 
nor do the minutes released by other central banks, and it would not be sensible to do so, for 
the reasons I articulated a few moments ago. 
Readers  will  also  observe  that  the  pattern  of  votes  of  individuals  is  not  recorded,  only  the 
outcome. That is a point of difference with other central banks which publish minutes. But in 
those  cases  the  decision-makers  are  full-time  appointees,  in  some  cases  in  systems  with 
expressly  individual,  as  opposed  to  collective,  responsibility  for  their  decisions.  That  is  not 
the  system  Australia  operates,  and  our  pattern  of  disclosure  reflects  the  institutional 
arrangements. 
In the interests of clarity, let me also state that these minutes do not cover issues other than 
monetary  policy.  Other  matters  that  the  Board  considers  from  time  to  time  –  such  as  the 
Bank’s  accounts,  audit  processes,  issues  concerning  subsidiaries  and  other  governance 
questions – are not recorded in these published minutes, because there is no public policy 
case  to  do  so.  There  is  proper  disclosure  on  these  matters,  but  through  the  appropriate 
vehicle, which is mainly the annual report. This is in line with practice in other central banks, 
and with common sense. 
Our view is that minutes of the type we are now releasing, in combination with the regular 
statement after each meeting, and the large volume of other material released by the Bank, 
meets the legitimate claim of observers to know the basis of the Board’s policy decisions. It is 
consistent  with  arrangements  that  prevail  in  the  countries  to  which  we  would  look  for 
examples of good practice. At the same time, this approach should preserve the candour of 
discussion at the meeting and recognises and respects the basis on which the non executive 
members of the Board serve. As such, it strikes the right balance. 
Conclusion 
Communication has become a more important part of the central banker’s tool kit. While we 
will rarely be found courting publicity, neither will we shirk the responsibility to explain what 
we  are  doing  and  why.  That  is  a  requirement  of  good  governance,  but  also  it  will  usually 
make policy decisions more effective. 
There  are  limits  to  transparency.  More  is  not  always  better,  and  because  the  decision  to 
disclose additional information is hard to reverse once made, it should be made with care. 
Nonetheless, after reflecting on our own experience and evaluating experience around the 
world,  we  recently  judged  that  the  time  had  come  to  move  Australia’s  arrangements  to 
conform  with  normal  practice  elsewhere.  I  was  very  pleased  to  learn  when  I  met  the  new 
Treasurer a couple of weeks ago that he supported the changes. 
6 
 BIS Review 147/2007
This material will not compete too well with the best seller lists, and almost everyone will (I 
hope) have better things to read while on the beach over the summer than the Reserve Bank 
Board’s  minutes.  But  for  the  professionals,  this  will  hopefully  make  a  modest  further 
contribution to their understanding of the Board’s decisions. And for any of the rest of you 
who are having trouble getting to sleep … 
Whatever your preferred reading material, I wish you a pleasant festive season and a happy 
and prosperous New Year.  
BIS Review 147/2007 
 7
