Marion Williams: The development of money and capital markets in 
Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
5th Biennial Capital Markets Conference, Bridgetown, 25 October 2007. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  Distinguished  speakers,  Members  of  the  Board  of  The  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados, Deputy Governors, Members of Management and Staff of the Bank, Managers of 
Financial Institutions, Specially Invited Guests, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Welcome to the Central Bank and to the latest in the series of the Bank’s Capital Markets 
Seminars. The Bank is heartened by the attendance here this morning and takes that as an 
indication  of  the  high  degree  of  interest  which  is  now  attached  to  capital  market 
developments. We recognize that recent happenings on the local market have played their 
part.  However,  we  would  like  to  think  that  the  Bank’s  public  education  programme  has 
contributed to that growing interest. 
The Central Bank has been in the forefront of the efforts to develop and deepen the local 
capital  market.  Indeed,  the  development  of  money  and  capital  markets  in  Barbados  is  an 
explicit  objective  as  set  out  in  the  Act  which  established  the  Bank.  Secondly,  the  Bank’s 
responsibility to manage this country’s international resources and to facilitate its economic 
development behoves it to work towards the extension of the capital market. This is why the 
Central  Bank  played  an  active  part  in  the  establishment  of  the  Barbados  Stock  Exchange 
during the 1980s has constantly supported capital market development and is now partnering 
with the commercial banks in introducing a secondary mortgage market in Barbados. 
Over the years governments in Barbados have provided fiscal concessions for the purchase 
of  mutual  funds,  registered  retirement  savings  plans  and  stock  purchases.  Commercial 
banks and other financial entities like insurance companies and credit unions have devised 
additional  products  and  even  the  technology  which  drives  financial  transactions  has  been 
substantially  enhanced,  so  creating  an  environment  for  the  more  rapid  growth  of  capital 
markets.  Other  developments  include  the  imminent  liberalization  of  capital  transactions  by 
Barbados with Caricom countries and the intended move to greater reliance on open market 
operations. 
One of the major challenges is to provide opportunities for investors. This essentially means 
bringing on stream a number of attractive products tailored for every known level. The Bank’s 
seminar a few years ago on reverse mortgages was an attempt to introduce this concept to a 
wider  cross  section  of  interested  parties.  We  are  now  actively  looking  to  see  how  we  can 
develop a secondary mortgage market. The legislation is in process for its establishment. I 
am  hopeful  that  financial  institutions  will  put  their  backs  to  the  plough  in  this  regard  and 
devise attractive instruments. 
For any secondary market to operate efficiently, whether in bonds or other securities requires 
market  makers.  This  has  been  a  long  time  in  coming  but  I  believe  that  we  are  close  to 
making this a reality in Barbados. 
There  also  has  to  be  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and  financial  policies.  Poorly  run 
companies  with  weak  balances  sheets  and  cash  flow  profile  will  not  attract  investors. 
Moreover,  they  will  cause  confidence  in  well-managed  firms  to  fall.  Where  poor  decisions 
lead to financial losses and collapses in one subsector, because of the high level of financial 
integration, the consequences can be widespread. 
The local, regional environments today are significantly different from what existed when we 
held  our  last  capital  markets  conference.  On  the  domestic  scene  the  trend  towards 
consolidation in the financial sector has continued. The local stock market index which rose 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
by 26.4% in 2004 fell by 6.8% in 2006. The performance of the mutual fund component of the 
market which had been registering annual growth up to 2004 seems to be levelling off and 
performed  below  par  in  2006.  At  the  regional  level  many  of  the  strongest  well-established 
and most reputable regional companies have remained robust but some have experienced 
declines in their share prices during the last two years or so. However, the markets have not 
shown significant instability and are still relatively vibrant. 
The international economy however, has been beset by a serious liquidity crisis, instability in 
stock prices and a weakening in the US economy. It is against this backdrop that we thought 
it was timely to discuss some of the major issues, which are confronting the financial services 
industry abroad, and their impact on developments in the Caribbean. The world is becoming 
more global and it is increasingly difficult to completely insulate ourselves from international 
developments. 
Indeed this seminar comes at an opportune time both from an international perspective and 
from a national perspective. In the international markets the impact of the subprime problem 
has  led  to  Central  Bank  intervention  on  an  unprecedented  scale.  The  securitization  of 
mortgages and credit generally has served to merge the credit and securities markets and 
the  capital  markets  to  an  extent  where  collateralized  obligations  are  losing  value  sharply 
because of difficulties in the credit markets and the burden of stability has fallen on central 
banks. These movements have had their impact on both the equity and bond markets, so 
that Central Bank intervention in US Europe and the UK have been related to maintaining 
stability  in  the  capital  markets  as  much  as  in  the  credit  markets  in  a  way  which  was  not 
previously anticipated. The weakness in the US economy which is manifest in the declining 
value  of  the  US  dollar  and  the  uncertainty  regarding  the  price  of  crude  oil  are  also 
developments which coincide with the credit market problems. These relationships deserve 
exploration  and  for  that  reason  we  have  put  together  a  distinguished  team  of  speakers  to 
examine them for us. I would particularly like to welcome Geoffrey Belle who has spoken at 
each of our five capital market seminars to date. A warm and special welcome to Geoffrey. A 
special welcome too to all of our overseas speakers. 
In the light of the current global concerns, this is why we are starting off with two overview 
sessions, which deal with the international environment and weakness in the financial and 
economic system which can contribute to crises. 
During times of uncertainty the importance of sound financial regulation is brought sharply 
into focus. In financial circles the prevailing wisdom is that during crises there is a flight to 
quality. Quality here can be defined both in terms of institutions and instruments and this is 
when regulatory oversight really counts. Accordingly there is a session this morning which is 
entitled “Financial Market Integrity and Compliance”. 
In this environment the portfolios of regional investors in these markets has become a matter 
deserving close attention. Since regional investors desire diversification, this has prompted 
them to seek to invest in foreign markets. However the fluctuating and recently falling value 
of  these  portfolios  have  implications  for  maintenance  of  value  and  for  returns.  The  other 
question  is  can  these  developments  affect  returns  on  regional  equity  or  fixed  income 
securities  issued  and  traded  in  these  markets.  The  First  Panel  discussion  will  therefore 
examine the impact of volatility in capital and credit markets in developed countries on our 
investment portfolio decisions in the Caribbean. In addressing this topic we are seeking to 
determine  the  transmission  mechanisms  between  the  two  regions  and  how  vulnerable 
regional markets are to financial contagion from abroad. It would also be interesting to hear 
their views not only on asset portfolio diversification but on currency diversification – a trend 
we have observed – certainly among some central banks world-wide. 
The two sessions immediately after lunch speak to issues and policies which are currently 
occupying the attention of local policymakers. As some of you are aware, the Government of 
Barbados is committed to the removal of capital controls on transactions with members of the 
Caricom  Single  Market  and  Economy  from  December  31,  2007.  We  are  hopeful  that  this 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
process will facilitate capital market development and the first paper after the lunch break will 
address some of the issues relating to financial liberalization and the implications for capital 
market development. We are mindful here that the South East Asian capital markets were 
highly liberalized – in fact that is why money was able to move out so quickly in 1997. Yet 
everything points to the fact that financial liberalization assists in capital market development, 
particularly if they have global objectives. 
The  second  presentation  after  lunch  deals  with  open  market  operations,  drawing  on  the 
experiences of another regional central bank and should provide some useful lessons for us. 
We have observed the provision of liquidity by central banks in the major capitals recently as 
the credit crunch unfolded there. In the Caribbean, the pressure is often in the other direction 
–  to  mop  up  liquidity.  The  cost  can  be  tremendous.  That  discussion  should  be  quite 
instructive. 
The  panelists  in  the  final  session  will  focus  on  issues  and  challenges  emanating  from  the 
Regional Capital Markets. This should be an exciting session bringing together as it does a 
regulator, banker and an academic. Somewhere in the course of our discourse we may hear 
some views on the attempted amalgamation here in Barbados and the attempts to bid up the 
shares to levels way beyond expectations and as it turns out, beyond what the market can 
bear.  It  is  instructive  to  determine  whether  the  small  size  of  our  markets  and  the 
imperfections  in  the  market  lead  to  these  types  of  developments  which  make  our  markets 
susceptible. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  you  have  to  believe  me  when  I  tell  you  that  this  session  was 
conceptualized  before  the  current  happenings  which  are  now  affecting  three  well-known 
conglomerates  in  Barbados  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  before  the  subprime  problem 
erupted  in  the  US,  but  not  before  Barbados  had  committed  to  financial  liberalization  with 
respect to CARICOM with a hope of accelerating the development of our capital markets, so 
the timing has turned out to be a bonus in terms of interest in capital markets. 
We  look  forward  to  the  presentations  and  we  particularly  thank  those  who  have  gone  to 
much effort to be here. I thank you. 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 3
