Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Momentum of the global economy and the 
recent turbulence on the financial markets 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the 
Parliamentary Committee on Financial Affairs, Madrid, 18 September 2007.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
My  appearance  before  this  Committee  comes  at  a  juncture  characterised  by  two  notable 
phenomena.  First,  the  continued  strong  momentum  of  the  global,  European  and  Spanish 
economies  for  yet  another  year.  And  second,  the  sudden  emergence  of  uncertainty  in  the 
world economy as a consequence of turbulence on the financial markets. 
The root cause of this turbulence is the increase in US sub-prime mortgage loan defaults. 
The  distinctive  feature  of  these  loans  is  that  they  have  been  granted  to  individuals  with 
incomplete,  or  even  inexistent,  credit  records  illustrative  in  all  cases  of  a  high  risk  profile. 
These  loans  have,  moreover,  often  been  extended  under  rather  lax  conditions  and  hence 
have ultimately put the US institutions involved in a highly vulnerable position. 
When  the  (in  all  likelihood  excessive)  risk  exposures  materialised,  the  intermediaries 
specialising in mortgages of this type began to incur losses and some of them were unable to 
meet  their  payment  commitments.  In  the  early  stages,  then,  the  crisis  was  confined  to  a 
limited number of specialised US financial intermediaries. 
However, the weight of the US economy in world events, the high volume of funds attracted 
by it in recent years on the international markets and, above all, the strong interdependence 
that has developed between these markets and between financial institutions worldwide as a 
result of globalisation, have ultimately resulted in the financial turbulence taking on a global 
dimension. 
A key factor in propagating the turbulence internationally has been the prolific development 
in  recent  years  of  new  structured  financial  instruments  designed  to  smooth  the  transfer  of 
credit  risk  between  different  agents.  These  new  assets  enable  greater  diversification  of 
banks’ loan portfolios and therefore more efficient management of underlying risks. On the 
downside, however, there are also potential adverse effects owing to the valuation difficulties 
derived from their complexity and to the weak incentives for institutions specialising in these 
practices to properly calibrate risks that they may not ultimately assume. I shall return to this 
point later on. 
The spread of the turbulence throughout the international system brought falling valuations 
and rising volatilities in a good number of stock markets, along with a general increase in the 
credit risk premiums demanded in fixed-income markets. These movements reflect a trend 
towards the more accurate pricing of risks following a long period of excessive indulgence, 
and this should make for sounder economies in the medium and long term. Nevertheless, the 
correction  is  causing  tension  in  lending  conditions  which,  if  it  persists  too  long,  could  also 
bear on the confidence of investors and other economic agents. 
However, it is still premature to assess the effect of these shocks on world economic growth. 
Significant data are not yet available on how economies have performed after the shock. In 
any event, the size of the possible effect will depend closely on how much the US economy 
is affected by the turbulence that has arisen there. The information available so far shows 
that  the  United  States  is  more  resilient  to  the  residential  investment  crisis  than  originally 
envisaged,  so  the  foreseeable  effects  seem  limited.  This  diagnosis  is  consistent  with  the 
forecasts  of 
international  organisations  which,  while  acknowledging  a  considerable 
heightening  of  uncertainty  and  downside  risk,  continue  pointing  to  a  scenario  of  ongoing 
world buoyancy. Realistically, however, if the United States went into recession, a significant 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
change in the world economic scenario could take place, although the impact would in any 
event  be  cushioned  by  the  continued  buoyancy  of  the  emerging  economies,  which  have 
generally been little affected by the financial turbulence. 
The extent of the impact on global growth will also depend fundamentally on the force and 
duration of the shocks generated. In the past, in episodes such as that of 1998 sparked by 
the collapse of the Long Term Capital Management fund and by the Russian debt crisis, the 
financial turbulence barely influenced world economic buoyancy despite the dark predictions 
that accompanied it. Other episodes, by contrast, such as the “new economy” crisis had a 
more far-reaching impact, albeit of varying intensity and duration in the different geographical 
areas. 
Unfortunately, these experiences are no precedent for diagnosing the potential scope of the 
current  episode,  which  exhibits  many  new  features,  including  the  fact  that  it  is  especially 
concentrated  in  the  Western  heartland  of  the  industrialised  countries.  The  recent  past  has 
seen turbulence in Asia, Latin America and eastern Europe. Now, in contrast, the shocks are 
mainly affecting the United States and the more developed European countries. 
Let me thus take an eminently European perspective as I examine more closely some of the 
main features at play here. This approach will also help me to look at its implications for euro 
monetary policy, which I believe is the most logical way to address the possible impact on 
the Spanish economy. 
I  wish  to  begin  by  emphasising  the  non-existence  in  the  euro  area  of  the  sub-prime 
mortgages that are accepted practice in the United States. Therefore, in the first analysis, the 
rise  in  doubtful  assets  in  the  United  States  should  affect  only  the  European  financial 
intermediaries that acquired securities linked to sub-prime mortgage loans originated in that 
economy.  However,  the  propagation  of  contagion  is  not  confined  to  the  influence  of  this 
channel alone, but rather is transmitted through a wider range of shocks. 
The  increase  in  doubtful  assets  and  defaults  in  US  mortgages  has  set  in  motion  a  global 
process of upward revision of credit risk premiums, which in the climate of economic boom of 
recent years had sunk to very low, barely discriminatory levels, prompting what was probably 
excessive investment in potentially high-risk activities. 
These  investments  were  further  driven  by  the  proliferation  of  new  financial  intermediaries 
specialised in the credit risk transfer markets to which I referred earlier. In particular, in the 
current bout of turbulence a major role has been played by institutions that raise funds by 
issuing very short-term fixed-income securities and use the proceeds to acquire structured 
products linked to long-term loans, including US sub-prime mortgages. 
The liquidity risks associated with such practices have been clearly under-estimated by these 
specialised institutions. And the consequences have been felt in the money markets because 
some  credit  institutions  agreed  to  provide  liquidity  to  these  specialised  institutions  if,  upon 
maturity, the latter did not manage to roll over the funds raised via the issuance of securities. 
This led to a serious liquidity crisis in the money markets of a good number of industrialised 
economies, including the euro area. 
Central  banks,  and  the  ECB  in  particular,  reacted  rapidly  and  implemented  emergency 
processes to inject the amounts of liquidity demanded by the market. This prevented the lack 
of liquidity from compounding the crisis and sent a message of calm and reassurance to the 
markets. 
However,  the  difficulties  in  pricing  the  structured  products  linked  to  sub-prime  mortgages 
and, above all, the patent lack of transparency in the process of pooling, segmentation and 
redistribution  of  credit  risk  carried  out  through  these  products  are  causing  problems  of 
confidence between institutions. 
All these problems have practically paralysed the interbank markets for term loans, in which 
transaction  volumes  are  very  low,  and  led  to  interest  rates  above  those  expected  under 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
for 
financial  and 
normal  circumstances.  European  stock  market  prices,  particularly 
construction firms, have also been adversely affected, while some investors have shifted to 
lower-risk assets such as government debt, resulting in declines in yields on these securities. 
The  uncertainties  deriving  from  all  these  movements  pose  evident  added  complexity  in 
monetary policy decision-making. 
Fortunately, the financial turbulence described reaches Europe at a time of high economic 
buoyancy and, therefore, notable resilience in the euro area. The GDP of the euro area grew 
somewhat less than expected in the second quarter of the year, but 2007 to date represents, 
overall,  a  continuation of  the  economic  boom  initiated  in  the  area  in mid-2005.  The  sound 
financial  position  of  firms,  the  expected  profit  rates  and  the  favourable  response  of 
employment to the step-up in activity suggest that this stage of output expansion will persist 
over the coming quarters at a rate that, although it may well be slightly lower than anticipated 
some months ago, continues to be around potential growth. It should be kept in mind that the 
persistence  of  certain  global  imbalances  and  protectionist  pressures  and  the  uncertainties 
over oil and other commodity prices represent risk factors for growth, which date from before 
the outbreak of the current bout of turbulence. 
Turning to prices, the behaviour of production seems to have been accompanied by a slight 
upturn in inflation to around 2% in the medium term, since the smaller contribution of indirect 
taxes (which has been especially marked in 2007) should be offset by the larger contribution 
of unit labour costs, in what is a buoyant labour market. Against this background, a possible 
increase  in  wage  pressure  associated  with  the  aforementioned  taking-up  of  slack  in  the 
labour  market,  or  a  widening  of  the  margins  in  those  sectors  more  sheltered  from 
international competition, pose risk factors for price stability in the euro area. 
The current financial market turbulence has naturally heightened the downside risk to growth, 
and  this  has  in  some  way  mitigated  inflationary  risks,  which  nevertheless  continue  to  rise. 
Above all, however, the turbulence has widened the range of uncertainty associated with the 
central scenario for the European economy that I have just described. 
In  these  conditions,  the  first  ECB  Governing  Council  meeting  this  month  unanimously 
decided, as you know, to hold interest rates unchanged and gather more information on this 
episode of turbulence and study it in more detail before taking any new decisions. It should 
come as no surprise to anyone that the conditional nature of the decisions, which has always 
been  a  significant  feature  of  ECB  monetary  policy  practice,  should  take  on  particular 
significance in the current setting of particularly high global uncertainty. 
Hence in the coming months the main channels through which financial shocks could affect 
the European economy will have to be monitored very closely. In my opinion, three factors 
require  particular  attention.  First,  it  is  necessary  to  gauge  the  true  extent  of  the  US 
slowdown, its possible spread to the world economy and the possible impact on exchange 
rates. Second, at the European level, the effect of the turbulence on the cost and availability 
of financing for the private sector will have to be calibrated. Finally, the possible impact on 
corporate and consumer confidence will have to be monitored carefully. The signs identified 
in  these  latter  two  channels,  i.e.  credit  and  economic  sentiment,  will  be  particularly 
informative for euro area economic growth when they affect countries in which consumption 
growth is still somewhat hesitant. 
I  also  believe  that,  echoing  the  words  of  the  ECB  President  after  the  Governing  Council 
meeting, this is an appropriate time to reiterate the firm commitment of monetary policy to the 
objective of price stability, which is the best way to promote the sustained growth of output 
and employment and thus the welfare of European citizens in general and of Spaniards in 
particular. 
In fact, these events have taken place at a time when the Spanish economy, too, continues 
to  show  considerable  buoyancy  that  is  prolonging  its  already  long  expansionary  phase. 
Output grew in the first half of this year at a rate of around or slightly above 4% (in line with 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
reduced 
the  expansionary 
the performance in the closing months of 2006) and the vigour of activity was compatible with 
a more even balance between domestic and foreign sources of spending. In particular, the 
contribution  of  net  external  demand,  which  trimmed  two  percentage  points  from  growth  in 
certain months of 2004 and 2005, improved in 2006 and continued to do so in the first half of 
this  year.  At  the  same  time,  the  share  of  business  investment  in  domestic  demand  has 
continued to rise at the expense of private consumption and residential investment. 
The  process  of  normalisation  of  monetary  and  financial  conditions  that  commenced  at  the 
end  of  2005  has  contributed  effectively  to  achieving  this  more  balanced  composition  of 
spending.  Moreover,  the  healthy  performance  of  the  world  economy  in  2006  and,  in 
particular,  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  have  spurred  exports  after  several  years  of 
weakness.  On  the  supply  side,  the  growing  availability  of  labour  resources  in  a  highly 
expansionary demographic setting helped to smooth the adjustment of activity to this robust 
demand, preventing excessive cost and price pressure from building up. Indeed, the inflation 
rate fell to around 2% (2.2% in July and August), taking the differential with the euro area to 
half a percentage point, although some rise can be expected in the rest of the year and in the 
first quarter of next year. 
The smoothly slowing path of household consumption in 2006 and the first half of this year 
reflects,  as  mentioned  above,  the  foreseeable  adaptation  to  more  normal  monetary  and 
financial  conditions.  The  rise  in  interest  rates  that  began  at  the  end  of  2005  has  been 
spreading  gradually  to  the  various  financial  and  banking  markets,  stimulating  household 
saving and increasing the interest burden on indebted households. Also, the lower rates of 
household wealth appreciation (mainly due to the gradual containment of house price rises) 
have 
influence  of  wealth  effects  on  consumption. 
Counterbalancing  this,  the  strength  of  employment,  which  continues  to  grow  at  more  than 
3%,  and  the  high  levels  of  confidence  have  played  a  significant  role  in  ensuring  that  this 
process  of  adjustment  of  household  consumption  to  more  sustainable  levels  has  been 
smooth. 
Also  perceptible  since  the  beginning  of  2006  has  been  the  lesser  vigour  of  residential 
investment which, as in the case of private consumption, was also in response to the interest 
rate  rise  and  to  the  lowered  expectations  of  house  appreciation  following  the  sharp  price 
increases  of  previous  years.  In  this  case,  the  gradualness  of  the  residential  investment 
slowdown was made possible by the support provided by strong housing demand, against a 
backdrop of high demographic momentum in the Spanish economy in recent years. 
The lower contribution to growth of these two domestic expenditure components was offset, 
first,  by  the  continued  buoyancy  of  productive  investment  of  firms,  in  a  situation  of  high 
profitability  and  favourable  business  expectations  due  to  the  continued  momentum  of 
domestic  demand  and,  above  all,  to  the  surge  in  the  world  economy.  In  particular,  capital 
goods  investment  in  2006  grew  by  more  than  10%  and  in  recent  quarters  its  rate  of 
expansion has been around 13%. Furthermore, net external demand has helped to mitigate 
the impact of the slowdown in household spending on growth, thanks to the notable recovery 
of exports in 2006 and to the moderation in imports in the first half of this year. 
The most probable scenario for the coming months is the continued gradual moderation of 
domestic  demand  and  of  output  growth.  In  fact,  there  were  signs  in  2007  Q2  that  might 
suggest a gradual change to a more subdued growth path, although GDP growth was only 
10  bp  less  than  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  The  information  (still  very  partial  and 
fragmentary) of certain economic indicators relating to 2007 Q3 also points in this direction. 
In  light  of  the  buoyancy  of  domestic  demand  in  recent  years,  it  is  reasonable  that  private 
consumption  and  residential  investment  should  show  somewhat  lower  growth  rates, 
although,  as  has  been  the  case  so  far,  a  continued  robust  employment  and  population 
growth rate would fairly effectively counter the possible deceleration of these two variables. 
In  the  construction  sector,  moreover,  investment  in  civil  engineering  and  in  non-residential 
building, which has so far shown greater resilience, will foreseeably remain vigorous in the 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
next few years. This could soften the negative impact on growth caused by the slowing of 
residential investment, where a cyclical downturn seems to have started. 
Productive investment will probably continue to be the most buoyant component of domestic 
demand, although it is hardly likely that it alone will offset the lower contribution of household 
spending. Therefore, the role of net external demand will be fundamental in ensuring that a 
certain containment of expenditure is compatible with continued growth of around 3%. The 
contribution of this variable will hinge crucially on the behaviour of Spain’s export markets, 
but  also  on  competitiveness,  which  is  a  factor  that  firms  and  the  economic  authorities  are 
actually able to influence. 
In this respect, the basic channel through which the recent episode of financial instability and 
heightened  international  uncertainty  could  affect  the  Spanish  economy’s  expected  growth 
scenario  depends  on  the  performance  of  the  foreign  sector.  Indeed,  if  that  episode 
significantly affected the buoyancy of Spain’s international markets, the capacity of external 
demand  to  contain  the  negative  impact  of  the  slowdown  in  private  spending  would  be 
diminished. 
The  Spanish  economy’s  track  record  over  the  last  few  years  shows  that  the  behaviour  of 
employment and its influence on household income expectations play a key role as drivers of 
household  spending.  For  this  reason,  it  is  essential  that  resource  allocation  mechanisms 
should  be  sufficiently  flexible  to  enable  industrial  and  service  activities  (partly  linked  to 
exports) to play a greater role and take up the baton from construction. 
From the standpoint of the continued dynamism of domestic spending, attention also has to 
be paid to how the Spanish economy may be affected by a possible tightening of financial 
conditions stemming from developments in European financial markets, a process in which a 
fundamental  role  is  played  by  the  behaviour  of  Spanish  financial  institutions.  Allow  me, 
therefore, to devote special attention at this point in my address to the current situation of 
Spanish credit institutions, which stand at the heart of our financial system.  
Spanish  credit  institutions  face  this  bout  of  turbulence  from  a  position  of  strength  based 
principally on high profitability, which is always the first line of defence against any adverse 
shock; comfortable solvency levels clearly above the minimum regulatory requirements; and, 
standing  at  some  point  between  the  two,  the  ample  coverage  of  doubtful  assets  by  the 
provisions that have been built up during the boom years. I believe that the role played by the 
Banco de España in promoting this accumulation of provisions is well known, so I shall not 
dwell on this point. 
I  will,  however,  point  out  that  there  are  various  idiosyncratic  factors  in  the  performance  of 
Spanish  institutions  that  have  limited  their  exposure  to  the  current  shocks.  I  have  already 
mentioned that in the euro area there is no equivalent to the US sub-prime mortgage market, 
an observation that applies fully to Spain. Rather, the credit quality of Spanish mortgages is 
high, as shown by the low doubtful assets ratio and the moderate levels of the average loan-
to-volume ratio and of the collateral required. 
Along  these  same  lines,  the  weight  of  the  assets  linked  to  the  sub-prime  mortgages  on 
institutions’ balance sheets is completely marginal, as is also their indirect exposure through 
any  lines  of  credit  granted  to  other  financial  intermediaries  that  may  actually  hold  such 
assets. The fact is that intermediaries of this type have not proliferated in Spain’s financial 
system. 
One of the factors that has probably contributed most to preserving the quality of assets in 
the Spanish financial system is the persistence of a traditional banking model in which, unlike 
in other countries (especially the United States) in recent years, institutions have used asset 
securitisation mainly to fund the expansion of activity and not to transfer to third parties the 
risks  associated  with  their  loan  portfolio.  One  particularly  positive  effect  of  this  pattern  of 
behaviour in the current situation is that the institutions’ practice of keeping credit risks on 
their own balance sheets has acted as a powerful incentive for them to ensure that their risk 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 5
quality controls continue to work properly. Also, since the securitisation processes used by 
Spanish  institutions  have  aimed  to  raise  fresh  funds  rather  than  redistribute  risks, 
instruments such as covered bonds or asset-backed bonds have been used, which are not 
very  complex  and  are  much  easier  to  price  than  the  structured  products  that  have 
proliferated in other parts of the world. 
These  sources  of  solidity  should  not  lead  us  to  overlook  the  danger  that  an  excessive 
prolongation of the current bout of  turbulence could ultimately have undesirable effects on 
investor confidence. These effects might extend above and beyond a desirable and healthy 
correction of abnormally low risk premiums and volatility levels, and substantially reduce the 
capacity  of  financial  markets  to  offer  useful  yardsticks  by  which  investors  can  discriminate 
the  true  credit  quality  of  the  different  instruments.  If  this were  to  happen,  the  need  for  the 
Spanish  economy  to  turn  to  the  international  markets  to  finance  a  large  part  of  the 
investment  spending  of  Spanish  households  and  firms  could  become  an  obstacle  to 
continued high buoyancy in the future. 
Overall, ladies and gentlemen, since I last appeared before you, the growth prospects for the 
Spanish economy that I then described largely remain in place, although the financial turmoil 
has,  as  everywhere,  heightened  the  uncertainty  surrounding  those  prospects.  The  outlook 
offered by a scenario of continued buoyancy – albeit at a slightly more moderate rate but with 
a more balanced composition – and the solidity of our financial institutions are evidence of a 
strength that affords every assurance of being able to withstand the impact of the turbulence. 
However, depending on the ultimate duration and intensity of this episode of turbulence, it 
cannot be ruled out that some difficulties may arise to prevent external demand from acting, 
as  it  has  to  date,  as  a  factor  sufficient  to  offset  the  foreseeable  gradual  moderation  of 
domestic demand. This will be even more the case if the impact of the financial instability on 
the growth of Spain’s main export markets becomes substantial. 
In circumstances such as those prevailing at present, economic policy has a very important 
role to play in offering a framework in which confidence stems from the existence of leeway 
for  taking  action  to  deal  with  possible  future  contingencies.  To  this  end,  policy  should 
maintain  its  firm  stance  on  medium-term  stability  targets  and  consequently  avoid  the 
adoption  of  measures  excessively  focused  on  the  short  term.  In  this  respect,  budgetary 
policy should not change its current stance, which is proving so beneficial for the strength of 
the economy by preserving a sufficiently wide budget surplus, so that there is headroom to 
deploy,  if  needed,  its  stabilising  potential  in  less  favourable  circumstances  than  those 
prevailing at present. For this purpose, spending deviations should be avoided, since they 
would absorb prematurely a part of that headroom at a possibly inappropriate time. We will 
have  occasion  to  look  more  specifically  at  this  topic  in  the  framework  of  the  budget 
discussion process. 
An equally important task is that of continuing to implement resolutely and ambitiously the 
structural reform agenda, both in making the goods and factor markets more flexible and in 
pushing  ahead  with  the  capitalisation,  productivity  and  competitiveness  of  the  economy. 
These reforms are essential in the current circumstances because they are needed to enable 
resources, such as labour, to be reallocated without friction between sectors and to improve 
the conditions under which Spanish production competes in the international markets. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2007
