Davíð Oddsson: The ongoing battle against inflation 
Opening address by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central 
Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a  breakfast  meeting  of  the  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Reykjavík, 
6 November 2007. 
 Last Thursday’s decision by the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland to raise 
the policy interest rate appears to have taken many people by surprise, though few seem to 
view that surprise as a welcome one. However, the Board of Governors considers that, over 
the  past  several  months,  it  has  issued  a  number  of  signals  indicating  the  possibility  of  a 
policy rate hike. On the last two interest rate decision dates, in July and September of this 
year, the Bank emphasised strongly that the short-term inflation outlook had deteriorated and 
that, in the absence of a change for the better, it would respond in line with its duties. On the 
latter  decision  date,  in  September,  it  could  be  discerned  that  the  Bank  wished  to  wait  yet 
awhile to see if the outlook would improve against all odds. It wanted to see the outcome of 
the  turmoil  in  the  global  and  domestic  financial  markets  in  August,  and  to  see  how  the 
budgetary bill for next year would be received.  
If the Central Bank had stayed its hand now, despite the worsening outlook and the myriad of 
indicators of continuing deterioration, accusations of indifference, and even cowardice, would 
have been appropriate in view of the criticism to which the Bank has been subjected recently, 
some of it from quite unlikely sources. A few  decades ago, when Iceland was engaged in 
disputes over its territorial fishing waters, we shot blanks first before loading the weapons on 
our tiny Coast Guard cruisers with real ammunition, and even then we thought it sufficient to 
shoot wide of the mark rather than aiming directly at the alleged offenders. The Cod Wars 
are bathed in a romantic glow in Icelandic history, but they were no small matter at the time, 
a daring game of chance by a tiny country contending with much larger neighbours. At one 
point it was said that Icelanders had won that unequal battle, that we couldn’t have afforded 
to lose it. The same applies, actually, to the fight against inflation. We can’t afford to lose it. 
Inflation must not take root in this economy again. We must take decisive action against it, no 
matter how unpleasant – or even costly – the effort may be in the short run. There is no need 
to go into detail about the consequences of inflation for the income and financial position of 
businesses and households; the repercussions are familiar enough.  
It is often said, even by supposedly responsible people, that the tools used by central banks 
all over the world to combat inflation will not work here in Iceland, not least because of the 
way globalisation treats small currencies like the króna, and because of how many investors, 
through  the  shelter  afforded  by  globalisation,  have  the  means  to  avoid  the  Central  Bank’s 
thumbscrews.  The  cannons  on  Iceland’s  coast  guard  cruisers  were  no  weapons  of  mass 
destruction,  and  the  difference  in  size  between  Thór  and  Aegir,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
British navy, on the other, was horrific, but we managed nonetheless. Of course, a reference 
to the Cod Wars is merely a metaphorical one, and I use it more or less in jest, as it doesn’t 
fully apply to the current situation. But the comparison between the Central Bank of Iceland’s 
tools and those of other central banks, which enjoy the relative security of a large currency, is 
worth examining. In the past few months, though, large currencies have not been protected 
from tremors, shocks, and even wide fluctuation. For example, the euro has appreciated by 
more  than  70%  from  its  weakest  point  against  the  US  dollar,  an  enormous  change  in  a 
relatively short period of time. The Icelandic króna has not been nearly so volatile despite all 
of the shocks it has had to tolerate. A volatile króna in a turbulent season tends to indicate 
that the króna is effective as a currency, and not the reverse. When interest rates and capital 
flow allow it, the króna appreciates, whether people like it or not. When there is a credibility 
loss  in  the  market,  either  in  Iceland  or  abroad,  the  króna  will  depreciate  suddenly  and 
sharply, and when there are tremors and rumblings in the economy, domestic or foreign, the 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 1
exchange rate tends to resemble a Meteorological Office seismograph. In short, the króna 
functions just like any other currency, and if it did not react in this way to these conditions, we 
should complain loudly indeed.  
Globalisation has made a massive impact on all markets and all currencies, and there is little 
doubt that, until now, it has lightened the load borne by central banks and central bankers in 
the battle against inflation. This could well change in the future, so that central banks will not 
have it as easy as they have recently. Peoples and nations that have hitherto been isolated 
from  the  principles  governing  most  Western  nations  have  been  entering  the  world  of 
international business in the past few decades. At first that entry was slow, careful, and even 
ponderous, but it has gained pace and become bolder year by year. The new entrants are 
China  and  India,  either  of  which  is  larger  in  terms  of  population  than  the  US  and  the  EU 
combined. A huge number of diligent and eager employees, who still work for shockingly low 
wages, are streaming into the labour market and producing goods at a far lower price than 
would be possible in the West. The importation of these goods has counteracted inflationary 
pressure in Western nations and kept it within the bounds of manageability. But as a result, 
this newly awakened world gives rise to a growing number of hopeful consumers who lack all 
of the things we in the West have so long taken for granted, things we couldn’t live without. 
They are consumers who, for the first time, have money in their hands.  
These two groups overlap somewhat, of course, but it is clear that the former group has been 
instrumental  in  the  battle  against  inflation  in  the  West.  It  could  well  be,  however,  that  the 
latter  group  will  eventually  put  its  weight  on  the  other  end  of  the  scale.  Globalisation  has 
undeniably  eased  the  battle  against  inflation,  both  in  Iceland  and  elsewhere,  so  it  is 
doubtless  inaccurate  to  assert  that  globalisation  is  the  reason  we  are  having  trouble 
conquering inflation. Other factors have been much more troublesome, and most of them are 
home-made.  For  example,  we  haven’t  managed  to  contain  public  investment  during  an 
economic  upswing  –  this  is  eminently  clear  to  anyone  who  examines  figures  on  public 
investment, which increased by more than 20% last year and is still growing this year.  
There  has  been  an  enormous  increase  in  lending  activity  at  a  time  when  the  nation  is 
engaged  in  the  largest  investment  it  has  ever  undertaken,  its  financial  system  has  been 
revolutionised, and the housing market has seen a virtually unparalleled injection of capital, 
to name just a few things. Neither can it be denied that competition has abated considerably, 
the  market  has  become  much  more  concentrated,  and  duopoly  is  common.  It  cannot  be 
debated that effective competition in as many areas as possible is the main premise for the 
successful transmission of any central bank’s decisions into the economy.  
Managers of companies in the export sector have complained vociferously about the policy 
and  activities  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland.  Their  comments  and  criticisms  are 
understandable, especially those coming from the fishing industry, which has had to stand up 
to the double blow of unfavourable exchange rates and an unavoidable cut in the cod quota. 
What has lightened the load for exporters, however, is that many of them, especially those in 
the aluminium and fishing sectors, can command high export prices at the moment. But while 
we must understand that exporters are dissatisfied with the current circumstances, it is not a 
given  that  their  complaints  are  founded  on  the  right  premises.  Many  people  consider  the 
exchange  rate  of  the  króna  disquietingly  high  and  blame  the  Central  Bank’s  interest  rate 
policy for it. This is correct, of course, to a point: the Bank’s policy influences exchange rate 
developments to a considerable degree, and the exchange rate is higher than Iceland can 
tolerate for the long term.  
But the Central Bank’s high policy rate is not the source of the problem. It is a response to 
the conditions reigning in our economy: strong excess demand no matter where one looks, 
large output growth, sharp increases in purchasing power, excess demand for labour, influx 
of capital … the list goes on. The Central Bank decided to raise the policy rate now because 
inflation has risen once again, and indicators suggest that it will be higher in 2007 and 2008 
than earlier projected. Demand has grown more rapidly than was expected when the Bank 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2007
announced its last interest rate decision. Output growth is greater than estimates allowed for. 
Private  consumption  is  on  the  upswing,  and  indicators  imply  that  consumption  growth  will 
accelerate  even  further.  Gross  capital  formation  was  greater  in  2006  and  2007  than 
previously estimated. Real estate prices continue to rise rapidly, pushing inflation upwards as 
well.  A  shortage  of  labour,  wage  drift,  growing  wage  costs,  and  rapidly  rising  disposable 
income are also contributing factors. And it appears as though some people think that, under 
these  circumstances,  the  best  solution  is  to  let  an  inflation  episode  flow  through  the 
economy,  as  it  were.  But  inflation  wouldn’t  merely  flow  through;  it  would  pass  into  the 
economy  and  settle  there.  It  would  fester  and  be  harder  to  uproot  as  a  result.  Such  a 
suggestion is preposterous, and we can simply forget it.  
The exchange rate of the króna is high in an historical context, to be sure, and a depreciation 
is  factored  into  the  Central  Bank’s  forecasts.  The  Bank  has  emphasised  strongly  how 
important it is that the economy begin to cool off before the exchange rate drops too much, 
so that the depreciation will have less of an effect on inflation.  
Some think that, instead of using the chief weapon in its arsenal, the Bank should use other 
means,  primarily  the  reserve  requirements.  But  changing  reserve  requirements  is  an 
obsolete  measure  that  would  have  a  limited  and  unpredictable  effect  apart  from  raising 
interest rates. After Iceland’s banks were privatised and their international operations began 
to grow, it was inevitable that reserve requirements here should be similar to those in other 
countries; otherwise, the competitive position of Iceland’s financial institutions would be quite 
different – and poorer – than that of their competitors. In developed countries, central banks 
no longer use the reserve requirement as a tool to combat inflation.  
It has been said that the Central Bank’s problem is that it is looking in the rear-view mirror 
when it makes its decisions, whatever that might mean. It is true, of course, that the Central 
Bank  looks  both  at  the  present  and  the  past  when  it  examines  indicators  of  likely  future 
developments.  There  is  no  other  way  to  forecast  future  developments  intelligently  than  to 
examine  the  indicators  from  the  recent  past,  apply  to  them  the  metrics  that  the  copious 
experience from Iceland and abroad has taught us to use, and to use both indicators and 
metrics as a guideline in projecting future developments. If we didn’t use this method, there 
would only be one left: to pour tea into a cup, turn it upside down, and read the tea leaves 
when the saucer is dry. The Central Bank has no comment to make on those who wish to 
pursue that course, but it isn’t likely to be terribly successful.  
When the Central Bank announced its interest rate decision, it stated that several factors that 
have  made  inflation  harder  to  control  could  change  over  time.  Sooner  or  later,  higher 
mortgage interest rates will affect the real estate market. Global financial market conditions 
have changed for the worse. Those changes are already being felt, and sooner or later they 
will be felt in Iceland as well. In its forecasting, the Bank takes these factors into account, and 
it does not rule out the possibility that their actual impact will be greater than projected. Many 
people hoped that the unrest in the financial markets, which stems largely from the subprime 
mortgage market in the US, would blow over rather quickly. Some even seemed to believe 
that a modest drop in US interest rates would be sufficient to coax everything back into place 
once again. But by now most have realised how unlikely these problems are to disappear so 
quickly. There is every reason to believe that the coming months could prove difficult as a 
result, and there is correspondingly little reason to believe that the crisis is past. Uncertainty 
abounds.  A  huge  investment  bank  like  Merrill  Lynch  could  not  foresee  that,  in  only  two 
weeks’ time, it would have to write down billions of dollars’ worth of outstanding debt. The 
CEO of the company has had to pack his bags and leave, albeit with a generous going-away 
present. The largest bank in the world is also beset by the restlessness, and it isn’t yet fully 
clear what the effects will be, but that CEO has received his marching orders as well. And 
according  to  the  latest  reports,  while  there  are  reported  write-downs  of  a  mere  20  billion 
dollars on subprime mortgages, the actual amount could in the end be between 250 and 300 
billion.  
BIS Review 131/2007 
 3
One cannot help but wonder whether market participants in Iceland and elsewhere preferred 
to suffer through a shaky third quarter in the hope of some redemption in the fourth quarter, 
and in the process, avoided recording some items that should have appeared in third-quarter 
accounts.  No  one  is  going  so  far  as  to  allege  that  the  global  markets  are  besieged  by  a 
broad-based movement to violate the law or act contrary to ethical business practice, but it 
could nonetheless be that the rules are stretched quite a bit, though perhaps within the limits 
of legality and even ethics. In so doing, companies everywhere are factoring in the value of 
assets for which there is, at present, no market. To be sure, assessing the market value of 
assets  that  are  not  marketable,  either  for  the  short  term  or  for  the  long  term,  is  a  tricky 
matter.  In  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  a  market  will  develop  at  a  later  date,  and  if  the 
companies in question have the wherewithal to hold them until that market develops, there is 
no  reason  to  harbour  any  real  anxiety.  But  assets  that  end  up  at  a  fire  sale  are  another 
matter  entirely.  So  it  is  difficult  to  determine  market  value  when  the  market  is  sticky  and 
virtually  closed.  All  of  these  conditions  kindle  suspicions  and  undermine  faith,  and  as  it 
seems, the real problem is not so much a growing lack of liquidity as a growing lack of faith. 
The sooner trust and faith begin to grow again in world markets, the sooner they will rise up 
from this slump, or recession – at the moment we don’t know which term is more appropriate.  
Many things are changing, both in Iceland and elsewhere. A new edition of the book “Ten 
Little Negroes” causes ripples of unrest. Of course, there is no reason to ban books, but the 
unrest  caused  by  this  book  is  actually  a  positive  thing.  It  is  a  sign  of  changing  times, 
enhanced  understanding,  and  diminishing  prejudice.  When  that  book  was  published  in  the 
mid-20th century, hardly anyone thought of it as being hurtful or offensive in any way. But 
now we see that it can indeed be those things, and this is why the publication of the book 
and the ensuing discussion are a positive indication of new times and changed perspective. 
Actually, recent decades have seen a fervent effort to recast well-known terms and names 
for all sorts of phenomena so as to avoid injuring those who, either temporarily or for the long 
term, might be vulnerable. This is also positive, though some of these philanthropic efforts 
have  gone  a  bit  too  far  in  their  enthusiasm.  Another  phenomenon  we  see  is  that  newly 
coined  terms  soon  become  cloaked  in  a  sort  of  semi-divinity  in  Iceland  –  like  the  term 
“international  expansion,”  which  no  one  dares  oppose  lest  he  be  accused  of  being  an 
anachronism, devoid of a sense of “vision,” as it is now called, and of not knowing when the 
time is ripe for action.  
Upon  closer  scrutiny,  the  term  “international  expansion”  seems  to  be  nothing  more  than 
investment  abroad  –  together  with  utilisation  of  knowledge  and  talent,  of  course.  In  that 
sense,  the  construction  of  the  aluminium  smelter  in  Reydarfjördur  can  be  called  Alcoa’s 
international expansion into Iceland, though no one has bothered to call it that. But it is: it is 
investment  combined  with  the  utilisation  of  knowledge  of  the  aluminium  industry.  That 
expansion  is  promising  in  many  ways,  of  course,  and  some  aspects  of  it  have  already 
generated  substantial  returns,  not  least  because  people  took  advantage  of  favourable 
conditions and external circumstances. For a while, cheap capital was readily available, and 
some were bold enough to grab the opportunity. But the flip side of expansion, and the side 
that  cannot  be  ignored,  is  that  Iceland  is  becoming  uncomfortably  beleaguered  by  foreign 
debt. At a time when the Icelandic government has rapidly reduced its debt and the Central 
Bank’s foreign and domestic assets have increased dramatically, other foreign commitments 
have increased so much that the first two pale into insignificance in comparison. All can still 
go well, but we are surely at the outer limits of what we can sustain for the long term.  
The  term  “international  expansion”  is  so  thoroughly  bathed  in  radiance  that  even  when 
people seem to be invading companies that are owned by the public, the invasion is called 
“expansion”.  And  companies  whose  primary  obligation,  by  law  and  by  the  nature  of  their 
operations,  is  to  provide  the  public  with  specific  services  at  the  lowest  price  possible, 
suddenly find themselves participating in foreign risk ventures without there having been any 
rational  discussion  of  the  matter  beforehand  –  and  all  in  the  name  of  “international 
expansion.” In matters such as this, we must proceed with the utmost caution.  
4 
 BIS Review 131/2007
We Icelanders have been successful in our endeavours in the recent past, and we have had 
the wit to be careful when necessary, but it would be imbecilic to believe that we can loosen 
our belts – that is, if we want to continue being successful. One of the ways in which we must 
remain vigilant is to refuse to allow inflation to gain a foothold in our economy. All attempts to 
dodge this responsibility will harm the Icelandic people, with unforeseeable consequences. 
We must not increase our foreign debt beyond its current limits – on the contrary, it is right 
and necessary that we reduce our foreign debt and achieve a more favourable balance with 
abroad. Plans for international expansion must therefore be carried out within sensible limits. 
The immoderate zeal that is so intoxicating may not be allowed to steer our course for the 
future. We know that, in many ways, our upward climb rests on a bed of clouds. To some 
extent, this is inevitable, and it is normal that items like intangible assets should be prominent 
in good times; but when the sky darkens and the clouds become heavy, the rain can start at 
a moment’s notice, and little may be left of those assets when the air clears. So we must take 
care in this as well as in other things.  
By law, the Central Bank of Iceland is assigned a clearly defined role. The Bank takes that 
role very seriously. It does not ask to be spared criticism of its work and its decisions, but it 
would appreciate some support in its attempt to keep inflation within tolerable limits. If we are 
successful  in  that  endeavour,  all  Icelanders  will  benefit.  If  we  all  work  together,  we  can 
reduce interest rates sooner and more quickly. 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 5
