Pierre Duguay: Managing risks to financial system stability 
Remarks by Mr Pierre Duguay, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to CFA Quebec, 
Quebec City, Quebec, 20 November 2007.  
 Good afternoon. I'm very pleased to be here today. When I was offered the opportunity to 
speak  to  you,  early  this  year,  I  thought  this  would  be  the  perfect  occasion  to  promote  the 
Bank of Canada's work on financial system stability, to share our assessment of some of the 
risks  and  vulnerabilities  facing  the  system,  and  to  underscore  the  necessity  of  striving 
continuously  to  identify  emerging  risks,  to  understand  the  possible  consequences,  and  to 
implement measures to contain the impact, should they materialize. 
The recent dislocations in credit markets have brought these issues into sharp focus. Among 
other  things,  the  market  turbulence  has  highlighted  the  critical  role  that  confidence  and 
liquidity  play  in  financial  markets.  Confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to 
withstand  shocks  is  essential  if  savers  are  to  be  encouraged  to  put  their  money  into 
investments, and liquidity is a prerequisite to trade and price discovery in financial markets. 
The  recent  events  also  drove  home  the  fact  that  shocks  never  materialize  in  quite  the 
manner that we expect. Certainly, many of the individual sources of the recent turbulence in 
global  financial  markets  had  been  apparent  for  some  time,  prompting  warnings  from 
numerous stakeholders, including the Bank of Canada. Among the concerns expressed was 
a fear that, in their quest for higher yields, global investors might have underpriced risk and 
rushed into products whose complexity made it extremely difficult for them to judge the risk 
exposure  they  were  assuming.  But  while  these  key  sources  of  vulnerability  had  been 
correctly  identified,  no  one  anticipated  the  extent  of  the  strains  that  developed  in  the 
interbank money markets.  
With this as background, I'd like to explore a few of these issues from the Bank of Canada's 
perspective. I've organized my thoughts around five general questions. First: Just what do we 
mean  by  financial  system  stability,  and  why  does  it  matter?  Second:  What  is  the  Bank  of 
Canada  doing  to  foster  stability?  Third:  What  lessons  are  we  learning  from  the  recent 
turbulence?  Fourth:  What  is  being  done  at  home  and  at  the  international  level?  And  fifth: 
What can you, as chartered financial analysts, do to help? I will then close with a few words 
about Canada's current economic situation. 
Promoting financial system stability 
To begin, let me focus on what I mean by financial system stability and why it matters. The 
financial  system  is  composed  of  financial  institutions  such  as  banks,  caisses  populaires, 
pension funds, and insurance companies; financial markets such as debt and equity markets; 
and settlement arrangements such as the payments and securities settlements systems. The 
financial system provides the channels through which savings become investments, money 
and financial claims are transferred and settled, and, ultimately, risk is allocated. 
A  key  role  of  the  financial  system  is  to  provide  insurance  against  adverse  economic 
outcomes by allocating risk to those who are most willing and most able to bear it. The result 
is  a  more  effective  allocation  of  capital  which,  in  turn,  can  contribute  to  more  productivity-
enhancing investments and improved living standards.  
But for the financial system to perform this important role, households and firms must have 
confidence in its ability to withstand shocks. This is a crucial point, because problems in one 
area of the system can quickly spread, as recent events have vividly demonstrated. Thus, to 
help the financial system perform its role efficiently, public authorities and market participants 
themselves put a great deal of effort into finding ways to strengthen the system. And since 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 1
shocks can never be fully anticipated in advance, we must strengthen the shock absorbers in 
the system, while still allowing room for innovation. This involves such elements as a secure 
system for large-value payments, deposit insurance, bankruptcy laws, central bank provision 
of liquidity, and sound risk-management practices, including capital cushions and prudential 
regulation.  
Let  me  be  very  clear,  the  goal  of  these  shock  absorbers  is  not  to  prevent  losses,  but  to 
absorb  them  without  impairing  the  effective  functioning  of  credit  markets  and  the  financial 
system in general. And because the best levees can break down in a hurricane, we need 
strong  crisis  management  that  will  mitigate  the  fallout  from  financial  shocks  without 
weakening the incentives for prevention of such breakdowns.  
One method that is increasingly being used to gauge the robustness of the financial system 
is the conduct of simulations to identify vulnerabilities to extreme shocks. Such stress testing 
of the Canadian financial system was undertaken recently through the International Monetary 
Fund's  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program.  The  Bank  of  Canada  used  its  models  to 
design a macroeconomic scenario involving a disorderly resolution of global imbalances and 
to assess the possible impact on corporate default probabilities by sector. Major Canadian 
banks were then asked to estimate the losses they might incur under such a scenario, and 
their results were assessed by the central bank, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions  (OSFI),  and  the  IMF  against  results  obtained  from  their  own  less  complex 
models. The results generated by sophisticated internal models used by banks were broadly 
in line with those generated by the Bank of Canada and the Fund. They showed that major 
Canadian banks have enough capital to withstand a severe macroeconomic shock. This is 
useful information, but such simulations do not tell the whole story. For instance, they ignore 
important feedback from market participants. Factoring these effects is no easy task, but it is 
a prerequisite to a full assessment of risk in the financial system. This is an active area of 
research  at  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  as  well  as  at  international 
organizations such as the IMF. 
The Bank of Canada's contribution 
Now, let me talk more specifically about the Bank of Canada's role in helping to maintain a 
robust financial system, the second of my five points. Promoting financial system stability is a 
common  goal  for  a  number  of  public  and  private  sector  bodies,  both  nationally  and 
internationally.  In  Canada,  the  public  sector  responsibility  is  shared  among  a  number  of 
agencies including the central bank, the Department of Finance, OSFI, the Canada Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, Quebec's Autorité des marchés financiers, and provincial securities 
commissions.  
As Canada's central bank, our key functions in the area of financial system stability are to 
provide  liquidity  to  facilitate  the  settlement  of  financial  transactions  and  to  ensure  that  the 
risks  of  a  systemic  disruption  in  the  payments  and  settlements  systems  are  virtually 
eliminated.  The  Bank  also  contributes  to  financial  stability  by  providing  an  environment  of 
low, stable, and predictable inflation through monetary policy. We use our key position at the 
centre of Canada's financial system, our membership in international bodies – such as the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Bank for International Settlements, and the Financial 
Stability Forum – and our extensive research capabilities to foster the safety, soundness, and 
efficiency of the financial system in Canada and internationally. For example, the Bank has 
been an active promoter of improved transparency in domestic markets and of IMF reform – 
including strengthened IMF surveillance – internationally. 
The  promotion  of  financial  system  stability  is  complementary  to  our  conduct  of  monetary 
policy  in  two  ways:  First,  because  monetary  policy  works  through  financial  markets;  and 
second, because financial turbulence may affect aggregate demand and require a monetary 
policy response. For example, a reassessment of default risk that increases risk premiums 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2007
and  results  in  tighter  credit  conditions  may  require  a  lower  policy  rate  than  would  have 
otherwise been the case. 
We  communicate  our  research  and  analysis  of  trends  and  developments  in  the  financial 
system,  including  policy  and  infrastructure  developments,  as  well  as  our  assessment  of 
systemic risks and vulnerabilities, in our semi-annual Financial System Review (FSR). The 
next  issue  of  the  FSR  will  be  published  on  6  December  and  will  examine,  among  other 
things, recent developments in the market for asset-backed commercial paper, as well as the 
current debate around credit-rating agencies. The FSR will be available on our website on 
that date. 
Lessons from the events of last summer 
That's a quick overview of the work that we do to strengthen financial system stability. Now, 
let me go on to the third question that I raised in my introduction, which relates to the lessons 
we've learned from this year's turbulence in global financial markets. While the turbulence is 
not over, it is not too early to begin to probe its causes and effects and start to draw lessons 
as to how we can strengthen the ability of the financial system to deal with stress. 
The  recent  turbulence  was  triggered  by  greater-than-expected  losses  on  U.S.  subprime 
mortgages,  which  unexpectedly  spread  around  the  world  because  these  mortgage  loans 
were  re-packaged  into  opaque  structured  products  funded,  in  many  cases,  by  short-term 
asset-backed commercial paper. Liquidity evaporated in the market for structured products 
as  investors  shunned  them.  A  flight  to  the  safety  and  liquidity  of  government  securities 
ensued,  and  credit  spreads  increased.  Many  commercial  banks  were  affected,  with  the 
impact  coming  from  such  sources  as  their  direct  holdings  of  these  structures,  their 
commitments to provide funding to conduits, their difficulty in securitizing loans, and the fact 
that companies began to fall back on their bank lines of credit. At the same time, many banks 
became  reluctant  to  make  loans  to  one  another  because  of  uncertainties  around 
counterparty risk and about their own future funding needs. The effect was to increase the 
cost and reduce the availability of credit, both in Canada and globally. 
In Canada, the ABCP problem took on a unique characteristic since non-bank sponsors had 
issued paper with restrictions on the back-up lines of credit which prevented their access to 
these lines. This prompted a call for a standstill (known as the Montreal Proposal) to effect 
an  orderly  workout  for  most  of  these  ABCP  conduits.  The  standstill  period  has  been 
extended  to  14  December  and  it  has  been  reported  that  progress  is  being  made  in  the 
negotiations to convert short-term paper into medium-term tradable financial instruments. 
Although  some  dislocation  continues,  it  appears  that  the  financial  system  has  thus  far 
weathered  the  turbulence  reasonably  well.  Canadian  and  global  banks  have  had  large 
enough capital cushions to withstand the shock and support an expansion of their balance 
sheets.  Canadian  banks  have  been  able  to  issue  medium-term  paper  and  capital-eligible 
subordinated debt to meet existing and future funding needs. However, it is clear that there is 
now  a  greater  awareness  of  risk  –  an  awareness  that  was  slow  in  developing,  despite 
numerous warnings of the possibility of a sudden repricing of risk in credit markets. And this 
repricing  is  being  hampered  by  a  lack  of  liquidity  in  markets  for  some  structured  products 
because of the complexity and opacity of these new products.  
In a sense, we are witnessing the growing pains of an immature segment of the market, a 
segment that did not exist five to seven years ago. So, there are lessons to be learned and 
corrections  to  be  made.  Most  of  the  corrections  will  undoubtedly  be  driven  by  market 
participants  themselves,  who  will  seek  greater  disclosure  and  greater  standardization  of 
structured products, and who will adopt stronger risk-management practices, including lesser 
reliance on credit ratings. 
The recent market events have made crystal clear just how crucial disclosure is to financial 
markets.  To  operate  efficiently,  markets  need  information.  At  the  heart  of  the  summer's 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 3
market  turbulence  were  structured  products  that  were  so  complex  and  opaque  that  even 
some sophisticated investors couldn't understand exactly what they were buying. This lack of 
transparency led to a breakdown when investors started to question the value of the assets 
backing the securities that they owned. So, it is in the interest of market participants to make 
sure that all parties to a transaction have access to all the necessary information. Investors 
must demand greater transparency where it is now lacking. Vendors of financial instruments 
will then need to structure them in such a way that market players can clearly see what they 
are buying and what leverage is embedded in the instrument. In this way, market discipline 
will be more effectively exercised. Credit-rating agencies can help with this by being more 
forthcoming about the assumptions on which they based their ratings, and by adjusting their 
ratings promptly when circumstances require. 
The  role  credit-rating  agencies  played  in  the  recent  market  turmoil  has  generated  a  great 
deal  of  debate.  Bank  of  Canada  research  to  be  published  in  next  month's  FSR  notes  that 
there  are  some  natural  self-correcting  market  forces  at  work,  which  should  help  to  ensure 
that rating agencies improve their rating process in the future. There may still be a useful role 
for regulators in fostering an industry-led code of conduct and in reconsidering the role that 
ratings play in various regulations. But they should avoid any knee-jerk response to calls for 
stricter  regulations  for  rating  agencies.  Allowing  market  forces  to  chart  the  route  to  the 
desired  outcome  is  generally  preferable  to  burdensome  regulation,  which  may  have  the 
unintended consequence of absolving the regulated entity from responsibility for its ratings.  
One  important  lesson  from  recent  developments  is  just  how  vital  liquidity  is  in  a  market-
based financial system. We saw very clearly this summer how banks may be called upon to 
fill  the  gap  by  providing  credit  when  there  is  a  sudden  erosion  of  market  liquidity.  This  is 
because  only  banking  institutions,  including  credit  unions  and  caisses  populaires  centrals, 
can provide liquidity throughout the financial system, since only these institutions have direct 
access to the ultimate source of liquidity: the central bank. But the modern financial system 
has  evolved  in  such  a  way  that,  today,  financing  is  increasingly  done  through  securities 
markets. And the recent turbulence has shown that sudden re-intermediation when liquidity 
dries up can have implications that had not been anticipated.  
The provision of liquidity through regular operations – the Bank of Canada's standing liquidity 
facility  to  direct  clearers,  our  supply  of  settlement  balances  in  the  Large  Value  Transfer 
System, and our open-market buyback operations with primary dealers – has been effective 
in keeping the overnight rate close to target. 
However, liquidity further out the maturity spectrum was more problematic, owing in part to 
the  precautionary  build-up  of  liquidity  by  financial  institutions.  This  raises  the  question  of 
whether some market failures might be better dealt with if the central bank had a facility that 
would  provide  liquidity  at  terms  longer  than  overnight,  collateralized  with  a  possibly  wider 
range of securities. The types of market failure that such a facility would be designed to deal 
with would obviously need to be very carefully considered to avoid weakening the incentive 
for preventative risk and liquidity management by market participants. That being said, it is 
the case although term money market spreads remain wider than usual, they have narrowed 
considerably, and the market is functioning. Indeed, liquidity has returned in the market for 
bankers' acceptances. 
What is happening abroad?  
Since the recent market turbulence has been felt around much of the globe, you won't be 
surprised to hear that the issues that I've highlighted thus far are being actively discussed at 
a global level. And this brings me to my fourth point, which is the international perspective. 
The  global  community  –  market  participants,  regulators,  and  policy-makers  alike  –  are  all 
examining the causes and effects of this summer's events and attempting to distil lessons 
from them.  
4 
 BIS Review 135/2007
Important  work  has  already  begun  through  a  number  of  international  bodies,  including  the 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF). The FSF has been asked by the G-7 finance ministers and 
central  bank  governors  to  establish  a  working  group  to  identify  weaknesses  that  merit 
attention from policy-makers, and to recommend actions to enhance market discipline and 
institutional  resilience.  The  working  group,  which  includes  Canada's  Superintendent  of 
Financial Institutions, is looking into a number of issues. First is the financial institutions risk 
management  practices  including  liquidity  management,  stress  testing,  and  assessment  of 
counterparty  risk.  Second,  the  FSF  group  is  also  probing  valuation  and  risk  disclosures, 
including  the  role  of  credit-rating  agencies.  Third,  it  is  re-examining  the  principles  and 
practices  of  prudential  oversight,  particularly  with  respect  to  off-balance-sheet  exposures. 
And  fourth,  it  is  exploring  issues  related  to  the  authorities'  capacity  to  respond  to  market 
turbulence, including the tools available to central banks and supervisors in times of distress. 
Numerous other bodies – IOSCO, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the OECD, 
BIS, the G-20, and the IMF – are also addressing many of these issues.  
Market participants, including financial institutions, hedge funds, and rating agencies are also 
assessing  the  need  for  changes  in  light  of  recent  events.  For  example,  the  Institute  of 
International Finance has established a committee to review a host of issues, including risk 
management, the use of off-balance-sheet vehicles, the valuation of complex products, and 
transparency. 
What can CFAs do? 
To  this  point,  I've  talked  about  the  efforts  that  are  being  made  at  the  institutional  and 
international levels to understand the reasons behind the recent market turbulence and draw 
lessons for the future. Now, for my fifth and final question, I'll turn to you, my audience, and 
ask: What can chartered financial analysts do to help? 
As I said earlier, disclosure is a very important principle in financial markets, one that seems 
to have been lost in the period leading to the latest turbulence in credit markets. But effective 
disclosure  goes  beyond  making  information  available.  It  involves  ensuring  that  the 
information is understood by investors. This is an area where you can play an important role. 
Investors  must  demand  greater  transparency  where  it  is  now  lacking,  and  credit-rating 
agencies  will  have  to  be  more  forthcoming  about  the  basis  on  which  their  ratings  are 
assigned. But all of you, as investment professionals, have a special responsibility for diligent 
research and for helping your clients understand the nature of their investments. I'm glad to 
see  that  this  is  reflected  in  the  CFA  code  of  conduct,  which  requires  that  members:  "use 
reasonable  care  and  exercise 
judgment  when  conducting 
investment  analysis,  making  investment  recommendations,  taking  investment  actions,  and 
engaging in other professional activities." 
independent  professional 
The Canadian economy  
Let me now say a few words about what we economists call the "real side" of the economy. 
The  recent  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  has  occurred  at  a  time  of  robust  global 
economic  expansion  and  strong  commodity  prices.  In  the  context  of  ongoing  global 
developments,  the  Bank  has  identified  several  important  issues  and  increased  associated 
downside risks that currently face the Canadian economy. The marked volatility and sharp 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar warrant particular attention. Indeed, the volatility we have 
seen in foreign exchange markets has been extremely high and the magnitude of the recent 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar has been stronger than historical experience would have 
suggested. The weakening of prospects for the U.S. economy is another issue. At the same 
time, the Canadian economy is operating above its production capacity and the momentum 
in domestic demand has been strong in spite of the tightening of credit conditions that has 
occurred  in  the  wake  of  recent  financial  market  turbulence.  As  always,  we  at  the  Bank  of 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 5
Canada will be considering all the accumulated information on trends and developments in 
the  global  and  Canadian  economies,  and  their  implications  for  the  outlook  for  inflation  in 
Canada, as we sit down to make our decision for the 4 December fixed announcement date. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  financial  market  dislocation  that  arose  in  the  summer  from  the 
reassessment of credit risk has yet to fully run its course. But it seems that, so far, Canada 
has come through the recent turbulence reasonably well. There has been some tightening of 
credit  conditions,  but  it  appears  that  Canadian  companies  and  Canadian  banks  are  in  a 
strong  position  to  withstand  the  turmoil.  Still,  there  are  important  lessons  to  be  learned  in 
terms of how we can continue to strengthen the resilience of our financial system. For our 
part,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  carefully  examine  how  liquidity  is  supplied  to  the 
economy. We will continue to do research to understand financial system mechanisms and 
developments so as to increase our ability to identify risks. And we will work with our partners 
to implement preventative measures. I am confident that you will do your part, too. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2007
