Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Northern  Ireland 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Belfast, 9 October 2007. 
 Three  weeks  ago,  thousands  of  depositors  queued  on  the  streets  outside  branches  of 
Northern  Rock  to  take  their  money  out.  Those  scenes,  broadcast  around  the  world,  were 
shocking. How did they come about and how can we prevent them in future? 
My  focus  tonight  will  be  on  why  the  incentives  facing  banks,  investors, and  depositors  led 
them to behave as they did. Most of what happened can be understood in terms of those 
incentives. And, if we are to create a structure for our banking system so that such scenes 
are not repeated, we must ensure that the temporary measures put in place in recent weeks 
evolve into permanent reforms in the coming months. 
But  I  want  to  start  with  the  story  of  how  these  events  came  about.  It  begins  in  the 
international  capital  markets.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  changes  in  the  world  economy 
over the past decade has been the fall in interest rates. Some of that stems from the fall in 
inflation  as  central  banks  have  regained  control  after  the  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  and 
1980s. But even adjusting for inflation, low-risk borrowers have been able to borrow on world 
capital  markets  at  very  low  rates.  In  the  UK,  the  yields  on  10-year  inflation-protected 
government bonds have, in the past year, been close to 1%. At the turn of the millennium, 
they were 2%. Back in 1990, they were 4%. 
Why have these real interest rates fallen so much? The primary explanation is the high rates 
of saving in other parts of the world. Japan has been a net saver for more than a quarter of a 
century. Following the Asian crisis in the mid-1990s, many of Japan’s neighbours also raised 
their national saving rates. That group includes the country which is now the world’s biggest 
saver – China. And more recently, after the tripling of oil prices, they have all been joined by 
the oil-producing nations from Saudi Arabia to Norway. 
The  savings  of  these  countries,  evident  in  their  trade  surpluses,  have  flooded  into  world 
capital markets. Faced with what Ben Bernanke has called a “glut” of savings, borrowers in 
the  rest  of  the  world  have  been  able  to  attract  long-term  loans  at  remarkably  low  interest 
rates.  Those  rates  of  interest  have,  in  the  developed  world,  encouraged  borrowing  and 
spending, and reduced saving. From the United States to Australia, and also here at home, 
we  have  increasingly  spent  more  than  we  earn,  resulting  in  large  and  expanding  trade 
deficits.  Our  own  trade  deficit  is  more  than  3%  of  GDP,  but  that  is  dwarfed  by  the  United 
States, with a trade deficit of more than 6% of GDP. 
The response of central banks in the developed world to these changes was predictable. To 
keep  overall  demand  growing  –  and  inflation  stable  –  in  the  face  of  trade  deficits,  they 
needed  to  keep  short-term  interest  rates  low  and  domestic  spending  strong.  In  the  United 
Kingdom, Bank Rate has averaged just 4 ½% in the past 5 years. In 2003, it was as low as 3 
½%. But even then, the UK had the highest interest rate in the G7. In the United States, the 
Federal Reserve cut its interest rate to just 1%, and in Japan, experiencing deflation, interest 
rates were just 0.1%. 
Those developments were inevitable if the world economy was to continue to grow. But the 
price was unusually low interest rates – both short and long-term – which were considerably 
below  the  levels  to  which  most  investors  had  become  accustomed  in  their  working  lives. 
Dissatisfaction  with  these  rates  gave  birth  to  the  “search  for  yield”.  This  desire  for  higher 
yields  could  not  be  met  by  traditional  investment  opportunities.  So  it  led  to  a  demand  for 
innovative,  and  inevitably  riskier,  financial  instruments  and  for  greater  leverage.  And  the 
financial  sector  responded  to  the  challenge  by  providing  ever  more  sophisticated  ways  of 
increasing yields by taking more risk. But some of those new instruments were so opaque 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 1
and complex that investors lost sight of the risks involved. Until, that is, they were brought 
down to earth with a bump on August 9. 
Occasional tremors in financial markets had been evident over the past year or so, and again 
in  July  this  year.  It  was  impossible  to  tell  whether  they  constituted  a  gradual  release  of 
pressure  on  risk  premia  that  had  become  overly  compressed,  or  whether  they  signalled  a 
more disruptive movement to come. On August 9 the question was answered. 
As if to highlight the global nature of the crisis, the unexpected revelation by a French bank 
that its investment funds could no longer value their exposures to US sub-prime mortgage 
loans  produced  a  sharp  reappraisal  of  the  risks  they  were  taking  by  investors  around  the 
globe. The returns demanded by investors on all risky assets rose – from packages of bank 
loans  to  plain  vanilla  company  shares  –  so  the  prices  of  those  assets  fell.  And  in  some 
markets  for  complex  financial  instruments,  investors  realised  that  perhaps  they  did  not 
understand as much about the nature of the risks involved as they should. So not only did 
asset prices fall, but the markets in some of these instruments virtually closed. There were 
no buyers. 
This freezing of capital markets led to a chill in banking systems around the developed world. 
Banks  that  had  relied  on  selling  packages  of  loans  in  securitised  form  found  that  they 
couldn’t  sell  them.  Investment  vehicles  that  held  securitised  loans  have  found  it  difficult  to 
finance their holdings by borrowing. Faced with the possibility that they would have to finance 
these  vehicles  themselves,  banks  with  spare  cash  have  hoarded  it  and  have  become 
reluctant to lend to other banks beyond very short maturities. That has been evident in the 
spreads  between  interbank  lending  rates  and  central  bank  interest  rates  in  the  UK  and 
equally in the euro area and United States. The bottom line is that banks that had financed 
themselves  by  borrowing  from  their  peers,  or  by  securitising  and  selling  their  loan  assets, 
found  that  their  funding  dried  up.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  Northern  Rock  was  particularly 
exposed. It was able to borrow only at shorter and shorter maturities. 
The present financial crisis is of a most unusual nature in that it comes against a background 
of five years of strong growth of the world economy and a decade and more of remarkable 
economic stability at home. Moreover, most banking and financial crises in the past – from 
the failure of Overend and Gurney in 1866, to the collapse of BCCI in more recent times – 
were associated with bad loans and significant losses on assets. The remarkable fact about 
this crisis has been the relatively small size of the bad loans compared with the total assets 
of banks. The crisis has arisen instead from the way banks have managed their liabilities. 
What did the Bank of England – as the central bank – do for the banking system?  
First, we did our routine work in the money markets of lending to the banking system against 
high quality collateral, such as government debt, and at Bank Rate set each month by the 
Monetary Policy Committee. After some initial volatility, we achieved our primary objective in 
the money markets of bringing interest rates on overnight borrowing into line with Bank Rate. 
And over the past two months as a whole, overnight interest rates have, on average, been as 
close to Bank Rate in the UK as in the euro area and closer than in the US. 
We  were,  however,  pressed  to  do  more  than  our  routine  job  and  to  lend  in  exchange  for 
other  collateral,  including  the  financial  assets  for  which  the  markets  had  virtually  closed. 
Banks, in particular, said they wanted us to help them turn illiquid assets into cash. 
As I told the House of Commons Treasury Committee on 20 September, we were cautious 
about doing this. The case for caution is, in the jargon, moral hazard. Put simply, such action 
by us encourages the very risk-taking that caused the present problems. It is crucial that, in 
making their lending and borrowing decisions, banks face the right incentives. That is why we 
did offer to lend in exchange for illiquid assets but only at a penalty rate of interest. 
Support  on  the  scale  required  by  Northern  Rock  would  have  been  difficult  to  undertake 
without it becoming “stigmatised” – regardless of the method adopted. The only way to avoid 
that would have been to offer to lend to all banks at a rate that many others – in addition to 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2007
Northern Rock – found attractive to pay. And to do that without drawing attention to Northern 
Rock’s  take-up  would  have  required  a  truly  massive  injection  of  cash  into  the  banking 
system.  That  could  happen  only  if  there  were  no  penalty  rate  or  if  conditions  in  money 
markets  generally  were  difficult  enough  to  make  the  penalty  rate  attractive  to  many  banks 
over a prolonged period. 
Nothing would have been easier than for the Bank of England to lend freely without a penalty 
rate. Almost every actor in this drama saw advantage in cheap money and plenty of it. The 
role of the central bank is to ensure that the appropriate incentives are in place to discourage 
excessive risk-taking and the under-pricing of risk, and in so doing to avoid sowing the seeds 
of an even greater crisis in future. That we have done in each action we have taken – by 
maintaining the principle of the penalty rate. 
Some commentators have taken issue with these concerns about moral hazard, arguing, by 
analogy, that fire departments put out fires started by people who smoke in bed. I agree that 
we  have  fire  services  to  do  precisely  that.  And  if  a  fire  starts  in  the  financial  system,  the 
central  bank  will  put  it  out  if  it  threatens  to  spread.  But  fire  services  do  not  offer  free 
insurance for people who smoke in bed or set fire to their own house, thereby encouraging 
them to take risks that endanger others. 
When it became clear that Northern Rock could not find funding elsewhere, it came to the 
tripartite  authorities  (FSA,  Treasury  and  Bank)  to  seek  financial  support  from  the  Bank  of 
England. Rather than stabilise the situation, the actions of the authorities seemed, at least 
initially, to fan the flames. There are lessons for us to learn. And I will come to those in a 
minute.  But  let  me  return  to  the  queues  of  depositors.  Here  is  an  extract  from  a  local 
newspaper: 
“By noon on Friday, more than 40 … customers … were waiting in line at 
the branch … waiting upward of an hour and a half to withdraw money from 
their accounts.” 
“Anxious depositors clutching withdrawal slips filled the offices for a second 
straight  day.  …  The  company  placed  extra  chairs  in  a  waiting  area  and 
asked customers to write their names on a sign-in sheet.” 
This  wasn’t  Newcastle  or  London.  It  was  Los  Angeles  on  August  17  and  18.  The  bank 
experiencing the run was not Northern Rock but Countrywide, a US mortgage bank. It is a 
Tale of Two Banks – banks of similar sizes and facing similar difficulties with funding – just a 
few  weeks  apart.  Like  Northern  Rock,  Countrywide  took  risks  and  relied  on  short-term 
funding from investors. But the similarity ends there. There were two significant differences. 
First, Countrywide had paid millions of dollars each year to big banks as a liquidity insurance 
policy  so  that,  in  the  event  of  difficulty,  they  would  provide  it  with  long-term  loans.  So  on 
August  17  Countrywide  was  able  to  claim  on  that  insurance  and  draw  down  $11.5bn  of 
committed credit lines. Northern Rock had not taken out anything like that level of liquidity 
insurance. So when it came to the Bank of England for support, it was important that liquidity 
was not provided free. 
Second,  even  though  Countrywide  had  insurance,  its  depositors  were  still  worried.  On 
hearing that it had claimed on its insurance, queues formed. But those queues were short 
and  soon  dissipated.  The  depositors  simply  did  not  face  the  same  incentives  to  withdraw 
their money. The United States has a well-developed insurance scheme for depositors. If a 
bank is forced into administration, there are mechanisms in place to repay depositors in full, 
up to $100,000 per account. And most importantly, the depositors are paid within just a few 
days. Without such a scheme in the UK, once the queues started to form at Northern Rock, 
other depositors faced every incentive to join them. The only way to stop the run was for the 
Chancellor  to  announce  a  government  guarantee  of  the  deposits  of  Northern  Rock,  which 
today  was  extended  to  new  depositors  as  part  of  the  continuing  stabilisation  plan  for  the 
business. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 3
So  what  are  the  main  lessons  for  us  from  the  recent  episode?  Time  will  provide  an 
opportunity for deeper reflection, and it is important that careful thought does come before 
action. But I would identify three lessons. 
First,  liquidity  should  be  central  to  the  regulation  of  banks.  Regulation  worldwide  has  paid 
insufficient attention to liquidity, focussing instead on capital. Northern Rock did not face a 
problem of inadequate capital. But it was vulnerable to a shock that reduced the liquidity in 
markets for securitised mortgages. Banks need to face the right incentives to manage their 
funding positions. Smaller banks with reliance on wholesale funding should be encouraged to 
put  in  place  insurance.  We  should  not,  however,  expect  regulation  alone  to  solve  this 
problem. That is why I think it is so important to create the right incentives. 
Second, the single largest impediment to dealing with Northern Rock was the absence of a 
mechanism for intervening pre-emptively in a bank in trouble to separate the retail deposit 
book – the insured deposits – from the rest of the bank’s balance sheet. The ability to do this 
is central to the way the US and other systems operate, where the authorities are obliged to 
step in early – “prompt corrective action” – to protect depositors. One tool at their disposal, 
currently unavailable in the UK, is a special insolvency law for banks. Legislation to create 
the powers to deal with a bank in this way seems to me the single most important necessary 
reform.  Deposit  insurance  is  another  area  that  requires  change.  To  pretend  that  retail 
depositors can be treated in the same way as unsecured creditors in a business as complex 
and opaque as some of today’s banks is wholly unrealistic. The upper limit on deposits that 
qualify for 100% insurance has sensibly been raised, and the Government has made clear 
that a longer term reform of deposit insurance is also under review. 
Third, central banks operate as lenders of last resort. We need to be able to lend against 
good, albeit illiquid, collateral, and at a penalty rate, without destabilising further any bank to 
which we lend. Reform of deposit insurance will go a long way to achieving this. But in an 
age of instant communications, where the news of a facility for Northern Rock was leaked 
even before it was officially announced, it may be difficult to adopt the quiet methods used by 
central banks in the past. We will, however, explore ways to restore the use of discretion in 
central bank operations. 
Finally, it is worth remembering that, unlike the cases of BCCI and Barings a decade or more 
ago, or the problems with pensions and life insurance more recently, not a single depositor 
has  lost  a  penny.  I  hope,  however,  that  the  three  lessons  I  have  identified  will  be 
incorporated in future legislation. 
It is equally important that the Bank is not distracted from the job of setting interest rates to 
meet the 2% target for CPI inflation. In March this year, inflation rose to 3.1% and I wrote an 
open letter to the then Chancellor explaining why and what we were doing about it. Over the 
past 12 months, we have raised Bank Rate by one percentage point. And, notwithstanding 
some  claims  at  the  time  of  the  open  letter,  inflation  has  since  fallen  back  quite  sharply, 
mainly as retail gas and electricity prices have stopped rising and, more recently, fallen. CPI 
inflation was, in August, a fraction below the 2% target. The challenge now for the Monetary 
Policy Committee is to keep it there. 
The current turmoil in financial markets is not over. Conditions have eased a little – share 
prices  have  recovered  and  interbank  interest  rates  have  fallen  back.  Indeed,  spreads 
between interbank rates and anticipated central bank interest rates are now lower in the UK 
than in the euro area or United States. But for the moment, some markets remain virtually 
closed. And even as they re-open, there will not be a return, I hope, to the excessive risk-
taking  –  and  associated  rapid  expansion  of  credit  –  of  the  past  few  years.  With  investors 
more wary of risks, banks will find it harder to raise funds. So credit will not be so readily or 
cheaply available to businesses and households. 
As  we  said  in  August,  pressures  on  capacity  mean  that  output  growth  needs  to  slow 
moderately over the next year or so if we are to continue to meet the inflation target. We will 
be monitoring closely the impact of tighter credit conditions on demand and output over the 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2007
coming months. Even though inflation is close to the target and pay pressures are muted, we 
will continue to look ahead and monitor the risks to inflation that we identified in August: the 
signs from surveys and financial markets that people expect inflation to pick up; the strength 
of company pricing intentions, and the recent increases in world commodity prices. 
Keeping inflation close to the 2% target is the biggest contribution the Bank of England can 
make to economic stability generally. Changes in Bank Rate could not prevent the profound 
change in the world economy that pushed down yields on low-risk financial assets and led 
investors to take on more risk. They cannot now prevent the re-pricing of that risk. And just 
as  Bank  Rate  was  not  set  to  insulate  the  manufacturing  sector  from  the  trade  deficit  that 
resulted from the earlier change in the world economy, it will not be set now to insulate the 
banking system from the re-pricing of risk. But you can be sure that we will do whatever is 
necessary to keep inflation close to the 2% target. 
Tonight  is  the  first  time  that  the  Court  of  the  Bank  of  England,  and  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, have gathered in Northern Ireland. So much has changed in the Province since 
the troubles started and I first came to Belfast to speak at Queen’s University. Given that we 
are  the  Bank  of  England,  it  would  be  understandable  if  many  in  Northern  Ireland  were 
suspicious of our role. But I can assure you that we are most definitely the central bank of the 
whole of the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland. We pay great attention to events 
here, and, along with other members of the Monetary Policy Committee, I visit regularly. We 
have a full time Agency with a team who live and work in Northern Ireland and report back 
every month on what is happening in the local economy. 
At this momentous time in the history of Northern Ireland, I can assure you that the Bank will 
continue to place great importance on its presence here. During my visits, I have discovered 
some  extraordinarily  successful  companies,  many  set  up  during  the  troubles.  As  you 
continue to build the political success and economic prosperity of the new Northern Ireland, 
the Bank of England will support you wholeheartedly through our efforts to provide a platform 
of economic stability. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 5
