Christian Noyer: Foreign reserve accumulation – some systemic 
implications 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Salzburg  Global 
Seminar, Salzburg, 1 October 2007. 
 The topic of foreign exchange reserves is a very old one, but it has gained new prominence 
for two obvious reasons: the level of such reserves has increased dramatically over the last 
decade; and the management of those reserves is increasingly diversified. Today, I  would 
like  to  reflect  on  the  implications  of  these  changes  for  the  international  monetary  and 
financial  system.  I  will  try  and  examine  how  they  are  linked  to  the  persistence  of  global 
imbalances, their consequences on global capital allocation and asset prices, as well as their 
impact on structural change and economic governance in all countries, both emerging and 
developed. 
The level and nature of international reserves 
The facts 
World  foreign  exchange  reserves  have  surged  from  USD  2  trillion  in  2001  to  an 
unprecedented  USD  5  trillion  in  early  2007.  Of  this  total,  the  share  of  emerging  Asia  has 
risen from USD 600 bn to more than 2 trillion, as a result of reserves having increased at a 
rate of USD 200 to 300 bn per year since 2003. In addition, reserve assets of oil-exporters 
boomed in 2005 and 2006 by more than USD 200 bn each year. 
The drivers 
In  order  to  fully  understand  the  nature  of  this  protracted  process  of  foreign  asset 
accumulation, it is important to examine the various factors motivating it. 
Insuring against shocks 
The  drivers  of  international  reserve  accumulation  in  emerging  economies  were  originally 
related  purely  to  crisis-insurance  motives,  in  the  context  of  widespread  pegging  to  the  US 
dollar. In the wake of the financial crises of the late 1990s, when their official reserves were 
quickly depleted, emerging economies rapidly rebuilt their foreign assets in order to stave off 
further  speculative  attacks,  and  be  able  to  better  absorb  the  shocks  of  sudden  stops  in 
capital inflows. These countries were understandably eager to protect themselves from the 
dire macroeconomic consequences of crises like the one  they had just experienced. Such 
self-insurance was also meant to limit future dependence on a bail-out from the international 
community.  Even  for  countries  that  were  not  directly  affected  by  the  crisis,  these  motives 
probably played a central role, to the extent that some degree of capital account liberalisation 
may already have been foreseen at the time. Over the years, however, the persistence of 
large trade and current account surpluses has resulted in an unprecedented accumulation of 
official reserves. 
A deterrent against speculative attacks 
One approach that has also been contemplated by the literature is to acknowledge that, to 
some  extent,  the  probability  of  a  speculative  attack  may  be  substantially  lowered  by  the 
reserve accumulation policy. As a matter of fact, the very limited impact of recent financial 
turbulence on emerging market currencies may to some extent vindicate the precautionary 
benefits of reserve assets. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
Foreign reserves as a policy tool for growth 
In a series of papers, Dooley, Garber and Folkerts-Landau1 have suggested that what they 
characterise as a “revived Bretton Woods” arrangement may provide a coherent explanation 
of  trends  in  current  account  imbalances  and  reserve  accumulation.  They  argue  that  Asian 
emerging  economies  are  pursuing  export-led  growth  strategies  by  deliberately  maintaining 
undervalued exchange rates, while providing the funding for the US current account deficit, 
as  the  US  is  a  key  consumer  of  these  exports.  They  also  conjecture  that  large  foreign 
reserves may have been accumulated as “collateral” guaranteeing foreign direct investment. 
This  interpretation  highlights  the  dual  responsibility  of  US  consumption  patterns  and 
emerging Asia’s growth dynamic in the build-up of global current account imbalances. 
Are foreign exchange reserves "excessive"? 
The benchmarks 
Assessing  the  appropriate  level  of  accumulated  reserves  requires  taking  into  account  the 
initial motives for holding these reserves, in order to come up with a quantitative norm. 
Building  on  the  experience  of  currency  crises,  the  IMF  Guidelines  for  Foreign  Exchange 
Reserve Management recognise that “official foreign exchange reserves are held in support 
of a range of objectives”, including to: 
• 
“support and maintain confidence” in monetary and exchange rate policy, including 
the capacity to conduct foreign exchange interventions; 
“limit external vulnerability by maintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks 
during times of crisis or when access to borrowing is curtailed, and in doing so, 
provide  a  level  of  confidence  to  markets  that  a  country  can  meet  its  external 
obligations.” 
  Not  so  long  ago,  the  required  level  of  forex  reserves  was  inferred  from  empirical  rules  of 
thumb such as the “three months of imports” rule. After the experience of the 1990s, when 
financial  crises  were  triggered  by  a  drying-up  of  capital  inflows,  the  ability  of  economies 
relying on international borrowing to service their external  debt became a central criterion. 
The “Greenspan-Guidotti” rule thus recommends that reserves should enable full coverage of 
total short-term external debt in order to be able to pay back that debt in event of sudden 
stops, i.e. if and when foreign lenders do not roll-over their loans. 
The  empirical  literature  provides  evidence  that,  today,  the  level  of  forex  reserves  in  some 
emerging economies appears excessive with respect to the level inferred from both rules. 
Recently,  Jeanne  and Rancière2  provided  a  “quantitative  normative  framework”  to  infer  an 
optimal level for foreign exchange reserves in order to mitigate the impact of sudden stops of 
capital inflows. Their model, based on welfare criteria, suggests that the build-up of reserves 
has been excessive in Asian countries since 1997-1998. To be sure, the Asian crisis may 
have  prompted  emerging  economies  to  reassess  the  magnitude  of  potential  sudden  stops 
and the subsequent output loss. Under widespread uncertainty, assessing an optimal level 
for  foreign  reserves  confronts  us  with  the  problem  of  catastrophic  events.  In  other  words, 
even if the likelihood of a financial crisis may be very small, the potential consequences may 
be so dramatic that emerging countries could rationally accumulate very large reserves. 
                                                 
1   Dooley, M., Garber, P., and Folkerts-Landau, D. (2003) – An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System, 
NBER working paper ; (2007) – The Two Crises of international Economics, NBER working paper. 
2   Jeanne,  O.  and  Rancière,  R.  (2006)  –  The  Optimal  Level  of  International  Reserves  For  Emerging  Market 
Countries : Formulas and Applications, IMF working paper. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
Nonetheless, Jeanne and Rancière’s standard approach suggests that the level of reserves 
is in some countries excessive with respect to the self-insurance motive. 
Domestic monetary implications 
Excessive accumulation of foreign assets may lead to domestic financial imbalances. These 
can be caused by incomplete or ineffective sterilisation3. While theoretically feasible through 
issuance  of  central  bank  bills,  large-scale  sterilisation  proves  problematic  in  practice, 
especially  in  emerging  economies, which  are  not  always  fully  equipped  with  market-based 
policy  instruments.  In  order  to  effectively  control  exuberant  credit  expansion,  emerging 
economies  have  often  had  to  recourse  to  large  increases  in  reserve  requirement  ratios  or 
even  non-market  policy  instruments  such  as  the  rationing  of  credit.  In  a  context  in  which 
credit and interest rates are largely administered, the fiscal cost of sterilisation can effectively 
be transferred to the banking sector, and ultimately to bank customers and stockholders; but 
that  does  not  remove  the  opportunity  costs  of  sterilisation  for  the  private  sector  or  the 
monetary risks of incomplete sterilisation. The bottom line is that in economies where large-
scale foreign asset accumulation needs to be sterilised, it is very likely that capital allocation 
efficiency will be reduced, especially if non-market instruments have to be used. 
Foreign reserves and international competition 
A  second  risk  is  that  reserve  hoarding  may  exacerbate  trade  competition  and  emphasise 
regional  tensions.  Emerging  economies  compete  in  their  exports  towards  developed 
economies, as much as they compete with developed economies. As noted by Aizenman4 
“in  a  world  with  symmetric  emerging  markets  competing  in  similar  industries,  competitive 
[reserve] hoarding tends to dissipate most competitive gains, leading to a “beggar-yourself” 
[outcome]  and  excessive  hoarding”.  By  contrast  “in  an  asymmetric  world,  an  emerging 
market  with  low  enough  cost  of  sterilisation  may  win  the  hoarding  war  […]  akin  to  the 
“beggar-thy-neighbor”  outcome  of  asymmetric  Tariff  Wars”.  The  heterogeneity  of  emerging 
economies,  together  with  regional  trade  interdependence  may  require  a  more  nuanced 
interpretation.  However,  that  very  interdependence  raises  the  stakes  of  possible  trade 
tensions. 
Such tensions at the regional and international level create genuine risks of a protectionist 
backlash,  with  potentially  very  high  welfare  costs.  A  protracted  accumulation  of  foreign 
assets in  one  form  or  another  will  likely  be  associated  with  negative  externalities;  whether 
domestically or at an international level. 
More generally, the emergence of such large holders of foreign assets contributes to shaping 
a new “world financial order”, the stability of which remains to be tested. 
Foreign reserves and the allocation of savings 
At  this  point,  it  is  useful  to  reflect  on  the  savings  motives  in  Asian  economies  at  a  more 
fundamental level, i.e. to explore why people save so much in emerging economies. Besides 
potentially powerful demographic factors, the precautionary motive is an obvious candidate: it 
is 
the 
underdevelopment  of  their  social  insurance  systems  (be  it  health  insurance  or  pension 
schemes). Self-insurance against idiosyncratic risks at the household level (as opposed to 
self-insurance  at  the  central  bank  level)  may  cause  households  to  accumulate  large 
quantities of precautionary wealth. 
that  some  emerging  economies  record  high  savings  rates  due 
likely 
to 
                                                 
3   Mohanty M. and Turner, P. (2006) - Foreign exchange reserve accumulation in emerging markets: what are 
the domestic implications?, BIS Quarterly Review. 
4   Aizenman,  J.  (2007)  –  Large  Hoarding  of  International  Reserves  and  the  Emerging  Global  Economic 
Architecture, NBER working paper. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
Moreover,  precautionary  savings  may  be  compounded  in  emerging  economies  that  are 
characterised by greater macroeconomic instability. In addition, when the private sector has 
limited  access  to  credit,  agents  have  to  rely  on  self-financing,  whether  for  household 
purchases of durable goods or for corporate sector investment. 
What are the underlying mechanisms that cause these private savings to end up in public 
balance  sheets?  Such  a  substitution  of  public  savings  for  private  savings  in  emerging 
countries results from the interaction of two basic ingredients: incomplete financial markets 
and inflexible exchange rate regimes. 
Beyond  credit  constraints,  a  key  feature  of  financial  market  incompleteness  in  emerging 
economies  is  the  lack  of  domestic  financial  assets,  such  as  fixed-income  securities.  As  a 
consequence, a large share of these savings ends up in bank deposits. 
The  other  key  ingredient  is  of  course  the  exchange  rate  regime.  In  many  emerging 
economies, 
foreign  currency  revenues.  Capital  account 
regulations  sometimes  involve  surrender  requirements  of  such  currency-denominated 
income but more importantly, in a fixed or a pegged exchange rate regime, the central bank 
purchases foreign currency to prevent appreciation. 
The capital account regime and financial constraints of developing economies result in the 
central bank “borrowing” from the private sector as a domestic counterpart to the hoarding of 
international reserves. Banks naturally play a central intermediation role in this mechanism 
by  taking  deposits  of  private  savings  and  purchasing  sterilisation  bills.  That  completes  the 
mechanism of excess private savings being diverted into public holding of excess reserves. 
Of  course,  one  could  argue  that  central  banks  are  doing  their  job  in  taking  over  foreign 
exchange  positions:  naturally,  holding  foreign  assets  would  expose  private  agents  to 
currency risk exposure, and in that respect the public holding of foreign assets may be seen 
as relieving domestic agents from that risk. However, this reasoning raises two objections: 
- 
trade  surpluses  reflect  net 
as taxpayers, domestic private agents are still indirectly exposed to the realisation of 
the  large  currency  risk  that  public  managers  of  foreign  assets  bear,  which  entails 
fiscal costs; 
if the capital account regime had not resulted in the public sector management of 
these  savings  in  the  form  of  foreign  assets,  in  principle,  corporates  (and  possibly 
households)  would  have  directly  invested  their  savings  in  financial  instruments  of 
their  choice  abroad.  More  realistically,  they  would  probably  have  unwound  their 
currency  exposures  and  saved  in  domestic  assets.  In  the  absence  of  official 
intervention, the exchange rate would have adjusted. 
 However,  the  fact  remains  that  foreign  reserve  holdings  belong  to  the  nation  that  has 
accumulated these assets, hence indirectly to private domestic agents (admittedly including 
future  generations).  The  public  intermediation  of  these  savings  naturally  leads  us  to  the 
question of the appropriate manner in which to manage such large holdings. 
The management of international reserves 
The facts 
High current account surpluses mechanically reflect an excess of domestic (private or public) 
savings,  which  must  be  invested  abroad.  But  in  East  Asia  and  commodity-exporting 
countries,  these  accumulated  excess  savings  appear  to  be  largely  held  by  sovereigns.  In 
addition to foreign exchange reserves, a growing part of these foreign assets is now invested 
through sovereign wealth funds (SWFs). 
For  the  time  being,  the  assets  managed  by  SWFs  (around  USD  2.5  trillion)  are  relatively 
small compared with the global capitalisation of bond and equity markets – about USD 100 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
trillion  –  or  even  compared  with  the  holdings  of  the  private  asset  management  industry 
(pension,  insurance  and  mutual  funds),  estimated  at  around  USD  55  trillion.  However, 
according to some estimates, SWF assets could more than treble over the next 5 years and 
reach around USD 8.5 trillion in 2012. 
All  SWFs  share  a  common  purpose  which  is  the  transfer  of  wealth  across  time.  The 
objectives of central banks are different, namely to foster price stability and financial stability. 
Besides, central banks may be more sensitive to headline risk, and exposure to large losses 
could damage their credibility. Creating an entity separate from the central bank, an SWF, in 
order to manage risky assets has often been seen as a good governance structure. Such a 
structure  is  also  expected  to  set  up  a  Chinese  wall  between  central  banks  and  SWFs, 
eliminating the risk of trading based on insider policy information. The effectiveness of such 
segregation  may  yet  be  challenged,  but  more  importantly,  it  may  not  completely  prevent 
conflicts of interest.  
A distinction probably has to be made between commodity and non-commodity SWFs. In oil-
producing economies, foreign asset accumulation stems from oil royalties reflected in large 
government  budget  surpluses,  so  that  their  management  by  public  entities  is  a  natural 
outcome. The funding of commodity SWFs stems from a domestic resource that is most of 
the time owned, exploited or taxed by the government: in this respect it is genuine sovereign 
wealth, and the result of public savings. By contrast, foreign reserves and SWF accumulation 
that  is  not  commodity  related  might  be  seen  as  primarily  a  diversion  of  excess  private 
savings. 
Commodity funds 
The set-up of stabilisation funds by oil-exporting countries was first motivated by the desire to 
smooth oil revenues, which are highly volatile, with a view to maximizing the overall rent from 
oil  extraction.  To  the  extent  that  commodities  are  non-renewable  resources,  standard 
economic  theory  suggests  that  part  of  extraction  revenues  should  be  saved  in  order  to 
smooth the nation’s inter-temporal consumption, very much like an individual saves over the 
lifecycle  for  his  retirement,  but  also  possibly  in  order  to  leave  a  bequest  to  his  offspring. 
Commodity  SWFs  were  indeed  equally  motivated  by  an  attempt  to  optimise  the  inter-
temporal  benefits  of  natural  resources  beyond  the  exhaustion  horizon,  as  well  as  on  the 
grounds  of  fairness  to  future  generations.  As  such,  oil  funds  are  far  from  being  a  new 
phenomenon: the earliest funds were thus created in the aftermath of the first two oil shocks. 
The more recent surge in oil prices has naturally spurred the set-up of new funds in countries 
where new extraction capacities have emerged as profitable. 
Non-commodity funds 
Non-commodity  SWFs  are  mainly  born  out  of  foreign  exchange  interventions,  and  can  be 
regarded as “spillovers” from international reserves that can no longer be properly managed 
within  the  standard  framework  of  official  reserve  assets.  One  of  the  questions  to  be 
discussed  is  whether  they  correspond  to  the  same  rationale  as  commodity  funds,  and  to 
what extent they can be considered to have the same sound basis. 
Comments 
FX reserves are typically invested in safe and liquid assets such as T-bills, T-bonds or short-
term  collateralised  deposits.  The  emphasis  on  liquidity  risk  control  in  the  prudent 
management  of  reserves  logically  results  from  their  possible  use  in  foreign  exchange 
interventions. 
But SWFs are clearly designed to invest in less-liquid and riskier assets that provide higher 
returns than the typical assets held in official reserves. Whereas the objective of reasonable 
returns was typically mentioned last, as “subject to liquidity and other risk constraints”, in the 
IMF  Guidelines  on  reserve  management,  excess  returns  clearly  feature  as  a  primary 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 5
objective of SWFs. A central reason for this reordering of objectives is of course the much 
longer-term horizon of these funds, which entails greater tolerance of short-term fluctuations 
in  returns.  Indeed,  the  development  of  SWFs  can  in  some  cases  to  be  related  to  the 
increasing reliance on fully-funded government pension schemes, which often share a similar 
approach to asset allocation. 
For  instance,  Norway’s  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  the  continuation  of  its 
Petroleum  Fund,  is  managed  with  respect  to  a  strategic  benchmark  that  holds  40%  of  its 
assets in equities, 50% of which are outside Europe. 
In the case of several East Asian economies, the transfers from official reserves to SWFs 
therefore entail a loss of the liquidity services from holding reserve assets. But to the extent 
that expected returns are higher, one benefit of investing in riskier assets is a reduction in the 
fiscal cost of sterilisation. 
The  strategic  asset  allocation  of  SWFs  could  in  principle  be  designed  in  relation  to  the 
specific risk exposures of the country. Emerging market economies are characterised by a 
range of vulnerabilities to global macroeconomic shocks such as sharp changes in oil, metals 
or agricultural commodities prices, as well as the business cycles fluctuations of developed 
economies. For instance, it seems intuitive that the optimal asset allocation of oil-producing 
countries  should  be  diversified  into  assets  uncorrelated  with  oil  prices.  By  contrast,  most 
Asian countries are commodity importers and could hedge their risks with long positions on 
commodities  futures  and  other  assets  that  are  highly  correlated  with  commodities  prices. 
SWFs can thus potentially provide macro-hedging services to their countries. The task might 
however  be  easier  for  commodity  exporters:  their  macroeconomic  risks  are  clear,  highly 
concentrated and hedging products are readily available on financial markets. 
Issues 
Impact on asset prices 
Under  what  conditions  can  sovereign  asset  management  go  hand  in  hand  with  orderly 
functioning of the financial markets? 
Large  foreign  reserve  holdings  are  already  seen  to  have  an  impact  on  asset  prices.  The 
strong preference for safety and liquidity in official reserves, combined with the fast increase 
in  reserve  assets,  has  often  been  given  as  an  explanation  for  what  Alan  Greenspan  first 
called  a  conundrum,  namely  the  persistently  low  level  of  long-term  interest  rates.  For 
instance, Warnock and Warnock5 estimated that, under the hypothesis of “no foreign official 
flows into U.S. government bonds in 2005”, the 10-year Treasury yield would have been 90 
basis points higher. Several alternative estimates exist and there are significant differences 
between  them.  But  they  consistently  conclude  at  least  some  impact  on  long-term  interest 
rates. 
As  SWFs  hold  portfolios  with  higher  risk/return  profiles  than  the  usual  FX  reserve 
management  funds,  many  market  economists  predict  that  their  development  will  result  in 
additional  demand  for  high-risk  asset  classes  like  equities  and  lower  demand  for  low-risk 
assets classes like short-term government securities. This could in theory lead to an increase 
in bond yields (partly reversing the prior impact of official reserve accumulation) as well as a 
decrease in the equity risk premium. Estimates of these effects must however be interpreted 
with  caution:  they  rely  on  fragile  assumptions,  amounting  to  an  equivalency  between  the 
development of risky sovereign holdings and a lasting decline in global risk aversion. Before 
jumping to such a conclusion, one should keep in mind that if private savings had not been 
                                                 
5   Warnock,  F.  and  Warnock,  V.  (2006)  -  International  Capital  Flows  and  U.S.  Interest  Rates,  NBER  working 
paper. 
6 
 BIS Review 119/2007
intermediated  in  public  balance  sheets,  they  might  as  well  have  been  invested  directly  in 
risky assets. 
Yet  the  impact  of  SWF  investments  on  some  small  and  illiquid  financial  markets,  such  as 
gold, commodities and real estate might be high. To the extent that SWFs attempt to hedge 
macroeconomic  risks  for  their  country,  difficulties  could  arise  insofar  as  the  best  existing 
hedging  instruments  may  be  less  liquid  than  bonds  and  equities.  The  risk  of  a  potentially 
disruptive impact on asset price dynamics should then be acknowledged for large SWFs, as 
underlined by the 2007 IMF Global Financial Stability Report. 
Investment criteria 
By their very nature, the criteria used for sovereign portfolio strategic asset allocation are not 
exclusively related to value-enhancing considerations, but may also encompass other policy 
objectives.  Among  the  main  non-financial  criteria,  ethical  and  environmental  concerns  are 
sometimes put forward. The Norwegian Government Pension Fund, for instance, established 
in  2004  its  “ethical  guidelines”,  excluding  investments  in  weapons  production  industries  or 
polluting sectors. Strategic or industrial goals can also be pursued, such as facilitating the 
access of domestic firms to new foreign technologies, or more generally bolstering national 
industries. One such example is provided by the new Chinese State Investment Company, 
which  could  possibly  use  a  large  fraction  of  its  assets  to  recapitalise  the  Chinese  banking 
sector. 
In a word, sovereigns are also in charge of economic policy and it is intrinsically difficult for 
them to maintain schizophrenia between their actions as policy-makers and their decisions 
as managers of public assets. The strategic allocation of their risky assets can therefore be 
expected to be used, in some cases, as another policy instrument. Given these specificities 
of sovereign holdings of risky assets, it is legitimate to wonder whether the growth of these 
holdings raises new challenges for central banks and the international community. 
Transparency 
I will conclude on the issue of the appropriate transparency level for SWFs. Should SWFs be 
more transparent than other institutional investors? This question must be addressed from 
two different perspectives: accountability and financial stability. 
As a public institution, an SWF should disclose a minimum set of information because of its 
fiduciary  responsibility.  Over  the  recent  past,  public  institutions  have  responded  more  and 
more  favourably  to  the  arguments  in  favour  of  transparency.  In  particular,  the  benefits  of 
greater  accountability  and  the  benchmarking  of  sovereign  institutions  tend  to  outweigh 
arguments in favour of secrecy. For instance, most central banks nowadays report their FX 
reserves  holdings  to  the  IMF  under  the  SDDS  and  publish  a  detailed  annual  report.  The 
Central  Bank  Gold  Agreement  also  provides  a  striking  example  of  where  central  bank 
transparency  ex  ante  and  ex  post  has  had  significant  benefits  in  preventing  market 
disturbances, in the patrimonial interest of its participants. 
A similar level of transparency could therefore be extended to SWFs, for their own benefit. 
Some  of  them  have  already  adopted  such  good  practices:  the  Norwegian  Government 
Pension  Fund  is  widely  recognised  as  a  model  in  that  respect:  it  provides  detailed 
information  about  its  asset  allocation,  its  quarterly  results  and  its  investment  policy  on  its 
website. More generally, public pension funds typically set a useful example. For instance, 
the  French  Fonds  de  Réserve  pour  les  Retraites  also  endeavours  to  ensure  transparency 
and accountability. 
From  the  perspective  of  financial  market  stability,  a  lack  of  information  regarding  SWF 
holdings  and  strategies  can  contribute  to  herd  behaviours,  with  a  potentially  very  negative 
impact  on  financial  markets  dynamics.  With  that  overriding  concern  in  mind,  a  code  of 
conduct would be welcome, which could be designed within international fora (for instance 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 7
under the aegis of the World Bank or the IMF), in order to establish minimum requirements 
regarding  adequate  information  disclosure.  Further  progress  in  that  field  would  greatly 
alleviate  concerns  over  risks  of  capital  misallocation  as  well  as  possible  negative 
macroeconomic and financial market externalities of large foreign asset management. 
8 
 BIS Review 119/2007
