Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Introduction of a CHOGM 
commemorative banknote in Uganda 
Address  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
press  conference  for  the  official  launch  of  the  CHOGM  Commemorative  Shs  10,000 
banknote, Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 20 November 2007. 
 4. 
2. 
3. 
I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  the  Bank  of  Uganda  decided  to  issue  a  Shs  10,000  CHOGM 
Commemorative banknote on November 20, 2007 to celebrate and mark Uganda’s hosting 
of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to be held in Kampala November 23-
25, 2007.  
Central banks worldwide issue commemorative coins and notes to mark important events of 
national  and  international  interest.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  has  in  the  past  issued  the 
following commemorative coins:  
1. 
FAO  1968  Coin  to  mark  the  United  Nations  World  Food  Day  with  the  theme  ‘ 
Produce More Food’  
Pope Paul VI Coin issued in 1969 to commemorate the Pope’s visit to Uganda.  
International Year of the Disabled Persons Coin issued in 1981to educate the public 
about the rights, talents and needs of the disabled throughout the world.  
Bank of Uganda 20 Years of Service Coin issued1986 to mark BOU’s 20 years of 
service.  
5. 
The Bank of Uganda 40th Anniversary Commemorative Coin issued in August 2006.  
Issuing  the  CHOGM  banknote  will  be  the  first  time  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  issuing  a 
Commemorative Banknote.  
The Commemorative Shs10,000 banknote, unlike the previous commemorative coins will be 
a  circulation  and  transaction  banknote.  It  will  circulate  side  by  side  with  the  existing 
banknotes  and  coins.  It  has  however  been  issued  in  limited  quantities  and  is  a  one  time 
issue.  
Immediately  after  this  launch,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  will  distribute  the  commemorative 
banknotes to commercial banks for issue to customers in the normal course of business.  
The Commemorative banknote will be issued in limited quantities and, therefore banks and 
financial  institutions  have  been  requested  to  issue  the  CHOGM  banknotes  randomly  to 
customers  together  with  other  circulation  notes  using  the  ATMs  and  in  the  banking  halls. 
Banks shall accept exchange of existing bank notes and coins for the CHOGM banknote and 
vice versa.  
Let me now turn to the features of the Shs10,000 CHOGM Commemorative Banknote. As 
you can see from the publicity materials and samples, the CHOGM banknote is similar to the 
current Shs 10,000 banknote in dominant colors gradations and most security features.  
The  distinctive  and  distinguishing  features  of  the  CHOGM  banknote  from  the  current  Shs 
10,000 note are as follows:  
At the front:  
1. 
2. 
CHOGM Logo has replaced the musical instruments vignette,  
A  color  shifting  windowed  security  thread  has  replaced  of  the  silver  foil  stripe 
and  the  embedded  security  thread.  The  colour  shift  is  from  green  to  red  and  is 
distinguishable  when  the  angle  of  view  is  changed.  The  denominational  numeral 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
6. 
At the back:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
10000 and letters BOU are printed on the windowed security thread and can be read 
from either side of the banknote when it is held up against the light.  
Gold  coloured  denomination  numerals  have  been  put  at  the  top  right-hand 
corner. This numeral is in raised printed detectable by gently running a finger over it.  
Green/blue colour shifting denominational numerals has been put at the bottom 
left corner instead of magenta/green. The colour shift is noticeable when the angle 
of view is changed.  
A signature of the Secretary has changed. The signature of the Governor has not 
changed, but the signatory for Secretary is the Acting Bank Secretary.  
A printed date on the note is 2007.  
The Mountain Gorillas has replaced the Uganda Kob vignette.  
A Special Feature has been added to the litho design running across the note on 
the right-hand side between the unprinted area and the Kiira Dam vignette to give 
greater security. This feature is fluorescent under UV light and gives the design its 
characteristic light purple colour.  
We shall be distributing public leaflets and posters to financial institutions and public places 
(strategic business and commercial places) and through the media to help the public to get 
acquainted with the features of the CHOGM commemorative banknote.  
The  Bank  of  Uganda  has  prepared  limited  quantities  of  specially  packaged  CHOGM 
Commemorative bank notes for presentation to the Queen and visiting Heads of Government 
and for sell to Collectors.  
I look forward to your usual cooperation to ensure that the public understands the purpose, 
use and features of commemorative bank note.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
