W A Wijewardena: The internal auditor in banking institutions – 
challenges and his new role 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, at a seminar by the Institute of Internal Auditors, Colombo, 30 November 2007. 
 The precise role which an auditor should play in an organization has always been subject to 
much debate. Different schools of thought had held different views on the subject based on 
their  personal  feelings  and  ideologies.  When  we  were  studying  auditing  at  the  university 
some four decades ago, an adage which was firmly planted in our heads was that “an auditor 
was  a  watch  dog  and  not  a  blood  hound”.  This  principle  which  had  ruled  the  sphere  of 
auditing for decades had been established in many legal cases that had been judged in the 
United Kingdom and elsewhere by reference to the common practice of auditing. This simple 
expression amply described what role an auditor was expected to play in an organization. He 
was simply to keep a watchful eye on the operations of a business and alert his masters of 
any  irregularity  that  was  happening.  Once  this  was  done,  it  was  the  responsibility  of  the 
masters to take necessary corrective action. An ambitious audit officer may be tempted to go 
beyond the  bound of this adage and take upon himself the responsibility of passing penal 
judgments on those whom he finds as miscreants of financial responsibility. But, the auditor’s 
role is simply to function as a pointer and not a financial crusader. If he chooses to function 
as a financial crusader, he may not only embarrass his masters, but also endanger his own 
position  as  well.  Without  any  penal  power  vested  in  the  auditor,  it  is  also  practically 
impossible for him to act as a penal authority. 
The auditor is a watchdog and not a blood hound 
Businesses today, specifically those involving banking institutions, are very much complex in 
nature. Hence, one may rightly question whether the old adage relating to auditing could still 
serve a purpose. Though the complexity of the businesses has grown tremendously, I feel 
that  the  old  adage  relating  to  auditing  is  still  valid  and  relevant.  It  has  demarcated  the 
boundary within which an auditor has to operate. If he steps outside this boundary, the most 
likely consequence would be the creation of a hostile atmosphere for the auditor to perform 
his duties. No organization, whether big or small, could function effectively and efficiently in 
that scenario. This caution is equally valid for both external auditors and internal auditors. 
The role of the internal auditor 
Internal  audit,  as  against  the  external  audit,  is  the  first  safeguard  available  to  the 
management  and  owners  to  run  their  business  free  from  financial  irregularities  and 
misbehaviour. Internal auditor is available on site throughout the period and, therefore, can 
play  his  role  as  an  effective  watchdog  continuously.  His  screening  and  evaluation  of  the 
operations of an organization makes the work of the external auditor easier. It cuts the cost 
of the external audit which otherwise has to conduct all audit examinations and tests on his 
own  in  order  to  arrive  at  his  audit  conclusions.  By  relying  on  the  audit  trails  continuously 
conducted by the internal auditor, the external auditor could complete his audit examinations 
on time by conducting only the relevant sample tests. In this sense too, an internal auditor is 
a necessary element in modern organizations. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
Internal auditor or management auditor? 
Over the years, the scope of the internal audit has expanded to cover new areas which have 
become  important  to  an  organization  from  the  point  of  view  of  efficiency  and  productivity. 
Modern business is fiercely competitive and, unless an organization acquires a competitive 
edge over its rivals, it would not be able to continue in business. This is specifically relevant 
to  banking  institutions.  Hence,  in  addition  to  the  normal  routine  surveillance  over  financial 
matters,  internal  auditor  was  required  to  comment  on  the  efficiency  of  operations  as  well. 
This  involved  his  examination  of  processes,  systems  and  methods  to  gauge  whether  the 
money spent by a business really makes a contribution to the business in return. The new 
work-load changed the title of the internal auditor to management auditor. He was, therefore, 
required  to  function  as  an  in-house  management  consultant  and  advisor  to  the  top 
management  of  organizations.  Today,  we  do  not  make  any  distinction  between  “internal 
audit” and “management audit”. Whatever the term we use to call him, an internal auditor has 
to function as a management auditor as well. 
New challenges for internal auditors 
The expansion of banking business both horizontally and vertically over the years has posed 
new challenges to the internal auditor. This expansion has resulted in creating giant banking 
holding companies encompassing almost all areas of financial services. A bank which was 
confined only to borrowing and lending some six to seven decades ago is now a universal 
bank  that  provides  all  types  of  financial  services  to  its  customers.  They  may  do  it  through 
different units or departments set up under one umbrella or through the establishment of a 
host of associate and subsidiary companies under one holding company. An internal auditor 
in a bank, therefore, cannot simply confine his work only to the main business of banking. 
Since  there  are  cross-border  risks  involving  different  segments  of  a  banking  holding 
company,  he  now  has  to  expand  his  area  of  operation  to  cover  the  entire  business  as  a 
single entity. This adds not only a new work-load, but also a new challenge to an internal 
auditor.  It  behooves  on  the  auditor  to  acquire  new  knowledge  and  skills  to  handle  the  job 
effectively.  Hence,  an  internal  auditor  today  has  to  be  an  all-rounder  in  banking  and 
associated financial business, if he is to do his job effectively. This makes it necessary for the 
internal auditor to put him on a continuous learning path so that he could update himself of 
the new developments in banking as well as his own field. 
High tech and associated risks 
In modern banking, the internal auditor has been challenged by a new dimension of business 
process development in banks. This has basically arisen from the extensive employment of 
advanced technology, namely, information and communication technology, in banks and the 
consequential business process outsourcing that has sprung up throughout the world as an 
efficient cost-cutter for banking firms. The second would not have been possible, had the first 
had  not  taken  place.  With  regard  to  the  employment  of  high-tech  in  business  processing, 
banks  have  been  the  pioneers  in  the  game.  With  the  rapid  advancements  that  took  place 
from around early 1960s, banks successfully resorted to advanced ICT so as to cut costs, 
have a wider customer outreach, supply a wide range of financial products and out-beat their 
less  tech-savvy  rivals.  This  resulted  in  a  tremendous  growth  in  banking  business  in  the 
subsequent  decades.  The  very  same  development  has  now  paved  the  way  for  a  further 
quantum leap type of business expansion in the form of business process outsourcing. Both 
have been beneficial to banks. Yet, they have brought new types of risks to banks as well. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
Internal auditor as the principal risk manager 
The internal auditor of a bank is the principal risk management officer as well. Since banks 
are  highly  leveraged  institutions,  they  also  face  different  types  of  risks  which  other 
businesses  do  not  normally  face.  These  risks  are  numerous  and  usually  range  from 
operational  risks  to  fraud  risks  to  liquidity  risks  to  reputation  risks  and  so  on.  These  risks, 
unless properly managed, are often fatal to a bank. It is, therefore, necessary that a bank 
should be adequately prepared to successfully mitigate or avoid these risks. The failure to do 
so will lead the bank to closure of business. A bank which operates well by any standard may 
soon find itself boggled with a serious liquidity issue arising from some external shock. If it is 
unable  to  raise  funds  quickly  to  meet  liquidity,  it  will  face  a  general  bank-run  forcing  it  to 
plead for assistance from other banks, authorities etc. The recent liquidity crunch due to the 
sub-prime issue is a case in point. It had been reported that one such bank that had faced 
this  liquidity  crunch  severely  had  boasted  of  itself  in  August  that  it  was  indeed  a  well-run 
robust  bank.  To  its  much  embarrassment,  just one  month  later,  it  had to  swallow  its  pride 
when it had to plead with authorities for assistance. This points to the fact that the internal 
auditor has to develop risk assessment and mitigation systems in a bank and take effective 
measures to give advance warning in the event of an impending risk crisis. 
The significance of systems and governance principles 
Given the gigantic nature of the risks faced by banks and the inability to foresee the delivery 
of external shocks, the life of the internal auditor is made miserable today. He has to function 
as an effective watchdog. But, he does not possess a set of well tested paraphernalia to do 
this  job.  He  may  be  an  honest,  genuine  and  committed  worker.  But,  the  rest  in  the 
organization  may  not  be  so  to  the  same  degree.  Hence,  any  mishap  can  occur  without 
warning or the knowledge of the internal auditor. If it so occurs, the internal auditor himself is 
driven to a serious quandary. The way to overcome this risk is to develop and place in place 
suitable and effective systems, processes and methods across the organization at all levels. 
The  internal  auditor  could  just  monitor  and  ensure  that  the  systems  are  genuinely  and 
effectively followed by all. 
An important element which also helps him to perform his job effectively is to introduce and 
follow  to  the  letter  the  good  governance  principles  in  the  organization.  These  governance 
principles  would  bind  all  in  the  organization  by  a  common  code  of  ethics.  The  absence  of 
proper  governance  will  lead  to  misuse  of  the  resources  to  the  detriment  of  outside 
stakeholders. The internal auditor cannot keep a watchful eye on everything that happens in 
a bank. A good deal of discipline that should be inculcated throughout the bank comes from 
self-discipline and there again, through the strict adherence to governance principles. It is, 
therefore, in the interest of the internal auditor to promote governance to facilitate his job in a 
bank. 
The need for continuous learning 
These  new  challenges  that  are  faced  by  internal  auditors  require  them  to  acquire  the 
necessary skills and competencies on a continuous basis. This makes it necessary for them 
to  place  them  on  a  learning  path  so  that  they  could  update  themselves  with  new 
developments.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  internal  auditor  should  be  an  all-rounder.  He 
should know all aspects of banking in order to perform an effective job as an internal auditor. 
In this respect, the work done by the Institute of Internal Auditors in developing a wholesome 
internal  auditor  is  laudable.  In  addition  to  providing  professional  qualifications,  it  conducts 
regular  seminars,  lectures  and  short-term  training  programmes  to  keep  its  membership 
continuously  updated  of  the  new  developments.  In  the  modern  world  where  human 
knowledge  is  subject  to  the  fastest  depreciation  and  obsolescence,  the  cry  by  any 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
professional should be learning, learning and learning. I hope that this seminar will fulfill that 
task. 
Conclusion 
The  functions  of  internal  auditors  have  expanded  substantially  over  the  years  due  to  the 
expansion of business, addition of new risk elements and adoption of advanced technology. 
Yet,  the  basic  character  of  the  auditors  remains  the  same.  They  should  function  only  as 
extended  ears,  eyes  and  arms  of  the  top  management  and  owners.  They  may  point  at 
irregularities, but would not act as penal authorities. Hence, the auditor, including the internal 
auditor, is still a watchdog and not a bloodhound. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2007
