Savenaca Narube: Increasing productivity and improving customer 
service 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
Rotaract Club of Suva Business Seminar, Suva, 13 October 2007. 
 The President of the Rotaract Club of Suva, Ms Roshika Deo 
Distinguished Guests and Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good Morning 
It is not usual for me to be up delivering a speech this early on a Saturday morning! But I am 
very  pleased  to  join  you  today  for  your  Business  Seminar.  I  believe  that  such  training  of 
young  people  like  yourselves  is  a  noble  cause  and  worthy  of  waking  up  early  for  on  this 
Saturday. The saying that our youth of today are our leaders of tomorrow is very relevant. I 
am sure that you the youth that have sacrificed your Saturday to attend this training will be 
our leaders tomorrow. I am certain it is worth the sacrifice. 
Rotaract 
I  fully  subscribe  to  the  principles  of  your  organisation  of  serving  the  community,  building 
understanding and elevating ethical standards. They are all about making a difference in our 
own lives and the lives of others. And perhaps what is more striking is that you are doing all 
these for men and women aged between 18 to 30 years. I applaud Rotaract for providing the 
opportunity for young adults to enhance knowledge and skills that will assist them in personal 
development and build better relations between all people. 
Seminar 
I also think that the theme that you have chosen for this seminar – Increasing Productivity 
and  Improving  Customer  Service  –  is  a  very  appropriate  one.  I  was  interested  to  know 
though  why  you  chose  this  combination.  But  on  reflection,  they  both  equate  to  making 
money. And in this lifetime, despite what some may say, money is what makes all things go 
round. Productivity and Customer Service are at the very core of successful businesses or 
indeed of all spheres of life. 
I also understand that the seminar has another equally important purpose of fund raising to 
renovate  the  kitchen  facilities  at  St  Giles  Hospital.  This  again  is  a  very  worthwhile  cause. 
Giving back to the community is something that I fully encourage and support. 
And the earlier we start to do that in our lives, the better it is for the giver. I wish you the very 
best in this fund-raising and I am sure that you will reach your target of $10,000. 
I therefore congratulate Rotaract for this initiative of training our youth and at the same time 
reaching out to the community. It is indeed an excellent combination and one that perhaps 
we can adopt more frequently. 
The five objectives of your business seminar are impressive. In addition to productivity and 
customer  service,  your  will  also  be  talking  on  leadership,  motivation,  people  skills  and 
communications. Those of us who have been around for some time will tell you that these 
are some of the key ingredients of a successful life. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
Leadership 
I  recently  talked  on  leadership  to  a  Human  Resource  Convention.  I  emphasised  the 
importance of leadership in this time of rapid change. Change is everywhere these days. And 
no one can stand against these changes either as an individual, family, company or a nation. 
Fiji cannot stand in the way of trade liberalization. We cannot resist the pressure to integrate 
into the global economy. 
Globalization  is  of  course  the  major  driver  of  many  of  these  changes.  Competition  in  this 
rather hostile environment is the key. 
If you cannot compete, you perish. Survival is paramount. Leadership and skills are therefore 
evolving  in  response  to  these  changes.  They  hold  the  answer  to  globalization  and 
competitiveness.  Even  with  the  state-of-the-art  machines  and  the  best  processes,  without 
leadership and the right skills, the firm will struggle. 
One  of  the  books  on  leadership  that  I  read  recently  puts  it  rather  interestingly  that  “The 
secret  to  leading  people  and  living  and  working  with  them  is  found  in  the  space 
between their ears”. The book went on to explain that leadership is all about training people 
to think. There is a lot of truth in what Buddha once said that “What we think we become”. 
In this modern world, the coercive leadership model in my view no longer works. Why? I think 
that one of the major reasons is that workers are now better educated and better informed 
than  they  were  before.  They  are  also  more  independent.  They  know  that  they  can  take 
alternative  options.  The  global  job  market  has  opened  up.  The  modern  leadership  style 
needs to attend to these factors. Leaders not only need to be knowledgeable, they now need 
to lead a very knowledgeable team. 
In my experience, passion has a lot to do with good leadership. Passion is sometime not well 
understood. To me, before becoming passionate one must do three things: 
1. 
First, you must know your destination. You cannot be passionate about processes. 
Rather, you must be passionate in getting to where you want the organisation to be. 
It’s  the  vision.  It’s  the  future.  I  came  across  a  recent  quote  from  a  Mr.  Ted  Levitt 
which  puts  this  very  well  that  “The  future  belongs  to  people  who  see 
possibilities before they become obvious”. 
The  second  thing  is  that  you  should  have  some  idea  of  how  to  get  to  where  you 
want to go. One cannot hope to get to where one wants to go without knowing how 
to get there. I do not mean details. But rather broad strategies. Leaders must not 
loose sight of the bigger picture. Do not allow the details to bog the vision down 
The last thing one must do is to know when you have arrived at your destination. It 
is  very  difficult  to  be  passionate  about  getting  somewhere  when  you  do  not  even 
know  when  you  have  arrived.  Measurement  and  information  are  therefore  critical. 
Someone once said that you cannot achieve what you cannot measure. 
2. 
3. 
With these three prerequisites, you can then get excited about your vision and be passionate 
about  it.  You  must  become  personally  convinced  and  confident  that  you  will  get  there. 
Moreover, you must display your commitment and confidence not only most of the time but 
all of the time particularly when things are not looking bright. 
It  is  relatively  easier  to  lead  when  things  are  rosy.  But  leaders  are  challenged  most  when 
things are tough. The saying that “When the going get tough, the leaders get going” is 
very appropriate. When the situation is tough, tough decisions needs to be made and there is 
a  high  premium  on  being  level-headed,  keeping  emotions  under  control  and  being  an 
optimist. 
I do not want to spoil your morning by talking about the economy. But times are obviously 
tough in Fiji now. Popular decisions are easier to take. But unfortunately they sometimes are 
not the right ones. When times are tough, decisive and proactive steps must be taken. Over 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
the  last  four  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  raised  interest  rates,  reduced  liquidity  and 
tightened  exchange  controls.  Raising  interest  rates  and  tightening  exchange  controls  are 
never going to be popular. But unfortunately they are necessary. As a result, we now see 
imports declining and our foreign reserves stabilizing and even rising. 
I find that leaders must continuously stretch the boundaries of the corporate space and take 
your teams  out of their comfort zone. Only when they are  out of their comfort zone would 
they  be  inspired.  And  inspiration  is  the  pinnacle  of  personal  victory.  I  fully  subscribe  to  a 
quote by a Richard Florida that says: “People do not need to be managed, they need to 
be unleashed”. 
A leader is also solution focused. A common challenge that I usually pose to my colleagues 
is  that  they  should  not  only  come  to  me  with  problems  but  also  solutions.  I  do  not  hold  a 
monopoly on solutions. That always gets them thinking. An interesting side effect is that the 
problems started declining. Needless to say a leader must be a good communicator. 
Productivity 
Let me turn to productivity. Productivity is one issue that I get passionate about. Why? I firmly 
believe that better productivity can solve many of our economic problems in Fiji and I will talk 
more about this later. But more importantly, improving productivity from our low level would 
not take too much of financial resources. It will only require a change in behaviour and work 
ethics. It will only require that we all get excited about this issue at all levels. Firstly, in my 
view, we require a national vision for productivity. This national vision will assist in changing 
the  mindsets.  In  this  regard  we  should  include  the  word  productivity  in  the  name  of  the 
relevant  government  ministry  and  in  our  case,  I  believe  that  it  is  the  Ministry  of  Labour. 
Secondly,  we  must  begin  to  measure  productivity.  Thirdly,  we  must  continue  to  train  our 
workers. Lastly, we must continue to change attitudes. 
Motivation  is  important  in  changing  behaviours.  How  do  we  motivate  people  to  raise  their 
productivity?  We  motivate  them  through  their  pockets.  Being  more  productive  must  mean 
more money in the pocket. And not just for the company but for everyone. It must mean more 
take home pay for workers and more profits for the companies. More income means a better 
quality of life – better education for our children, shelter for our families, and more food on 
the table. 
There are few ways which we can create this win-win situation. Firstly, I am firm believer that 
as  far  as  possible  rewards  and  recognition  including  wage  rises  must  be  linked  to 
productivity. A worker must be rewarded for the additional effort that he or she puts into the 
organisation and not rewarded the same as those that just turn up to work each day. This 
calls  for  an  overhaul  of  our  rewards  and  recognition  system  to  include  incentives  for 
productivity. 
Secondly, it is also very obvious from the surveys and feedbacks that our people want to be 
treated with respect. They want to feel that they are valued. They want to feel that they are 
recognised for their contributions. I have found that non monetary incentives inspire, just as 
much as monetary rewards do – a pat on the back, a nod, a special announcement, a thank 
you note, a signed certificate and so forth. 
One  of  my  roles  is  to  inspire  everyone  in  our  organisations  to  walk  the  talk  on  corporate 
ethics and values. These values must filter down to all aspects of the organisations. And we 
must  align  our  system  to  reward  those  that  uphold  these  values.  We  have  therefore 
integrated  the  organisational  values  with  our  formal  recognition  and  reward  system  in  the 
Bank.  Alignment  to  these  values  now  determines  the  rewards  that  one  will  be  awarded  at 
year end. 
I  have  spoken  many  times  in  the  Productivity  Awareness  Week  organized  by  Productivity 
Authority of Fiji’s (TPAF). In one of my speeches I emphasised that “Productivity is not an 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
end  in  itself.  It  is  simply  a  means  to  an  end.  And  what  is  the  end?  That  end  must  be 
prosperity at the individual and household levels”. 
Being  productive  means  working  smarter  and  nor  necessarily  harder.  It  means  producing 
more from the same resources and even producing more from less. In Fiji our resources are 
limited. The biggest resources that we have are land and our people. How productive are we 
using these resources? I am sure that you will agree with me that we could do a whole lot 
more in this area. No wonder our long term economic growth rate is a meager 2.5 percent – 
not enough to absorb our school leavers! 
At the Bank, we have tried to take a macroeconomic measure of productivity by taking the 
total output produced by each worker. This is a very aggregative and crude measurement. It 
shows  that  productivity  has  grown  by  an  average  of  around  1  percent  since  1996.  This  is 
very low. Some Asian countries are achieving over four percent growth. My crude estimate 
says that the multiplier effect of a rise in the growth rate of productivity on economic growth is 
at least 2. This means that if we raise productivity growth from 1 to say 2 percent every year, 
we can raise our average economic growth rate from 2.5 to 4.5 percent. And that makes a lot 
difference in jobs, in incomes and in poverty alleviation. 
Customer service 
Let me say a few words on the second part of your theme that of customer service. 
When  we  talk  about  customers,  we  are  really  talking  about  you  and  me.  We  may  be 
entrepreneurs or workers but we are all customers. And here the best motto is to do to others 
what you want done to you. 
Firstly, we all want to be understood. Communication and feedback are therefore important. 
Listening is the best way of communication and believe you me listening is not an easy thing 
to do. 
Secondly, we want to be served efficiently and courteously with minimum waiting time. Have 
you heard the story of a patient named Tom that was being examined by a doctor? Every few 
minutes the doctor had to stop talking with Tom to answer calls from other patients, listen to 
their symptoms and advise them what to do. This went on for a while. When the doctor next 
answered the phone, he heard, “Doctor, this is Tom calling!” 
Thirdly, we all want to get what we paid for. Standards are important. Have you heard about 
the customer who fronted up to the hamburger counter and asked for a burger that had stale 
vegetables, raw eggs that were dripping off the sides and beef that was still red with blood? 
The attendant was totally aghast and proclaimed that they do not serve such a burger and 
will definitely not serve such a thing to the customer. The customer calmly replied “Well you 
did so yesterday!” 
My  experience  is  that  good  customer  service  is  about  attitude  and  the  culture  of  the 
business. It boils down to a personal touch and going the extra mile. 
Concluding remarks 
Finally, I would again like to thank Ms. Roshika Deo for inviting me here this morning. I would 
also like to thank the distinguished speakers who are contributing to the program – they are 
all professionals in their own fields and have a lot of experience and knowledge to share with 
you today. To you participants, I wish you well in your deliberations. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
Official opening 
I now have much pleasure in declaring this business seminar – Increasing Productivity and 
Improving Customer Service open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 5
