Klaus Liebscher: Prospects for the international role of the euro 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Salzburg 
Seminar “Challenges to the International Monetary System”, Salzburg, 1 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Let me begin by thanking the organizers for inviting me to share with you my views on the 
“Prospects for the international role of the euro” in this marvelous and historic venue. I have 
accepted the invitation with pleasure. 
Since the introduction of the single currency, the Eurosystem, i.e. the ECB and the National 
Central Banks of the euro area, was always of the opinion that the international use of the 
euro should neither be promoted nor hindered. It has taken a neutral stance and has left it to 
the market forces to determine the role of the euro as an international currency. To the extent 
that  the  Eurosystem  has  been  successful  in  maintaining  price  stability,  this  in  itself  has 
fostered the use of the euro as an international currency. 
Eight and a half years after its introduction, the euro has now established itself firmly as the 
second world currency. 
Nearly  one-third  of  all  international  debt  securities  are  denominated  in  euro,  and  the  euro 
accounts for more than 25% of global foreign exchange reserves. Moreover, with 646 billion 
banknotes and coins in circulation, the euro has already overtaken the US dollar.1
In  international  foreign  exchange  markets,  the  US-Dollar  has  retained  its  dominant  role, 
however the euro has established itself as the second most often traded currency. 
Notwithstanding its neutral stance, the ECB and the Eurosystem are following developments 
closely. Since 2001, the ECB has been publishing its so-called “Review of the international 
role of the euro” on a regular basis. This review provides a detailed description of the euro’s 
use in the various segments of financial markets and in international trade. 
The latest “Review of the international role of the euro”, published in June 2007, reports that 
recent  developments  in  the  international  use  of  the  euro  vary  across  global  market 
segments. 
While  the  international  role  of  the  euro  has  lessened  slightly  in  some  segments,  namely 
international debt securities, international deposits and loans as well as foreign exchange, in 
other segments it has continued to be highly stable or even to grow gradually. In particular, 
the  use  of  the  euro  as  a  reserve  currency  by  third  countries  has  increased  somewhat. 
Moreover, demand for euro banknotes and for euro-denominated deposits by private agents 
in third countries has continued its gradual rise. The role of the euro as a settlement currency 
for exports of goods from euro area countries appears to have stabilized, while its share in 
the invoicing and settlement of imports of goods declined during the review period, probably 
in conjunction with developments in energy markets. In contrast, its upward trend seems to 
have continued for exports and imports of services. 
As  in  earlier  issues,  this  year’s  “Review  of  the  International  Role  of  the  Euro”  finds  the 
internationalization  of  the  euro  to  be  characterized  by  a  strong  institutional  and  regional 
pattern. 
During  the  review  period,  the  euro  maintained  its  role  as  an  exchange  rate  anchor  for 
countries in the geographical proximity of the EU and countries that have established special 
                                                 
1   USD banknotes and coins: USD 810 bn = EUR 615 bn (all data and the exchange rate current at end-2006). 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
institutional arrangements with the EU or its Member States. Recent exchange rate regime 
changes involving the euro as an anchor currency have occurred in Slovenia, Slovakia and 
Russia.  Slovenia  adopted  the  euro  on  1  January  2007.  Slovakia  joined  the  ERM  II  in 
November 2005. In Russia, the weight of the euro in the Russian central bank’s operational 
basket for daily exchange rate management increased in two steps from 35 to 45%. 
Regarding  the  role  of  the  euro  as  an  intervention  currency,  several  central  banks  in  EU 
neighboring  countries  –  particularly  some  non-euro  area  EU  Member  States  and  EU 
candidate countries – continued to intervene in foreign exchange markets by using the euro 
as the intervention currency. 
Nevertheless, the introduction of the euro has not yet resulted in a significant change in the 
currency  composition  of  official  reserve  holdings.  For  the  time  being,  the  USD  has 
maintained  its  place  as  the  dominant  reserve  currency,  supported  by  the  edge  that  USD-
based financial markets still have over euro-based markets, especially in terms of size and 
liquidity. Recent data show that about 64.7 percent of world currency reserves are held in US 
dollars and 25.8 percent in euro. 
As regards the private use of the euro as a parallel currency, the stock of banknotes shipped 
by  banks  to  destinations  outside  the  euro  area  has  continued  to  increase  gradually.  In 
addition, the share of euro-denominated deposits has increased in most new Member States 
and  EU  candidate  countries.  Having  described  briefly  the  latest  developments  in  the 
international use of the euro, I now would like to explain the factors underlying the various 
roles of the euro. 
It is widely agreed that well-developed financial markets are necessary for a currency to play 
a role as reserve asset. The introduction of the euro has greatly improved the functioning of 
euro area financial markets. In 2004, today’s US Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke2 
pointed  out  that  the  development  of  euro  financial  markets  is  frequently  seen  as  the  most 
tangible benefit of European Monetary Union (EMU). Moreover, studies by institutions such 
as the Bank for International Settlements3 have confirmed that the liquidity and breadth of 
euro financial markets are fast approaching those of USD markets. The single currency and 
associated efforts to harmonize institutional structures have led to a reduction in transaction 
costs as well as a decline in country-specific macroeconomic risks. 
According  to  the  IMF  classification,  the  euro  area  is  the  3rd  largest  economic  area  in  the 
world in terms of real GDP (15%), after the US (20%) and developing Asia (27%). Against 
this background, it is somewhat striking that the euro does not yet play in all segments of the 
international monetary system a role equal to its economic weight. How come? 
The  story  of  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  is  a  story  of  achievements  and 
challenges. On the achievement side, it has to be mentioned that in a global perspective the 
EU  and  the  euro  area  are  unique.  No  other  model  of  supra-national  cooperation  or 
agreement has become so highly integrated. 
Earlier  this  year,  we  celebrated  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Treaty  of  Rome,  which 
established  the  European  Economic  Community  (EEC).  The  day  the  Treaty  was  signed, 
March  25,  1957,  is  considered  the  birthday  of  the  European  Union,  which  today  unites 
around 490 million people in 27 countries. 
The  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  the  euro,  which  seemed  to  be  very  ambitious 
projects of European integration some decades ago, have since come to make a remarkable 
                                                 
2   Bernanke, B., 2004, “What have we learned from the euro at five?”, Remarks made at “Euro at Five: ready for 
a global role”, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 26 February. 
3   Galati, G., Wooldridge, P. 2006, “The euro as a reserve currency: a challenge to the pre-eminence of the US 
dollar?”, BIS Working Paper No. 218. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
contribution to both the stability and the international competitiveness of the European Union 
in general and the euro area in particular. 
One  of  the  factors  behind  the  success  of  this  milestone  of  European  integration  was  the 
strong political will to establish the “stability architecture of EMU”, which rests on three pillars: 
a  monetary  policy  oriented  to  price  stability,  a  fiscal  policy  geared  towards  sound  public 
finances (the so called “Stability and Growth Pact”) and structural policies designed to foster 
competitiveness and sustainable economic growth (the “Lisbon Agenda”). 
The monetary policy framework of the Eurosystem is based on central bank independence, 
transparency, accountability and an explicit mandate to maintain price stability. 
The Eurosystem goes to great lengths to communicate the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, 
the rationale for monetary policy decisions and our assessment of economic developments.  
These communication efforts not only take the form of regular testimonies in the European 
and national Parliaments, periodic bulletins and speeches, but also take place in “real time”: 
ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet  explains  the  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the 
underlying  reasoning  in  press  conferences  which  take  place  immediately  after  Governing 
Council meetings and which provide “question and answer sessions” for journalists. 
In  today’s  euro  area,  about  317  million  people  in  13  countries  benefit  from  a  low  inflation 
environment and stable inflation expectations, a high degree of confidence in their currency 
and moderate interest rates – all of which are elements of a business and investment-friendly 
economic environment. EMU and the euro can be seen as one of the EU’s most important 
strategic responses to the chances and challenges of a globalized world. 
Since 1999, we have experienced a number of important shocks to the global economy, such 
as the millennium challenge, substantial oil price increases, the ups and downs of the euro 
exchange rate, the equity market boom and bust, global imbalances and the clouds of war 
and terrorism. 
Amidst  all  of  this,  the  Governing  Council  of  the European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has guided 
inflation expectations in a firmly  manner consistent with price stability and thus provided a 
reliable anchor for the euro area economy, while the euro has sheltered euro area financial 
markets against those shocks. 
Not least because of the growing international use of the euro, the stability culture formed by 
the single currency has already brought positive benefits to the non-euro area EU Member 
States and many Eastern European, Middle Eastern and African countries. 
Moreover, the euro area has overcome a few years of economic sluggishness to become an 
ever larger player in the global economy, thereby contributing positively to a rebalancing in 
global economic growth. Economic activity, in fact, accelerated to 2.9% last year, and since 
the start of Monetary Union real GDP growth has averaged 2.1%. The ECB staff projections 
from September 2007 see growth ranging from 2.2% to 2.8% in 2007 and from 1.8% to 2.8% 
in 2008, even though risks are tilted to the downside. In a particularly welcome development, 
unemployment  has  declined  significantly,  from  9%  in  1999  to  6.9%  (July  2007).  12  million 
new jobs have been created since 1999. 
Inflation  has  stood  at  2.1%  on  average  since  the  start  of  EMU,  which  shows  that  inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored. Hence, price stability has created a favorable environment 
for  investment  and  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Concerning  the  outlook  for  prices,  ECB  staff 
projects annual inflation to average between 1.9% and 2.1% this year and between 1.5% and 
2.5% in 2008. 
As  already  referred  to  earlier,  a  price  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  is  a  necessary 
precondition – but by no means the only precondition – for sustainable dynamic growth and 
employment. It needs the support of sound public finances, ambitious structural reforms and 
a competitive economic framework. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
This last point brings me to the challenges the euro and the euro area are facing with a view 
to the international role of the euro. 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  sustainable  fiscal  policies  are  a  sine  qua  non  for  the 
success of EMU. For instance, higher risk premiums in response to unsustainable policies in 
one Member State could spill over to other euro area countries. Euro area membership thus 
also means compliance with a rigorous regulatory framework: the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We  are  aware  that  structural  improvements  are  only  part  of  the  reason  for  the  current 
improvement in euro area fiscal balances, from -1.6% in 2006 to an expected -1.0% in 2007. 
It is much more a consequence of the favorable international economic environment. 
Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  any  budgetary  leeway  granted  by  the  current  favorable 
economic environment should be used for lasting budgetary consolidation in order to prepare 
for  challenges  such  as  population  ageing  and  to  create  room  for  maneuver  for  future 
economic downturns. 
In  addition,  structural  polices  are  needed  to  ensure  that  countries  can  flexibly  react  to 
asymmetric shocks, as the single monetary regime makes adjustment to asymmetric shocks 
a painful and drawn-out process. 
In  2000  the  European  Council  adopted  the  Lisbon  Agenda.  Broadly  speaking,  the  Lisbon 
strategy  aims  to  make  Europe,  by  2010,  “the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-
based  economy  in  the  world”.  In  2005,  after  the  mid-term  review,  European  policymakers 
renewed their commitment to the ambitious goals. 
Even  though  a  number  of  Member  States  have  achieved  significant  progress  in  several 
areas(such  as  the  liberalization  of  the  electricity  market  and  the  progress  in  pension  and 
labor market reforms), much remains to be done. More effective and efficient investment in 
knowledge  and  innovation  is  necessary,  and  labor  and  product  markets  need  to  be  made 
more flexible. Indeed, research by the ECB4 suggests that euro area countries typically have 
undertaken more comprehensive and far-reaching reforms than other OECD countries over 
the past decade. However, a comparison of reform progress across policy areas shows that 
euro area countries have generally not made more progress than other OECD countries in 
reforming the “difficult” areas, where political resistance is strong. 
These  “difficult”  areas  have  included  –  for  instance  –  the  modification  of  employment 
protection legislation (EPL), i.e. relaxing the rules governing temporary contracts, as well as 
extending the working age while reducing incentives for early retirement or scaling back the 
automatic indexation of wages.5
The reform process therefore appears to have slowed down in many euro area countries. For 
EMU  to  continue  to  be  a  success,  structural  reforms  remain  essential  to  raise  factor 
productivity and potential output, create new jobs and achieve lower prices and higher real 
incomes! 
It  goes  without  saying 
international 
competitiveness would evidently ensure that the euro area will – sustainably – play a role in 
the 
its  economic  weight.  Moreover,  such 
improvements are vital to master the challenges facing EMU in the years to come. 
To  date,  the  8  new  Member  States  from  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  which  joined  the 
European Union in 2004, and the two which became members in 2007, have succeeded in 
international  monetary  system  equal 
the  euro  area 
improvements 
further 
that 
to 
in 
                                                 
4   Duval, Elmeskov, 2006, “The effects of EMU on structural reforms in labour and product markets”, ECB WP 
No 596. 
5   See  e.g.,  Rajan,  G.R,  2005,  “Revitalising  reforms  in  Europe”,  The  Ludwig  Erhard  Lecture,  Brussels,  8 
December. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2007
transforming  their  economies  from  centrally  planned  systems  to  market  economies. 
Substantial progress has been achieved in the areas of property rights and privatization as 
well as capital and trade liberalization. As the 12 new EU member States – including Cyprus 
and Malta – have anchored their institutional structures to the EU, they are being viewed as 
increasingly secure places for investing and doing business in general. 
Moreover,  the  euro  anchors  monetary  stability  in  the  region,  often  directly,  for  instance 
through  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  ERM  II.  Currently,  six  of  the  12  new 
Member  States  are  members  of  ERM  II:  Cyprus,  Estonia,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Malta,  and 
Slovakia. 
Slovenia  became  the  13th  member  of  the  euro  area  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  In  July 
2007,  the  European  Council  has  approved  the  requests  of  Malta  of  Cyprus  to  adopt  the 
single currency at the beginning of 2008. 
Full monetary integration and membership in the euro area will be the ultimate goal of all new 
Member States depending on their progress towards sustainable convergence. However, the 
application of the convergence criteria for the new Member States must not be less strict – 
but also no more strict – than for the current euro area countries. Moreover, when adopting 
the euro, quality must not be compromised for the sake of speed. 
The euro also has an anchoring effect for many other countries located in the neighborhood 
of the euro area. Increasingly closer financial and institutional links are an integral part of the 
EU’s Stabilization and Association process with the countries of the Western Balkans. This 
process is assessed regularly. 
Let me now turn to the global dimension of EMU. Financial institutions, in particular from the 
United  States,  Canada  and  Great  Britain,  are  increasingly  benefiting  from  the  greater  size 
and  liquidity  of  an  integrated  euro  bond  market.  In  addition  to  this  financial  market 
perspective, the euro contributes to global monetary and financial stability. 
The euro area is a constructive element in the post-Bretton Woods international setting and 
is  actively  committed  to  multilateral  cooperation.  Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the  IMF’s 
review  of  the  Medium  Term  Strategy,  currently  under  way,  where  strengthening  the  IMF 
surveillance framework figures prominently on the agenda. Recently, the IMF concluded the 
first of its proposed multilateral consultations, and the main issue is how to address global 
imbalances while maintaining robust global growth. 
We  define  global  imbalances  as  external  positions,  i.e.  current  account  and  financial 
balances, of systemically important economies that reflect distortions or entail risks for the 
global economy. 
Global imbalances figure most prominently in the US, with a large current account deficit of 
some  6%  of  GDP,  which  is  balanced  on  a  global  basis  by  significant  current  account 
surpluses in China (some 10% of GDP and rising), Japan (some 4%) and the oil exporting 
countries.  
Global imbalances became a central policy concern only a couple of years ago. Since then, 
the discussion about the causes and consequences of the global imbalances has evolved, 
even though many aspects remain open. In particular, there is no consensus over whether, 
when and how these imbalances will adjust. 
The  widening  of  the  current  account  imbalances  has  been  driven  by  both  structural  and 
cyclical determinants. The structural determinants of global imbalances relate for instance to 
incomplete  financial  globalisation,  related  in  particular  to  the  lower  stage  of  financial 
development in some regions of the world. 
Financial  market  imperfections  in  fast  growing  emerging  economies,  combined  with  rising 
incomes resulted in higher savings ratios in these regions. Together with the rapid process of 
financial globalisation this had an impact on international capital flows, with capital flowing 
from emerging to industrial countries.  
BIS Review 143/2007 
 5
Actually,  this  is  at  odds  with  economic  theory,  as  emerging  markets  should  attract  capital, 
instead of providing capital, because the potential returns to investment in those countries 
should  be  higher.  Another  debatable  development  is  the  increasing  reliance  of  the  US  on 
official  capital  inflows,  i.e.  portfolio  investments  by  foreign  central  banks  and  treasury 
departments, relative to private capital inflows. 
Beside these factors, several emerging markets focus on an export led growth strategy, e.g. 
by  keeping  their  exchange  rates  very  competitive.  The  equilibrium  generated  by  these 
structural  factors  cannot  last  forever,  but  is  probably  sustainable  in  the  short  and  medium 
term.  
Thus,  structural  reforms  in  the  countries  concerned,  e.g.  in  order  to  make  their  financial 
systems  more  stable  and  efficient,  as  well  as  measures  to  improve  the  framework  for 
domestic demand and to reduce the reliance on exports, are not only in the interest of these 
countries, but also in respect to global imbalances. 
Cyclical factors have further fuelled widening external positions. These cyclical factors relate, 
for  instance,  to  saving-investment  patterns  in  the  private  sector  in  the  US.  Private 
consumption boomed due to a productivity-induced increase in US permanent income and 
due to wealth effects from rapid asset price increases, which allowed for significantly lower 
saving ratios. At the same time, the public sector of the US did exhibit budget deficits. 
Considering most recent developments related to the US sub-prime market, it appears that 
the  ability  of  US  agents  to  borrow  has  undergone  some  adjustment,  as  lending  to  private 
households has become more restrictive. In addition, productivity increases in the US have 
become  less  impressive.  Overall,  this  suggests  a  cyclical  moderation  of  the  US  current 
account deficit in the months to come. 
Another noteworthy development are rising oil prices from some 10 US-Dollar per barrel in 
the  late  90ies,  to  some  80  US-Dollar  today.  At  first,  rising  oil  prices  led  to  a  significant 
worsening  of  trade  balances  for  energy  importers,  and  to  considerable  trade  balance 
improvements for oil exporters, which were perceived as a mainly cyclical development. In 
the meantime, high oil prices are perceived as a rather structural and probably lasting event, 
which is going to allow oil exporters to spend more of their energy-related income on imports, 
thereby ameliorating global imbalances.  
Finally, let me also touch upon the euro area. For several years the euro area’s balance of 
payments has been broadly balanced. Nevertheless, the euro area has to contribute to and 
prepare for the orderly resolution of the global imbalances. 
Why? Because ultimately, the – at least in the longer term – necessary rebalancing of the 
imbalances will be accompanied by significant shifts of productive factors from and to traded- 
and  non-traded  sectors,  respectively  shifting  resources  between  export  orientated-  and 
domestic demand orientated sectors. 
In particular, this will hold true for countries with large current account imbalances, but also 
for the euro area, as there are significant current account imbalances within our region. As 
you would expect, flexible and productive economies with sound and well structured public 
finances certainly will cope better with these challenges. 
Albeit important structural reforms in Europe have been implemented already, much remains 
to  be  done  in  order  to  improve  potential  growth,  thereby  reducing  growth  differentials 
lastingly.  We  have  to  respond  with  policies  designed  to  use  opportunities  of  globalization, 
particularly  to  increase  productivity  and  competitiveness,  while  minimizing  unavoidable 
adjustment costs. The right answer to globalization and international competition is therefore 
to continue and intensify the Lisbon process already mentioned.  
There is no doubt that globalization has worked well for the people of Europe. After nearly 
nine years of experience, Economic and Monetary Union  has proven to be Europe’s most 
forceful strategic response to global economic change. However, we have to concede that 
6 
 BIS Review 143/2007
big changes rarely only create winners. In many EU countries, regrettably, people are critical 
and see little benefit from globalization. There has been an undue proliferation of fears that 
increased  import  competition  from  low-wage  countries  would  put  too  much  pressure  on 
domestic  producers  and  workers  and  that  economic  activity  would  allegedly  be  relocated 
abroad. 
Sometimes, these concerns have been reflected in a relative lack of confidence in Europe’s 
future. However, backsliding into protectionism, as has been called for by some, would be 
like  traveling  back  in  time.  There  is  no  other  way  to  reap  the  potential  gains  from 
globalization but to evolve towards further specialization, innovation and diversification into 
new areas of comparative advantage. 
In this context, let me mention the moribund Doha round, which has even cast doubt on the 
future of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Although calls for protectionist measures to 
counter the increasing competition from Asian economies should be taken seriously, I stand 
on the side of free trade and believe that protectionist pressures need to be firmly resisted. 
Eight and a half years after its introduction, the euro has now firmly established itself as the 
second world currency. The increasing globalization of the world economy, with new players 
emerging on the world stage, has contributed to the very impressive expansion of the world 
economy in the recent past. Yet, this dynamic growth has also spurred economic challenges, 
such as strongly rising commodity prices and significant current account imbalances. 
The  economic  upswing  recorded  in  the  euro  area  can  be  attributed,  at  least  partly,  to 
improved  economic  structures  and  is  based  on  the  stability-orientated  framework  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
The ECB and the Eurosystem respectively, will continue to support economic growth in the 
euro area by vigorously pursuing price stability. Following this approach also guarantees that 
the euro can contribute most effectively to international stability.  
BIS Review 143/2007 
 7
