Lars Nyberg: The financial market turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Riksdag 
Committee on Finance, Stockholm, 22 November 2007.  
 I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here to discuss how we at the 
Riksbank view the recent unrest in the financial markets. I shall begin by talking about the 
background  to  the  market  turbulence  and  about  the  spark  that  ignited  the  actual  chain  of 
events.  Then  I  shall  go  on  to  discuss  developments  during  the  autumn  and  what  we  can 
learn from what has happened – as far as is possible at this early stage. In conclusion, I shall 
talk about the risks we see before us.  
Rapid changes in the credit market 
In  recent  years  there  have  been  major  changes  in  the  international  credit  markets.  New 
agents have entered the market at the same time as new instruments have been introduced 
at a rapid pace. 
At the core of the changes in the credit market is a phenomenon called securitisation. This 
has to a great extent been practised by US mortgage institutions and banks since the 1970s. 
So it is not a new phenomenon. In brief, securitisation entails a number of loans, such as 
mortgages  or  credit  card  accounts,  being  placed  in  a  specially-created  company,  which  is 
then financed by issuing bonds on the market. These bonds are usually called Asset Backed 
Securities  (ABS).  Managed  properly,  there  are  considerable  advantages  to  securitisation. 
Illiquid loans are converted into liquid bonds, which can easily be sold. Many investors are 
happy to have credit risk in their portfolios for better diversification. But they do not want to 
manage individual credits, and they also want liquidity in their investments. They therefore 
appreciate the securitised products.  
In recent years, however, it has become increasingly common for securitised loans (which 
have been converted into bonds) to be repackaged into various so-called structured credit 
instruments.  An  impressive  variety  of  this  type  of  structured  product  has  arisen  in  a  short 
period  of  time.  Perhaps  the  most  common  form  are  those  known  as  CDOs,  Collateralised 
Debt  Obligations.  With  a  CDO  it  is  possible  to  put  together  bonds  from  many  different 
securitised  loan  portfolios  and  even  to  add  other  assets  if  desired.  The  idea  is  that  the 
portfolio  that  has  been  put  together  is  structured  in  different  parts  (tranches)  with  different 
credit risks (this is in practice often done by the large international investment banks). When 
interest income from the underlying assets starts coming in, it is distributed according to the 
order of priority of the tranches, or their seniority. First, the most senior tranches receive their 
allocation. After that the income is distributed to the second most senior tranches, and so on. 
Investing in a junior tranche thus entails greater risk than investing in a senior tranche, but on 
the other hand the earnings are higher. At the bottom is an equity-like part, which is only paid 
when all the others have received their share. But then they receive everything that is left. 
The advantage with prioritising the payments in this way is that one can sell the tranches to 
investors with different risk appetites. Those with a high risk appetite can buy the higher risk 
tranches, while more cautious investors, such as insurance companies and pension funds, 
can buy the tranches that are assessed to have the lowest credit risk. 
But although there are advantages to packaging together securitised loans in a CDO, there 
are  also  disadvantages.  One  disadvantage  is  that  it  is  expensive,  time-consuming  and 
difficult to assess the credit risk in the different tranches. The underlying assets may be of a 
heterogeneous nature. Moreover, there are products where a CDO is repackaged and in turn 
included as a component in another CDO, which will of course make it more difficult to gain 
an overview of the risk content. The credit risk in the structured products is often assessed 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
by the credit rating agencies, which also rate the different tranches, at least the more senior 
ones.  The  credit  rating  agencies  thus  play  an  important  role  with  regard  to  the  structured 
products.  Pricing  is  another  problem.  Tailor-made  products  are  not  in  general  subject  to 
regular trading and price listings are rare. One is often reduced to employing mathematical 
models,  which  are  based  on  estimated  default  frequencies  for  various  credits,  given  the 
development  previously  observed.  Quite  simply,  one  calculates  a  price  of  what  the 
instrument should be worth and hopefully the theoretical price will not differ too much from 
the price one gets if one actually sells it. The credit rating is often a decisive factor in the 
pricing. 
The  structured  products  are  thus  more  adapted  to  investors’  needs  than  the  purely 
securitised products. But this has been at the cost of poorer liquidity. 
Special investment companies soon emerged 
It  is  essentially  a  good  thing  that  new  instruments  make  it  possible  to  trade  credit  risk. 
Insurance  companies,  pension  foundations  and  other  institutional  investors  benefit  from 
being able to invest in such products. And if the banks’ balance sheets are relieved of the 
credit risk and investors with capital take on the risk, it is a positive development for financial 
stability. It increases the system’s capacity to manage shocks.  
However, not all of the credit risk has moved from the banks to financially strong investors. In 
recent years, many banks have started special investment companies that are separate legal 
entities outside of the banks’ balance sheets. What these have in common is that they invest 
in assets with a high return and long duration, for instance, structured credit products, and 
finance themselves by issuing certificates in the short-term money market. The certificates 
are  called  Asset  Backed  Commercial  Paper  (ABCP).  Depending  on  how  they  are 
constructed, the investment companies are often called "conduits” or Structured Investment 
Vehicles (SIV). ”Conduits” are the more common of the two and account for almost 80 per 
cent  of  the  outstanding  stock  of  asset-backed  commercial  paper.  An  SIV  has  a  more 
advanced construction than a “conduit”. It is usually highly leveraged, 15-20 times the equity 
capital. It is not necessarily tied to a bank and the financing is largely for longer durations. 
But the need for financing in the short-term money market is nevertheless crucial. 
Although  the  investment  companies  in  themselves  are  not  banks,  they  conduct  bank-like 
operations; they have their own balance sheets and names and are in principal independent 
of  the  banks.  But  if  an  investment  company  is  for  some  reason  unable  to  issue  new 
corporate certificates when the old ones fall due for payment, the bank guarantees the ability 
to pay, wholly or partly. The guarantees may be of a formal nature, where the bank commits 
itself  to  redeeming  the  certificate  if  the  investment  company  is  unable  to  do  so.  But  a 
guarantee can also be of a more informal nature and based on the bank being unwilling to 
abandon its investment company in order to protect its name and reputation. Whichever is 
the case, it means that if an investment company linked to a bank faces financing difficulties, 
the  problem  is  referred  back  to  the  bank,  which  must  provide  the  company  with  sufficient 
liquidity for a short period of time. This is to some extent reminiscent of the situation during 
the Swedish financial company crisis, which started the 1990s bank crisis. 
This construction with companies that have invested in assets that are difficult to value and 
have a long duration and which have financed themselves in the short-term money market 
with a guarantee from the banks is a powder keg – and a powder keg where the powder has 
been piled up more quickly and to a greater extent than both the market and the authorities 
have been aware. The igniting spark came from the US mortgage market, but it could have 
come from other areas. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
Bad credits in the US mortgage market is the igniting spark 
In the United States the financial innovations have gone hand in hand with a rapid increase 
in loan volumes. As is the case in most of the world, it is mainly households’ mortgages that 
have increased. What distinguishes the United States in this respect is that a not insignificant 
portion  of  the  mortgages  have  been  taken  by  households  with  poor  credit  ratings.1  These 
loans  are  called  subprime  loans.  Although  the  subprime  loans  constitute  a  minority  of  the 
total  mortgages,  there  are  nevertheless  significant  sums  involved.2  It  is  worth  pointing  out 
here  that  of  course  it  is  not  always  wrong  to  grant  loans  for  housing  merely  because  the 
lenders cannot manage the banks’ normal, fairly tough criteria. But it is always necessary to 
carry  out  a  proper  credit  assessment.  And  the  lender  should  be  paid  for  the  higher  risk 
through a correspondingly higher interest rate. None of this happened in the United States. 
During  spring  2005  and  2006  the  credit  assessments  appear  to  have  deteriorated,  at  the 
same time as loans were granted on terms that far from corresponded to the risks. The price 
of risk was quite simply too low. 
However,  during  this  period  risk  premiums  on  all  assets  fell.  So  it  was  not  merely  on 
subprime loans where the price was set too low. The same also applied, for example, to the 
market for leveraged buyouts.  
Hedge funds were the first to experience problems  
The first signs that the spark had reached the powder keg came during the summer, when it 
was  evident  that  there  would  be  more  defaults  on  subprime  loans  than  had  been  feared 
earlier. Two hedge funds tied to the US investment bank Bear Stearns were among the first 
to be affected. The funds had borrowed money which was then invested in structured credit 
instruments linked to securitised subprime loans. When the financiers wanted to pull out, the 
funds  were  forced  to  sell  their  assets.  However,  they  were  not  successful  as  suspicions 
against  subprime  loans  had  increased  and  the  funds  collapsed  with  substantial  losses.  At 
around  the  same  time  the  credit  rating  agencies  began  downgrading  credit  instruments 
containing  subprime  loans.  As  the  ratings  have  set  the  tone  for  how  the  instruments  are 
assessed,  the  downgradings  have  meant  that  the  financial  markets  more  or  less  lost 
confidence in anything that might contain subprime loans. 
Finally the banks were also affected 
But it was not only hedge funds that had invested in subprime loans. The banks’ investment 
companies  had  also  done  so  to  a  great  extent.  The  buyers  of  the  investment  companies’ 
certificates  are  usually  risk  averse  investors  who  are  choosing  between  buying  short 
government securities and corporate certificates. When it became clear, or even when there 
was reason to suspect, that subprime loans were among the investment companies' assets, 
the demand for certificates fell drastically. Investors instead chose to buy short government 
securities, which meant that interest rates on these fell. One could say that the investment 
companies  suffered  a  classic  bank  run.  The  parent  banks  were  now  forced  to  fulfil  the 
liquidity  guarantees  they  had  made  earlier.  At  the  end  of  July  the  German  bank  IKB 
announced  that  it  had  suffered  major  losses  through  an  investment  company  that  had 
invested in subprime loans. Some weeks later another German bank, Sachsen Landesbank, 
experienced similar problems. 
                                                 
1   See  also  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2006):  “Housing  Finance  in  the  Global  Financial 
Market”, CGFS papers, No 26. 
2   Subprime loans comprised an estimated 13 per cent of the total mortgage stock in the United States in 2006. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 3
The  banks  then  began  to  hoard  liquidity  and  distrust  spread  throughout  the  bank  system. 
Banks  that  had  investment  companies  did  not  want  to  lend  money  as  they  might  need  it 
themselves  to  meet  their  own  guarantee  obligations.  Even  banks  without  investment 
companies were unwilling to lend money as it was uncertain where in the bank system the 
credit risk was actually located. It was impossible to gain a clear insight into the complicated 
CDO structures. Consequently the interest rates on the interbank markets soared. Parallel to 
this,  scepticism  towards  the  credit  rating  agencies'  ability  to  grade  structured  products 
increased, and this concerned not only products containing subprime loans. 
Several  central  banks  decided  at  this  point  to  intervene  in  different  ways  in  the  interbank 
market.  In  general,  the  interventions  contributed  to  reducing  interbank  rates  towards 
desirable  levels  for  shorter  durations.  For  the  longer  durations  the  difference  between  the 
interbank rate and the risk-free rate remained substantial. The unwillingness to lend money 
was  a  hard blow  to  institutions  dependent  on  financing  from  the  market.  For  example,  the 
British mortgage lender Northern Rock was forced to seek help from the Bank of England to 
manage its acute liquidity problems when it could no longer obtain financing. 
The  market  turbulence  during  the  autumn  had  relatively  limited  effects  on  the  Swedish 
banks.  The  main  effects  were  higher  financing  costs,  some  changes  in  the  value  of  bond 
portfolios and less activity on some markets. Here an important factor was the fact that the 
Swedish banks did not have any significant exposure to securitised subprime loans, neither 
directly nor indirectly through investment companies. 
Deficiencies in the functioning of the credit markets have been exposed 
The rapid developments in the financial system over the past decade have essentially been 
beneficial. There is no reason to wish we were back in the financial iron age of the 1980s. It 
is  also  interesting  to  note  that  credit  derivatives  and  hedge  funds,  which  many  people 
claimed  would  cause  the  next  crisis,  have  not  reinforced  the  problems  in  the  market,  but 
rather to them being handled. 
Nevertheless,  the  market  turbulence  has  shown  that  the  deficiencies  in  the  design  and 
functioning of the credit markets need closer investigation. Some innovations appear to have 
been a little too fast for the market. At the same time, as I said in my introduction, it is still too 
early to draw any definite conclusions from what we have seen.  
When loans pass through several channels and are repackaged along the way, there is often 
a long distance between the final investor and the party that originally issued the loan. This 
means  that  the  incentive  to  make  a  thorough  credit  assessment  declines.  It  appears  as 
though the original credit grantor took too little responsibility in the repackaging process. The 
way that information on credit quality is passed on to investors is also open to debate. One of 
the credit rating agencies’ tasks is to fill in the information gap between the issuer and the 
end investor.3 With hindsight one can note that this has not always been successful. 
But even if there are deficiencies in the way that the credit rating agencies have worked with 
regard to structured credit products, there are also signs that many investors misunderstood 
how a credit rating should be used. They also need to take into account liquidity and market 
risks, which are not captured in the credit rating. 
However,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  the  market  for  structured  credit  products  is  entirely 
dominated by professional investors. There is thus no evident need for consumer protection 
that would justify the intervention of the authorities.  
                                                 
3   For  a  more  detailed  discussion,  see  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2005):  "The  role  of 
ratings in structured finance: issues and implications”, CGFS Publications no 23. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2007
The difficulty in grading and pricing the various structured products remains. Some of them 
will  probably  disappear  without  being  missed,  and  for  exactly  this  reason.  But  it  may  be 
possible to develop simpler products that can even be traded on stock markets and thereby 
form  a  base  for  pricing  more  complicated  instruments.  The  way  the  market  manages  this 
challenge is an important issue for the future. 
Something that requires more thorough investigation is the directly problematic roll played by 
the banks’ investment companies. They appear to have often existed because of so-called 
regulatory arbitrage. The banks have been able to circumvent the capital adequacy rules and 
liquidity  rules  by  investing  assets  in  apparently  independent  companies.  Moreover,  it  has 
also been a mystery which banks have been exposed to which investment companies, how 
large the exposures are and what they have consisted of. This has made it difficult for market 
participants  and  authorities  to  assess  a  bank  on  a  consolidated  basis.  Some  of  these 
problems  are  dealt  with  by  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules  in  Basel  II.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
essential that the authorities play an active role to ensure better insight. And this is also very 
much in the market’s own interests.  
The uncertainty remains 
The outcome of the current information will depend on how subprime loans are valued in the 
long  term.  If  interest  rate  payments  from  the  underlying  loans  are  received  as  calculated, 
there is no need to write down the value for this reason. However, it looks as though there 
will be more defaults on payments than originally feared. In addition, it takes several months 
from the time that a household defaults on payment of a loan until it reaches the minus side 
of  a  balance  sheet.  Although  a  number  of  banks  have  already  made  major  losses  when 
forced to write down the value of their assets, it will be a long time before all the cards are on 
the table.  
There are also considerable problems with valuations. Banks and other investors are to write 
down  the  value  of  their  assets,  but  there  are  rarely  any  market  prices  for  the  structured 
products containing mortgages. The valuation problems may force the banks to take bigger 
write downs than what is motivated by the underlying credit quality. 
An important factor in all of this is US economic activity. If there is a more rapid downswing 
than expected, the problems in the mortgage market may be more profound and spread to 
other sectors of the credit market. And of course the unrest in the financial markets can in 
turn contribute to a broader slowdown in the US economy.  
The  situation  remains  uncertain  and  there  is  considerable  sensitivity  to  new  negative 
information and to other shocks. And there will probably be more bad news from the United 
States and Europe. 
We were all taken by surprise 
This autumn has seen a number of unpleasant surprises and, as I have said, there is reason 
to  believe  that  the  unrest  will  continue.  The  Riksbank,  like  most  other  central  banks,  had 
previously  warned  that  there  were  difficulties  in  the  credit  market,  particularly  the  low  risk 
premiums.  The  situation  we  have  seen  was  therefore  not  entirely  unexpected.  However, 
something that was underestimated was how quickly and by how much the price of risk rose, 
as  well  as  how  quickly  problems  in  a  distant  part  of  the  US  credit  market  could  spread 
throughout the world and have such a strong impact on the interbank market, which is the 
actual core of the international financial system. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 5
To those wishing to learn more about the market turbulence, I can warmly recommend the 
Riksbank's  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  will  be  published  soon.4  The  Report  is 
celebrating its 10th anniversary and also contains an article on how central banks need to 
adapt  their  analysis  and  find  new  approaches  to  meet  the  challenges  of  operating  in  a 
constantly changing financial landscape. This is a task that is as exciting as it is important. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
4   Financial Stability Report 2007:2 will be published on 4 December 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 136/2007
