Christian Noyer: Some thoughts on current financial turbulences 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Euro Fixed Income 
Forum, Paris, 4 December 2007. 
 These  are  difficult  times  for  policy  makers.  Financial  turmoil  has  created  macro  economic 
uncertainties. Events are still unfolding. In those circumstances, I thought best to have a look 
at  the  dynamics  driving  recent  turbulences;  then  describe  potential  consequences  for  the 
economy; finally make remarks on challenges for Central Banks and best ways to preserve 
and restore international financial stability. 
The dynamics of the crisis 
• 
I will start with a paradox. By any measure, we are facing a huge shock in financial 
markets.  Spreads  in  some  segments  of  credit  markets  have  widened  with 
unprecedented  speed  and  volatility.  Even  more  significantly,  interbank  markets  in 
large  industrial  countries  have  been  severely  disrupted,  for  the  first  time  in  fifty 
years,  more  disrupted  in  fact,  and  for  a  longer  period,  than  after  September  11, 
2001. 
And  yet,  the  losses  themselves,  while  significant  and  spectacular  for  some 
institutions,  would  not  seem  to  pose  a  major  risk  to  the  health  of  the  financial 
system. Current median estimates put the direct cost of subprime defaults around 
250  billions  USD.  This  is  a  little  less  than  one  year  of  profits  for  the  40  major 
financial institutions in the world. Most notably, the turbulences occurred in a very 
favorable macro economic environment. 
 Why is there such a disproportion between the cause and the effect? 
At the aggregate level, most observers – including the Banque de France – would point to a 
prolonged period of excessive risk taking in credit markets fueled by liquidity expansion at 
the  world  level.  This  was  most  apparent  in  the  strong  developments  of  LBOs,  mostly 
financed through leveraged (i.e. with weak covenants) loans. According to this interpretation, 
we may be witnessing the burst of a credit bubble. 
But there is also a deeper, more structural, element to the current turmoil. This crisis is the 
first  in  a  disintermediated  credit  world.  While,  previously,  loans  were  originated  by  banks, 
kept on their balance-sheet and monitored for the entire life of the loan, the process is to a 
large extent dissociated today: the loan is originated by a first entity, then bundled together 
with other loans as a structured product by another entity, then sold to final investors. 
These developments were expected to bring important benefits to the financial system and 
the broader economy: 
o 
As part of the securitisation process credit risk is now “sliced and diced” and more 
widely spread in the financial system to be sold to a wide spectrum of investors 
In theory, banks can offload those risks from their balance sheets to other financial 
investors – including hedge funds – and use their overall capital more efficiently 
In this way, also in theory, risk is allocated to those agents best equipped and most 
willing to take it 
So the overall capacity of the system to bear risks is, everything equal, increased 
o 
With  hindsight,  we  now  see  some  unanticipated  problems  and  difficulties  associated  with 
those innovations: 
o 
o 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
There  is  no  incentive  for  originators  of  loans  to  assess  –  let  alone  monitor  –  the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers  since  they  expect  to  transfer  the  totality  to  other 
investors. This explains the explosion of lending to subprime borrowers, with more 
and more "exotic" features during the last two years. This may also have fuelled the 
dynamism of the LBO market. 
The process has gone with an increasing complexity of instruments, which combine 
an  extensive  use  of  derivatives  with  customization  to  individual  investors'  needs. 
This has made valuation and risk assessment more difficult. 
Indeed, valuation of complex instruments is currently at the forefront of discussions 
between  regulators,  market  participants  and  investors.  There  is,  of  course,  a 
circularity involved, since liquidity depends on valuation, fair value must be based on 
a market price, and the ability to price an asset itself depends on sufficient liquidity 
in  the  market.  The  difficulty  to  get  out  of  this  circularity  in  periods  of  stress  is 
currently creating significant uncertainty. 
Hence  a  dependence  of  the  whole  market  on  the  rating  process.  In  a  securitized 
world, investors heavily rely upon rating agencies to provide information about the 
risks attached to various instruments. These agencies have been strongly criticized 
recently. It is not my purpose to enter into any blame game. Suffice it to say that 
there has been a deep misunderstanding between investors and rating agencies as 
to the scope and true meaning of ratings. Most investors were not fully aware that 
rating did not encompass liquidity risk; nor did they realize that ratings for structured 
products  were  intrinsically  more  volatile  than  for  more  simple  "plain  vanilla" 
securities.  The  use  of  identical  metrics  for  rating  what  are  fundamentally  different 
categories  of  assets  certainly  did  not  help  and  may  have  contributed  to  the 
confusion. 
Finally  the  turmoil  has  revealed  the  fragility  of  off-balance  sheet  structures  and 
vehicles which underpinned securitization. Conduits, especially SIVs, were not built 
to  absorb  shocks.  Their  relationships  with  sponsor  banks  are  sometimes  very 
ambiguous.  There  may  be  a  gap  between  the  legal  commitments  taken  by  the 
banks  through  liquidity  support  and  credit  enhancements,  and  the  “true”  level  of 
responsibility they felt obliged to take to protect their reputation. 
Potential consequences for the economy 
Financial turbulences may affect the real economy through several channels. 
• 
There  is,  obviously,  a  potential  effect  on  confidence.  We  are  currently  seeing 
deterioration in business and consumer surveys in the Euro area, although from very 
high  levels.  This  may  put  a  question  mark  over  our  hopes  that  Europe  could 
"decouple"  its  cyclical  evolution  from  the  evolution  of  financial  markets  and 
uncertainties in the US outlook. 
Most  of  the  impact,  however,  will  depend  on  how  credit  markets  will  evolve  in  the 
period to come. While some sectors – such as hedge funds – seem to have held up 
well, the increased turbulence of recent weeks has partly reversed the improvements 
in  market  dynamics  seen  in  late  September  and  in  October.  Funding  uncertainties 
around year-end maintain inter-bank markets under pressure. 
Some tightening of financing conditions has already occurred through stricter lending 
standards and decreased credit availability for the weakest segments of the market. 
The sectors more concerned have been household's non-conforming mortgage loans 
(jumbo loans, subprime loans…). 
  2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
 triple  shock:  unwanted  expansion  of 
For the future, there will be pressures on Banks balance sheets and we must watch 
carefully  for  signs  of  quantitative  restraint  on  credit  distribution.  There  are  talks,  in 
some countries, of "capital shortages" in big financial institutions. We have absolutely 
no signs of this in France. But, in all countries, banks have been (or will be) exposed 
to  a 
through 
reintermediation;  higher  cost  of  capital  as  a  consequence  of  the  decrease  in  share 
prices; and, finally, a deterioration in the quality of their assets if the credit cycle turns 
downward  or  valuation  problems  appear  for  some  securities  (all  this,  according  to 
Basel  II,  would  mobilize  additional  capital).  Tighter  credit  conditions  might  be 
desirable.  Repricing  of  risky  assets,  better  risk  compensation  and  more  attractive 
yields may ease some of the restrictions and bring in new investors into the markets. 
However,  quantitative  constraints  on  credit  distribution  could  be  very  damaging  – 
especially if corporate bond issuances were to stay, as they are now, extremely low. 
their  balance  sheets 
Challenges for central banks 
The most immediate was to restore the orderly functioning of the interbank market. This has 
been done by providing liquidity to the market. Actions by Central banks have raised some 
concerns  about  so  called  "moral  hazard":  would  liquidity  provision  lead  to  "bailing  out 
speculators"? In fact, we have responded to an exogenous and general increase in demand 
for Central Bank money and ensured smooth management of liquidity conditions. No more, 
no  less.  This  is  the  job  of  Central  Banks.  Clearly,  as  experience  in  some  countries  has 
shown, it is not an easy one and we may have to think, in the future, about our modalities of 
intervention. I am personally very satisfied with the way we have operated. Our organisation 
has proved  efficient and flexible. Inside the Eurosystem, we have reached the appropriate 
balance between centralisation and decentralisation. Most recently, we have announced that 
the  maturity  of  the  main  refinancing  operation  settling  on  19  December  2007  will  be 
lengthened  to  two  weeks  to  cover  the  end  of  the  year,  and  the  operation  settling  on  28 
December  2007  will  allow  potential  further  liquidity  demands  to  be  satisfied.  For  France, 
having banking supervision inside the Central Bank has proved a big advantage and enabled 
us to react quickly and with flexibility in fast changing circumstances. 
A broader challenge relates to the policy reaction. To which extent should it be influenced by 
financial turbulences? Obviously, action by Central Banks has to be fully consistent with their 
mandate,  which,  for  the  Eurosystem,  means  preserving,  first  and  foremost,  price  stability. 
Past  episodes  of  financial  turbulences  have  occurred  in  an  environment  of  low  and  stable 
inflation,  with  expectations  solidly  anchored.  We  live  today  in  a  less  benign  environment. 
Strong growth in big emerging economies is increasingly putting pressures on the price of oil, 
food and other commodities. While labour supply in emerging countries will remain abundant, 
it  is  not  all  that  clear  it  will  remain  cheap  and  inflation  pressures  are  piling  up  in  many 
emerging countries. This translates into higher import prices for developed economies. That 
said, the Governing Council has judged, in its last two meetings, that the ongoing reappraisal 
of  risk  in  financial  markets  has  led  to  continued  uncertainty.  This,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
Governing  Council,  warranted  a  thorough  examination  of  additional  information  before 
drawing further conclusions for monetary policy in the context of our medium term-oriented 
monetary policy strategy focused on maintaining price stability. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 3
