Caleb M Fundanga: Media relations and the Bank of Zambia – a healthy 
interaction 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of 
the Bank of Zambia 12th Media Seminar, Ndola, 5 October 2007. 
 • The Chairperson 
• Distinguished Journalists 
• Invited Participants 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of Bank of Zambia and indeed my own behalf, I am pleased to welcome you all, to 
this Bank of Zambia sponsored annual seminar, which is the 13th in the series. Further, it is 
also my great pleasure to welcome you to the City of Ndola. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as it is normally the case, some of you are participating for the first 
time. For those of you that are participating for the first time, let me inform you that this is 
your seminar and I urge you to participate freely and effectively. I know that your friends who 
have participated in the seminars before, will agree with me that, every year that we meet at 
such a forum, we meet as “partners” and it is certainly in the interest, of not only us gathered 
here but the nation at large that this spirit is exhibited through out this seminar, and beyond. 
In  fact,  let  me  thank  the  media  for  having  embraced  this  partnership  and  worked  towards 
maintaining it. The Bank of Zambia-Media relations have been quite healthy, partly due to 
annual interaction through Media Seminars. 
Let me reiterate facets of the media namely, education and information to which the Bank of 
Zambia attaches a lot of importance, and forms the guiding principles for the formats of all 
media seminars Organized by the Bank. We in the Bank believe that an effective or indeed a 
well informed media is key in the country’s development efforts. It is in this regard that the 
Bank will continue to work towards the provision of quality information and/or education to 
the media as evidenced by the continued holding of such seminars coupled with quarterly 
media  briefs.  Such  efforts  as  you  may  be  aware  are  not  for  our  own  interests  but  the 
Zambian stakeholders. This is as it should be. 
Distinguished journalists; may I humbly urge you, to actively participate in the deliberations of 
this seminar. Let me hasten to mention, particularly to those of you that are participating for 
the  first  time  that  you  may  not  be  able  to  completely  grasp  the  materials  that  will  be 
presented during the seminar. This must not discourage you, as you are free to make follow-
ups with the respective departments (and indeed officers) at our offices in Lusaka and our 
Regional Office here in Ndola. Nevertheless, I am confident that the respective presenters 
will ensure clarity in their presentations and fully respond to any issues arising there-from. 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me, at this point in time to brief you on the performance of the 
economy in 2006 and the period January – August 2007. As you may be aware, Zambia has 
in the recent past recorded macroeconomic stability and growth in the economy, reflected in 
low and falling inflation, relative stability in the Kwacha exchange rate, falling lending rates 
and  positive  real  GDP  growth  rates  underpinned  by  strong  private  sector  investment  in  all 
growth or priority sectors. Further, the financial sector has been stable, and continues to post 
growth. 
In  2006,  the  performance  of  the  Zambian  economy  continued  to  be  encouraging  as  it 
registered  a  positive  growth  of  6.2%  in  real  GDP,  marking  the  eighth  consecutive  year  of 
positive  real  growth.  You  will  note  that  over  the  period  2001-2006  growth  in  real  national 
output  averaged  5.0% per  annum  and  was  above  the  average  population  growth over  the 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 1
same period, while inflation declined to 8.2% in December 2006 from 15.9% in December 
2005. 
Distinguished journalists, it is worth-mentioning that the growth, which has been broad-based 
has  extended  beyond  the  recovery  of  the  mining  sector  and  shown  resilience  to  adverse 
shocks,  such  as  droughts  and  record  increases  in  oil  prices,  Agriculture,  construction, 
transport and communications, and tourism sectors have been the other key contributors to 
the sustained increase in economic activity. 
A lot of progress continue to be made on the inflation front, as shown in September 2007, 
when  inflation  declined  to  9.3%  despite  having  risen  to  12.7%  in  March.  Continued 
implementation of prudent monetary and fiscal policies, fairly favourable developments in the 
exchange rate coupled with pro-growth and pro-poor agricultural policies that have led to an 
increase in food supply and subsequent improvement in the country’s food security largely 
explain  the  favourable  developments  in  inflation.  For  instance,  the  country  recorded  an 
increase in maize surplus to 250,000 metric tons (mt) this consumption period from 160,000 
mt during the 2006/2007 consumption period. 
With  respect  to  the  money  market,  given  lower  inflation  and  yield  rates  on  Government 
securities, commercial banks lending rates have been on the downward path. This can be 
illustrated by the nominal average lending rates which declined to around 28% in December 
2006 from about 34% in December 2005, and further fell to 24.3% in September 2007. This 
is consistent with Government’s desire of making more funds available for priority sectors of 
our economy at reasonable cost, in line with the objectives the Fifth National Development 
Plan,  2006-2010.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  testimony  to  this  was  the  recent  lowering  of  the 
statutory reserve ratio by the Bank of Zambia to 8% from 14% effective 1st October 2007. 
We expect this action, will release more funds to the commercial banks for on-ward lending 
to  the  priority  sectors.  Availability  of  investible  funds  to  sectors  such  as  agriculture, 
manufacturing, tourism and mining will stimulate further growth in the economy, create more 
employment and incomes, and contribute to alleviation of poverty. However, it must be noted 
that  the  economy  desires  much  lower  lending  rates  than  so  far  recorded  to  make  credit 
affordable and effectively contribute to expansion of economic activity. 
The external sector has continued to score remarkable improvement as lately reflected in a 
the  resilience  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  foreign  currencies,  and  the  country  posting  in 
2006, an estimated overall balance of payments surplus of US $696 million compared with a 
deficit of US $284 million in 2005. For instance, the Kwacha appreciated by 12.0% against 
the  US  dollar  while  the  local  currency  gained  by  10.4%  against  the  South  African  Rand 
during  the  period  end-December  2006  to  21st  September  2007.  This  improvement  largely 
occurred due to increased export, which mainly arose from continued high copper prices and 
complimentary  higher  export  volumes  coupled  with  the  buoyant  growth  in  non-traditional 
export earnings. The maintenance of an appropriate monetary policy, in the wake of a higher 
than  expected  inflation  outcome  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  also  contributed  to  the 
resilience  of  the  Kwacha.  The  developments  in  the  Kwacha  should  not  only  enhance 
competitiveness of the country’s exports, particularly the non-traditional exports but should 
overall have a positive bearing on inflation developments in the coming months. 
Esteemed  colleagues,  the  financial  sector  has  continued  to  enjoy  stability  and  growth  this 
year,  characterised  by  improved  banking  services  and  emergence  of  new  products.  The 
overall  financial  condition  and  performance  of  the  banking  sector  has  been  assessed  as 
satisfactory. The performance of the non-bank financial institutions has todate been fair as 
the Bank of Zambia continues to implement measures aimed at maintaining and enhancing 
the soundness of the financial system. 
Chairperson; when we met last year at Fringilla in Chisamba, I informed the participants to 
the 12th Media Seminar that further expansion in the banking sector was eminent, as some 
commercial banks had plans to re-open or indeed open more branches across the country, 
this  has  come  to  reality  as  most  of  you  have  seen  the  establishment  of  new  branches  by 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2007
several  banks.  These  developments  are  undoubtably  a  manifestation  of  the  improving 
investment  environment  arising  from  consistent  macroeconomic  reforms  reflected  in 
enhanced  macroeconomic  stability.  We  have  also  continued  to  received  inquiries  from 
foreign banks that want to establish operations in our country. 
Under the Financial Sector Development Plan, implementation of activities has continued key 
among them being: 
Sovereign rating for Zambia 
a)  
The process of obtaining a sovereign rating for Zambia, being spearheaded by Government 
has  made  appreciable  progress,  with  the  completion  of  the  Terms  of  Reference  for  the 
provision  of  advisory  services  and  subsequent  submission  of  Cabinet  Memorandum  for 
approval.  The  Sovereign  rating  is  expected  to  compliment  other  government  initiatives  to 
promote foreign investment in the Zambian private sector and stimulate the development of 
domestic capital markets and investment by Zambians. 
Credit Reference Law and Services 
b)  
Following  the  issuance  of  the  Credit  Reference  Services  (Licensing)  Guidelines  and  the 
Credit Data (Privacy) Code, the Bank of Zambia has drafted the Credit Reference Law. The 
draft law is currently undergoing legal review and is expected to be effected in the course of 
next year. Meanwhile, the licensed credit reference bureau – Credit Reference Bureau Africa 
Limited (CRBAL) has not yet commenced operations as some commercial banks are yet to 
provide the required data to the CRBAL. 
The National Payment Systems Law 
c)  
The  National  Payment  Systems  Law  has  been  enacted  and  became  effective  on  15  June 
2007. The Law is intended to mitigate the shortcomings that were in the legal framework and 
provide legal backing to international best practices in the payment systems. 
To all of you gathered here, I would like to implore you, not to only inform the public about 
these and other developments but to interpret what these mean to ordinary Zambians. It is 
only  when  ordinary  Zambians,  who  are  the  key  stakeholders,  have  an  unquestionable 
understanding of these developments that they shall fully support our developmental policies 
and strategies. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  remind  you  that  our  quest  for  development  will  in  no 
doubt  be  without  challenges.  The  continued  higher  and  unstable  international  oil  prices 
poses  one  of  the  strong  challenges  to  our  targeted  growth  of  7%  this  year  and  end  year 
inflation  of  9%.  Another  challenge,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  a  growing  economy  such  as 
ours is the need to ensure availability of growth-supporting infrastructure. Inclusive of these 
are  good  trunk  and  feeder  roads,  communication  facilities  and  sufficient  and  affordable 
energy  supply,  particularly  electricity.  Furthermore,  current  regional  integration  initiatives 
coupled with globalization, in part entail that Zambia has to appropriately re-position itself in 
the region. This will be with a view to create greater opportunities for expanded trade in the 
region and international markets as well as empowering the local business players. 
These and other challenges are for all of us as partners, to tackle by playing our respective 
roles  with  the  aim  of  achieving  stronger  economic  growth  rates  that  will  have  a  notable 
bearing on improving the standards of living of our people. 
Chairperson,  as  per  the  usual  tradition,  the  topics  for  this  Seminar,  have  been  carefully 
selected aimed at not only educating and informing but also sharing views. Please as you 
discuss,  you  are  encouraged  to  be  broad  not  to  confine  your  contribution  to  the  topics 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 3
presented you. We will welcome views on various issues within the Bank’s mandate. You are 
further encouraged to interact with members of staff outside the Seminar sessions. 
Let me again pay tribute to the Media for the interest it has shown and subsequent active 
role it has continued to play in the economic affairs of our country and in particular matters 
related to the mandate and functions of the Bank of Zambia. Let us continue as partners and 
provide checks and balances to each other for the good of our people. 
Let me, once again, welcome you to this Media Seminar and declare the Seminar officially 
open. 
I thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 113/2007
