David Clementi: Banks and systemic risk – theory and evidence
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  a  Bank  of  England
Conference held in London, 23 May 2001.
 Introduction
I would like to begin by extending a very warm welcome to you all to the Bank of England and to this
conference. It is a great pleasure indeed to be welcoming so many distinguished participants, both as
speakers and audience members; I am confident that we have the right mix of academics, officials,
and industry representatives to take forward our chosen subject.
'Banks  and  systemic  risk'  is  our  title,  and  I  would  like  to  introduce  the  conference  by  saying  a  few
words about the choice of material: why is it important to discuss these issues? And why is it topical to
discuss  them  now?  Having  dealt  with  the  importance  of  financial  stability  and  the  challenges
presented by the current environment, I would then like to turn to some policy responses and to focus
in particular on disclosure, the procyclicality of capital requirements and the impact of the new Basel
Accord  on  overall  capital.  I  would  like  to  finish  by  saying  something  about  the  importance  of
consistency in the capital requirements for banks and insurance companies. One theme which I will
return to throughout is the importance of achieving an acceptable balance between financial stability
and financial efficiency. And a second theme is the need to bear in mind the distinction between the
stability of individual institutions and the stability of the system.
Bank of England's role in financial stability
But if I may, I'd like to precede all this with a brief explanation of why we are discussing this topic here
– that is, why we at the Bank of England have a keen interest in promoting debate in this area.
As  many  of  you  may  know,  in  1997  the  UK  Government  took  the  decision  to  separate  banking
supervision  from  the  central  bank  and  unify  it  with  the  rest  of  financial  supervision  under  the  new
Financial  Services  Authority.  At  the  same  time,  the  maintenance  of  stability  in  the  overall  financial
system was clarified as one of the three core tasks of the Bank of England, along with responsibility
for  monetary  stability  and  promotion  of  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  financial  system.  So  we
continue to take a strong interest in the issue of overall systemic stability, including how to monitor it,
how to promote it, and how best to deal with any stresses that might arise.
Obviously  co-ordinating  our  efforts  with  the  FSA's  supervision  of  individual  institutions  and  the
Treasury's legislative responsibilities is key. We work hard at fostering a close relationship, helped by
the fact that I am a member of the FSA Board and Howard Davies, who is giving the key-note address
tomorrow, is a non-executive director of the Bank. Our respective roles and responsibilities, including
in a crisis, are set out in a formal Memorandum of Understanding published in the Autumn of 1997
between the Treasury, Bank of England, and FSA. The MOU also  established a Tripartite Standing
Committee  that  meets  monthly  to  exchange  information  and  discuss  current  threats  to  financial
stability.
I  like  to  think  that,  with  the  departure  of  responsibility  for  day-to-day  supervision  of  individual
institutions, the Bank has addressed the issue of systemic stability with a new-found clarity of purpose.
That said, we know that there is a huge amount of work still to be done on understanding systemic
risk. I see a clear contrast here with the monetary policy field. In monetary policy, we are closer to a
general consensus about the policy framework and the objectives of monetary policy, even if at any
moment  of  time  uncertainty  still  surrounds  our  forecast  for  inflation  and  the  appropriate  policy
response. Certainly the UK target for monetary stability (the 2.5% symmetrical inflation target) is clear
and transparent. In the field of systemic stability and financial crisis, however, our understanding is at
a very preliminary stage. We face an array of fundamental questions: how to define systemic stability;
how to measure and predict it; what policy weapons we should employ to achieve it; what the costs
are if we fail; and how best to resolve instability if it occurs. We have only partial answers to these
questions. Defining the objective is possible only in the broadest sense, measuring how close we are
BIS Review 43/2001
1
to it is even more difficult; there is certainly no agreed single indicator or set of indicators which tell us
when we have achieved financial stability or when we risk failing to achieve it.
Importance of financial stability
In part this is because we still lack evidence. This comment may strike some of you, perhaps those
from  Scandinavia  or  Japan,  as  ironic;  you  may  feel  that  the  body  of  evidence  we  have  is  already
disagreeably large. However, whilst banking crises are not exactly rare, they are episodic rather than
regular  and  they  tend  to  exhibit  a  number  of  idiosyncratic  characteristics.  This  is  in  some  sense
reassuring – at least banks and the authorities do not keep making exactly the same mistakes – but at
the same time it makes predicting crises very difficult. The causality is complex and difficult to grasp.
In some cases, fragility at individual banks can turn into system-wide fragility and in turn into system-
wide crisis. In  others, a macro-prudential shock or policy  error  can  impact  on  individual  institutions,
revealing underlying systemic weakness and triggering a crisis. However, the papers to be presented
at this conference each address, in various ways, one or more of these issue s – about definitions,
objectives, and policy mechanisms – and I am confident that at the end we will have achieved our aim
of a real advance in our understanding.
I said just now that I wanted to address two questions, the first of which was why the subject is so
important. Well, in this murky and difficult area, there is perhaps one aspect which commands a fair
consensus,  which  is  that  financial  crises,  specifically  banking  crises,  produce  real  economic  costs.
There are the immediate direct costs to the public sector if crisis-hit banks require lender of last resort
support or have to be bailed out, and longer term costs to growth. There is a lively debate on how to
measure the latter, which I hope we can take further during this conference, as one of the papers is
addressing this very subject, but I would describe the range of estimates in some countries as starting
at  large  and  ending  at  very  large  indeed.  Interestingly,  on  some  measures,  the  longer  term  output
costs seem to end up higher in developed countries than in emerging market countries, in the main we
think because crises in developed countries have typically dragged on for long er. On top of evidence
about the impact of financial instability, there is also evidence that the incidence of banking crises has
become more frequent over the past 20 years. In fact four out of the G-10 countries have suffered a
banking  crisis  of  one  sort  or  another  in  the  last  ten  years.  It  is  thus  clear  that  financial  instability
remains a hugely relevant topic to both developed and emerging market economies.
Threats to financial stability in the current environment
Having described the potential costs of financial crisis and why financial stability matters, I want to turn
to my second question, why it matters now. By this I do not mean that we have detected any unusually
marked  amount  of  stress  or  weakness  in  the  financial  system.  Indeed,  I  cannot  resist  at  this  point
expressing some thankfulness that we are managing to hold this discussion in relatively calm times
(although  this  is  the  sort  of  comment  that  might  be  better  saved  for  the  closing  address  at  a
conference rather than the opening one). The last international conference the Bank sponsored on a
financial stability topic, back in September 1998, followed closely on considerable turbulence in global
bond markets and in fact managed to coincide with the incipient collapse of LTCM. As we found out
shortly afterwards, we were lucky to have any American colleagues at all at that event! Rather, I mean
that the financial system, and in particular the banking system, is undergoing substantial change, both
in  its  external  environment  and  in  the  way  it  manages  its  risks  and  is  regulated.  Globalisation,
consolidation,  conglomeration  within  and  across  sectors,  technological  change:  these  are  not  new
developments,  but 
intensifying.  These  developments  present  new
opportunities to banks, as financial markets open up and mature. But they also present challenges.
New markets, new customers, new products, new technology: the risks of something going wrong are
high if the industry's risk assessment procedures and control mechanisms do not keep pace.
The  impetus  behind  all  these  changes  is  intensified  competition.  This  is  good  news  for  financial
efficiency, and given that this is also one of the Bank of England's core interests, we welcome it. But
there  are  undoubtedly  some  implications  for  financial  stability,  at  least  in  transition.  An  increase  in
competitiveness  may  for  a  period  increase  the  financial  system's  vulnerability  to  shocks;  academic
research suggests that the process of financial liberalisation can increase significantly the probability
of a banking crisis. So how do we make this trade-off acceptable, given that we certainly do not want
to exchange the overt costs of financial crisis for the hidden costs of financial protectionism?
they  are  continuing  and 
2
BIS Review 43/2001
Policy response to the changing environment
Well,  a  large  part  of  the  answer  must  be  to  strive  for  improvements  in  the  financial  and  regulatory
infrastructure – to 'risk proof' the system as it were. There are a number of very significant initiatives
that  are  worth  mentioning  in  this  context.  The  proposed  new  Accord  from  the  Basel  Committee  is
deservedly the focus of a number of the papers to be presented at this conference. A large slice of our
time here is also going to be devoted to evidence on the effectiveness of market discipline on banks.
Market discipline through enhanced disclosure does of course form one of the pillars of the new Basel
Accord but there are also broader international initiatives underway on this front. What I would like to
do is spend a little time here discussing how increased public disclosure, and certain other aspects of
the new Basel Accord, could affect financial efficiency and financial stability. Is it possible to achieve
advances in both?
Enhanced disclosure
Clearly  the  architects  of  these  initiatives  believe  so.  Increased  disclosure  should  help  the  market
distinguish between  well-managed  and  adequately capitalised  banks and their  poorly managed and
unsound counterparts. The latter will as a result come under pressure to improve their performance.
This  should  produce  clear  financial  stability  benefits,  and  also  financial  efficiency  ones,  since  the
weaker  banks  are  likely  to  be  those  who  in  some  sense  misdirect,  or  rather  mis-price,  credit  to
borrowers.
Greater  disclosure  should  also  help  to  address  the  propensity  in  financial  markets  for  self-fulfilling
crisis. By this I mean, the tendency as conditions deteriorate and confidence is dispelled for market
participants  to  act  in  a  way  that  precipitates  crisis  for  firms  that  would  otherwise  be  solvent.  The
greater  the  uncertainty  the  more  participants  will  be  liable  to  trigger  a  crisis  in  this  way.  Increased
disclosure has a part to play in reducing this risk. But it also explains the importance that we attach to
liquidity management and the need to ensure that, given the current focus on the new Basel Accord,
the regulation of liquidity is not overlooked.
There  are  of  course  a  number  of  conditions  that  have  to  hold  before  we  can  be  confident  that
increased  disclosure  will  deliver  real  benefits  for  financial  stability  and  efficiency.  As  far  as  market
discipline is concerned, increased disclosure by itself is not enough to achieve this: the market has to
have  an  incentive  to  monitor  the  disclosed  information,  the  ability  to  monitor  it,  and  the  means  to
influence  the  banks  once  it  is  disclosed.  There  is  no  point,  for  example,  in  introducing  extra
disclosures if the burden of producing and absorbing it proves too high. This will not achieve our aim
of improving stability and will probably negatively affect efficiency through the imposition of pointless
costs. I think that the proposals in the new Basel Accord do incorporate these considerations, even
though  there  has  been  some  concern  from  the  industry  about  the  proposed  volume  of  disclosure.
First, the disclosure requirements are intended to use information that is already produced for other
purposes, whether regulatory or internal. This helps to keep producer costs down. And secondly, there
are  recommendations  for  standard  formats  and  templates  for  disclosures,  which  will  help  keep  the
user costs of absorbing the information low.
Equally  there  is  no  point  in  enhancing  disclosures  if  the  market  has  no  incentive  to  apply  the
information because creditors believe that banks will not be allowed to fail. So our goal of improving
and  harnessing  market  discipline  has  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  continued  rolling  back  of  state
guarantees, whether formal or implicit. Finally, we have to do our best to ensure that market discipline
is  exercised  in  a  relatively  benign  and  gradual  way  –  graded  differentiation  of  spreads  on  debt  for
example, rather than sudden refusal by the market to rollover debt at any price. This means we need
to  think  hard  about  the  frequency  as  well  as  detail  of  disclosures,  and  specifically  the  trade-off
between the two. Too frequent disclosure might not only be too onerous but also add to the volatility of
company ratings. Too long and the potential for large step changes in an institution's risk profile will
increase market uncertainty and volatility. Of course, there may be times when this cannot be avoided
–  the  sudden  emergence  of  fraud  for  example  –  which  is  where  crisis  management  by  the  bank
concerned and by the authorities comes into play. But we should not overemphasise the relevance of
these new disclosure  initiatives  in  this  particular sort  of situation: publicly  owned  banks are after all
already required to disclose any information which could significantly affect their share price.
BIS Review 43/2001
3
Impact of the New Basel Accord
Turning to the Basel proposals on minimum capital, their aim is to align regulatory capital much more
closely with risk. This should have financial efficiency benefits, as I explained just now. To the extent
that seriously undercapitalised risk taking by banks will in the future be more difficult, there are also
clear financial stability benefits. But for system wide financial stability, we also need to think about the
effects not just on individual banks, but collectively on the financial system. In this context I would like
to touch briefly on four issues: procyclicality; overall capital; financial consolidation; and consistency of
the capital framework for other financial intermediaries.
Procyclicality
(a)
On the first I will be very brief indeed; the implications of risk sensitive capital requirements over the
financial cycle is a subject which I and other commentators have raised on a number of occasions. But
it is extremely relevant to a debate on systemic risk. It is a clear example of how rational and indeed
prudent behaviour by individual banks – raising capital, including cutting back on credit granted if no
other route is possible, in the light of perceived heightened risk – could collectively be damaging to the
system. Some academics are indeed criticising the risk-sensitive capital requirements that we already
have for market risk, on similar grounds. In the  Asian crisis, for example, VaR measures of market
risk, and their associated capital requirements, increased extremely sharply, leading banks to enforce
loss limits which in turn exacerbated price falls. But I am not aware that anyone is suggesting that risk
insensitive  capital  measures  are  the  answer  –  they  are  associated  with  much  more  obvious  and
damaging pitfalls. Rather we need to ensure that, in so far as we can, we avoid sudden perceptions of
changed risk. To achieve this, risk sensitive capital requirements need to be both sufficiently backward
looking and sufficiently forward looking: backward-looking in the sense that they should be based on
long runs of data that incorporate experience of both peaks and troughs; and forward-looking in the
sense  that  risk  measures  hold  good  through  the  business  cycle,  taking  account  of  possible  future
downturns even as banks are extending credit in benign conditions.
Overall capital
(b)
The issue of how the new Basel framework will affect the overall amount of capital in the international
banking system is also a hot potato at the moment. Again, this is a question which is crucial to the
right balance between financial stability and financial efficiency. Erring on the low side in the minimum
capital standard could result in unacceptable risk, while erring on the high side with too much capital is
likely to result once again in wasteful and costly regulatory arbitrage. The importance of the question
is,  however,  mirrored  by  its  difficulty.  Deciding  the  relative  riskiness  of  different  types  of  banking
business is technically challenging enough, but the issue of where absolutely our tolerance of banking
fragility lies is not only a problematic technical question but is also of course a normative one. And like
all normative questions, different people will have different answers.
Turning to the technical aspects of this issue, I  would  note that even if  we can agree  on,  and  then
measure, the minimum solvency standard which we should be targeting for our international banks,
perhaps the really hard step is making a robust connection between individual banks' solvency and the
solvency of the system. The latter is the primary focus of central banks though the former is obviously
a necessary condition. I am encouraged to see that a number of the papers to be presented here have
a  go  at  making  this  connection.  This  is  an  issue  which  merits  substantially  more  attention  and
research.  It  is  far  from  just  a  statistical  exercise:  whilst  we  might  just  possibly  be  able  to  calculate
statistically the joint probability of failure for a group of banks from their existing individual probabilities
of failure, this does not of course reflect realities. Those realities are that the risk of collective bank
failures depends on hard-to-measure and fluctuating factors such as correlations in risk profiles, and
the mood and behaviour of the market once fragility at one institution becomes apparent.
Consolidation
(c)
The changing financial landscape complicates the task, and this brings me to the third point I wanted
to highlight, namely consolidation. Consolidation of financial institutions is a trend that is relevant to
several different facets of systemic risk. First, does consolidation make banks more or less likely to
fail?  Diversification  is  a  solid  protection  against  failure,  but  not  all  mergers  and  acquisitions  are
motivated by diversification – they may by contrast be designed to  gain greater market share in an
existing  business  and  thereby  do  nothing  to  increase  diversification.  Moreover,  there  is  again  the
4
BIS Review 43/2001
distinction between individual banks and the system – the system can be diversified by having lots of
different  specialised  banks.  This  would  not  in  all  circumstances  be  a  less  robust  system  than  one
where individual banks have reasonably diversified  portfolios  which are all as  a result vulnerable  to
common shocks, or one where a smaller number of large banks are all directly interconnected  with
each other. And finally, even if we were to conclude that consolidation makes banks safer in the long
run, the short run effects could be very  different  as  management  tries  to  resolve  inconsistencies  in
systems or clashes in cultures.
Secondly, there is the issue that consolidation is perhaps likely to make bank failure more damaging in
its impact, although again this can only be judged case by case. And thirdly, since larger banks tend to
be organisationally more complex, there is the question that resolving large bank failures can turn out
to be an infinitely more complex task. I would stress that all this does not mean we think consolidation
extends 'too big to fail' status; but it does mean that central banks and other authorities have to ensure
that  they  are  monitoring  how  consolidation  is  affecting  risk  and  financial  interlinkages.  They  should
also think ahead and examine matters such as their own operational expertise, information flows with
other bodies, legal processes and other procedures, in the event of a complex wind-down.
Consistency
(d)
The final point I want to highlight is the question of consistency of regulation between different types of
financial  intermediary.  It  makes  no  sense  to  introduce  a  Rolls  Royce  system  of  capital  adequacy
regulation for banks if we have not considered the ramifications for the financial system as a whole, in
the light in particular of the very different capital frameworks which apply to insurance companies. We
may  find  that  our  new  rules  are  simply  arbitraged  away,  for  example  using  credit  risk  transfers  to
insurance  subsidiaries,  or  asset  securitisation  sales  to  third  party  insurers,  or  credit  insurance  and
derivatives  sold  by  insurers.  In  the  long  run,  both  our  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency
objectives could be undermined by this: financial stability if we find that these credit risk transfers are
not  robust,  or  that  they  result  in  potentially  systemic  strains  in  the  insurance  sector;  and  financial
efficiency through the extra costs of arbitrage processes.
I emphasise that this is not a call for harmonisation of regulation or a blind assertion of the need for a
completely level playing field, but simply a call to re-examine the rationale for differences in regulation.
We may find that some differences are justified. For example, if we conclude that failures of insurance
companies  impose  fewer  systemic  costs  than  bank  failures,  we  might  certainly  choose  to  set  our
minimum  insolvency  tolerance  at  a  different  level.  Much  of  the  detail  of  risk  measurement  and
regulation must necessarily differ, for example because of the very different time horizons involved in
life insurance compared with either banking or securities business or non-life insurance. But there is a
body of common risks faced by banks and insurers on both their assets and liabilities – namely credit,
market,  and  operational  risks  –  as  well  as  a  body  of  distinct  risks  (such  as  mortality  risk  for  life
insurance companies and on the banking side liquidity risk); and to my mind this means that any very
fundamental divergences in the basic frameworks do need careful consideration: for example, whether
the  trend  toward  risk  based  measures  in  banking  needs  to  be  mirrored  in  the  non-life  insurance
regulation in Europe. This is clearly not a small task but I would welcome it being scheduled for the
future on the international agenda. The establishment in recent years of regulators like the FSA with
responsibility in a single body for bank and insurance supervision will help to achieve progress in this
area;  indeed  the  convergence  of  risks  being  taken  by  financial  institutions  of  different  origins  is  a
central plank underlying the need, certainly in the UK, for an organisation like the FSA.
Conclusion
I  feel  aware  that  throughout  this  address  I  seem  to  have  repeatedly  stressed  the  importance  of
advancing our analysis of systemic risk and at the same time the huge complexities involved in this
task. Having highlighted the difficulties, it is now conveniently time to hand over the podium to those
who may have some of the answers! I'd like to end by referring back to my statement of our objective
for this conference, namely to achieve an advance in our understanding of systemic risk. This is of
course not our only objective: we also hope that you manage to enjoy the opportunity of meeting with
so many colleagues from around the  world,  enjoy  the  Bank's  hospitality,  and  for  those  of  you  from
overseas to enjoy your visit to London. Thank-you.
BIS Review 43/2001
5
