Winston Dookeran: The state of the economy in Trinidad and Tobago and the
outlook for 2001
Address  by  Mr  Winston  Dookeran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  to  the
Trinidad and Tobago Chamber of Industry and Commerce, 16 May 2001.
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen once again it is a pleasure to be here to address you today. In
keeping with past discussions I want to share with you my thoughts on the state of the economy today.
Some  analysts  in  the  media  have  commented  on  a  number  of  current  economic  issues  e.g.  the
possibility of a slowdown, interest rates, private sector credit, consumer confidence. Today, however, I
want to focus on five main themes and perhaps I may be able to clarify some of these topical issues.
My themes are as follows: -
1. 
What  are  the  major  characteristics  of  our  current  economic  expansion  and  how  does  this
expansion differ from previous ones?
What is the nature of private sector credit in the economy at this time?
What is the current monetary policy framework?
What impact if any will the current slowdown in the US have on the local economy?
What are the major downside risks and challenges as we continue into 2001?
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Introduction
Trinidad and Tobago is entering the eighth year of a long period of economic expansion, the second
time  in  the  post  independence  period  that  we  have  had  such  an  experience.  This  expansion  is
significantly different from that of the mid and late seventies although there are several similarities. In
particular this current phase of continuous growth has not been directly driven by an improvement in
the country’s terms of trade as occurred in the 1970’s with the first oil shock. Indeed in the present
period  higher  commodity  prices  have  supported  the  buoyancy  in  the  economy  while  the  sustained
level of growth we are now experiencing is a direct consequence of the policies introduced during the
adjustment phase of the 1980’s.
You may recall that Trinidad & Tobago introduced a number of structural reforms in the aftermath of
adjustment  –  trade,  tax,  privatization,  tariff  and  financial  reforms  –  that  provided  a  platform  for  the
current investment upswing in the oil and gas sector in particular. Many analysts have suggested that
the  market  –  friendly  reform  policies  which  were  undertaken  and  the  investments  made  thereafter
contributed  significantly  to  the  current  economic  performance.  Today  the  economy  is  reaping  the
rewards  of  these  first  generation  reforms  and  as  the  economic  conditions  continue  to  improve,  the
time  will  be  appropriate  to  introduce  second-generation  reforms  such  as  labour  market  reforms,
pension reform and institutional changes in the educational, health and social security systems.
The long expansion has been characterized by moderate inflation rates and consistently lower levels
of unemployment. This is in sharp contrast to two decades ago when the growth in the economy was
accompanied  by  double  digit  inflation.  We  have  been  able  to  manage  our  affairs  to  keep  in  check
those  domestic  sources  of  inflation.  As  we  go  forward  we  need  to  ensure  that  wage  settlements
remain in line with productivity. One measure of productivity in the manufacturing sector for Trinidad
and Tobago suggests that output per man hour worked grew by 3.3 per cent for the first nine months
of 2000 compared with 7.1 per cent for the corresponding period of 1999.
The strength of the country’s performance is also evident in the healthy state of the external accounts
where  the  country  recorded  an  overall  balance  of  payments  surplus  in  2000  –  the  eighth  such
consecutive  surplus.  This  has  also  led  to  a  build  up  in  the  country’s  gross  foreign  reserves  which
amounted to US$1,890 million or around 5.2 months of prospective imports.
BIS Review 41/2001
1
The state of play
Over the past seven years real GDP has grown on average at just under 4 per cent per annum and
preliminary indications are that growth will continue apace during 2001. Despite the slowdown in the
fourth quarter of 2000, when real GDP rose marginally (0.4 per cent) the economy has rebounded in
the  first  quarter  of  2001  growing  by  around  1  per  cent,  considerably  higher  than  the  0.2  per  cent
recorded  one  year  earlier.  At  that  time  the  delay  in  settling  the  natural  gas  contract  impacted
negatively  on  economic  activity  in  the  energy  based  industries  and  these  adverse  developments
continued well into the second quarter of 2000, when the natural gas contract was eventually signed.
For  example,  the  protracted  negotiations  led  to  a  reduction  in  the  volume  of  fertilisers  exported  to
international customers, and also affected other sub-groups in the energy sector. For 2001 however
the sector is expected to operate at or near capacity with minor stoppages.
In the non energy based sectors of the economy, the 2000 performance is noteworthy in that for the
first time in more than four years, every sector experienced positive growth: – Agriculture rebounded
from two difficult years as the output of raw sugar totalled 107 thousand tonnes. Construction activity
has slowed after spikes in 1997 and 1998 consequent on the installation of additional capacity in the
energy based sectors, but some slowdown was expected as the major investments and public sector
capital spending on infrastructure began to taper off. This tapering off will help to keep in check any
overheating in these sectors of the economy.
While the longer-run inflationary trend (or core inflation) remained subdued with the inflation rate for
2000 registering 3.6 per cent compared with 3.4 per cent in 1999, short run supply shocks continue to
impact  the  level  of  retail  prices.  In  1998  floods  and  drought  contributed  to  a  spike  in  the  annual
inflation rate. A similar situation occurred in 2000 as flood damage adversely affected the supply of
fruits and vegetables in November and as a consequence prices rose sharply towards the end of the
year. Since then average consumer prices have fallen in January and March with the inflation rate for
the first quarter set at 1.5 per cent compared with 2.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000.
The  improvement  in  the  country’s  terms  of  trade  in  2000  was  reflected  in  the  fiscal  accounts  as
buoyant oil prices contributed to an almost balanced budget for the fiscal year 1999/2000. The trend of
higher than budgeted oil prices continued into 2001 and into the new fiscal year. Preliminary evidence
suggests that for fiscal 2000/2001 the central government will achieve an overall surplus of just under
0.5 per cent of GDP.
Indeed for the first six months of the fiscal year, the government recorded an overall surplus of $473
million  as  actual  oil  prices  averaged  around  US$30  well  above  the  budget  estimates.  Despite  this
performance there are some downside risks to the fiscal position. The downside risks arise from the
possibility of a sharp reversal in the terms of trade with oil prices falling well below US$20 as well as
the inability of the central government to keep the reins on the transfers and subsidies element of the
budget  –  especially  transfers  to  public  enterprises  and  utilities.  Preliminary  estimates  show  that
transfers  are  projected  to  rise  from  7.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in  fiscal  1998/1999  to  9.2  per  cent  in  the
current fiscal year. While the central government may achieve an overall budget balance in the current
fiscal year we at the Central Bank continue to focus on the high level of fiscal injections associated
with these activities as there are implications for liquidity management.
During fiscal 1999/2000 the central government established a Revenue Stabilisation Fund in which it
is  estimated  that  two  thirds  of  the  excess  of  actual  oil  revenues  over  budgeted  revenues  will  be
placed. At the end of the fiscal year just over TT$400 million was placed into this Fund and given the
general trend  in  oil prices for the current fiscal  year a similar  amount  may  accrue  to  the  Fund.  For
those economies which are dependent on non-renewable resources such as oil and gas, the depletion
of  the  countries  wealth  over  time  raises  issues  of  inter-generational  equity  and  fiscal  sustainability.
The establishment of a revenue stabilisation fund goes some way towards addressing these issues.
Money, credit and interest rates
As  you are aware our current monetary  policy framework is focussed  on  liquidity  management  and
exchange rate stability  which is directed  towards  ensuring  internal  and  external  price  stability  –  the
internal  and  external  value  of  the  currency.  Liquidity  conditions  must  be  managed  to  ensure  that
business credit is not retarded especially during periods in which the public sector is a major player in
the money and capital market.
2
BIS Review 41/2001
During 2000 private sector credit by the commercial banks expanded by 14.5 per cent compared with
a  12  per  cent  growth  in  the  previous  year.  These  developments  were  taking  place  alongside  an
increase of 30.5 per cent in credit by non-bank licensed financial institutions reflecting an increase in
the  holdings  of  private  sector  investments.  It  is  against  this  background  understandably  that  credit
growth  from  the  commercial  banks  has  slowed  in  the  first  few  months  of  2001.  All  components  of
credit fell except credit to business firms which grew by 4.4 per cent in the first two months of the year.
Nonetheless  private  sector  credit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  remains  at  around  38  per  cent  of  GDP
around  the  same  levels  as  were  evident  in  1999  and  2000.  Over  the  past  several  years  many
businesses relied on overdraft financing as their preferred method of business finance. The high cost
of  financing  these  operations,  the  imperative  for  many  firms  to  be  internationally  competitive,  the
improved  economic  climate  and  the  generation  of  internal  sources  of  funds  (retained  earnings)
suggests that more business firms may wish to change the nature of their business finances as they
begin to generate more internal funds and begin to make more use of the domestic capital market.
Cash reserve requirements for commercial banks
The  growth  in  credit  over  the  past  two  years  has  taken  place  against  the  backdrop  of  a  growing
economy, large fiscal injections, a prime rate of 16.50 per cent  and  a cash reserve requirement for
commercial  banks  of  21  per  cent  of  designated  liabilities  –  that  is  deposit  liabilities  and  other
fund-raising instruments. At 21 per cent the cash reserve ratio for commercial banks is relatively high
and indeed represents high intermediation costs. The Central Bank is committed to lowering the cash
reserve requirement over the medium term especially as the  Bank moves  away  from  a  reliance  on
direct instruments of control to more market oriented policy tools. In respect of the latter Open Market
Operations  (OMO)  were  introduced  almost  five  years  ago  and  are  now  undertaken  routinely.  In
respect  of  the  direct  controls  the  Bank  has  begun  to  rationalise  reserve  ratios  in  the  commercial
banking system. Changes will take place only when monetary conditions permit.
You may be aware that commercial banks earn no income on cash reserves  and this represents  a
cost to banks and must be recovered in the spread between loan and deposit rates. A reduction in the
reserve requirement will lead to either lower deposit rates or lower loan rates or some movement in
both that will lead to a narrower spread. Thus the reduction in the reserve requirement from 21 per
cent to 18 per cent – which is effective from the reserve week beginning today - will lead to a fall of
about $376 million in the amount that commercial banks need to hold in cash at the Central Bank. To
ensure that there is no impact on current liquidity conditions these funds have been re absorbed with a
simultaneous issue of government securities to the commercial banks. The Central Bank expects that
the reduction in the cash reserve ratio initially will impact the loan rates in the banking system so that
borrowing costs will be lower.
Capital market developments
Over the long period of expansion the domestic capital market has been able to meet the needs of
domestic firms as well as the public sector when the need arose. Over the last two years the domestic
capital  market  has  witnessed  what  some  have  termed  the  internationalization  of  the  market  as
Trinidad and Tobago has emerged as a regional financial centre. Several regional governments and
quasi-public sector entities have raised US dollar financing on the domestic market. Indeed between
1999 and 2000 US$195 million was raised by regional governments (Barbados, Belize, St. Lucia) on
the domestic capital market while TT$6,640 million was also issued in bond financing over the same
period  to  local  companies  and  para  statal  companies;  all  this  points  to  the  growing  ability  of  the
domestic capital market to supply long term funding.
These developments augur well for our capital market but as the volume of transactions grow there
must also be some additional institutional changes. As more governments and regional corporations
enter  this  market,  the  absence  of  an  independent  benchmark  measure  of  risk,  the  pricing  of  these
securities, the absence of good credit analyses – all point the need for the establishment of a regional
credit rating agency. Perhaps the time is right and it may well be a good idea for the private sector
interests to explore the feasibility of the establishment of such an institution.
BIS Review 41/2001
3
Implications of the slowdown in the United States
There has been a lot of discussion recently on economic conditions in the United States and its impact
on the local economy. Growth in the United States slowed to 1 per cent in the final three months of
2000 prompting a number of commentators to suggest that the United States economy was heading
towards a recession. However, if one were to follow the strict methodology for the dating of business
cycles  in  the  United  States,  the  onset  of  a  recession  is  marked  after  three  consecutive  quarters  of
negative  growth. Without  getting  into  a  debate  on  semantics  this  is  not  the  current  situation  in  the
United States.
It must be noted however that some slowdown in growth was expected given the pace of expansion
witnessed  in  the  United  States  over  the  1990’s.  While  the  pre-emptive  action  taken  by  the  United
States  Federal  Reserve  in  2000  had  contributed  to  the  slowdown,  the  economy  has  also  been
impacted by what some analysts have termed a series of shocks:- higher energy prices especially the
spike in natural gas prices and the energy crisis in California, the tightening of credit, a fall in equity
markets,  a  significant  decline  in  the  price  and  earning  potential  of  technology  stocks.  Recent  data
show that the economy rebounded with an annual growth rate of 2 per cent in the first quarter of 2001
as aggregate demand fuelled by consumer spending contributed to this performance.
Lower  commodity  prices  which  are  now  emerging  at  the  beginning  of  2001  represent  one  channel
through which the United States ‘slowdown’ may impact the domestic economy. For every US$1 per
barrel fall in the price of oil, government’s receipts from the energy sector  will  be  lower  by  TT$154
million.  However  the  budget  for  fiscal  2000/2001  was  based  on  an  average  oil  price  of  US$22  per
barrel and prices are unlikely to fall below US$22 for the remainder of the fiscal  year. In respect of
export earnings these exports to the US are not expected to be adversely affected as most of these
commodities are sold under long term contractual arrangements.
Outlook for 2001 and possible risks
Real GDP is expected to grow at around 4½ per cent in 2001 with inflation estimated at just below 4
per cent  in the  absence of any major supply  shocks. As I indicated earlier the  public sector should
achieve an overall surplus of just under 0.5 per cent of GDP with crude oil prices holding at around
current levels in the range of around US$25 a barrel. In line with the moderation in energy prices the
current account surplus of the balance of payments is expected to be lower in 2001, but nevertheless
an  overall  surplus  of  about  US$400  million  –  around  the  level  achieved  in  2000  –  is  expected  and
should contributed to a build up of net official reserves in 2001 to around US$1,845 million (5 months
cover).
You may well ask what are the downside risks to such a positive scenario and I can think of two critical
ones.  The  first  of  these  has  been  mentioned  already  i.e.  the  possibility  of  a  sharp  reversal  in  the
commodity terms of trade. As a primary producer and exporter, Trinidad and Tobago is dependent on
our  oil  and  gas  exports.  Over  the  years  the  economy  has  become  more  resilient  to  these  price
changes but we still guard against their sudden reversals.
While the current slowdown in the US does not pose a major threat to our exporters, we need to be on
our  guard  against  US  steel  interests  seeking  to  introduce  further  curbs  against  steel  imports  as
occurred a couple of years earlier.
A second downside risk falls within the area of fiscal management. Buoyant oil prices have allowed
the  fiscal  authorities  to  balance  their  accounts  but  we  need  to  continue  to  work  towards  ensuring
buoyancy  in  non-energy  taxes,  overall  public  sector  surpluses  and  a  reduction  in  the  transfer  and
subsidy  budget.  Failure  to  do  so  may  lead  to  erosion  of  the  gains  made  in  the  aftermath  of  the
adjustment period.
Future challenges in public policy
On  the  basis  of  the  current  macroeconomic  performance  the  medium  term  outlook  appears  to  be
relatively favourable for Trinidad and Tobago. Nevertheless there are still a  number of public policy
challenges to be faced over the next few years. The first challenge relates to the diversification of the
Trinidad  and Tobago  economy. Away from an over dependence on crude  oil,  Trinidad  and  Tobago
has  been  transformed  into  an  oil  and  gas  economy,  more  significantly  since  the  establishment  of
Atlantic  LNG.  The  planned  expansion  of  Atlantic  LNG  with  Trains  II  and  III  together  with  the  most
4
BIS Review 41/2001
recent natural gas finds suggest that the country may be well on its way to becoming a major supplier
of gas based products, which also opens the possibility of expanding our production frontiers with new
value added industries in this sector.
A second challenge which remains is the improvement of the physical infrastructure – electricity, water
and communications. The abundance of natural gas should ensure that the country’s electricity needs
are satisfied at relatively low costs. However much more needs to be done in the area of improvement
of  water  supplies  not  only  for  commercial  customers  but  for  domestic  purposes  as  well.  The
desalination plant slated to be open at year’s end should relieve WASA of most of its commitments to
the Point Lisas Estate. The communication sector must meet the challenge of modernisation with state
of the arts communication network infrastructure.
In my concluding remarks, I want to stimulate some discussion on the notion that a major challenge
facing small Caribbean states such as Trinidad and Tobago is that of industrial competitiveness. When
I speak of industrial competitiveness, I am referring to the ability of a country’s industries to withstand
competition  by  rapid  export  expansion  and  technological  upgrading  of  its  industries.  We  are  all
certainly aware that with the pace of globalization and phasing out of special preferences enjoyed by
small states, the need for a coherent competitiveness strategy model becomes of critical importance.
The  attainment  of  industrial  competitiveness  is  also  the  key  to  the  achievement  of  overall  national
competitiveness where a nation is able to sustain high rates of economic growth while at the same
time maintaining and expanding the real incomes of its people over the long term. I must stress that
strong industrial competitiveness depends in large measure on:
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
It is clear that for Trinidad and Tobago to take a prominent role in the new global framework, policy
makers must embark on goals to hasten industrial competitiveness.
trade, foreign investment and macro policies;
skills, technology institutions and finance and last but not least;
infrastructure.
BIS Review 41/2001
5
