Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The outlook for the Malaysian economy: issues and strategies
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Bank Negara Malaysia, at the Malaysian Unit Trust
Week Second Annual International Seminar 2001, Kuala Lumpur, 23 April 2001.
 Bismillah hirahman nirahim
Yang Berbahagia Tan Sri Dato’ Seri Ahmad Sarji bin Abdul Hamid
Ladies and Gentlemen
Introduction
It is my honour and pleasure to speak to you this morning on the current economic situation and the
outlook for the Malaysian economy at this seminar organised by Permodalan Nasional Berhad (PNB)
in conjunction with the Malaysian Unit Trust Week. In the recent months, there has been a number of
global economic and financial developments that impinge significantly on the prospects for our region.
The slower than expected growth in the industrial economies, the increase in the volatility in the major
currencies and the sharp movements in the global stock markets have generated further weakness in
external demand and unstable financial market conditions. As we enter into this more uncertain and
challenging  period,  it  is  important  to  assess  these  developments  in  their  appropriate  context  and
perspectives. Should market sentiment dominate, its impact on the business cycle could increase the
amplitude of the cycle. In such an environment, it is therefore important to look beyond the immediate
term and take a longer-term perspective of these developments so as to avoid such over adjustments.
The  issue  before  us  is,  to  what  extent  will  these  developments  affect  Malaysia’s  overall  economic
performance. How well can Malaysia withstand this current phase of slowdown without undermining
our  long-term  growth  prospects.  What  are  the  important  elements  that  will  determine  a  country’s
resilience and performance in this environment. What are the strategies that need to be adopted by
the authorities and by the private sector to deal with the emerging issues. Specific to Malaysia, these
recent  developments  have  raised  questions  on  the  viability  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  the
associated level of reserves. Let me begin with the current economic situation and then proceed to
discuss these issues that have emerged before proceeding to discuss the strategies that have been
implemented and the important role that has to be played by the private sector in addressing these
issues.
Current economic situation
The  United  States  economy  has  entered  a  period  of  cyclical  slowdown  after  a  decade  of  rapid
expansion.  Given  that  the  United  States  accounts  for  slightly  above  one-fifth  of  world  output  and
absorbs  about  19%  of  world  exports,  its  slowdown  is  expected  to  result  in  a  more  moderate  world
growth. While there has been aggressive monetary easing by the United States, it is likely that the full
impact  of  the  easing  will  only  be  felt  with  a  six  to  nine  month  lag.  Thus,  while  the  severity  of  the
slowdown may be contained, the assessment is that a recovery will only emerge towards the end of
the year or early next year. Against this background, we have already experienced some moderation
in  the  expansion  of  Malaysia’s  exports  and  in  output  in  the  first  two  months  of  2001.  In  this
environment,  the  strategy  is  to  promote  further  the  domestic  sources  of  growth.  While  growth  will
moderate,  the  momentum  of  growth  built  up  over  the  last  two  years,  the  pre-emptive  measures
introduced in the 2001 Budget in October 2000 and the more recent package announced on 27 March
2001 are expected to mitigate the extent of the slowdown. In the context of these developments, real
GDP is forecast to experience a slowdown in growth in the first two quarters of 2001 before recovering
in the second half of the year.
In the next few months, before clear signs of a  recovery  in  the  United  States  emerge,  the  external
environment can be expected to be vulnerable to volatility as markets react to specific developments.
This uncertain environment has raised the potential risks of over reaction by the market and of further
BIS Review 31/2001
1
instability.  In  an  environment  where  the  focus  is  on  the  immediate  term,  the  outcome  risks  being
driven by market sentiment. Over adjustment not only occurs due to misjudgements of the economy,
but  market  sentiment  can  collectively  reinforce  the  business  cycle  to  amplify  the  magnitude  of  the
business cycle. Amidst such an outlook, it is important to stay focused and to have an ability to see
beyond the immediate term. More specifically, to have an ability to assess and  distinguish  between
short-term  trends  and  longer-term  fundamentals  and  structural  developments.  In  this  regard,  it  is
important  to  recognise  the  context  of  this  current  external  environment  and  the  domestic  resilience
that Malaysia has to ride out this more challenging external environment.
The underlying economic conditions in the country are sound. Growth has slowed but will remain firmly
in positive territory with the medium-term outlook remaining favourable. The strong fundamentals allow
macroeconomic policies to promote domestic sources of growth. These same fundamentals allowed
Malaysia to recover within a short period of time from the major economic contraction in 1998. While
the current environment is triggered by external developments, the momentum of growth experienced
over the last two years and the strong foundations built-up have enhanced Malaysia’s ability to absorb
and adjust to this more challenging environment. Let me highlight these factors:
• 
Malaysia  has  diversified  its  economic  structure  over  several  decades  to  become  less
vulnerable to external shocks. The recent recovery which has been broad based across all
sectors has further reinforced this trend. The diversification has taken place not only in terms
of expansion in new growth areas but also within the traditional sub-sectors. Even in terms of
electronics exports, an area which is perceived to be vulnerable to the global downturn in the
electronics  sector,  Malaysia  has  a  relatively  well  diversified  mix  of  products  and  range  of
markets.
The current account surplus remains robust, lending strength to the balance of payments.
While  the  services  deficit  will  continue  to  be  large,  the  forecast  shows  that  the  current
account surplus is  likely  to remain significant through this  year and the next. For the  year
2001, the current account surplus is estimated to be in the region of 6-7% of GNP.
Inflationary pressure is contained in the region of 2%, thus allowing monetary policy to
remain accommodative to reinforce the fiscal measures. The low inflation has kept the cost
of doing business in Malaysia low.
Low levels of external debt has further reduced vulnerabilities to external developments.
Debt levels declined further in 2000. A total of US$4.2 billion was repaid in the year 2000 by
both the private and public sectors. External debt declined to 50.5% of GNP as at end-2000,
from 57.8% the year before.
The  high  savings  rate,  not  only  provides  a  large  pool  of  domestic  liquidity  for  capital
formation, but also allows for pro-growth measures to raise consumption spending. The rate
of savings in  2000  was  39.5%  of  GNP.  There  is  therefore,  adequate  domestic  sources  of
financing. There is also efficient financial intermediation and systems for payments.
The fiscal position is strong, with outstanding debt of the Federal Government contained
at  37%  of  GDP  in  2000.  The  fiscal  deficit  continues  to  be  financed  largely  from  non-
inflationary  domestic  sources.  As  part  of  the  fiscal  stimulus,  expenditure  allocations  have
been targeted to projects with strong linkages to the economy to ensure maximum impact on
growth, minimal leakage in terms of imports while meeting socio-economic targets.
The  Malaysian  banking  sector  has  strengthened  and  become  more  resilient  with
enhanced  asset  quality,  higher  capitalisation  and  improved  profitability.  This  has  been
reinforced by the consolidation of the banking institutions with the focus being on enhancing
efficiency. With the further development of the private debt securities market, financing of the
domestic economy is now more diversified.
Overall, Malaysia has a high degree of policy flexibility for effectively managing the impact
of the external slowdown on the domestic economy. Policy options are available to absorb
potential  shocks  to  the  economy  given  the  low  level  of  indebtedness  and  the  low  rate  of
inflation.
Malaysia has high grade infrastructure that has been put in place during the high growth
years  without  resulting  in  high  external  indebtedness.  There  is  therefore  an  adequate
physical infrastructure in place to support growth.
        2
BIS Review 31/2001
 There is full employment, with the unemployment rate at 3.1% in 2000, and high level of
labour mobility. While some dislocation may occur with rationalisation, unemployment levels
will be contained in a growing economy where employment opportunities will emerge in new
growth sectors.
Given  these  strong  initial  conditions,  Malaysia  is  well  positioned  to  absorb  this  current  phase  of
slowdown in economic activity and maintaining our long-term growth prospects.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Policy  strategies  adopted  during  the  past  decade  have  enhanced  Malaysia’s  prospects  for
productivity-driven growth. Malaysia is already on track towards achieving this goal. In 2000, Malaysia
achieved a strong growth of 8.5%, with labour productivity rising strongly by 3.8%. The higher growth
was also supported by a lower investment to GDP ratio of 31% compared with 49% in 1995-96 when a
significant part of the capacity expansion programmes undertaken during the 1990s were projects with
long gestation period.
The  capacity  of  the  domestic  labour  force  to  achieve  productivity  gains  should  not  therefore  be
underestimated. Malaysian workers have demonstrated ability to adjust to the changing environment.
Policy strategies have also focused on providing an enabling environment for training and retraining of
workers displaced by structural adjustments in the economy. Emphasis also continues to be placed by
the  Government  on  the  education  system  and  industrial  training  to  increase  the  pool  of  high-end
skilled labour. While there are shortages in high-end, rules on the import of high skilled labour have
been  liberalised.  Overall,  Malaysia  is  committed  to  enhancing  productivity  to  achieve  sustainable
growth. Long-term strategies under the Third Outline Perspective Plan are geared towards achieving
this objective.
The recent policy package to promote domestic economic activity contains the measures to  bolster
consumption  spending.  Malaysia  has  essentially  been  an  investment  driven  economy  where
investment was the main driver of high growth in the 1990s. As Malaysia transitions into the next stage
of development, where growth is derived from efficiency and productivity gains, the rate of investment
required to produce higher growth can be expected to moderate. In 2000, the rate of investment to
GDP declined to 31% to achieve an overall growth of the economy of 8.5%. Malaysia therefore has
room to manoeuvre to increase consumption spending while maintaining an adequate rate of savings.
Going forward, consumption spending will need to become relatively more important to boost further
domestic  economic  activity.  Consumers  therefore  need  to  spend  productively  albeit  within  their
means.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In the recent period, there has been significant discussions and debate on the exchange rate regimes
and  policies.  Recent  events  in  the  global  economy  indeed  warrant  a  greater  understanding  of  the
complexities  and  efficiencies  of  exchange  rate  policies  in  the  management  of  our  economies.  The
exchange  rate  is  a  means  to  an  end.  It  is  a  mechanism  that  facilitates  international  trade  and
investment. The search is therefore for an efficient functioning exchange rate regime that will facilitate
international trade and investment. Over the decades, we have seen a shift by countries towards more
flexible regimes. It has been argued that greater exchange rate flexibility would insulate a country from
external shocks and that it has a  built-in mechanism for automatic adjustment to  deal  with  external
imbalances. However, experience has shown  that the change  in  the  exchange  rate  system,  from  a
fixed to a more flexible system of floating rate regime, however, has not contributed towards reducing
the economic problems. In theory, there should not be any balance of payments disequilibrium under
the  floating  exchange  rate  system.  Market  forces  should  correct  any  imbalances  arising  from  an
overvaluation or an under- valuation of the exchange rate. Under such an arrangement, there will be a
reduced need for Central Banks to hold external reserves since it would not be necessary for Central
Bank  intervention  to  support  the  exchange  rate  at  predetermined  levels.  Consequently,  the  floating
system  should  enable  governments  to  use  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  to  achieve  the  domestic
macroeconomic stabilisation objectives of sustained economic growth and price stability.
In  reality,  however,  it  is  not  so  straight  forward.  The  international  economic  and  financial  turmoil
experienced since the abandonment of the Bretton Woods System indicates that we are a long way
from the Utopia that we seek. Indeed, during this period, exchange rates have experienced significant
and  violent movements. Volatility of the  exchange rates over a  prolonged  period,  particularly  of  the
currencies  of  the  major  industrial  countries  is  a  matter  of  concern  for  emerging  and  developing
nations. Volatile fluctuations in the exchange rate have destabilising consequences on our economies,
BIS Review 31/2001
3
affecting trade, capital flows and external debt servicing. Significant currency movements also result in
increased risk for investment. Exchange rate management is further complicated by capital flows that
have during unstable market conditions resulted in an over shooting of the exchange rate. When the
market perceives that this has taken place, there will be expectation for a retracement. Such reversal
in  market  sentiment  generally  produces  a  severe  correction.  As  experience  has  shown,  flexible
exchange  rates  can  be  equally  demanding  on  policy  when  extreme  volatility  and  misalignment  is
experienced. Depending on the openness of a country, such movement in the exchange rates arising
from short-term capital movements have resulted in severe adverse effects on the real economy. It is
therefore important for the market to have the ability to assess the viability of alternative exchange rate
regimes and the conditions under which such regimes are viable and sustainable.
In the recent weeks, there has been heightened concern over the movements of the major currencies,
in particular, the Japanese yen, which triggered expectations that other currencies in the region would
depreciate  to  preserve  competitiveness.  Seen  in  a  historical  context,  the  experience  has  been  that
excessive  yen movements in the last  decade  were not sustained for long periods.  Over  reaction  to
adjusting the exchange rate in response to these short-term movements would result in misalignments
of exchange rates. The exchange rate should adjust to structural changes that result in shifts in the
underlying  fundamentals.  For  Malaysia,  domestic  macroeconomic  fundamentals  continue  to  remain
consistent with the pegged exchange rate system. The exchange rate continues to be supported by a
strong current account surplus, projected at 6-7% of GNP in 2001. Inflation is expected to remain low
at about 2%. External debt remains low with reserves exceeding short-term external debt by 5.7 times.
Historically,  it  has  never  been  Malaysia’s  policy  to  rely  on  the  exchange  rate  to  strengthen
international competitiveness. Currently, the exchange rate is assessed to be at fair value. It would not
bring any advantage to Malaysia to depreciate the currency to reap temporary pricing advantages. If
we look in the context of the current environment, an adjustment in our prices through the exchange
rate by 5  to  10  percent  is  unlikely  to  increase  exports  at  a  time  where  external  demand  is  slowing
down. Competitive depreciation would also wipe out the gains for an individual country. Under these
circumstances, depreciation would only contribute to rising inflation and higher cost of doing business
which would wipe out any gains derived from depreciating the currency. On balance, it is assessed
that there would be no advantage and it therefore would not be in our interest to precipitate greater
uncertainty  by  an  adjustment  in  the  current  peg.  We  need  to  recognise  the  importance  of  the
exchange rate in our economy and our financial system. An economy which is open, with the volume
of  trade  that  is  two  times  the  size  of  our  economy  requires  an  efficient  functioning  mechanism  to
facilitate international trade and investment.
There has also  been recent concern  about the sustainability  of the peg  given  the  declining  level  of
international reserves. While outflows have occurred, there is a need to recognise the nature of these
flows. Flows need to be distinguished from those that reflect trade transactions and those that reflect
capital account transactions. With the latter, we need  to distinguish the short-term flows from those
that are long term, that is, foreign direct investment and official flows. During the period 1993 and early
1994,  Malaysia  received  substantial  inflows  of  short-term  capital.  Reserves  that  were  built-up  from
these short-term flows are vulnerable to the reversal of flows. During the course of 1994, there was
indeed such a reversal of these flows. During that period, it was also widely discussed as to whether
the currency should be allowed to adjust in response to these short-term flows. Allowing the currency
to adjust in response to short-term flows would have resulted in an overshooting of the exchange rate
and  increased  volatility.  It  was  assessed  that  given  the  significance  of  trade  in  the  Malaysian
economy, the stability and a degree of predictability of the exchange rate was vital for the conduct of
business decisions and that it should not be determined by developments that for the most part were
driven by sentiment.
The role of short-term flows came to the forefront again in 1997-1998, when such flows was one of the
trigger factors for the depreciation of the East Asian currencies. Countries in this region experienced a
30-70%  depreciation  of  their  currencies.  In  the  current  environment,  countries  continue  to  be
vulnerable  to  inflows  of  short-term  funds  and  their  reversal.  In  early  2000,  Malaysia  received
significant short-term flows amounting to US$2 billion. While this raised the reserves level to US$34.5
billion in April 2000, an outflow of US$3.1 billion occurred during the remaining part of the year. For
the year as a whole, net portfolio outflows amounted to US$1.1 billion. The increase in reserves during
this period were from the trade surplus, foreign  direct  investment and official  inflows. These inflows
have to some extent cushioned the outflows. A significant part of the outflows in 2000 and early 2001
were also for repayments of external debt and direct investment abroad  by  Malaysians. In  addition,
4
BIS Review 31/2001
after adjusting for a revaluation adjustment by US$900 million, the reserve level as at end-March was
US27.2 billion.
In contrast,  in  the  first  half  of  April,  the  heightened  uncertainty  and  unstable  market  conditions  that
prevailed, both at home and abroad resulted in an overreaction by the market. The period saw marked
movements in Japanese yen which depreciated to touch a low of Y126 against the US dollar towards
the end-March, its lowest level in two and a half years. Following the rapid movement of the yen, the
market  expectation  was  for  a  further  weakness  in  the  yen  which  would  result  in  competitive
depreciation  in  the  regional  currencies.  Developments  in  the  global  equity  markets  were  also  not
encouraging  due  to  continued  concerns  over  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy.  Profit  warnings  by
corporations  and  the  release  of  disappointing  quarterly  corporate  results  by  a  number  of  US
technology companies led to a 6.5% decline in the Nasdaq and a 0.9% decline in the Dow Jones in
the first week of April. In this environment, the announcement by Standard and Poor’s on 4 April that
the  outlook  for  Malaysia  was  revised  from  positive  to  stable  contributed  to  further  volatility  in  the
domestic  financial  markets.  These  specific  events  had  an  adverse  impact  on  the  local  market
sentiments. The negative expectations culminated in a 6% decline in KLSE composite index on 4 April
and another 4.2% fall on 9 April. Over reaction by the market to these developments resulted in an
increase in the gross outflow compared with trend levels previously seen. While this trend has  now
subsided and net inflows have occurred, the events in the first half of April resulted in an outflow of
US$0.9 billion.
Positive  developments  in  the  third  week  however,  have  led  to  an  improvement  in  the  flow  of
international reserves. The volatility in the financial markets has subsided during the third week. The
yen and most regional currencies have stabilised. The US interest rate cut by the Federal Revenue
Board of the United  States on 18  April  also  improved market conditions. Global stock markets also
recovered. This situation has also been reinforced by the narrowing of the interest rate differentials.
Going forward, the regional currencies  would continue to be influenced by movements in the major
currencies, in particular the yen, the developments in US financial markets and the growth prospects
in the United States.
Conclusion
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We live in an increasingly complex world where there are no straight forward answers to the issues
that  have  emerged.  In  addition,  the  environment  is  characterised  by  incomplete  information,
contradictory  knowledge  and  understanding,  conflicts  of  interest,  divergent  views  and  preferences
conditioned by experience and ideology.
What  is  important  is  to  ensure  sustainability.  While  daily  assessments  of  opportunities,  risks  and
trends are important, those who over react to change and perceived risks will only contribute towards
destabilising  conditions.  To  secure  the  future,  focus  has  to  be  on  building  on  those  elements  that
provide  the foundations for sustainable performance. The focus has to be beyond being  concerned
with issues of immediate term and immediate relevance. A longer-term perspective is required, looking
beyond the immediate term and immediate interests.
In managing the environment, sustainability requires that we pay attention to the entire cycle and that
takes into account context and perspective. While managing the environment has been seen to be the
realm of the governments, the response by businesses, consumers and the market will determine the
overall  resilience  and  performance  of  a  nation.  While  Malaysia  will  not  be  immune  to  external
developments,  it  is  our  combined  actions  that  will  secure  sustainability  of  economic  prosperity  for
Malaysia.
BIS Review 31/2001
5
