European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in
Frankfurt am Main on 1 February 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen, let me welcome you to our first press conference of 2001. The Vice-President
and I are here to report, as we have done for more than two years now, on the outcome of today's
meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by the Eurogroup President,
Minister  Reynders,  as  well  as  by  Commissioner  Solbes.  Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  again
welcome Greece as the twelfth country to join the euro area. Mr.  Papademos,  the  Governor  of  the
Bank of Greece, has been participating in our meetings as a member of the Governing Council since 1
January 2001.
The  Governing  Council  conducted  its  regular  examination  of  monetary  and  economic
developments  and  their  implications  for  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The
decision to keep interest rates unchanged reflects the Governing Council's assessment that the risks
to price stability in the medium term now appear more balanced than at the end of last year. Factors
which might pose upward risks to price stability in the medium term are still present and as such will
be subject to ongoing close monitoring.
Let me elaborate on this assessment. Starting with the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the
ECB, monetary data for December 2000 confirmed the gradual moderation of the growth of monetary
aggregates which has been observed since the spring of last year. According to the latest data, the
three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 in the months from October to December 2000
stood  at  5.0%,  which  was  slightly  lower  than  the  average  of  5.1%  recorded  for  the  period  from
September to November 2000. Therefore, after the recent slowdown in monetary growth, the risks to
price stability from the monetary side have become increasingly balanced. Caution still needs to be
exercised,  however,  given  the  continued  dynamics  in  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  and  the
upward deviation of M3 from the reference value in the past.
Turning  to  the  examination  under  the  second  pillar,  broadly  similar  indications  are  emerging,  as
inflationary impulses resulting from previous developments in oil prices and the external value of the
euro are gradually diminishing.
As regards economic activity, uncertainty concerning the external environment for the euro area has
increased, mainly related to signals that the slowdown in growth  in  the  United States may be more
significant than earlier expected. This is likely to result, directly and via a spillover to other regions, in
some deceleration of growth in the world economy. World real GDP growth, which in 2000 posted its
strongest  performance  for  many  years,  may  therefore  moderate  in  2001  but  will  still  remain  at  an
acceptable level.
This deceleration will clearly have some dampening effects on euro area net exports. The euro area is
a large economy where exports of goods and services amount to around 17% of GDP only. Economic
activity in the euro area is therefore determined mainly by domestic factors. Overall, the fundamentals
of the euro area remain broadly favourable. While, as recently published data show, real GDP growth
slowed somewhat in the second half of last year, the level of business and household confidence has
remained  high,  supported  by, 
inter  alia,  high  degrees  of  capacity  utilisation  and  ongoing
unemployment declines. Moreover, real income in the private sector will benefit from lower oil prices
and from the reductions in direct taxes in 2001. Hence, while downside risks to real GDP growth exist,
growth is very likely to continue at a reasonably robust pace.
Developments  in  the  euro  area  bond  markets  are  in  line  with  this  outlook  for  economic  activity.
Moreover, inflationary expectations implied by bond  yields confirm that the financial markets expect
current levels of consumer price inflation to be temporary, and price stability to be maintained in the
medium term. This assessment may also have been reinforced by the recent moderation in oil prices
and the movement of the euro exchange rate in the period since the end of October 2000.
BIS Review 8/2001
1
Lower  oil  prices  and  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  have  already  produced  some  effects  on  price
developments. In December 2000 the annual rate of increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP) declined to 2.6%, from 2.9% in November. A confirmation of recent developments in oil
prices and the euro exchange rate would contribute to a further downward adjustment of overall HICP
inflation in the period ahead. Over the near term, this process may be slowed down by the delayed
impact  of  past  import  price  increases  and  possibly  also  by  some  transitory  further  food  price  rises
caused by the current health issues  associated  with  beef consumption.  It may  therefore  take  some
time for HICP inflation to move back below 2%.
Notwithstanding the assessment that the risks to price stability are now more balanced, there are still
factors posing upside risks which  therefore require continued  attention. These are mainly related to
potential  second-round  effects  on  wages  of  the  past  increases  in  import  prices,  as  well  as  to
bottlenecks and shortages in labour markets. For the medium term, it remains paramount that wage
developments remain moderate.
In  addition,  it  is  crucial  that  structural  adjustments  continue.  This  requires  sustained  labour  market
reforms,  continuing  liberalisation  of  product  markets  and  further  integration  in  the  financial  services
sector, all of which will expand economic activity and increase employment. It is equally important that
further  progress  be  achieved  in  the  area  of  fiscal  policy  reform,  with  continuing  progress  in  fiscal
consolidation through limits in public spending growth, allowing both a reduction in remaining budget
deficits and an alleviation of the fiscal burden on corporations and households without threatening or
slowing the progress in fiscal consolidation.
Overall, the existence of the euro and the single monetary policy has provided the euro area with an
institutional setting  which  leaves  it significantly less exposed  to  external  influences.  Within  the  euro
area  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  together  with  further  progress  on
structural  reforms,  will  provide  an  important  contribution  to  the  achievement  of  sustained  non-
inflationary economic growth and will thereby also support a further solid and sustainable expansion of
the world economy.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President, who will inform you about other issues decided by
the Governing Council.
The Governing Council has adopted a set of standards, recently endorsed by the G10 Governors, as
the minimum standards  of  the  Eurosystem's  common  oversight  policy  on  payment  systems.
The Eurosystem will assess all systemically important payment systems in the euro area against these
"Core Principles" and will make the results of its assessments available to the public.
Concerning issues relating to euro banknotes and coins, I should also like to provide you with the
following information.
First, the Governing Council adopted an ECB Guideline on the 2002 cash changeover. Owing to the
crucial  importance  of  this  matter,  and  given  the  responsibility  of  the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole  in
achieving  a  smooth  cash  changeover,  a  legal  framework  has  been  established.  The  Guideline  will
enable all those involved to become familiar with the basic rules to be followed in preparing for the
introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  This  ECB  Guideline  will  be  published  today  on  the
ECB's website and shortly in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
Second,  yesterday  evening  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  were  given  a  presentation  by
Publicis, the  communication  agency  selected  to  assist  in  conducting  the  Eurosystem's  Euro  2002
Information  Campaign,  on  the  current  status  of  the  campaign.  This  focused  in  particular  on  the
creative  concept  of  the  mass  media  campaign,  which  will  start  in  September  2001.  A  website
dedicated to the Euro 2002 Information Campaign has now been launched in all 11 official languages
of the European Community (www.euro.ecb.int). The website currently contains a section on the euro
banknotes and coins. Further sections will be added over the next two weeks to help specialist groups
and the general public to prepare for the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. These sections
will be updated throughout the year.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
2
BIS Review 8/2001
