David Klein: Three differences between Israel and the US in the 'quality of the
environment’ in managing monetary policy
Address  by  Mr  David  Klein,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Israel-America  Chamber  of
Commerce, held in Tel-Aviv, 10 May 2001.
 The background
On 3 January, 2001, after the US Federal Reserve announced the first interest-rate cut of the year, the
demand was made that the Bank of Israel follow suit. The demand was reiterated after the additional
interest-rate reductions that followed. No such demand had been made in 1999 and 2000, when the
Fed raised interest several times, so that it had to be assumed that the demand to follow suit was no
more than an attempt to vary the list of reasons, which changes from time to time, behind the demand
that  is  always  on  the  agenda  in  Israel  to  reduce  the  interest  rate,  and  the  faster  the  better.
Nevertheless, it may be instructive to consider the differences between Israel and the US in referring
to  the  management  of  monetary  policy.  Understanding  these  differences  can  shed  light  on  the
question of whether it is reasonable to automatically  imitate the Fed–naturally  only when it reduces
interest.
The differences
What, then, are the differences?
The culture of inflation
1.
Ever since the trauma that Americans experienced in the wake of the oil crisis of the 1970s, when the
inflation rate reached an intolerable level of 13.5 percent in 1980, there has been no argument in the
US regarding the need to keep inflation low. The US has no formal inflation target, and the law – which
has not changed in this respect in the last 50 years – instructs the central bank to relate to growth and
employment, too. Despite all this, throughout the 1980s the American central bank focused on getting
the  annual  inflation  rate  down,  to  the  2-3  percent  that  has  characterized  the  last  eight  years.  The
unemployment rate ranged from 5 to 7 percent all those years, and still the central bank did not relent.
The  message  was:  employment  is  generated  not  by  accepting  inflation  but  by  making  structural
changes and raising productivity. Thus, ultimately, the unemployment rate declined to 4 percent, and
the US economy showed that maintaining price stability does in fact go hand in hand with reducing
unemployment.
The upshot is that the US consumer is prepared to invest time in comparing prices and to travel quite
a long way to buy the same product for less money. At any rate, the Cent is still legal tender, and the
efforts to replace the one-dollar note with a coin have not succeeded.
As you know, the Agora is no longer  legal tender  in Israel, though  it still features in prices, and an
interesting debate is currently being held about the rules of price-rounding when payment is in cash.
Anyone who thinks that the rules of price-rounding are simple – after all, this was settled in the Bank of
Israel Law – should study the proposed law on the subject that has already passed its first reading in
the Knesset. In addition, the note with the smallest value is the NIS 20, and it is quite a long time since
the NIS 10 note was replaced by a coin. Despite the differences in average income, the attitude of the
Israeli consumer to money and prices seems to be somewhat less careful than that of his American
counterpart, and he is also somewhat less confident that the low inflation rate will persist.
It  is  hardly  surprising. When  actual  inflation  deviated  upwards  from  the  target  people  said  that  this
constituted a proof that it was impossible to lower the inflation rate in Israel. When the deviation was
downwards, they said that the Bank of Israel had failed – as if monetary policy was an exact science
and the interest rate a laser beam. When the inflation rate diverged upwards from the target, people
said  that  the  target  had  to  be  raised,  and  that  a  little  more  inflation  was  preferable  to  a  little  more
unemployment;  and  when  it  diverged  downwards  from  the  target  people  said  that  a  commission  of
inquiry should be set up and, naturally, the Governor dismissed. The Chairman of the Federal Reserve
in the US once defined 'price stability' as a situation in which no-one considers inflation as something
that  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in  economic  decisions.  Apparently  we  have  not  yet  reached  the
BIS Review 39/2001
1
stage  where  we  regard  low  inflation  and  price  stability  as  natural.  We  still  require  proof,  and  that
obliges Israel's  central  bank  to  be  a  little  less  indifferent  than  its  US  counterpart  to  threats  to  price
stability.
Thus, anyone who claims that the Fed thinks that there is substitutability between inflation and growth,
and that it now tends to prefer growth to inflation, is mistaken. The Fed is reducing the interest rate
aggressively  because  it  is  indeed  convinced  that  it  is  needed  in  order  to  shorten  the  period  of
slowdown  in  the  US  economy,  but  this  policy  is  undertaken  on  the  assumption  that  it  will  not
accelerate inflation. This assumption is based on both the rise in productivity that characterizes the era
of information technology and the longstanding credibility that the Fed has acquired in its struggle to
maintain price stability. In that, too, we are very different from them.
The dollar and the shekel
2.
The dollar, as you know, is a currency that many people in many countries are prepared to use as a
means of payment and hold in order to maintain the value of their assets. The shekel, as you know,
has  not  yet  attained  that  status.  It  is  true  that  because  of  the  decline  in  the  inflation  rate  we  have
stopped running after the dollar, but the habit of linking the prices of certain goods and services to the
dollar has not yet disappeared.
That provides the background for the fact that the balance-of-payments deficit has been  part of the
American scene for many years. In the last year, for example, it amounted to $ 400 billion – about 4.5
percent of GDP. Till now the Americans had no real difficulty financing their import surplus. The world
was willing to take the difference in dollars, which were invested in various assets in the US. Foreign
investment in US Treasury bonds alone is nearly a massive $ 1,300 billion.
Our  situation  is,  of  course,  very  different.  Although  for  us,  too,  a  balance-of-payments  deficit  is  a
matter of routine, we cannot finance it with our currency. In other words, both we and the Americans
need dollars in order to cover the import surplus. The difference is that they can print them. We need
to borrow them or, as has happened in recent years, benefit from the foreign investment in Israel that
has enabled us to maintain an import surplus without increasing our foreign debt, and even to accrue
foreign-currency reserves and reduce our past foreign debt.
Naturally, all this was possible because our balance-of-payments deficit shrank significantly. This was
not the case in the mid-1990s, for example, when the deficit amounted to 6 percent of GDP – a rate
that  was  taken  as  signalling  an  approaching  crisis.  The  fears  were  so  great  that  in  deciding  on  its
economic policy targets for 1997 the government placed the need to reduce the balance-of-payments
deficit first, before growth, and certainly before reducing inflation (the inflation target set for 1997 was
7-10 percent). That balance-of-payments deficit had grown because fiscal and monetary  policy  was
loose, there had been economic growth because of the rise in consumption and the standard of living,
and that  had brought  both the balance-of-payments  deficit and  inflation in its  wake. Only  the  policy
shift saved us from certain disaster, teaching us once again the lesson that we have learned several
times in the past: growth led by consumption cannot be sustainable in Israel.
The  Americans,  on  the  other  hand,  are  building  on  that  alone  to  revive  their  economy.  Both  their
monetary and their fiscal policy are expansionary – the former by rapid interest – rate reduction and
the latter by tax reduction – in order to stimulate growth through an increase in private consumption. If
as a result there is a rise in the balance-of-payments deficit, so be it. It is true that from time to time
somebody  stands  up  and  says  that  things  cannot  go  on  like  that,  but  so  far  it  has  worked.  Maybe
because  the  alternatives  are  less  appealing.  Another  angle  of  the  same  situation  is  that  US
Secretaries of the Treasury advocate a strong dollar, while Israeli Ministers of Finance prefer a weak
shekel.
The financial markets
3.
The third difference lies in the structure of the financial markets. It is widely known that the US has the
most  developed  financial  markets  in  the  world.  In  the  last  few  years  the  Nasdaq  has  attracted
widespread publicity, but the main point is that the Americans have a developed system of non-bank
financial intermediation, comprising inter alia a huge market for both Treasury and corporate bonds.
There  are  also  markets  for  the  financial  instruments  that  have  developed  in  the  last  twenty  years,
primarily derivatives of various kinds on interest rates, exchange rates, and share prices. In addition,
there is an institutional system outside commercial banking that includes investment banks, financing
2
BIS Review 39/2001
institutions, asset- and financial-management services, and brokers of various kinds, offering a variety
of financial services. And what about us?
• 
The stock market may be replete with companies registered for trading, representing a large
number relative to the size of our economy,  but  with a small turnover and a  concentrated
ownership structure. All this is despite the fact that the management of the stock exchange
has done all it could – and even more – to introduce trading and clearing systems that are
among the most advanced in the world.
The  market  for  government  bonds  is  drying  up  a  little  more  each  year  because  of  the
proliferation  of  non-tradable  earmarked  government  bonds,  and  if  nothing  is  done  it  will
gradually die. The market for tradable bonds will dwindle even more rapidly once the switch
(commendable in and of itself) from a pay-as-you-go pension system to a pay-as-you earn
one gains momentum, and especially once the proposal to introduce an obligatory pension
scheme in the present institutional structure is accepted.
Israel's Treasury bill market is paralyzed by the folly of the ceiling on the amount that may be
issued, so that while the market for Treasury bills is one of the most developed in western
money markets, ours is unable to take off, and the spreads between the bank borrowing and
lending rates are higher than they should be.
The market for commercial papers has barely reached lift-off.
The market for mortgages and the financing of other long-term investment has not managed
even to get to the drawing-board.
The banks' control of the provident and mutual funds is as tight as ever, regardless of their
performance.
And on top of all the above, serious distortions were created because of tax regulations that
were introduced at a time when the government was involved in everything, and that really
was a long time ago. Our ability to change these regulations seems to be further away now
than ever.
     The reason why I am bringing all this up here is because monetary policy only begins when the central
bank sets 'its' key interest rate. Shifts in this interest rate should have an impact via the changes  it
causes in the behavior of households and firms. One of the differences between us and the US is that
the Americans are involved in the financial markets to a far greater extent – whether as borrowers or
as investors – than Israelis. A rise in share prices, not to mention in bond prices, means a fall in the
cost of capital, and vice versa. This of course affects both investment and consumption. The result is
that  the  interest-rate  changes  that  are  initiated  by  the  central  bank  have  another  channel  of
transmission  in  the  US  that  does  not  in  effect  exist  in  Israel,  namely,  the  channel  of  the  financial
markets. As you know, the interest rate is one of the factors influencing the financial markets-when
these exist, of course. This additional channel intensifies the impact of interest-rate changes on the
economy, and shorten the lags with which a given interest-rate change affects economic activity.
In Israel, the Bank of Israel has had to conduct its interest-rate policy primarily vis-à-vis the banks, and
even the little that can be done via the capital market cannot be achieved to the full because of the
ceiling that limits Treasury bill issues. It is obvious that a policy conducted in such conditions is far less
effective, and as an instrument the interest rate is more blunt.
A concluding remark
When at some future date you hear that someone has told the Bank of Israel to imitate the actions of
the Fed – of course, only when it reduces the interest rate – I suggest you recall the saying: Israel is
not America. It is no empty phrase, at least as regards interest-rate policy. A lot needs to be done here
before  we  resemble  America,  and  we  are  talking  here  also  about  improving  the  welfare  of  the
consumer – whether individuals or businesses – and this is definitely up to us.
BIS Review 39/2001
3
