David Klein: The opening of the financial markets and the efficiency of Israel’s
macroeconomic policy
Address by Mr  David Klein, Governor of the  Bank of Israel, to the Herzliya Interdisciplinary Center,
Herzliya, 17 May 2001.
 The policy targets and the financial markets
We have become accustomed to examining the reform of the financial markets, which we have been
implementing  at  intervals  for  over  a  decade,  from  the  consumer's  point  of  view:  more  competitive
markets  mean  better  service,  a  higher  return  for  savers,  lower  costs  for  borrowers,  and  narrower
spreads for financial intermediaries.
Those,  however,  are  the  direct  benefits.  There  are  also  indirect  ones,  deriving  from  the  fact  that
developed  financial  markets  make  for  more  efficient  macroeconomic  policy.  It  is  these  that  I  will
address here.
    Fiscal policy
The aim of fiscal policy is to reduce the burden of government debt from its current 95 percent of GDP
to 60 percent of GDP. This is now overshadowed by the restriction embodied in the obligation to issue
earmarked government bonds for the pension funds. Why is this a restriction?
• 
Because the reduction of the debt burden is achieved by diminishing the budget deficit; only
by doing that will it be possible to decrease borrowing by issuing bonds. Since the obligation
to  issue  earmarked  bonds  does  not  depend  on  the  deficit  financing  needs  but  only  on
accrual by the pension funds, which has risen every year, limiting borrowing through issues
of government bonds can be done only by reducing issues of tradable bonds.
In the first half of the 1990s there was a trend change in the composition of long-term saving:
the share of the pension funds increased relative to that of the provident funds. There are
several reasons for that structural change, which has not yet been concluded. These include
fewer  fears  regarding  the  stability  of  the  pension  funds  as  the  old  funds  with  their  large
actuarial  deficits  were  closed  and  new  ones,  which  were  supposed  to  be  actuarially
balanced, were opened, starting in 1995. Another reason was the poor performance of the
provident  funds-which  are  not  entitled  to  get  earmarked  bonds-in  the  transition  to  a  low
inflation  rate  and  in  view  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  stock  market. This  structural  change  in
itself reduces the stock of tradable bonds and enlarges the amount of earmarked bonds.
Moreover, the accrual by the pension funds could rise even further in the future, exceeding
its natural rate of increase, for the following reasons:
A change in the tax regulations which will reduce the benefits of saving in provident funds by
self-employed  persons  (currently  withdrawals  are  possible  after  15  years,  not  only  upon
reaching retirement age, as is the case with wage-earners), and on the other hand, the fact
that since 1995 the pension funds have been opened to self-employed persons.
The reduction of tax benefits for capital saving (a one-off withdrawal upon retirement instead
of the right to a monthly pension) for employed persons, in provident funds and insurance
schemes.
The transition from a pay-as-you-go to a pay-as-you-earn pension scheme.
The introduction of a Compulsory Pension Law.
• 
• 
This problem embodies another one. As is generally known, earmarked bonds are indexed to the CPI.
On the  one hand,  because  of  the  low  inflation  rate  and  declining  demand  for  indexed  bonds,  most
borrowing  by  means  of  tradable  bonds  is  through  unindexed  bonds.  The  result  is  that  the  pension
funds  have  a  monopoly  on  obtaining  indexed  liabilities  from  the  government  –  an  increasingly  rare
asset, yet nonetheless one whose price is not subject to market forces. On the other hand, the crisis
which  has  affected  other  markets  is  being  exacerbated,  the  most  prominent  instances  being  the
BIS Review 40/2001
1
banking system's market for mortgages and indexed loans for financing long-term investments. They
do not have sufficient indexed sources because the accrual in savings schemes and provident funds
has been negative for some time.
Since the purpose of most gross borrowing by the government in a given year is not to finance the
deficit but to recycle bonds that have reached maturity, in the future this recycling will be achieved not
on  a  voluntary  basis  by  issuing  new,  tradable  bonds  but  by  compulsory  borrowing  by  means  of
earmarked bonds. Holders of tradable bonds that have reached maturity will find it difficult to recycle
them  by  investing  in  a  similar  asset.  The  result  will  be  that  the  nontradable  bond  component  of
government debt will grow, while that of tradable bonds will shrink.
In any event, each  year brings us nearer to  the point  where the government  will no longer  need to
issue  tradable  bonds  to  finance  the  deficit,  and  then  to  the  point  where  the  government  will  have
surplus funds since it cannot control the amount of earmarked bonds issued. Even beforehand there
will be a time when things will be right for part of the year, because of the seasonal nature of the deficit
during the year, and this will give rise to fluctuations in yields and an increase in the risk of holding
government bonds.
This process will also fetter the pension funds themselves, since they are required to invest 30 percent
of their portfolio in the market, and part of this is naturally directed to government bonds. Some people
are  against  sending  the  pension  funds  to  the  capital  market  because  of  the  risk  involved,  but  the
prevailing earmarked bonds arrangement is the main reason for the existence of this risk.
Thus, the earmarked bonds arrangement:
• 
Constitutes a growing obstacle to the government's ability to finance the budget deficit in a
rational manner;
Raises the cost of net borrowing to finance the deficit, and hence of debt-servicing, thereby
reducing the government's ability to allocate resources to social and economic objectives;
May bring the government back to being a financial intermediary, because of surplus budget
finance, and we have a wealth of experience of the negative implications of that;
Systematically  destroy  the  market  for  tradable  government  bonds,  the  yields  on  which
constitute a benchmark for determining the bank rate on long-term investments and loans;
Prevents the development of a market for both long- and short-term corporate bonds, which
in  every  worthwhile  stockmarket  is  based  on  the  existence  of  a  developed  market  for
government bonds;
Hampers the chances of the stockmarket, which is based on the possibility of borrowing and
trading in debt instruments as well as in equity;
And hence undermines the economy's ability to grow.
• 
There is no choice but to bring the chapter of earmarked bonds to a close. This arrangement not only
damages the economy but also constitutes a very high barrier to the development and expansion of
the funded pension savings route which, as is known, is itself far from being as widespread in Israel as
it should be.
     Monetary policy
In  August  2000,  for  the  first  time  in  Israel's  history,  the  government  decided  on  a  target  of  price
stability for the economy. This target was defined as between 1 and 3 percent, and was supposed to
come into effect in and after the year 2003.
Three obstacles deriving from the structure of the financial markets currently obstruct the conduct of
monetary policy.
• 
One final stage remains to be implemented in the foreign-currency market. The process of
the liberalization of foreign exchange proceeded along two parallel tracks: gradually reducing
foreign-currency control and gradually making the exchange-rate regime more flexible. The
restriction  on  investment  abroad  or  in  foreign  currency  in  Israel  by  institutional  investors
(provident  and  pension  funds,  and  life  insurance  schemes),  which  currently  stands  at  5
percent  of  their  assets,  is  yet  to  be  removed.  There  is  no  reason  to  delay  this  measure,
2
BIS Review 40/2001
 which  is  required  in  order  to  finally  make  the  the  NIS  fully  convertible.  Concurrently,  it  is
possible to abolish the exchange-rate band. In any event, it will be impossible to defend it,
should  the  need  arise,  and  there  is  no  point  waiting  and  deluding  people  on  that  score,
allowing them to make decisions on the basis of that erroneous assumption.
These changes will not have a dramatic effect on the economy if they are introduced at a
time  when  the  foreign-currency  market  is  not  exceptionally  volatile,  and  they  will  make
monetary policy more efficient. This is because it will not be necessary to make monetary
policy subservient to attaining targets in  the exchange-rate sphere-as  we had to do in the
past-and which could conflict with price stability. Thus, capital flows will be less influenced by
short-term, 'speculative' considerations, and will contribute to Israel's financial stability in the
long term. Long  experience,  and  logic,  have  taught  us  that  speculation  and  shocks  in  the
foreign-currency market are an inevitable by-product of exchange-rate regimes that are not
subject to the discipline of the market.
Another  obstacle  exists  in  the  form  of  the  quantitative  ceiling  imposed  on  the  issue  of
Treasury bills. This ceiling currently obliges us to administer most of our monetary policy vis-
à-vis the banks. Interest-rate changes are introduced via shifts in the money supply, which
are currently caused by changes in the extent of banks' deposits with the Bank of Israel. If
we  were  to  introduce  these  changes  in  the  capital  market  by  changing  the  quantity  of
Treasury  bills  we  would  expand  the  market  markedly,  strengthen  the  substitutes  for  the
public's deposits with banks and bank credit, and contribute to reducing the spread between
the borrowing and lending rates.
The spread would narrow not only because of the higher borrowing rate but also because of
the  lower  lending  rate.  A  deep  and  liquid  market  for  Treasury  bills  will  make  it  easier  to
create a parallel market for commercial papers, which constitutes a substitute for borrowers
for short-term bank credit.
A third obstacle is endemic in the absence of any financial intermediation outside the banks.
The reference here is to financial services involved in raising short- and long-term capital,
whether  on  a  one-off  basis  or  in  the  framework  of  investment  funds;  the  management  of
asset and liabilities portfolios for individuals or firms, and intermediation in the capital market-
all  of  them  outside  the  banking  system.  In  order  to  create  significant  nonbanking
intermediation  it  is  necessary  to  return  to  the  problem  of  the  current  concentration  of  the
financial services, and introduce the measures we have mentioned on various occasions for
dispersing  the  foci  of  financial  power  in  Israel's  economy.  Because  of  the  process  of
globalization  that  Israel  is  currently  undergoing,  this  involves  building  cooperation  with
international financial institutions rather than reducing the existing size of commercial banks.
Why  would  this  make  monetary  policy  more  efficient?  Because  the  aim  of  monetary  policy  is  to
influence 
financial
intermediation enables the interest rate to have a direct effect, not only via the banks, on the behavior
of  savers  and  borrowers.  A  better  balance  between  banking  and  nonbanking  intermediation  also
improves management by the business sector, because the public, which provides firms with capital
sources via the capital market, has long-term considerations, while the banks, which provide firms with
loans, have short-term ones. The combined outcome is that monetary policy is provided with another
channel  of  influence,  which  could  produce  more  rapid  results  than  in  a  situation  where  it  operates
solely  via  the  banking  channel.  This  promotes  lower  fluctuations  in  the  interest  rate  and  greater
stability  in  the  financial  markets.  This  stability  is  one  of  the  major  preconditions  for  sustainable
economic growth.
the  public's  economic  decisions.  The  existence  of  developed  nonbank 
 Conclusion
Opening  the  financial  markets  is  necessary  for  the  benefit  of  both  the  individual  and  the  business
sector, not only because of the advantages ensuing from a more competitive market. This policy also
enables more efficient use to be made of policy instruments, and everyone benefits from that. Note in
this context that the process of the structural change of the financial markets, only part of which has
been mentioned here, has come to an almost complete halt. The reasons for this should be examined,
the  necessary  conclusions  drawn,  and  steps  taken  to  return  to  the  implementation  of  the  changes
required for a modern country that wishes to integrate in the global economy.
BIS Review 40/2001
3
