Willem  F  Duisenberg:  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union:  a  success
story
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
annual conference of the Ifo Institute, Munich, 26 June 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great honour for me to be invited to the annual conference of the Ifo Institute in Munich. The Ifo
Institute  is  among  the  most  renowned  economic  research  institutes  in  Germany.  In  addition  to
participating in the production of the joint spring and autumn reports by German economic research
institutes,  it  also  plays  a  major  role  for  the  financial  markets  in  compiling  economic  analyses,
particularly  on  account  of  its  Ifo  Business  Climate  Index.  Moreover,  the  Ifo  Institute,  through  its
academic research on a number of current economic policy issues, makes a valuable contribution to
discussions on economic polices.
Introduction
1.
"European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union:  a  success  story"  -  many  of  you  might  ask  whether  an
assessment of this can be made at such an early stage. I know that in Germany in particular, many
citizens  view  the  changeover  from  the  Deutsche  Mark  to  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  with  much
scepticism. In my opinion, it is more a question of the loss of something which is well-established, i.e.
the Deutsche Mark, than of any real concerns about the new currency. This sort of reaction is very
human.  Nevertheless,  holding  onto  something  which  is  well-established  can  hinder  progress  and
change which in themselves can bring many advantages. The participants in European Economic and
Monetary Union (EMU) have already come a long way and have overcome a number of difficulties.
The cash changeover simply completes this process, which began at the beginning of 1999 with the
start of Stage Three of EMU. It was mainly on account of technical reasons that the euro banknotes
and coins could not be introduced simultaneously at the start of Stage Three of EMU at the beginning
of  1999.  Despite  this,  the  national  currencies  of  the  Member  States  of  EMU  have  only  been
representing denominations of euro since then. The euro is therefore already "OUR money".
I should like to refer briefly to the period before the introduction of the single currency at the beginning
of 1999. Of course, we should not talk only of the past. The monetary policy of the European Central
Bank (ECB) is after all forward-looking and thus I shall take a forward-looking stance myself. Following
a brief review of the history of EMU, I should like to explain the ECB's assessment of the monetary
and economic situation. In accordance with the ECB's strategy, I shall use the two-pillar strategy as
the basis for my explanations and analyse potential risks to price stability. In this respect, I should like
to  elaborate  on  one  of  the  most  important  issues  this  year  and  next  year  and  that  is  the  cash
changeover.
Milestones on the path towards European Economic and Monetary Union
2.
The major plan to establish European Economic and Monetary Union was conceived over thirty years
ago.  In  1970  the  so-called  Werner  plan  was  drawn  up  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  former
Luxembourg Prime Minister, Pierre Werner. It was only in the mid-1980s, however, that the  idea of
European Economic and Monetary Union found sufficient political support and was able to gradually
make further concrete progress in the following years. The Single European Act of 1986 is a milestone
on the path towards a single European market. The latter is characterised by the free movement of
goods, services, labour and capital. At the end of the 1980s, the Delors report, which was drawn up
under the chairmanship of the then President of the European Commission, Jacques Delors, laid the
foundations  for  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency.  In  this  respect,  a  three  stage  process  was
envisaged together with the establishment of a European Central Bank with the primary objective of
maintaining price stability. The first stage of EMU began on 1 July 1990 with the free movement of
capital  between  most  of  the  Member  States.  This  marked  an  important  step  towards  the  efficient
allocation  of  capital  within  the  European  Union.  However,  the  exchange  rate  risk  remained  an
important determining factor in the decisions of investors.
BIS Review 58/2001
1
When  looking  back  over  the  process  towards  a  single  European  currency,  the  difficulties  and
temporary setbacks should not be forgotten, including, in particular, the EMS crisis in the autumn of
1992. Less than a year later, following renewed volatility in the EMS, the fluctuation margins for the
bilateral  EMS  central  rates  were  widened  to  +/-  15%  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  financial  market
speculation. Both of these events can be regarded as examples of a number of tests by the financial
markets to see how serious the Member States really were on the issue of integration.
In  November  1993,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  came  into  effect  following  the  ratification  by  the  Member
States. The Treaty laid down the convergence criteria which were a prerequisite for joining EMU. On 1
January  1994,  at  the  beginning  of  Stage  Two  of  EMU,  the  European  Monetary  Institute  (EMI)  was
established.  The  latter  was  given  the  task,  as  the  forerunner  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  of
preparing  the  framework  in  which  the  ECB,  within  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),
was to assume responsibility for monetary policy at the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  on  1  January
1999. The period prior to the start of Stage Three of EMU was characterised by the unprecedented
convergence of short and long-term interest rates, the convergence of inflation rates, the reduction in
the  general  government  budget  deficits  and  debt  ratios  as  well  as  relatively  stable  exchange  rates
between the countries joining EMU.
Given the convergence of long-term interest rates towards a relatively low level, market participants
gave  the  ECB  a  vote  of  confidence  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU.  Moreover,  inflationary
expectations have remained low since the beginning of Stage Three of EMU. I shall elaborate on this
issue  later  on  in  my  speech.  This  shows  that  the  ECB  has  achieved  high  credibility  in  terms  of  its
primary objective of maintaining price stability. I should now like to explain the economic and monetary
developments  in  the  euro  area  and  the  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  context  of  the  two-pillar
strategy.
3.
The first pillar of the ECB's strategy - monetary developments give grounds for a
favourable outlook for price stability
As you know, the ECB assigns a prominent role to monetary developments in the euro area within the
context of its monetary policy strategy. Empirical evidence of monetary developments in the euro area
points towards a stable relationship between demand for the broad monetary aggregate M3 and price
developments as well as towards good leading indicator properties of M3 growth for inflation over the
medium term.
The ECB does not pursue monetary targeting, instead, it has set a reference value for the growth of
the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  This  reference  value  is  derived  on  the
basis  of  the  Eurosystem's  definition  of  price  stability,  i.e.  an  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%  compared  with  the  previous  year  and
assumptions for trend potential output growth of between 2% and 21/2% as well as for a trend decline
in velocity of M3 of between 1/2% and 1% per annum.
The reference value for M3 constitutes the  anchor for the analysis and communication of monetary
developments in the euro area. The monetary analysis is, however, not restricted to a comparison of
the current growth in M3  with the reference  value, rather it incorporates a much broader  approach.
Because, in order to be able to interpret monetary developments accurately, it is crucial to know the
precise  reasons  for  these  developments.  This  means  that,  in  addition  to  the  broad  monetary
aggregate  M3,  the  individual  components  of  M3  and  the  counterparts  to  money,  in  particular  the
dynamics of loans to the private sector, must be analysed in respect  of  their  implications  for  future
price developments. Allow me to briefly explain why a detailed analysis of the forces behind monetary
developments is so important.
Not  every  increase  in  M3  growth  in  excess  of  potential  growth  has  an  effect  on  consumption  and
hence, necessarily poses a threat to price stability. Greater dynamics in monetary developments can,
particularly in the short term, be attributable to portfolio movements for example, which are temporary
and therefore tend not to be a problem for inflationary developments. This was probably the case in
the  first  few  months  of  2001  when  the  uncertainty  on  the  stock  markets  temporarily  increased  the
attractiveness of short-term secure assets. The aim of the analysis must, therefore, be  to  trace  the
growth in M3 back to its underlying factors in order to assess the extent to which some components of
the monetary developments are not relevant for future domestic price developments.
The revisions to M3, which the ECB made in its publication of monetary data for April, should also be
considered in this light. The ECB has recently come into the position to indicate the extent to which
2
BIS Review 58/2001
money  market  fund  shares/units  are  held  by  non-euro  area  residents  and  to  exclude  these
shares/units from M3. All national central banks (NCBs) in the euro area now regularly report data on
the money market fund share/unit holdings of non-euro area residents in accordance with the general
reporting obligations in the context of money and banking statistics. From a conceptual point of view,
M3 should only capture the money holdings of households and firms located in the euro area. Above
all,  these  have  close  links  with  domestic  private  consumption  and  to  domestic  price  developments.
The money holdings by non-residents are, by contrast, likely to be used more for portfolio purposes.
These  revisions  should  bring  back  the  monetary  aggregate  M3  closer  to  its  theoretical  concept,
thereby  tending  to  strengthen  the  information  content  of  M3  for  domestic  price  developments.
Purchases of money market fund shares/units by non-euro area residents increased following the start
of Stage Three of EMU, whereas previously they had been of very little importance. The demand for
short-term, high-quality instruments was likely stimulated, on the one hand, by structural factors such
as, fiscal consolidation in most of the industrial countries and the resulting decline in the issuance of
government debt securities, and on the other, by economic factors such as the flattening of the yield
curve.
One further correction to the M3 statistics still needs to be made. To date, only provisional data are
available  on  purchases  of  money  market  paper  and  of  short-term  debt  securities  by  non-euro  area
residents.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  revised  M3  figures  should  be  published  taking  full  account  of
negotiable instruments held by non-euro area residents.
One of the important general challenges of producing and interpreting statistics is to maximise their
economic content. The revision of the monetary statistics in order to take into account purchases of
negotiable  instruments  by  non-euro  area  residents  is  a  further  step  in  this  direction.  The  monetary
statistics are among the most advanced statistics available for the euro area. They are based  on a
fully  harmonised  consolidated  balance  sheet  and  on 
fully  harmonised  money-issuing  and
money-holding sectors, as well as on harmonised financial instruments. In view of their close links with
inflationary  developments  and  their  good  leading  indicator  properties  for  future  inflation,  monetary
developments must also play a prominent role in the monetary policy strategy of the ECB in the future.
Since the second quarter of 2000, growth in M3 has been declining mainly on account of the increase
in  the  short-term  interest  rates.  Adjusted  for  the  money  market  fund  shares/units  held  by  non-euro
area residents, M3 grew at an annual rate of around 41/2% in the first four months of 2001. If current
data on purchases of money market paper and short-term debt securities of non-euro area residents
are also taken into account, the annual rate of growth of M3 over recent months has probably been
slightly below the reference value for M3. Overall, monetary developments therefore point towards a
favourable outlook for the medium-term maintenance of price stability.
Growth of credit to the private sector in the euro area has increased relatively strongly since the start
of Stage Three of EMU. In particular in 2000, some of the credit demand can, however, be attributed
to the financing needs in the context of mergers and acquisitions, partly outside the euro area, and to
the  financing  of  UMTS  licences.  These  factors,  however,  are  not  likely  to  affect  domestic  price
developments. In this respect, the dynamics of loans to the private sector in the euro area also support
the outlook of monetary developments for future price developments.
4.
The second pillar of the ECB strategy - real GDP growth around the level of trend
potential growth
I should now like to talk about the real economic situation. The analysis under the second pillar of the
ECB's monetary strategy also confirms that the current level of key interest rates remains appropriate
to ensure that the euro area economy will be able to maintain price stability in the medium term.
Macroeconomic projections of developments in the euro area have just recently been published in the
June Monthly Bulletin  by  the experts of the Eurosystem.  As  announced  last  year  and  conducted  in
December 2000 for the first time, these projections are produced twice a year by the experts from the
national central banks of the euro area Member States in collaboration with the experts from the ECB.
They serve as input for the assessment of economic developments and of the risks to price stability
conducted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  within  the  framework  of  the  second  pillar  of  the
monetary policy strategy of the ECB.
When interpreting these projections, it should always be taken into account that they are based on a
set  of  technical  assumptions  and  that  therefore  they  are  not  "unconditional".  The  projections  are
produced, for example, on the basis of unchanged short-term interest rates and unchanged bilateral
BIS Review 58/2001
3
euro  exchange  rates.  The  projections  by  Eurosystem  experts  are  therefore  "conditional"  and  not
directly  comparable  with  the  "unconditional"  projections  published  by  other  institutions  such  as  the
European Commission, the IMF and the OECD, for example. Moreover, the projections are published
in the form of ranges, in order  to take account of the  degree  of  uncertainty.  The  ranges  reflect  the
average  forecast  error  from  previous  periods  and  therefore  differ  between  each  of  the  projected
variables and the projection horizon.
Compared  with  December  2000,  growth  expectations  for  2000  and  2001  have  been  reduced.  It  is
probable  that  in  2001  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  will  decline  as  compared  with  the  strong
increase observed in 2000, before recovering slightly in 2002. Overall, this year and next year it will
broadly be in line with trend potential growth for the euro area. At the same time, HICP inflation will
probably be somewhat higher in 2000 than was expected at the end of last year. The expectation that
inflation  will  fall  in  2001  and  will  remain  below  2%  in  2002,  has,  however,  remained  unchanged,
meaning that the ECB will meet its objective of maintaining price stability in the medium term.
I should now like to go into some detail on the prospects for growth in the euro area. Eurostats first
estimate of the growth of real GDP in the first quarter of 2001 has confirmed that economic growth in
the euro area has moderated since the second half of 2000. Moreover, industrial production declined
further  in  April.  The  sentiment  indicators  available  for  the  euro  area  also  confirm  weaker  economic
growth.  The  surveys  provided  to  assess  the  situation  and  prospects  for  the  economy  constitute  a
valuable  source  of  information  for  an  up-to-date  economic  analysis.  You  also  make  a  valuable
contribution  towards  an  up-to-date  assessment  of  economic  developments  in  Germany  with  the
production  of  your  Ifo  Business  Climate  Index.  In  this  context,  it  should  be  emphasised  that  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  adopts  an  area-wide  perspective  in  its  assessment  of  economic
conditions and the outlook for price stability.
It is likely that during the course of the year the decline in global economic growth will show up to a
somewhat larger extent than has been the case up until now in net export developments. While global
trade (excluding the euro area) increased last  year by around 12%, it will probably only rise by just
under  6%  this  year  according  to  the  Eurosystem's  projections.  This  will  have  a  negative  impact  on
export prospects for the euro area. While growth in export (including intra-trade) rose at double-digit
rates last year, growth rates for the current year, on the basis of an unchanged euro exchange rate,
are  expected  to  lie  somewhere  between  5%  and  just  under  8%.  The  contribution  of  net  exports  to
GDP growth should, therefore, decline considerably compared with the previous year and be largely
neutral in the current year.
As  illustrated  by  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  the  first  quarter  of  2001,  subdued  export
prospects  can  put  pressure  on  domestic  demand  and  particularly  on  investment.  Despite  these
negative  factors  one  should  not,  however,  forget  the  positive  factors  which  contribute  towards  a
stabilisation  of  domestic  demand.  These  factors  include  the  still  favourable  financing  conditions  for
investment  and  consumption  and  a  slight  further  increase  in  employment  in  the  euro  area.
Furthermore, there are no fundamental economic imbalances, particularly in respect of the personal
savings ratio, which could put pressure on consumption in the euro area.
Against this background, consumer confidence in the euro area has been relatively robust over recent
months. Despite the slightly weaker assessment of the general economic situation in the latest survey
in May, consumer confidence in the euro area is still at an historically high level. In this respect, these
positive factors should make a valuable contribution towards ensuring that growth remains broadly in
line with its potential.
I should now like to elaborate on price developments this year and next year. Following an average
annual HICP inflation rate of 2.3% in the euro area last year, temporary pressures are likely to cause
inflation  to  be  above  2%  for  a  longer  period  of  time  than  was  expected  at  the  end  of  2000  by  all
institutions.  Strain factors and  easing factors are battling against each  other  at  the  same  time.  The
heavy impact of energy price developments should ease considerably this year. For the time being at
least, the renewed increase in energy prices in the second quarter of the year has delayed the fall in
the inflation rate in the euro area. In addition, the increase in food prices as a result of BSE and the
outbreak  of  foot-and-mouth  disease  in  some  of  the  Member  States  have  had  an  impact  on
developments in the HICP. Furthermore, the increase in some of the administered prices and indirect
taxation in some of the countries of the euro area have caused the inflation rate to rise over the past
few months. These factors should, however, only have a temporary effect on inflation in the euro area.
Lower economic growth also seems to point to a decline in the pressure on the price level.
4
BIS Review 58/2001
In spite of the fact that these factors will only have a temporary effect on price developments, caution
is warranted. Above all, it is important that an inflation rate of over 2% over a long period of time does
not  lead  to  higher  wage  demands.  Until  now,  wage  developments  in  the  euro  area  have  been
relatively moderate. Important wage negotiations will, however, take place in the second half of 2001
and in 2002. Further developments in wages will therefore be closely monitored by the ECB. Hence,
we will continue to remain vigilant.
Despite the long period of time in which inflation has stood above 2%, inflation expectations have so
far hardly changed  in  the euro  area. The difference between the  nominal  French  government  bond
yields and the corresponding real yields on French index-linked government bonds can be used as an
approximation  for  measuring  inflationary  expectations.  This  so-called  break-even  inflation  rate  has
remained  below  2%  for  ten-year  government  bonds  since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  and
currently stands at around the average level seen in 2000. This implies that the financial markets are
convinced that the ECB will be able to keep inflation in the euro area below 2% in the medium term.
This  is  a  success  for  monetary  policy,  particularly  during  such  difficult  times  in  which  external
economic influences and further temporary factors are having  a transitory impact on HICP inflation.
The  relatively  low  long-term  interest  rates  arising  from  low  inflation  rate  expectations  and  hence
favourable financing conditions are the most valuable contribution which monetary policy can possibly
make to achieving sustainable and sound growth prospects in the euro area.
In addition to monetary policy and the responsible behaviour on the part of the social partners, fiscal
policy is also responsible for ensuring sound long-term growth. In order to achieve this, fiscal policy
must continue the process of consolidation as laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the
national  stability  programmes.  At  the  same  time,  fiscal  policy  must  create  an  attractive  economic
environment for business investment and for the supply and demand of labour. In this respect, most
national governments of the euro area have already taken steps in the right direction. Lower tax rates
on businesses and households is, in this respect, very welcome. However,  this reduction  in the tax
rates  requires  the  appropriate  adjustments  to  be  made  in  order  to  meet  the  objectives  of  fiscal
consolidation, for example with the expansion of tax bases or cuts on the expenditure side. Until now
this has not taken place to a sufficient extent. The reduction in the expenditure ratios over the past few
years  in  the  euro  area  has,  above  all,  been  achieved  through  lower  interest  payments  and  lower
expenditure  on  unemployment  benefits  in  the  course  of  the  strong  expansion  of  the  economy.
Structural spending cuts must be more ambitious in order to meet the objective of sustainable fiscal
consolidation.
The budget deficit in the euro area will probably rise slightly in 2001, excluding the proceeds from the
sales of UMTS licences last year. This would mean that some of the euro area Member States may
not  be  able  to  meet  their  fiscal  consolidation  objectives  for  the  current  year,  despite  the  fact  that
economic growth in the euro area will probably be broadly in line with its potential. In order to achieve
a  sound  and  sustainable  fiscal  position,  however,  the  euro  area  Member  States  are  required  to
continue their fiscal consolidation efforts as laid down in the medium-term fiscal plans in accordance
with the Stability and Growth Pact.
Other areas in which more effort needs to be made by the national governments, in particular in the
large euro area Member States, include the goods and labour markets. Also in these areas, the first
steps in the right direction have been taken. The deregulation of the goods markets must, however, be
expedited in order to increase competition and to strengthen the growth of the economy. This is the
only way to increase the long-term growth potential in the euro area. With regard to labour markets,
unemployment has fallen considerably over the past few  years to stand  at 8.3% in April 2001. The
number of unemployed has declined by more than one million compared with April of last year, even
though,  most  recently,  the  decline  in  unemployment  has  actually  decreased  slightly  in  seasonally
adjusted terms. An unemployment figure of 8.3% is, however, much too high. Further incentives need
to  be  made  in  respect  of  the  demand  for  and  the  taking-up  of  employment.  This  requires  not  only
further reforms to the tax systems, but in particular also to the social security systems.
The implications of the euro cash changeover
5.
Finally, I should  like to talk about an issue  which, until the beginning  of next  year,  will be the focal
point: the euro cash changeover. By 1 January 2002, 14.25 billion euro banknotes and 50 billion coins
will be produced for the 12 Member States of the euro area. The introduction of the banknotes and
coins  is  an  enormous  logistical  challenge.  As  you  know,  the  ECB  has,  therefore,  decided  that  the
frontloading of euro banknotes and coins to credit institutions in the euro area and the sub-frontloading
BIS Review 58/2001
5
of euro banknotes and coins by credit institutions under special conditions to professional cash users
can begin on 1 September this year.
Owing to its monetary nature, the euro cash changeover does not only present a logistical challenge,
but  also  affects  the  economic  analysis  within  the  framework  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the
ECB.
A visible sign of the potential impact of the cash changeover on monetary developments is the annual
rate of growth of currency in circulation which has been negative since the end of last year to stand at
-2.9% in April. Preparations by euro-area residents for the cash changeover could be a factor in these
developments. It is possible that this factor will become even more important during the course of the
year, when a growing number of the population pays in its liquid reserves to the banks, which are not
directly  needed  as  cash  on  hand.  The  effect  of  these  transactions  on  overall  developments  in  M3
should, however, be relatively minor, as a large part of the liquid reserves, which is held as cash on
hand, should  be  invested  in  deposits  which  are  also  included  in  M3.  If  this  is  the  case,  M3  growth
should largely remain unaffected.
Not  only  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area,  but  also  non-euro  area  residents  with  cash  holdings  in  the
current  national  currencies  of  the  euro  area  countries  will  prepare  themselves  for  the  cash
changeover.  In  particular,  this  affects  inhabitants  from  central  and  eastern  Europe  using  Deutsche
Mark banknotes in parallel with their respective national currencies. According to estimates made by
the Deutsche Bundesbank, Deutsche  Mark holdings abroad in the mid-1990s accounted for around
30% to 40% of the German currency in circulation (see Franz Seitz: The circulation of the Deutsche
Mark abroad, Discussion Paper 1/95, Deutsche Bundesbank, May 1995). That is equivalent to around
EUR 45 billion, which could potentially flow back into the euro area, presuming that the amount has
remained unchanged since then.
According to all available sources, the actual flowback of cash holdings from abroad should, however,
be a lot lower. Owing to its geographical proximity and the close trade links with central and eastern
Europe,  the  Deutsche  Mark  is  used  in  many  countries  not  only  as  a  store  of  value  but  also  as  a
transaction currency. Therefore, it is unlikely that the demand for the Deutsche Mark will be completely
replaced by a demand for other non-euro area currencies. In addition to this, the exchange of national
currencies  of  the  euro  area  for  euro  will  equally  be  possible  outside  of  the  euro  area  and  it  will
probably also be used to a large extent by the population. It is difficult to speculate over the behaviour
of the informal side of the economy. At the same time, however, it should not be forgotten that we are
talking about a relatively small part of the economy, even though this part of the economy uses cash
to a relatively large extent. In addition, empirical findings have, to date, given no hard evidence of any
significant  flowback  of  Deutsche  Mark  banknotes  from  abroad.  In  the  light  of  this,  it  is  unlikely  that
there will be any major effects on the growth of M3 or any significant impact on the exchange rate of
the euro as a result of the euro cash changeover.
In  addition,  the  ECB  will  also  closely  monitor  the  potential  price  risks  relating  to  the  euro  cash
changeover. In principle, it cannot be ruled out that businesses will try to use the changeover to the
euro in order to introduce price increases. This would temporarily affect inflationary developments in
the euro area. In this respect, the use of the dual price display method for a while will be of benefit for
the consumers, as it will allow them to make a direct comparison between the prices in their respective
national  denomination  of  the  euro  with  the  euro.  Against  this  background,  the  ECB  appeals  to  the
consumers  to  be  vigilant  in  respect  of  possible  price  increases  as  a  result  of  the  euro  cash
changeover.
It should not be forgotten, however, that the conversion of prices in the former national currencies of
the euro area into euro can sometimes lead to favourable rounding effects from the point of view of
psychological price setting. In addition, hard competition in the retail sector will not make it possible for
price increases to be introduced easily. Comparisons with similar conversions in the past, such as the
introduction of the decimal system in the United Kingdom at the beginning of the 1970s or the abolition
of the cent in the Netherlands in 1983 show, above all, that the effect on price levels was generally
negligible.  Finally,  many  euro  area  Member  States  have  intensified  the  monitoring  of  prices.  Their
governments have also guaranteed that overall, the general government will, in the context of the euro
conversion, waive any receipts arising from any fees and charges levied by it and convert prices in a
neutral manner or smoothed  in favour  of  the  consumer.  Overall,  possible  short-term  price  and  cost
burdens should, therefore, be seen against longer-term favourable price effects as a result of lower
transaction  costs  and  greater  price  transparency  in  the  euro  area. Without  a  doubt,  however,  price
developments relating to the euro cash changeover will need to be closely monitored over the coming
6
BIS Review 58/2001
months by all participants, including the general government and consumers and last but not least the
ECB.
Conclusion
6.
You can be certain that by maintaining price stability in the euro area, monetary policy will continue to
do its very best to contribute towards creating an attractive location, ensuring sound economic growth
and prosperity for the population. I am confident that if fiscal policy and the social partners also make
their contribution, the longer-term prospects for the euro area will be favourable and the euro area will
become  an  increasingly  attractive  and  dynamic  location.  I  have  no  doubts  that  under  such
circumstances the success of EMU in the past shall continue into the future. I say this in view also of
the enlargement of the European Union towards central and eastern Europe. Major reforms in the EU
are  needed  in  order  to  achieve  further  integration.  The  fact  that  further  European  integration
constitutes a very positive growth potential by enhancing competition and as the result of the interplay
of forces should not, however, be overlooked. I should like to refer back to my opening lines: holding
onto something which is well-established can hinder progress and change which in themselves can
bring  many  advantages.  This  applies  not  only  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro  but  also  to  the
enlargement of the European Union.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 58/2001
7
