David Klein: Israel’s macro economic policy and the European standards
Speech  by  Mr  David  Klein,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  for  the  Euro  Conference,  Tel  Aviv,
4 September 2001.
 Israel is an open economy, more than many other countries in the world. A few indicators tell the story:
- 
- 
The share of exports plus imports, relatively to GDP, is almost 100%;
The stock of Israeli assets, shares and loans, private and public, held by foreigners, amounts
to US $130 billion - more than our GDP;
The stock of foreign assets, shares and loans, held by Israel’s residents, amounts to some
US $65 billion.
Exchange  controls  have  been  almost  fully  removed  and  the  exchange  rate  is  freely
determined in a growing interbank foreign currency market;
Israel is party to bilateral and multilateral international agreements, with the US, the IMF, the
EU, and the WTO, committing the economy to open trade in goods and services and open
capital account.
   This background is, of course, not accidental. Economic thinking in Israel was very much influenced, in
the last decades, by the agenda of the more developed industrial economies. Early on we realized that
free  trade  agreements  and  low  custom  duties,  although  painful  in  the  short-run,  are  a  necessary
condition for sustainable growth of a small economy like that of Israel. This state of affairs is taken
to-day as given and nobody contemplates seriously protecting Israeli industry from foreign competition
by tariff and non-tariff barriers, as we used to do in the past.
 Nevertheless, there is still a bridge that we have not completely crossed. We already understand that
to get integrated with the world economy we have to follow some rules. Paramount among them are
Maastricht-like criteria relating to fiscal discipline, public debt and  price stability. However, since  we
are not a member of the EU, and not even one of the accession countries that wait to join in, there is
no external pressure to abide by these rules. Hence, we have to do it on our own, which turns out to
be a rough process.
The major hurdle to-day is fiscal discipline. The essence of this rule, as is well known, is to limit the
general government deficit in order to reach a reasonable level of public debt ratio to GDP. The public
debt ratio of Israel is still high, above 90%, although it was a lot higher before we embarked on this
road. This means that we cannot pause, and certainly not change direction, in our attempt to maintain
a  low  deficit.  Raising  the  deficit  is  not  an  option,  especially  because  our  public  spending  level  is
already one of the highest,  if not the  highest,  in the  world. Our estimate is that  in the current  year,
2001, our ratio of public spending to GDP amounts to 54%, compared to an average of 42% in 20 of
the OECD countries, where all of the individual countries ratio are lower than ours.
So  what  can  the  government  do,  given  the  current  slowdown,  to  help  the  economy  get  out  of  the
recession? The only viable option is to change the composition of spending so that growth-enhancing
expenditures  will  get  priority.  Government  investment  in  infrastructure,  for  example,  ought  to  get
precedence over government programs to support those  who  are not  working. This does not mean
that these programs should be scrapped altogether. But it does mean that they should be refocused.
The question should not be how the state can help those who are not working to maintain a modest
standard of living, but rather how the state can help them join the labor force.
Another  example,  often  quoted,  relates  to  the  efficiency  of  our  public  education  programs.
International comparisons indicate that, in some instances, we get less for our money, compared with
other countries. Furthermore, we still grapple with the question whether, and to what extent, there is
room  for  private  sharing  of  educational  expenses  -  not  necessarily  to  save  public  money  but,  for
example, to focus more on education in development towns.
BIS Review 79/2001
1
These  are  only  some  aspects  of  fiscal  discipline  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  fiscal  consolidation.
They serve to illustrate why it seems, sometimes, easier to bypass the need to be more efficient, and
just increase overall government spending and the deficit.
   A  good  reason  to  resist  the  temptation  to  give  up  fiscal  discipline  is  its  implications  for  financial
markets:
- 
The first, and most immediate, effect of increased deficit is an increase in the interest rate on
government instruments to finance the deficit. This has already started to take place in the
last few months. The outcome holds not only for the increase in public debt, but also for that
part of the debt that needs recycling every year. Interest payments take already some 15%
of  the  government  current  resources,  and  are  larger  than  the  education  budget  and  very
much larger than government investments.
The increased interest on government instruments reverberates to private ones. This is the
second  effect.  We  know  that  the  yield  on  government  bonds  serves  as  a  benchmark  for
pricing long-term loans, like mortgages. The increased deficit level in the current year casts
already some doubts about the future trend of the cost of mortgages. Another example has
to  do  with  the  government  initiative  to  commission  private  entrepreneurs  to  invest  in
infrastructure  (the  so-called  P.F.I.).  These  will  need  capital  resources,  or  long-term  loans,
and  they  will  be  priced  based  on  the  yield  on  government  securities.  Hence,  increased
budget  deficit  will  increase  the  cost  of  capital  also  for  privately  financed  long-term
investments.
The  third  effect  is  on  inflation  and/or  on  the  balance  of  payments.  It  takes  more  time  to
materialize, but it is a certain outcome. We went through such a period in the middle of the
last  decade  where,  following  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy  in  the  first  half  of  the  decade,
supported by an expansionary monetary policy, we got a large and non-sustainable deficit in
the balance of payments and increasing inflation. To avert crisis, we had to back off and the
economy  slowed  down.  This  is  why  it  is  so  important  that  the  government  added  to  its
decision, to increase the deficit in 2002, a commitment to lower it in the three consecutive
years. The only question now is whether the markets will believe.
If  the  credibility  of  the  government  is  in  doubt,  we  will  get  the  fourth  effect  of  a  higher
government  deficit,  this  time  in  the  foreign  currency  market.  We  often  note  the  relative
stability  of  this  market,  despite  the  decline  of  long-term  capital  inflows  and  the  regional
tension. But we should not overlook the factors that hold the balance in this market:
On the  one hand  we have foreign investors who started, in  recent  months,  to  buy  foreign
currency on a relatively large scale, apparently to hedge their exposure to the shekel, due to
their long-term investments in Israel. The timing may reflect a concern lest the stability of the
currency will be impaired due to the rising military tension.
This  added  demand  for  foreign  currency  is  met  by  supply  of  Israelis,  mainly  from  the
business  sector.  They  sell  foreign  currency,  in  the  spot  and  future  markets,  that  they  get
either  from  their  export  receipts,  or  from  foreign  currency  loans,  or  from  drawing  on  their
foreign  currency  deposits  in  Israel  or  abroad.  It  seems  clear  that  Israelis  who  sell  foreign
currency have more faith in the stability of the shekel than their foreign counterparts. This is
what keeps the market in a relative balance.
Here is where the credibility of the government enters:
- 
In the eyes of the Israelis - if their trust in the government’s ability to maintain fiscal control
will  be  shaken;  and  if  they  will  loose  their  confidence  that  the  government  is  indeed
committed  to  price  stability  -  they  will  draw  the  conclusions.  The  relative  balance  in  the
foreign currency market will be replaced by excess demand.
From  similar  episodes  we  know  that  it  is  the  domestic  sector  that  reacts  first,  but  that
foreigners follow suite. Right now they just reduce their domestic currency risk. The situation
does not justify going beyond that, although foreigners have reduced some of their traded
portfolio in Israel.
    On  the  wayside  stand  foreign  analysts  and  rating  agencies.  They  publish  newsletters,  interview
policymakers, collect data and offer their considered view to their customers and the public. We know
2
BIS Review 79/2001
their  agenda:  fiscal  discipline,  price  stability,  low  public  debt,  stable  financial  system,  structural
reforms. They are not very good in seeing the future, but they are very quick to join the party in its
early  phases.  For  them  too,  perhaps  especially  for  them,  the  credibility  of  the  government  is
all-important.
 Hence,  a  government  that  starts  by  raising  the  deficit,  especially  after  a  year  where  the  deficit  is
expected to be larger than planned, is already on an inferior ground and has to do more to convince
the public that its commitment, to reduce the deficit in the following years, is credible. What can it do?
The  first  thing  is  to  confine  the  increased  level  of  spending  to  investment,  put  a  lid  on  current
expenditures,  and  show  it  explicitly.  The  government  ought  to  ratify  not  only  the  ceiling  on  total
spending for 2002, but also its breakdown to current and capital expenditure, and present the figures
in comparison to the estimated figures for 2001. It is  one thing  to borrow more for investment, and
completely another - to borrow more to finance current spending, even if it is called teachers’ salaries,
hospitals’  maintenance  and  poverty  reduction  programs.  The  approved  capital  spending  aggregate
ought  to  be  accompanied  with  a  list  of  projects  and  time-table  for  their  implementation.  Finally  the
government ought to discuss, and publish to the public, a quarterly report on the budget execution,
compared to its plan.
The  second  thing  is  to  make  absolutely  clear  that  the  government  is  committed  to  price  stability.
Hence:
- 
If somebody says that short-term interest should be reduced, he should also add: provided
that it does not undermine price stability;
If somebody says that we should follow in the footsteps of the US central bank that reduced
interest rates in 2001, he should also quote the Fed’s emphasis that, given the conditions in
the U.S economy, these interest-rate reductions are consistent with price stability;
And if somebody says that price stability is important and so are growth and employment, he
should also explain that if we have more than one target we should employ more than one
instrument,  and  we  should  not  expect  to  attain  all  targets  using  one  instrument.  Partial
statements  may  convey  the  message  that  an  interest  rate  reduction  is  an  end  to  itself,
regardless  of  the  consequences,  thus  increasing  skepticism  regarding  the  intention  of
government policy. But clear statements are not enough. The government should strengthen
the ability of the Bank of Israel to maintain price stability and go on with the reform required
to change the structure of the domestic financial markets. The main elements of the reform
are well known:
Removing  the  obstacles  preventing  the  creation  of  a  non-bank  money  market,  that  will
include  short-term  bills  (Makam),  commercial  papers,  certificates  of  deposit,  repos  and
various derivatives;
Enhancing  the  competitive  structure  of  long-term  institutional  investment,  by  gradually
abolishing  the  issuance  of  non-tradable  government  bonds  to  pension  funds,  and  reduce
concentration in this industry;
And  abolish  the  remaining  controls  on  foreign  currency  transactions,  including  the  archaic
exchange rate band, thus reaching full convertibility of the Shekel.
     The mission to lead the economy out of the recession is indeed awesome. Nevertheless, we should
not loose sight of our ultimate destination: durable growth, based on a competitive market, integrated
with the world economy and operating based on the same ground rules. Such an economy should be
also better equipped to deal with poverty reduction and other sensitive social issues.
 BIS Review 79/2001
3
