Bank of Japan’s January Report of Recent Economic and Financial
Developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 22 January 2001.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy continues to recover gradually, but the pace is slowing due to decelerating export
growth.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  on  an  increasing  trend.  The  recovery  in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole  through  lack  of  notable  improvements  in
employment and income conditions, but there are somewhat positive signs in some indicators. As for
public  investment,  the  pace  of  decline  is  slowing.  Meanwhile,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real
imports) are starting to decrease reflecting a slowdown in overseas economies such as the U.S. and
East Asia. Housing investment is declining gradually.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production remains on a rising trend, but the
pace is slowing considerably. Inventories of some materials and electronics parts, of which demand
from overseas is declining significantly, become somewhat excessive, but inventories as a whole still
remain  at  a  low  level.  Meanwhile,  corporate  profits  continue  to  improve.  Income  conditions  of
households still remain severe but are not deteriorating as employment conditions are on an improving
trend and wages are slightly above the previous year’s level.
As for the outlook, public investment is expected to start increasing with the implementation of the new
economic stimulus package by the government. In the corporate sector,  firms  still  strongly  feel  that
they  have  excess  capacity  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.
However,  it  is  very  likely  that  fixed  investment  in  high-growth  sectors,  including  those  related  to
information technology services, will increase as corporate profits continue to recover. Moreover, the
improvement in corporate profits will increase household income and this in turn is expected to boost
private consumption. However, the pace of recovery in household income will be modest for the time
being, since firms’ perceptions of excess employment still persist, and thus significant changes have
not been observed in their efforts to reduce personnel expenses.
Reflecting the overseas slowing  economies, a temporary  decline  in exports seems to be  inevitable.
Imports are projected to continue increasing, particularly those of consumer goods, and capital goods
and parts. Hence, net exports are expected to decline. Mainly due to these developments in exports,
industrial production is expected to slow down and remain at around the current level for a while.
Overall, it is likely that the economy will continue a gradual upward trend led mainly by business fixed
investment. In addition, the favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s continuation
of  easy  monetary  stance  and  the  government’s  new  economic  stimulus  package  are  expected  to
underpin  the  economy.  However,  risks  of  downward  pressures  on  the  economy  induced  by  the
slowdown in overseas economies as well as developments in foreign and domestic capital markets,
need more careful monitoring for the time being.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the yen. Domestic
wholesale prices are declining somewhat mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery,
although the rise  in crude oil prices  was passed  on to the prices  of petroleum products. Consumer
prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to the decline in prices of other imported products and
their substitutes, despite the increase in prices of petroleum products. Corporate service prices are still
falling slowly.
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the recent yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressures on prices. Moreover, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market is
                                                     
1
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was held
on January 19, 2001.
2
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on January 19 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 4/2001
1
projected to be on a gradual improving trend, while an economic recovery is expected to continue at a
moderate pace. Recently, however, the pace of recovery seems to be slowing and crude oil prices,
which  had  been  exerting  upward  pressures  on  prices,  are  falling.  The  declining  trend  of machinery
prices due to technological innovations and the decrease in prices of consumer goods arising from the
streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressures  on  prices.  Overall,
prices are expected to be somewhat weak for the time being.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is generally moving around 0.25 percent.
Interest rates on term instruments have declined after the increase towards late December. The Japan
premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds have been around 1.5-1.7 percent since the end of November
and are recently moving in the range of 1.5-1.55 percent. The yield spreads between private bonds
(bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds are mostly unchanged or expanding
somewhat.
Stock  prices  continue  to  be  weak  and  are  moving  around  the  lowest  level  recorded  since  the
beginning of 2000, while having recovered somewhat recently.
In the foreign exchange market, the  yen has been depreciating sharply since late December and is
currently being traded in the range of 117-120 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  There  seem  to  be  no
significant  changes  in  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such  instruments  as
corporate bonds and CP.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with the recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish, although the expansion
in the year-on-year decline is ceasing. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued
is slightly above the previous year’s level. The amount outstanding of CP issued was at a high level as
the year-end approached.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) continues to grow at around 2 percent on a year-on-year basis.
As for funding costs for firms, short-term funding rates basically remain flat but long-term funding rates
seem to be declining reflecting the developments in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions  remain  easy.  However,  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  stock  prices  on  the  fund-raising
conditions of firms need to be carefully monitored.
2
BIS Review 4/2001
