Ernst Welteke: The Bundesbank’s view on the world economy
Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Annual Members’ Dinner
of the Financial Services Industry Association in Dublin, on 4 September 2001.
 I
Ladies and gentlemen!
For  a  true  European  Dublin  today  is  a  great  place  to  be.  Ireland  has  shown  the  most  spectacular
catching-up process in the EU. It is all the more impressive as Ireland lies geographically on the edge
of  the  EU.  The  favourable  starting  conditions  created  by  the  advent  of  the  common  currency
framework were helpful in this respect. Economic and political convergence make for an ever-stronger
economic entity in Europe.
Great  challenges  are  ahead  for  us.  We  are  on  the  eve  of  the  physical  introduction  of  the  single
European currency. And we are in the process of negotiating the access of new EU members, most of
them much less wealthy than the current member states.
The  euro  area  is  the  second-largest  economy  in  the  world.  Right  now,  we  find  ourselves  in  an
environment of slowing global growth. Increasingly, the global markets have brought the strains in the
world economy to our doorstep, faster and with more thrust than at first expected. We do not blame
the  markets,  though.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  glad  to  see  the  financial  markets  in  Europe  evolving
rapidly.  In  this  regard,  the  euro  is  important.  The  single  currency  both  facilitates  and  accelerates
integration. And with the financial markets becoming ever-more complicated, financial supervisors are
faced with a challenge. In Ireland, as well as in Germany, a debate on how best to design prudential
supervision is taking place.
II
Ladies and gentlemen!
The development of the Irish economy is indeed impressive. Most of the catching-up took place in the
second half of the 1990s. Since 1994, Ireland has been the fastest-growing country in the European
Union with an average real growth rate of eight percent a year. More than half of the growth occurred
due to an increase in capital and labour inputs. Employment growth was the highest in the EU. The
unemployment rate has fallen  by  nearly ten percentage  points  during  this  period. With  employment
conditions being that favourable, Ireland now sees net immigration.
Ireland  is  the  only  EU  country  that  has  consistently  seen  double-digit  growth  in  private  investment
since 1994. Productivity has thus risen faster than  in most EU countries.  Ireland  is now among the
most  productive  countries  in  the  EU.  Last  year,  GDP  per  worker  was  15 percent  above  the  EU
average.
Foreign  direct  investment  has  been  important  in  financing  the  Irish  boom.  Inward  direct  investment
nearly  tripled  between  1998  and  2000.  The  major  part  originated  outside  the  EU;  the  US  alone
contributed three-quarters. Ireland is now a favourite location for enterprises trying to gain a foothold in
the EU.
These  impressive  developments  have  improved  living  standards  considerably,  GDP  per  capita  in
Ireland  is  117 per  cent  of  the  EU  average.  As  productivity  increases,  however,  the  need  for
subsidisation should decrease in step. The Irish boom owes much to funds allocated by the European
Union.  For  the  period  2000-2006,  Ireland  will  be  granted  a  total  of  4.2 billion  euros  via  both  the
Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund. Well, I just mentioned this fact to complete the picture.
The flip side of the impressive catching-up process in Europe can be seen in what is recognised as a
lack of economic convergence. And, most often in view of the national inflation rate, Ireland is being
cited as an example.
BIS Review 75/2001
1
Well, then, what exactly is meant by “convergence”? The term is one with many facets. The Treaty of
Maastricht set out to measure nominal convergence. You remember the fiscal and monetary criteria:
inflation rate, capital-market rates, sustainable fiscal policy and exchange-rate stability.
The Maastricht criteria were subject to heated debate in academia, as well as in policy circles. By no
means are they mere history. On the contrary, they are very much alive. They are to be applied when
further countries join the euro-currency area, be it the pre-ins like the UK or the accession countries.
The Maastricht criteria, however, are in a way both “stability criteria” and “convergence criteria”. They
ensure  that  a  country  is  not  pursuing  policies  that  might  impinge  adversely  on  the  stability  of  the
common currency. In the longer run, such stability must be built on economic integration. An extensive
body  of  theory  has  evolved  on  the  characteristics  of  optimum  currency  areas.  Central  criteria  are
flexibility for wages and prices as well as mobility for goods, labour and capital. Most of these criteria
call for a high degree of structural convergence. Market integration is crucial in this respect.
Under the common currency framework, market integration is deepening. It is already well advanced
in  trade  in  goods  and  services,  and  in  financial  markets.  The  labour  market  is  lagging  somewhat
behind.  In  this  respect,  Ireland  looks  like  being  in  a  somewhat  difficult  situation.  Labour  mobility  is
hampered  by  being  an  island  on  the  edge  of  the  common  currency  area.  Furthermore,  Ireland’s
neighbour and most important trading partner, the UK, has not yet joined the euro.
Apart from structural and nominal convergence, there is real convergence - a term I use here in the
sense  of  synchronicity  of  business  cycles.  Real  convergence  is  of  importance  in  a  currency  union,
because  all  the  countries  in  the  union  are  subject  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  Governing
Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  designs  monetary  policy  to  fit  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  A
country whose business cycle gets completely out of step might therefore suffer from an individually
inadequate  monetary  policy.  However,  marching  in  absolute  lock-step  is  not  necessary,  as  can  be
seen in the US, where certain regions grow faster than others.
During recent years, Ireland has been growing considerably faster than, for example, Germany. The
faster growth is due mainly to catching-up, and to the still incomplete synchronicity of the Anglo-Saxon
and the continental business cycles. Irish economic growth derived additional impetus from the start of
the European Monetary Union. Interest rates in Ireland were effectively cut by three percentage points
on January 1, 1999.
That sort of extra stimulus sent real interest rates to a historic low and boosted demand. Fiscal policy,
the  instrument  to  cushion  such  monetary  shocks,  was  tightened.  However,  with  the  fiscal  surplus
being already large, this tightening did not prevent inflation from starting to rise in late 1999.
Considering  the  facts  that  led  to  this  situation,  does  it  really  indicate  a  lack  of  the  necessary
convergence? I don't think so. A major part of the excess inflation is accounted for by the catching-up,
and  by  the  one-off  effect  of  the  start  of  the  common  monetary  policy.  As  economic  and  financial
integration  is  going  on,  the  business  cycles  will  grow  ever-closer,  that  is,  real  convergence  will
increase further.
III
Ladies and gentlemen, world output grew by 4.7 per cent last year, the highest rate in a decade. That
growth rate could not be kept up. Has the world economy now bottomed out? My answer: “We do not
know for sure” should come as no surprise to you.
The US economy is still playing the key role in the global economy. It accounts for 22 per cent of world
GDP and for 15 percent of world exports. The heavy dependence of NAFTA and some Asian countries
on trade with the US proliferates US weakness.
Signals from the US economy continue to be mixed. No direction is clearly visible from the data. The
slowdown  started  with  domestic  technology  investment.  Recently,  some  spillovers  have  been
observed. Consumer demand, up to now the stablest pillar of demand, is advancing more moderately.
Inventory correction that set in quickly is now well advanced. A positive contribution to growth may be
expected in the near future.
The  slowdown  opens  a  window  of  opportunity  to  unwind  macroeconomic  imbalances  - both  those
domestic to the US and international ones - in an orderly manner. In the US, the personal savings rate
has  started  to  increase,  slightly  but  steadily,  since  the  fourth  quarter  of  2000.  Slackening  domestic
demand should help to contain the large current-account deficit. The tech bubble has been deflated.
2
BIS Review 75/2001
The  labour  market  is  no  longer  overly  tight.  The  dollar/euro  exchange  rate  may  have  seen  a
turnaround; at least the downward trend is broken.
However,  the  risks  are  for  real.  The  overconfidence  in  technology  investment  in  the  US  may  have
given rise to over-investment that can be unwound only slowly. In case of a further fall in equity prices
the slump in consumer confidence and demand may be prolonged somewhat.
In spite of these risks, I tend to find the prospect of the start of a modest recovery towards the end of
this year plausible and encouraging. The macroeconomic easing should show its effects in the second
half of 2001. The Fed has brought interest rates down by 300 basis points in seven rate cuts, and a
tax cut of about 55 billion dollars is becoming effective this year. The confidence of both businesses
and households has strengthened somewhat, and usually this presages a pick-up in growth.
In  Japan,  the  economic  situation  is  broadly  unchanged.  The  banking  crisis  still  weighs  on  the
economy, a marked revival of economic activity is still not in sight, nor is it being predicted for the near
future.  Unfortunately,  macroeconomic  policy  has  very  little  leeway  left  for  providing  further  stimuli.
Structural  reforms  could  -  as  in  the  euro  area  -  be  of  considerable  help  in  accelerating  potential
growth.
In the wake of slower global growth, the euro-area economy has lost some of its previous dynamism.
World  trade  is  no  longer  growing  at  double-digit  rates.  Caution  in  investment,  as  well  as  in
consumption spending, is being reflected in receding industrial production; the July increase is not yet
to  be  regarded  as  a  firm  signal  of  a  turnaround.  Furthermore,  capacity  utilisation  is  now  lower,
although still above its long-term average rate. Business confidence has sunk, the previous reduction
in unemployment has come to a halt.
The euro-area economy has been hit particularly hard by the oil and food crises.  Both led to sharp
price  increases  and  put  the  consumer  into  a  state  of  uncertainty.  The  oil  price  shock  caused  a
negative terms-of-trade effect and major reductions in real disposable income. At this juncture, we see
the economy of the euro area having lost momentum, after the vigorous expansion in the year 2000.
There are, however, several reasons for feeling confident. The waning food crises will no longer weigh
on consumption and this year’s tax cuts are to come into effect in some euro-area countries.
The risks are clearly on the investment side. A major part of the reduction in GDP growth during the
first quarter - the latest data available - occurred owing to a lower contribution of gross fixed capital
formation.  Capacity  utilisation  is  still  high,  and  the  global  outlook  does  not  call  for  stepping  up
investment.  On  the  whole,  business  sentiment,  and  thus  the  propensity  to  invest,  hinge  on  a  more
optimistic view of the world economy. Financing conditions, however, are favourable in the euro area.
Capital markets rates are about the same level as rates in the US.
In  an  environment  of  weakening  growth  the  continuation  of  the  consolidation  of  the  public  sector’s
finances  is  becoming  more  difficult.  In  1997,  the  European  Governments  decided  to  implement  the
Stability and Growth  Pact. They  agreed to pursue a  policy  of  eliminating  structural  deficits.  In  most
euro  area  countries,  this  process  is  well  advanced.  These  countries  are  in  a  somewhat  favourable
position, as they have enough room to manoeuvre to let automatic stabilisers work in full. A minority of
countries (Germany, Italy, France and Portugal) - which, however, account for 70 per cent of euro area
GDP  -  still  show  structural  deficits  of  a  considerable  extent.  Under  the  present  circumstances,
therefore,  the  automatic  stabilisers  should  only  be  allowed  to  work  fully  in  those  countries  whose
budget positions are close to balance or in surplus.
Recently, suggestions have been aired to replace targets for the public sector deficit with targets for
public  expenditure.  I am  strongly  in  favour  to  stick  to  the  tried  and  tested  deficit  target.  The  public
sector  deficit  is  the  decisive  measure  for  its  demands  on  the  financial  markets.  The  deficit  is  the
benchmark for a government’s stability-orientation.
Last Thursday, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to lower its key interest rates by 25 basis
points. We considered that the available evidence points to an improvement in the outlook for price
developments. With regard to the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy, the three-month average
of the annual growth rate of M3 was 5.9 per cent. However, this figure needs to be corrected for some
holdings which do not necessarily have implications for price stability in the medium term.
Regarding  the  second  pillar,  there  are  clear  signs  of  lower  inflationary  pressures  from  the  demand
side. Lower growth expectations, a strengthening exchange rate, the downward trend of the growth of
consumer and producer prices lead to the expectation that price stability will be restored in the not too
distant future. Overall, as several indicators are pointing to an abatement of inflationary pressures, the
BIS Review 75/2001
3
new level of interest rates is compatible with the maintenance of price stability over the medium term,
which, in turn, is essential to create a favourable environment for sustainable economic growth.
IV
The evolution of the slowdown in the US highlights how important and how effective financial markets
are. The speed at which the slowdown spread around the world underlines this importance.
Changes  in  investment  and  in  financing  habits  have  altered  the  international  links  between  the
business cycles. For the first time since the mid-seventies oil crisis, the G-7 countries are slowing in
step. Evidence is piling up that this synchronicity is more than sheer chance.
Financial  markets  seem  to  more  and  more  replace  trade  in  goods  and  services  as  the  major
transmission channel for economic developments. The reasoning runs as follows:
Financial  market  prices  react  immediately,  once  new  information  becomes  available.  So  financial
markets  reflect  developments  in,  and  expectations  for,  the  real  economy  very  quickly.  Modern
information and communication technologies are of help. Any investor anywhere in the world can in no
time update his view of - let’s say - the correctness of the markets' expectations as to the future path
of ECB interest-rate policy. If his opinion differs from the markets’, that is, if he perceives opportunities
for arbitrage, he will rearrange his portfolio.
What is new about this process - besides technology? International portfolio diversification is no longer
a privilege  of  institutional  investors.  Today,  nearly  everybody’s  portfolio  is  internationally  diversified.
International  portfolio  diversification  may  occur  in  its  direct  form,  for  example,  in  holding  shares  in
companies  located  in  different  countries.  It  may  otherwise  come  in  its  indirect  form:  foreign  direct
investment.  More  and  more  often,  companies  substitute  foreign  direct  investment  for  international
trade. FDI flows are growing fast.
The financial sphere in Europe has changed tremendously. We now have a common currency in the
euro area. Currency risk has been eliminated. Financial markets are integrating faster than ever. They
have become, and are still becoming, broader and deeper. Breadth and liquidity of financial markets,
however, 
type.  And
disintermediation, in turn, fosters the breadth of capital markets. The broader and more liquid financial
markets are, the more attractive they are to international investors. Thus, the euro is one of the forces
working towards ever-closer financial links between national economies.
Ever closer financial integration has times and again provoked calls to “throw sand in the wheels of the
foreign  exchange  market”.  A ”Tobin  tax”  on  short-term  currency  transactions  was  proposed  to  bar
excessive  currency  speculation.  Such  a  tax  would  clearly  lower  transaction  volume  in  international
currency markets. However, it would come at too high a cost. Foreign trade in goods and services is
bound  to  suffer  as  well.  In  the  end,  the  wealth-enhancing  international  division  of  labour  will  be
hampered.  Furthermore,  in  times  of  distress,  a  Tobin  tax  is  not  effective.  Expected  returns  on
speculative capital movements during a crisis  by far outweigh the costs of any sensible  transaction
tax. The Tobin tax simply cannot make up for a loss of confidence.
On a  worldwide scale, financial  links are gaining  in  importance.  Internationally,  business  cycles  are
growing closer. That is why Europe was relatively quickly affected by the US downturn, although our
starting point was quite different from theirs. Although growth in Europe was vigorous, too, overheating
was not an issue with us.
financial  system  of  Anglo-Saxon 
favour  a  capital-market-oriented 
V
The financial services industry is very dynamic not only, but especially, in Ireland. Sophisticated new
products, new technologies, new channels of delivery and new forms of cooperation among hitherto
separate lines of business pose new risks.
As the financial world evolves, financial supervision faces new challenges. “Basle II” is one instrument
for financial supervisors to take these new risks into account. The three pillar approach seeks to bring
required minimum capital more into line with economic risk. Second, it brings banks’ risk profiles and
their ability for risk management closer into the focus of financial supervisors. And, third, enhanced
disclosure will bring about more transparency and even will integrate financial markets into financial
supervision.
4
BIS Review 75/2001
It  is  no  accident  that  new  models  of  financial  supervision  are  being  put  into  practice  in  several
countries. Ireland has decided on a new model, and Germany is also in the process of devising a new
institutional structure for its supervisory authorities. In both our countries, the role of the central bank in
the supervisory task is affected.
In March, the ECB published its views on the role of central banks in prudential supervision. The ECB
argued  in  favour  of  a  strong  involvement  of  central  banks.  That  view  is  well-founded.  In  all  major
industrial countries, the responsibility for the stability of the financial system is assigned to the central
bank. Macro- and microprudential analyses, however, are intertwined. If you want to assess the risks
to the system, you need to know about the players. If you want to assess individual risks, you need to
know about their exposure to systemic risk.
Central banks are required to oversee the smooth functioning of payment systems, another source of
systemic risk. During the conduct of monetary policy, central banks collect information which is of use
in the supervision of individual financial institutions. Interlinking central bank functions and prudential
supervision takes advantage of these synergies.
In Germany, the envisaged reform of financial supervision is linked to the reform of the Bundesbank.
In  its  statement  on  the  planned  reform  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  the  ECB  made  it  clear  how
valuable the independence of a central bank is - institutional independence, personal independence
and financial independence alike. The Maastricht Treaty set out to protect central bank independence
in all three regards. Article 108 of the Treaty explicitly protects both the independence of the ECB and
the independence of all the national central banks within the ESCB. Any central bank reform at the
national level must likewise respect such independence.
VI
Ladies and Gentlemen!
Today, financial integration is one of the distinctive features of the world economy. Ireland has been in
a position to exploit this development to its advantage. The catching-up has indeed been impressive,
and is encouraging in view of the upcoming eastward enlargement of the European Union.
Recent  developments  suggest  that  business  cycles  are  linked  more  closely  in  a  world  of  deeper
financial integration. For the eurozone, this is particularly good news, as it facilitates the conduct of the
single  monetary  policy.  The  ESCB  has  been  successful  in  pursuing  a  stability-oriented  monetary
policy. Its strategy and recent monetary policy decisions will contribute to more growth and stability in
Europe.
In 118 days the physical introduction of the euro will bring the single European currency to completion.
In Ireland you will then use the same notes and coins as will people in Greece. This is globalisation on
a European scale. As economic and political integration deepens, Europe can, Europe wishes to and
Europe will increasingly assume responsibility on a global scale.
BIS Review 75/2001
5
