T  T  Mboweni:  Volatility  in  the  currency  markets  and  its  impact  on  monetary
policy
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the ACI meeting, held in
Pretoria, 14 May 2001.
 Introduction
1.
I would like to thank ACI for the opportunity to address you this evening. Of course I have been aware
of the existence of ACI but I was reminded about it again when Mr Gibbs backed the Code of Trading
Principles,  as  agreed  to  by  sixteen  leading  intermediaries  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  and
released it to the press on 22 February 2001. The Reserve Bank values ACI’s endorsement of these
Trading Principles. I thank you all for your willingness to come to Pretoria as I believe that most of you
work in Johannesburg. I understand also that  your presence reflects a common interest  in financial
markets – and  not merely  a desire  to  gain  an  advantage  over  your  competitors  by  obtaining  better
insights into the thought-processes of central bankers!
Apparently many of you are foreign exchange dealers or are close to the foreign exchange market, so
I have chosen to talk to you about volatility in the currency market and about monetary policy. I will
first attempt to give some background information against which volatility in the currency markets has
developed and will then proceed to discuss developments in some of the major and emerging market
currencies.  The  focus  will  then  move  to  developments  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  and  its
potential impact on inflation and consequently on monetary policy in South Africa. I will also, as far as I
am able, attempt to address some other areas you may be interested in.
Developments in the currency markets in 2000 and 2001
2.
The  so-called  "emerging  markets  crisis"  in  1997  and  in  1998  was  a  major  event  which  adversely
affected  many  emerging  market  economies.  Currency  weakness  and  tighter  monetary  policies
impacted significantly on economic performance, as was the case in South Africa. We certainly looked
forward to a period of relative calm from 1999 onwards. Unfortunately, the financial markets have not
afforded  us  this  opportunity  and  volatility  has  been  a  somewhat  persistent  feature  of  the  financial
markets in the year 2000 and 2001 to date.
The most volatile markets have been the stock markets, particularly those trading technology stocks
 –  and  probably  also  media  and  telecommunication  stocks  –  the  well-known  trilogy,  TMT  stocks.
However, the  volatility has also  extended  to the fixed  income and currency markets. In the case  of
stock markets, the Nasdaq for example has declined by no less than 37 per cent in the calendar year
2000  and  by  a  further  17,6  per  cent  in  the  current  year  to  date.  According  to  Bloomberg  news
services, the historical price volatility over a ten-day period reached levels in excess of 70 per cent per
annum in April 2001. In early January 2001, the volatility appeared to be even higher. From its peak
on 10 March 2000, the Nasdaq has fallen by a staggering 58,3 per cent. The Dow Jones index has
also  declined  but  not  by  the  same  magnitude.  It  declined  by  5½  per  cent  during  2000  and  has
remained virtually unchanged in the year to date, with historical volatility reaching levels around 32 per
cent in March and April of this year. Other stock market indices have declined in sympathy with Wall
Street. Fortunately, as a matter of interest, the all share price index of the JSE Securities Exchange
has increased by some 5,1 per cent since the beginning of 2000 to date.
For most of the last decade the financial world has closely watched the economic expansion of the
United  States,  which  seemed  to  defy  what  had  been  learnt  about  business  cycles,  and  the
concomitant monetary policy tightening by the Federal Reserve from late 1999. Similarly, in the euro
area and in the United Kingdom, both the ECB and the Bank of England were also in monetary policy
tightening modes for most of 2000. The tightening in the euro area and in the UK, however, was in
reaction to inflationary pressures which resulted mainly from higher oil prices. Based on a perception
that monetary policy was entering an uncertain phase in the major economies of the world in the latter
half 2000, plus given the demanding price earnings ratios on the so-called hi-tech shares especially,
market  participants  seemed  to  react  more  forcefully  to  macroeconomic  news  than  usual,  thus
exacerbating the volatility.
BIS Review 39/2001
1
Stock markets in general turned positive in January 2001 with the announcement of a 50 basis points
reduction in the Federal Reserve’s target for the fed funds rate on 3 January 2001. This was followed
by a further 50 basis points cut on 31 January. This buoyed markets, at least temporarily. However,
perceptions again deteriorated on fears that the United States might be heading for a recession which
could eventually result in depressed world economic activity.
A principal feature in the currency markets during 2000 and 2001 has been the strength of the US
dollar in the international financial markets. One of the important factors behind the strong US dollar
were capital flows into the United States stemming mainly from its vibrant economic growth. Whilst the
United States was, and might still be, the major net recipient of capital and the euro area the world’s
largest  provider  of  foreign  corporate  investment  in  particular,  it  was  not  surprising  that  the  euro
remained under pressure and that the US dollar remained very strong. It is, however, currently not so
easy  to  explain  the  resilience  of  the  US  dollar  with  the  United  States’  economic  prospects  having
changed over the last six months.
As a result of the strong US dollar, many currencies have weakened against the US dollar in 2000 and
2001 to  date. The euro  declined to its  lowest  level  ever  against  the  US  dollar  on  26  October  2000
when  it  breached  US$0,83.  It  subsequently  recovered  but  remains  under  pressure.  The  Australian
dollar  and  New  Zealand  dollar  have  declined  by  26,0  and  24,1  per  cent  respectively  since  the
beginning of 2000 to date. Most currencies of emerging markets which have freely floating exchange
rate regimes, have also declined significantly since the beginning of 2000 to date.
When the euro depreciated  below  the key resistance  level  of  US$0,85  on  20  September  2000,  the
ECB reacted and, with the assistance of the G7 central banks, intervened on 22 September 2000. In
the  aftermath  of  the  intervention,  the  euro  appreciated  to  US$0,90.  The  recovery  of  the  euro  was,
however,  short-lived.  The  ECB  again  intervened  on  Friday  27  October  2000,  this  time  without  the
assistance  of  G7  central  banks.  A  third  intervention  package,  also  estimated  at  US$1  billion,  was
introduced  to  the  market  on  6  November  2000.  This  pushed  the  euro  from  a  level  of  US$0,86  to
US$0,87. It is interesting to note that Mr Horst Köhler, Managing Director of the International Monetary
Fund, gave the ECB a vote of support for its intervention and said the Bank had acted ‘appropriately’
when intervening on behalf of the euro. He furthermore said: "Co-ordinated activities are appropriate
and can work. Intervention is a legitimate instrument but it has to be very selective to have an impact."
It is perhaps also  worth mentioning that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  has  also  intervened  in  their
foreign exchange market in order to support the external value of their currency.
Developments in the rand exchange rate
3.
As is perhaps to be expected from a relatively open economy, the South African rand was not immune
to the developments in the world’s currency markets. The rand declined by 22,9 per cent against the
US  dollar  in  calendar  2000  and  by  a  further  5,4  per  cent  in  the  current  year  to  date.  However,
measured  against  a  basket  of  South  Africa’s  most  important  trading  partners,  the  rand  has  fared
better,  helped  by  the  weakness  of  the  euro,  pound  sterling  and  the  yen.  The  trade  weighted  index
value of the rand declined by 12½ per cent in 2000 and by only 0,9 per cent since the beginning of this
year to date.
Besides  the  strong  US  dollar,  other  developments  have  also  impacted  with  varying  degrees  of
significance  on  the  rand.  Firstly,  the  increase  in  oil  prices,  coupled  with  a  significant  decline  in  the
exchange rate of the rand against the US dollar, raised concerns in the first half of 2000, in particular,
of mounting inflation and the possible impact on the Bank’s inflation target. Secondly, concerns about
South Africa’s ability to achieve higher and sustainable economic growth rates was also a concern for
many  participants  in  the  financial  markets.  Thirdly,  for  a  few  months  in  2000,  the  rand  reacted
adversely 
in  Zimbabwe.  Notwithstanding  continued
re-assurances by  the  South  African Government that the rule  of  law  would  be  maintained  and  with
scant regard to the considerable differences between the two countries, foreigners, as well as South
Africans, were concerned at the prospect, however remote, of lawlessness spreading to South Africa.
Fortunately, this factor is hardly mentioned in the market at the moment. Fourthly, and not for the first
time, the net open forward position (NOFP) of the Reserve Bank has played a role in rand volatility.
Notwithstanding the fact that many countries find themselves in an over-borrowed position i.e. when
the  reserves  and  international  indebtedness  of  the  government  and  central  bank  are  added  there
would be a negative balance. The perception that the Reserve Bank needs to buy foreign exchange
from the market to close out the NOFP leads to a perceived "one way bet" on the fortunes of the rand.
to  political  and  economic  developments 
2
BIS Review 39/2001
This is a misguided notion, however, as the Reserve Bank realises that buying US dollars from the
market, as and when conditions permit, has achieved what could reasonably be expected. Our policy
position  is  that  we  will  continue  to  work  the  NOFP  down  as  and  when  economic  and  financial
conditions  are  favourable.  For  example,  from  privatisation  proceeds  as  and  when  available;
international  borrowing  by  government  as  and  when  it  occurs;  and  possibly  once-off  inflows  of  a
permanent nature as may accrue from the corporate sector. The exchange rate of the rand is far more
of a two-way risk than many market participants realise.
Perhaps it would also be appropriate, having touched on the NOFP issue, to reiterate the successful
reduction  in this position  which  has occurred  over  the  past  number  of months.  As  at  31  December
1998, the NOFP stood at US$22,5 billion and it has steadily been reduced to a level of US$9,0 billion
as at 30 April 2001. This is, in our view, an important milestone in the implementation of our policy.
The reasons mentioned above, and others, have culminated in higher volatility levels for the rand. In
1997  the  average  one-month  historical  volatility  of  the  rand  was  4,5  per  cent.  It  increased  to  an
average of 12,6 per cent in 1998 – having been around 35 per cent in the midst of the Asian crisis
 – before decreasing to an average level around 9 per cent for 2000. For the current year to date, the
average  one-month historical  volatility  is 12,3  per cent, much higher  than in previous  years.  But  as
mentioned before, we are in good company.
The impact of currency volatility on monetary policy
4.
Before turning to the impact of currency volatility on monetary policy, it is important that we spend a
few  minutes  refreshing  our  memories  about  the  recent  economic  developments  in  South  Africa.
Economic growth appears to have levelled off in the first three months of 2001, although activity has
remained at  a relatively high  level.  Still, the creation  of employment  opportunities for South Africa’s
growing population remains the major challenge facing the country.
South Africa’s overall balance of payments position remained sound during the first quarter of 2001,
with a further small surplus being recorded on the current account of the balance of payments and the
value  of  the  international  reserves  of  the  country  rising  slightly.  The  growth  over  12  months  in  the
broadly defined money supply (M3) accelerated from 7,5 per cent in December 2000 to 9,4 per cent in
February  2001  and  further  to  12,8  per  cent  in  March.  The  growth  in  bank  credit  extension  also
accelerated in the first quarter of 2001.
Continued  discipline  was  maintained  in  the  finances  of  the  fiscus  with  expenditure  only  marginally
exceeding  the  budgeted  amount  for  fiscal  2000/2001  and  revenue  rising  rapidly  largely  owing  to
improved administrative procedures.
Although the depreciation of the rand exerted untoward pressure on the prices of imported goods, the
overall effect on prices was counteracted by the somewhat temporary decline in international oil prices
combined  with  moderate  inflation  rates  in  South  Africa’s  main  trading  partner  countries.  Production
and consumer price inflation have, therefore, tended downwards.
All in all, South Africa’s economic performance is good.
With  the  advent  of  inflation  targeting  as  a  monetary  policy  framework  in  South  Africa,  the  relative
importance of the exchange rate has also changed. Whereas previously the Reserve Bank might have
interpreted its mission of protecting the value of the rand quite literally to encompass the possibility of
intervention in the foreign exchange market, we are now more prepared to accept the valuation of the
market on the exchange rate.
Within this new framework we focus more on the longer term inflationary consequences of any decline
in  the  value  of  the  exchange  rate  as  an  additional  factor  to  be  considered  when  deciding  on  the
appropriate stance of domestic monetary policy.
This  emphasis  on  inflation  per  se,  however,  does  not  imply  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  indifferent  to
developments in the exchange rate  and, in particular, to the level of  volatility.  The  fact  that  various
other currencies have weakened by more than the rand, or have been more volatile, does not mean
that the Bank is unaware of the damage done by a depreciating currency to South Africa’ s economy
via inflation, or, for that matter, to foreigners who invest in South Africa.
South Africa remains committed to gradual exchange control liberalisation, but there are times when
the authorities  are  concerned  by  the  fickleness  of  international  capital  flows,  and,  I  dare  to  say,  by
pure speculative transactions by non-residents in our markets. To  illustrate  the  fickleness  of  capital
BIS Review 39/2001
3
flows, South Africa experienced net portfolio inflows for the two years 1998 and 1999 of the order of
R87 billion. In the subsequent year a net outflow to the tune of R2,8 billion was recorded and for the
current year to date there have been net positive flows again to an amount of some R6,2 billion. These
figures refer to foreign investment in equity as well as bonds. The flows from the bond market on their
own have been far more volatile.
In  the  emerging  world,  South  Africa  is  characterised  by  relatively  liquid  financial  markets.  Over  a
longer  period  of  time  this  is  certainly  a  factor  which  should  attract  global  investors.  In  the  shorter
period, however, the Bank has the impression that this might engender pure speculative activity. Often
bad  news  in  distant  countries  leads  to  a  weakening  of  the  rand  with  no  regard  to  positive
developments in the South African economy. This is certainly a problem with which we are grappling.
There  is  no  turning  back  on  the  road  of  exchange  control  liberalisation,  but  that  does  not  preclude
better scrutiny of the application of rules that are in existence.
In this connection, we are encouraged by the adoption of the code of Trading Principles by a dozen or
so  banks  operating  in  South  Africa.  In  particular,  section  2  of  the  principles  which  says:  "Foreign
exchange  managers  have  a  particular  responsibility  in  the  execution  of  orders  at  volatile  times.
Intermediaries  should  take  care  to  discuss  with  customers  t  he  risks  of  operating  in  these
environments  and  the  possible  scrutiny  of  actions.  Market  makers  may  reserve  the  right  to  refuse
customer transactions that they feel may further disrupt or have the intent to disrupt the market." This
is indeed positive.
Nonetheless, volatility is, of course, part of our economic system. Cycles of boom and bust, "irrational
exuberance" and gloom, occur from time to time. With the benefit of hindsight, it is now clear that the
surge  in  the  American  stock  markets,  in  particular,  in  recent  years  was  overdone  and  a  sharp
correction,  with the attendant  volatility,  was inevitable. This  has  had  some  implications  for  currency
markets as well. Uncomfortable as this might be for central banks focusing on inflation and stability, it
is inevitable and we have to live with it – sit tight, grit our teeth and suffer in silence. It does make life
difficult for central bankers as volatility might disguise underlying trends that require monetary policy
adjustments.
Non-resident participation in the foreign exchange market
5.
Before I conclude my address, I  would  like to mention a few statistics on  the  South African foreign
exchange market which you may find interesting. The average net daily turnover on the South African
foreign  exchange  market  amounted  to  US$7,4  billion  per  day  in  March  2001.  Of  this  turnover,
non-residents accounted for almost 56 per cent, while resident clients accounted for only about 8 per
cent.  Inter-bank  transactions  among  the  authorised  dealers  account  for  the  balance.  Non-residents
continue to dominate swap market activity with about 60 per cent of swap turnover attributable to their
participation. Their activity in the spot and outright forward markets has also increased substantially. In
March  2001,  non-residents  accounted  for  almost  46  per  cent  of  turnover  in  the  spot  and  forward
market, compared to 34 per cent in January 2000. This increase in non-resident participation in the
foreign  exchange  market  could  be  explained  by  the  decline  in  the  number  of  foreign  banks  which
provide rand liquidity in London and possibly also by increased trading in the rand.
Conclusion
6.
Notwithstanding the volatility in the exchange rate of the rand, we are convinced that there is every
reason to be confident regarding the future path of the rand. With prudent fiscal and monetary policies
in  particular,  and  good  economic  policies  in  general,  being  in  place,  we  are  expecting  the  current
relatively  modest  but  sustainable  economic  growth  to  continue.  In  these  circumstances  the  current
account should be a positive factor with South African exports performing relatively well. Inflation  is
coming down slowly  but surely and, of importance to  you, by no stretch of  the  imagination  can  the
rand be regarded as overvalued.
May  I  conclude  by  quoting  a  press  release  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements:  "Maintaining
price stability is the best contribution central banks can make to continued  prosperity." We reiterate
our commitment to pursue the appropriate monetary policy to achieve the target range of 6 to 3 per
cent in CPIX (MU) on average in 2002.
Thank you.
4
BIS Review 39/2001
