Dr Y V Reddy: Developments in monetary policy and financial markets in India
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the Madras Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, Chennai, 24 April 2001.
 I  am  thankful  to  the  organisers  for  their  perseverance  in  getting  me  to  Chennai.  I  am  using  this
opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  explanations  on  the  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  for  2001-02
announced last week. This is the fifth Annual Policy of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) that I have been
associated  with,  and  soon  after  every  one  of  the  fine  statements,  I  had  publicly  articulated  some
explanations.  The  purpose  has  generally  been  to  highlight  elements  of  continuity,  change  and
contextual  relevance  in  each  policy.  However,  on  this  occasion,  a  slightly  different  approach  is
adopted. To start with, there will be an assessment of the projections made in the policy statements
since 1997-98 with reference to outcomes, giving some sort of monetary marksmanship, akin though
not similar to fiscal marksmanship. This will be followed by a brief review of the progress in reforms in
monetary policy and financial markets during the last five years. The features of the latest Monetary
and Credit Policy  would then  be mentioned  to  lead  to  the  tasks  ahead.  The  tasks  ahead,  following
from the recent policy statement are presented  in four sections,  viz., for Reserve  Bank of India; for
Government  of  India,  for  market  participants  and  for  technical  work  on  some  relevant  areas  of
significance.
Projections and outcomes : an assessment
The monetary projections and underlying assumptions in regard to the macro-economy are contained
in  the  annual  statements,  and  revised,  if  considered  necessary,  in  mid-year  review  in  October.  An
analysis  of  projections  and  actual  out  turn  since  1997-98  would  help  appreciate  the  realism  in  the
analysis as well as the overall macro management.
Broadly speaking, the following inferences can be drawn from such an analysis.
First,  the  outturn  in  regard  to  growth  in  Gross  Domestic  Product  has  been  close  to  the  projections
indicated  in  the  Policy  Statement  and/or  mid-year  review  except  in  1997-98,  when  it  touched  the
lowest level at 5.0 per cent.
Second, anticipated inflation has been out of alignment (i.e. beyond one hundred basis points from the
projection) only in respect of 1999-2000, when it peaked at 6.8 per cent.
Third,  the  growth  in  money  supply  has  been  consistently  above  the  projected  rate  except  in  1999-
2000, when it was at 14.6 per cent, below the projected level of 15.5-16.0 per cent.
Fourth, the deposit growth has been higher than projected in all the years except in 1999-2000 when
the growth was a mere 13.9 per cent compared to the projected level of 16.5 per cent.
Fifth,  the  growth  of  non-food  credit  {including  investments  in  PSU  bonds,  corporate  debentures,
Commercial Paper (CP) etc.} has generally been less than projected in all the years.
Sixth,  in  regard  to  interest  rates,  the  general  preference  has  been  to  bring  down  or  soften  interest
rates while focussing on stability, though no specific rates were indicated. There has been a reduction
every year, the range measured by Prime Lending Rates of public sector banks, having come down
from 14.0 to 14.5 per cent in 1997-98 to 10.0 to 13.0 per cent in 2000-01.
Seventh, the market borrowing programme of the union government exceeded the projections (as per
budget estimates) in all the years except in 2000-01, and there has been a significant borrowing in the
fortnight following the end of the fiscal year. In fact, the slippage in 1998-99 and 1999-2000 had been
very large, being about Rs. 15,000 crore, accounting for about 0.75 per cent of GDP. The borrowing
programme of State Governments has been consistently higher than originally indicated to RBI except
during 1997-98.
Eighth, as regards external sector, the current account deficit has been consistently less than 2.0 per
cent of GDP, strictly in consonance with the broad policy indications. In fact, it has been significantly
lower and at 1.5 per cent or less in all the years.
BIS Review 32/2001
1
Ninth, the policy objective of augmenting reserves has also been achieved in every one of the years
and the total addition to foreign currency reserves during the period at U.S.$ 17 billion far exceeded
the total addition to external debt (including amounts raised under Resurgent India Bonds and India
Millennium Deposits) of U.S.$ 4.5 billion.
Finally,  the  conditions  in  forex  markets  appear  to  have  been  reasonably  stable,  though  there  have
been several occasions when there were pressures warranting prompt actions by RBI.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  actual  outcomes  depend  upon  several  uncertainties  and  unanticipated
events that characterise any policy making during any given medium- term frame. The period under
consideration had to contend  with several  domestic  and  international  events  that  were  unexpected,
viz.,  domestic  political  uncertainties  due  to  Parliamentary  elections,  Asian  crisis,  sanctions  against
India by the USA, border conflict at Kargil and oil shock or large increase in price of petroleum. Surely,
there are lessons to be learnt and elements of good luck that might have visited on occasions but the
period also exhibited exercise of sound judgements and enhancement of skills in management at all
levels within RBI. What is of greater significance is the fact that the monetary policy was conducted
while bringing about significant structural improvements in the financial sector and developing financial
markets, especially the money market and the government securities market. Monetary management
was greatly facilitated by the solid foundations laid and sound policy framework created by the RBI
during the early nineties preceding the period analysed.
Review of progress (1996-2001)
The  main  objectives  of  the  policy  measures  during  1996-2001  have  been  to  increase  operational
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  by  broadening  and  deepening  various  segments  of  the  financial
market, to redefine the regulatory role of the Reserve Bank, to strengthen prudential and supervisory
norms,  to  improve  the  credit  delivery  system,  and  to  develop  the  technological  and  institutional
infrastructure  for  an  efficient  financial  sector.  These  measures  usually  announced  as  part  of  Policy
Statements  help  the  market  agents  to  appreciate  the  policy  changes  in  offing  and  to  prepare
themselves to meet possible challenges. In evolving these measures, market participants are closely
associated and consulted.
The  recent  experience  shows  that  monetary  management  in  terms  of  objectives,  framework  and
instruments  has  undergone  significant  changes,  reflecting  broadly  the  transition  of  Indian  economy
from a regulated to liberalised and deregulated regime. In that context, it would be worth the while to
address some of the major highlights of these changes and the related issues which have received
added and focused attention in recent years.
First,  during  this  period  the  twin  objectives  of  monetary  policy  of  maintaining  price  stability  and
ensuring availability of adequate credit to productive sectors of the economy to support growth have
remained unchanged; the relative emphasis on either of these objectives also continues to depend on
the circumstances. However, the gradual liberalization of financial markets has increased the potential
risks and vulnerability of institutions and has, therefore, implications for financial stability. The linkages
between financial stability and price stability have become pronounced in recent times. In this context,
the recent policy measures laid emphasis inter alia upon maintaining orderly conditions and containing
volatility in financial markets. While the market determined exchange rate system has implications for
monetary  policy,  the  international  transmission  of  price  changes  also  need  to  be  recognized  in
understanding the inflationary process. The structure of the economy and the role of services sector
have also been changing which have implications for transmission of monetary policy.
Second,  though  inflation  is  not  targeted,  policy  statements  including  those  in  the  reference  period,
have been identifying a tolerable level of inflation taking into account the global trends and domestic
compulsions. The measurement issues have also come to the fore and the notions of core-inflation
and underlying inflation as against headline have been subjects of discussion. There has also been
some sensitivity in the market, to the issues relating to measurement of prices in the growing services
sector as also asset prices. A national consensus on the need to emphasize price stability in macro
policy seems to be emerging.
Third, in a deregulated environment, besides the provision of adequate credit, availability of adequate
resources at appropriate costs, i.e., interest rates becomes more important. Stable and preferably a
low  interest  rate  regime  is  conditional  upon  enabling  stable  inflationary  expectations,  which  in  turn
depends on price stability. During the period, the fiscal and other constraints inhibiting the downward
flexibility  in  interest  rates  had  been  debated  and  the  need  to  impart  flexibility  to  interest  rates  has
2
BIS Review 32/2001
emerged  as  a  focal  point  for  policy  action.  Consequently,  there  is  widespread  appreciation  of  the
efforts  to  ensure  reduction  in  existing  high  levels  of  revenue  deficit  and  fiscal  deficit,  besides
rationalising  administered  interest  rates  on  contractual  savings  to  impart  efficiency  and  operational
flexibility to the financial sector.
During this period, most interest rates have been deregulated. The few prescriptions that exist, viz.,
export  credit,  small  loans,  foreign  currency  deposits  are  in  the  nature  of  ceilings  related  to  market
interest rates such as the relevant Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of the concerned bank or the LIBOR of
the  concerned  currency.  Currently,  the  only  administered  interest  rate  is  on  saving  deposits.  While
directed  credit  continues,  the  conditions  attached  to  such  credit  dispensation  have  been  made
considerably flexible.
Fourth,  the  monetary  policy  framework  in  India  from  mid-1980s  till  1997-98,  can,  by  and  large,  be
characterised  as  a  monetary  targeting  framework  on  the  lines  recommended  by  Chakravarty
Committee (1985). Because of reasonable stability of the money demand function, the annual growth
in  broad  money  (M3)  was  used  as  an  intermediate  target  of  monetary  policy  to  achieve  monetary
objectives. In practice, unlike many other countries, which followed such an approach, the monetary
targeting  approach  was  used  in  a  flexible  manner  with  a  ‘feedback’.  This  was  necessary  partly
because of high level of government borrowings and the fiscal dominance, administered interest rates
and  the  large  size  of  unorganized  sector.  Deregulation  and  liberalization  of  the  financial  markets
combined with increasing openness of the economy during this period necessitated some changes in
this  framework.  Consequently,  a  multiple  indicator  approach  was  announced  in  1998-99,  wherein
interest  rates  or  rates  of  return  in  different  markets  (money,  capital  and  government  securities
markets)  along  with  such  data  as  on  currency,  credit  extended  by  banks  and  financial  institutions,
fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions in foreign
exchange  available  on  high  frequency  basis  are  juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  policy
perspectives.  Such  a  shift  was  gradual  and  a  logical  outcome  of  measures  taken  over  the  reform
period since early nineties.
Thus the ‘exclusive’ use of broad money as an intermediate target was de-emphasised, but the growth
in  broad  money  (M3)  continues  to  be  used  as  an  important  indicator  of  monetary  policy.  In  a
deregulated  financial  environment  with  reasonably  open  capital  account,  monetary  policy  has  to
respond to unexpected changes on short-term basis. The switchover to a multiple indicator approach
provided necessary flexibility to the Reserve Bank to respond to changes in domestic and international
economic and financial market conditions more effectively. In a medium to long-term perspective, the
impact  of  money  supply  on  inflation,  however,  cannot  be  ignored  and  for  purposes  of  policy,  the
Reserve Bank still continues to announce projections of money supply compatible with the outlook on
growth of GDP and expected inflation.
Fifth,  the  institutional  context  in  which  monetary  policy  was  conducted  was  vastly  different  till  very
recently.  Since  1997,  a  major  change  has  taken  place  with  the  discontinuation  of  the  process  of
automatic  monetisation  of  government  deficit.  Although  the  mutually  agreed  Ways  and  Means
Advances (WMA) sought to put a limit on direct short-term access of funds from the Reserve Bank to
the  Government,  the  continued  high  fiscal  deficit  made  it  difficult  for  the  Government  to  reduce  its
requirement of borrowings from the banking sector. In the process, the Reserve Bank had to manage
liquidity in the system in such a way that the impact of the high fiscal deficit on monetisation as also on
interest  rates  is  minimized.  In  effect,  while  the  fiscal  impact  on  monetisation  has  been  reduced
significantly, the interplay between fiscal and monetary operations continued to be significant  in the
post-1997 scenario.
The overall monetary management becomes difficult with a large and growing borrowing programme
of the government, year after year, which puts pressure on the absorptive capacity of the market. The
banking  system  at  end-March  2001  held  government  securities  of  around  35.0  per  cent  of  its  net
demand and time liabilities as against the minimum statutory requirement of 25.0 per cent. In terms of
volume, such holdings above the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) amounted to as much as Rs.1,00,000
crore, which is substantially higher than the net annual borrowings of the government.
Sixth,  in  addition  to  the  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  framework,  targets  and  indicators,  and  the
institutional  context  in  which  monetary  policy  is  being  conducted  over  the  past  five  years,  a  major
transformation  has  also  taken  place  in  the  operating  procedure  of  monetary  policy.  The  reform  of
monetary and financial sectors has enabled the Reserve Bank to expand the array of instruments at
its command.
BIS Review 32/2001
3
The reliance on reserve requirements, particularly the cash reserve ratio (CRR), has been reduced as
an  instrument  of  monetary  control.  The  CRR  has  been  brought  down,  notwithstanding  intra-year
variations, from a peak of 15.0 per cent in 1994-95 to 8.0 percent in 2000-01. The objective of policy is
to reduce CRR to its statutory minimum of 3.0 per cent over a period of time. The Statutory Liquidity
Ratio has already been brought down to its statutory minimum of 25.0 per cent.
The liquidity management in the system is carried out through open market operations (OMO) in the
form of outright purchases/sales of government securities and repo and reverse repo operations. The
OMO are supplemented by access to the Reserve  Bank’s standing facilities and direct interest rate
signals through changes in the Bank Rate/repo rates.
For transmitting signals of monetary policy, the Bank Rate was initially operationalised as a signaling
and reference rate for influencing the interest rates in the economy. Interest rates on advances from
the Reserve Bank were linked to the Bank Rate. Refinance/liquidity support at the Bank Rate and repo
rates  were  intended  to  serve  as  a  ceiling  and  a  floor,  respectively,  setting  an  informal  corridor  for
money  market  particularly  the  call  money  market  to  operate.  In  the  context  of  the  continued  large
market borrowing programme of the government, the Reserve Bank on occasions adopted a policy of
strategically  accepting  private  placement  of  government  securities  and  then  releasing  those  to  the
market at an appropriate time without putting undue pressure on interest rates.
In terms of further progress in the use of market-based instruments, a liquidity adjustment facility (LAF)
was  introduced  in  June  2000.  The  LAF  enables  the  Reserve  Bank  to  modulate  short-term  liquidity
under  varied  financial  market  conditions  in  order  to  ensure  stable  conditions  in  the  overnight  (call)
money market. The LAF operates through repo and reverse repo auctions thereby setting a corridor
for the short-term interest rate consistent  with  policy  objectives. The LAF operations  combined  with
strategic  open  market  operations  consistent  with  market  liquidity  conditions  has  evolved  as  the
principal operating procedure of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank. The next stage of development
in this direction aims to move towards a full-fledged LAF by gradually removing/minimizing standing
facilities,  thus  providing  appropriate  conditions  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to  exercise  greater  degree  of
freedom in providing a direction on interest rates to the market.
Seventh, the emerging linkages among money, government securities and foreign exchange markets
require  the  Reserve  Bank  at  times  to  use  short-term  monetary  measures  alongside  intervention  to
arrest excessive volatilities in foreign exchange market. While there is no settled conclusion about the
appropriateness of an exchange rate regime within the broad range of corner solutions of ‘free float’
and a ‘currency board’, in the present market determined exchange rate regime, the primary objective
of the Reserve Bank continues to be the maintenance of orderly conditions in the foreign exchange
market,  meeting  temporary  supply-demand  gaps  which  may  arise  due  to  uncertainties  or  other
reasons,  and  curbing  destabilizing  and  self-fulfilling  speculative  activities.  To  this  end,  the  Reserve
Bank monitors closely the developments in the financial markets at home and abroad and takes such
measures, as it considers necessary from time to time.
The  recent  experience  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  building  up  foreign  exchange  reserves  to
take care of unforeseen contingencies, volatile capital flows and other developments, which can affect
expectations adversely. The emerging economies have to rely largely on their own resources during
external  exigencies  (or  contagion)  as  there  is  no  international  “lender  of  last  resort”  to  provide
additional  liquidity  at  short  notice  on  acceptable  terms.  Thus,  the  need  for  adequate  reserves  is
unlikely  to  be  eliminated  or  reduced  even  if  exchange  rates  are  allowed  to  float  freely.  The  overall
approach to the management of India’s foreign exchange reserves in recent years has reflected the
changing  composition  of  balance  of  payments,  and  has  endeavoured  to  reflect  the  “liquidity  risks”
associated with different types of flows and other contingencies.
Finally, the gradual switchover to indirect market-based instruments in the conduct of monetary policy
was made possible because of simultaneous efforts at developing various segments of the financial
market, particularly money, foreign exchange and government securities market.
The  increasing  responsibility  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  undertaking  reform  in  the  financial
markets has to be seen essentially in the context of improving the effectiveness of the transmission
channel of monetary policy. Development of financial markets has, therefore, encompassed regulatory
and  legal  changes,  building  up  of  institutional  infrastructure,  constant  fine-tuning  in  market
microstructure and massive upgradation of technological infrastructure. An important achievement in
this area was the amendment to the Securities Contracts Regulation Act, which clarified the regulatory
jurisdiction of RBI over the money, government securities and forex segments of the financial market.
4
BIS Review 32/2001
The  money  market  is  critical  in  facilitating  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  in  improving  the
transmission mechanism. This requires the RBI to have greater control over the liquidity in the system,
create an efficient mechanism to impart interest rate signals and undertake continuous refinements to
money market instruments. The market for repo is being scientifically developed over a period through
widening  of  participants  and  instruments,  and  by  bringing  uniformity  in  trading  and  accounting
practices with the help of Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).
A  Clearing  Corporation  has  been  proposed,  so  that  repo  operations  could  become  efficient  with
adequate  safeguards.  Similarly,  RBI  has  been  closely  nurturing  the  Treasury  Bill  market.  It  has
increased the range of T-Bills over the years, modified the notified amounts and incorporated changes
in  the  auction  formats  to  suit  the  needs  of  the  market.  The  efficacy  of  Commercial  Paper  and
Certificates of Deposit has also been improved over the years with measures such as reduction in the
minimum  period  and  amount  of  issue,  lock-in  period,  preferring  dematerialised  form,  etc.  The  most
important reform in the money market relates to the initiation  of  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF).
With the announcement of the second phase of LAF, the RBI has moved gradually from a system of
segmented refinance to a more fungible system of liquidity adjustment at market related rates. Reform
in the call money market has also been announced to make it purely interbank market, over a phased
period.
In  the  Government  Securities  market,  the  borrowing  programme  of  the  Government  has  been
systematised and rationalised with the establishment of cash and Debt Management Group consisting
of officials from RBI and the Government and could be completed without destabilizing the financial
markets. Changes have been incorporated in the formats of auction by combining both  price-based
and  yield-based  auctions,  thereby  improving  the  fungibility  and  liquidity  and  paving  the  way  for  the
development of a market for STRIPS, elongating the maturity for debt, facilitating the emergence of
benchmarks, etc. The institutional infrastructure has been strengthened by increasing the number of
Primary Dealers and making them functionally stronger through imposition of capital adequacy norms
and  other  prudential  norms.  PDs  have  been  made  more  vibrant  through  careful  modulation  of
responsibilities and facilities. Changes in  valuation  norms for banks’ investment portfolio  have been
introduced  and  RBI  has  moved  away  from  announcing  the  yield  curve  for  government  securities,
which is now the responsibility of FIMMDA. Further development of the government securities market
hinges  on  legal  reforms  proposed  by  RBI  and  completion  of  the  technological  upgradation  process
that has already commenced.
Measures initiated to integrate the Indian forex market with global financial system include permitting
banks to fix their own position limits and aggregate gap limits, to borrow from and invest abroad up to
15  per  cent  of  Tier  I  capital,  and  to  arrange  to  hedge  risks  for  corporate  clients  through  derivative
instruments.  Given  the  lack  of  depth  and  liquidity  in  the  forex  market,  the  aim  is  to  remove  these
imperfections.
A  hallmark  of  the  reform  process  in  the  financial  markets  is  the  consensus  building,  which  is
operationalised  through  inter-departmental  working  groups,  inter-agency  committees  and  Technical
Advisory  Committees  at  the  formulation  stages  and  Financial  Markets  Committee  at  the  monitoring
stage. The aim is to involve all the stakeholders in the formulation and implementation stages. Greater
deregulation  underscores  the  importance  of  closer  monitoring  of  market  developments  by  the
regulator. This is institutionalised in the form of Financial Markets Committee (FMC) in the RBI, which
meets daily before the opening of the markets and at times on more than one occasion, when situation
warrants. The FMC reviews the liquidity and interest rate situation in financial markets and advises the
top  management  on  the  course  of  action  that  would  be  required  by  RBI  during  the  day.  This
institutionalized framework helps the RBI to take an integrated view on all important decisions having
an impact on financial markets.
The presentation has not covered important  areas  relating  to  prudential  regulation,  supervision  and
credit delivery, though they do constitute very critical aspects of financial sector reform.
Features of the Policy
The Policy has to take into account the macro-economic and monetary developments of the previous
year.  Since  last  year,  a  separate  detailed  document  is  prepared  on  the  subject,  which  is  a  highly
recommended reading for serious analysts. This document was issued on April 19, 2001 along with
the Statement of the Policy for 2001-02.
BIS Review 32/2001
5
The  statement  itself  explains  in  detail  the  developments  in  2000-01  as  well  as  the  projections  and
outcomes for 2001-02. What is noteworthy is the nuance in the stance of monetary policy, which gives
greater emphasis than in the past to (a) credit growth and revival of investment demand; and (b) the
interest  rate  flexibility.  This  may  be  described  as  the  contextual  response  at  macro-policy  level.  At
micro level, there are contextual measures  such  as  those  relating  to  urban  cooperative  banks,  and
exposure norms of banks to stock market
The  second  set  of  measures  would  emphasise  the  continuation  of  some  reform  aspects  of  policy.
Changes are sought in the liquidity adjustment facility, call money market, repo market and export re-
finance.  The  set  of  measures  when  fully  implemented  in  the  next  two  to  three  years  would  mean
completion  of  the  transition  towards  indirect  instruments  of  monetary  policy,  and  imparting  greater
effectiveness of monetary policy transmission. To illustrate, at present, banks get liquidity from non-
banks  and  also  from  RBI.  In  fact,  RBI  is  currently  obliged  to  provide  eligible  amount  of  liquidity  at
predetermined  rate  which  gives  greater  freedom  to  banks  but  correspondingly  constrains  the
operations  of  RBI.  Further,  now  intra-day  liquidity  cannot  be  handled  by  the  RBI.  The  package  of
measures announced now would take care of  these  issues  and  carry  the  operating  environment  of
monetary policy to international standards.
Similarly,  in  the  area  of  institutional  and  technological  infrastructure  for  financial  markets,  the  full
implementation of computerisation of Public Debt Office and operationalisation of Clearing Corporation
during  the  course  of  the  year  represents  culmination  of  medium  term  efforts  to  instill  international
standards. Incidentally, the modern forex clearing operations proposed in India are pioneering, outside
of  America  and  Europe,  with  Hong  Kong  becoming  operational  last  year.  There  will  be  enormous
savings in time and cost of intra bank forex transactions in India. Corporates, mutual funds etc. can
operate in the repo market, i.e., access or provide collateralised liquidity for the very short term, with
all safeguards. Money market operations need no longer be confined to Mumbai. This should certainly
be cheered by Chennai!
The prescription that banks, Financial Institutions, Primary Dealers etc. should invest in CPs and other
instruments only in demat form is a significant new measure which will virtually make all these markets
into demat mode, thus ensuring safety for all including individual investors.
The movement  towards  competitive  and  deregulated  interest  rate  regime  has  also  been  completed
with linking of all lending rates to PLR of the concerned bank while PLR itself has been transformed
into a benchmark rate. With this, the erstwhile non-transparent practices of circumventing PLR when it
was a floor, as applied to creditworthy borrowers may end. Also, this gives greater scope for banks to
meet emerging business cycles.
In  the  area  of  prudential  standards,  markets  carry  on  impression  that  the  level  of  Non  Performing
Assets is understated on account of 180-Day instead of 90-Day norm. This will be clarified once the
position is crystalised as per international norm. However, to ensure smooth transition, sufficient time
up to 2004 is given for banks to make appropriate provisions. This is a forward looking measure, and a
change  to  meet  global  standards.  Similarly,  changes  have  been  proposed  in  the  measurement  of
capital  for  exposure  purposes  and  in  the  level  of  exposure  limit  itself.  These  changes  will  also  be
applicable from a future date.
In  the  recent  past,  policy  statements  emphasised  change  in  the  role  of  RBI  from  being  a  micro
regulator  to  concentrate  on  macro  aspects.  While  that  process  of  changing  the  role  is  almost
complete,  the  current  statement  emphasises  changing  the  functions  of  RBI.  It  sets  the  agenda  for
divesting  itself  of  the  functions  as  debt  manager,  as  owner,  and  in  some  ways  as  regulator  say  of
NBFCs or urban cooperatives and concentrate on monetary management.
There are several areas where progress is reported and further measures indicated, such as in the
areas  of  technology,  regulatory  review,  credit  bureau,  international  financial  standards  and  codes,
legal reforms, debt recovery etc. Perhaps there is no need to elaborate these to this gathering.
Tasks ahead for Government
The  current  monetary  policy  has  signalled  important  reforms  which  require  changes  in  existing
legislation  or  introduction  of  new  laws.  These  include  amendments  to  the  Public  Debt  Act  and
introduction  of  Government  Securities  Bill  (to  provide  flexibility  in  undertaking  transactions  in
Government securities and facilitate retailing) amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act (to bring
about  among  other  things  greater  flexibility  in  monetary  policy  operations  by  reducing  the  statutory
6
BIS Review 32/2001
minimum  for  CRR/SLR,  enable  separation  of  debt  management  functions  etc.);  passage  of  Fiscal
Responsibility  Bill  (to  bring  reasonable  control  over  fiscal  management),  amendments  to  the  State
Bank  of  India  (SBI)  and  other  Acts  governing  public  sector  banks,  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB),
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), and Industrial Development Finance
Corporation (IDFC) Acts (to transfer ownership of these institutions from the RBI to the Government);
a new Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) Act (to make it consistent with
financial  sector  liberalisation);  a  separate  Act  for  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs)  (to
provide  enhanced  protection  to  depositors  of  NBFCs);  amendment  to  Banking  Regulation  Act  (to
encompass areas of security laws and regulatory framework of banking), amendment to Negotiable
Instruments Act (to bring it in conformity with the Information Technology Act, 2000 to bring electronic
cheque, securitised certificate and other evolving products within its ambit); enactment of Bill on asset
securitisation (to create an enabling environment for market for asset securitisation).
Apart from legislative changes, an important aspect relating to the supervisory framework for Urban
Cooperative  Banks  has  been  proposed.  This  would  need  to  be  pursued  in  consultation  with  the
Central and State Governments.
Tasks ahead for the Reserve Bank of India
First,  RBI  has  already  forwarded  the  draft  amendments  to  the  various  acts,  which  is  under
consideration of the Government. However, some further work may be needed from RBI also.
Second, the changes proposed in the financial sector will need follow-up actions by RBI. For instance,
the move over to the second and third stages of LAF  would need RBI to have a  greater fix on the
liquidity  in  its  system.  RBI  is  already  formalising  a  short-term  liquidity  model,  which  should  provide
important inputs to its decision making. This would be all the more critical in the next stage.
Third, on the operational side, RBI would need to be prepared to advance the timing of the auction
process  under  LAF  as  also  be  prepared  with  its  systems  to  conduct  discriminatory  price  auctions
under LAF and uniform price auctions with regard to dated securities.
Fourth,  further  progress  in  reform  in  the  financial  markets  depends  on  the  commencement  of
operations by the Clearing Corporation and maintaining the time schedule for the Negotiated Dealing
System, Real Time Gross Settlement system and computerisation of Public Debt Office. RBI would
need to closely monitor to ensure timely implementation.
Fifth, although the Regulations Review Authority has ceased its operations, RBI has decided to make
the review exercise  an  integral part of the system by putting in place  an alternate mechanism. RBI
should  ensure  that  the  new  arrangements  are  in  place  quickly  to  continue  with  the  work  of  the
erstwhile RRA both in letter and same spirit.
Sixth, apart from this, the progress by the various Committees in RBI relating to the move towards risk
based supervision, macro-prudential indicators etc. will have to be hastened.
Seventh, follow-up actions on the work by the Advisory Groups on international standards and codes
may be designed in close consultations with the Chairmen concerned.
Finally, keeping abreast with international developments in financial markets as also coping with the
dynamics of liberalisation within our country would require continued upgradation of skills of personnel
within the RBI.
Tasks ahead for market participants
The monetary policy has bestowed greater flexibility and ushered in a more competitive environment
among market participants.
First, banks and Primary Dealers (PDs) should prepare themselves for Stage II of LAF where one-third
of the liquidity support normally available to them at fixed rate of interest would now be available at
market rate.
Second,  with  the  reform  in  the  call  money  market  having  been  announced,  banks  and  non-banks
should position themselves for a changed environment. While the total liquidity in the money market
would not reduce, the composition between collateralised and non-collateralised liquidity would alter
resulting in a new set of dynamics. Hence, new counter-party limits would need to be put in place. In
BIS Review 32/2001
7
fact,  with  the  operationalisation  of  Clearing  Corporation,  the  liquidity  would  improve  since  more
participants and more instruments would be eligible to participate.
Third, with rationalisation in the Primary Lending Rate (PLR) norms and more flexibility in fixed deposit
maturity  and  other  terms  such  as  premature  withdrawal  and  interest  on  overdue  deposits,  the
competition among banks could intensify, which would require banks to be more proactive, improve
their infrastructure and operational efficiency as also enhance human skills. Corporates will also have
greater incentive to improve their ratings as better corporates would be able to acquire bank loans at
finer rates.
Fourth, the move to 90-Day norm for Non Performing Assets (NPAs) for banks and 180-Day norm for
Financial Institutions (FIs) would require changes in the interest rate resets and implicitly alterations in
systems  and  procedures.  This  would  require  greater  credit  discipline  on  the  part  of  corporates
regarding repayment of loans as servicing of loans assumes greater importance.
Fifth, many of the changes in prudential regulations that have been announced, viz., credit exposures,
consolidated accounting and supervision, move to the new Basel Capital Accord, move towards risk
based  supervision  etc.  would  need  banks  to  initiate  steps  to  ensure  that  they  are  geared  to  adopt
these  changes.  This  would  involve  substantial  upgradation  to  the  existing  MIS,  risk  management
practices and procedures and technical skills of staff.
Tasks ahead for working groups
Progress in policy, especially on structural issues involve significant background technical work done
within the RBI well before articulating them in a Policy Statement or before embarking on consultations
with market participants or other stakeholders. It may be of interest to many observers that the RBI is
contemplating working groups or initiation of work on technical papers on some subjects. These relate
to  (a)  directed  lending;  (b)  current  account  facility;  (c)  clearing  and  settlement  system  and  (d)
regulatory and supervisory arrangements, and (e) lenders obligations and liability.
Directed lending
While  there  are  widespread  reservations  about  directed  lending,  in  a  developing  country  like  India,
there  is  need  for  some  sort  of  directed  lending,  especially  to  agriculture,  small-industry  and  export
sector.  No  doubt,  directed  lending  is  not  the  same  as  subsidised  lending.  The  current  stipulations
regarding lending to the above sectors have evolved incrementally resulting in discrimination between
foreign and public sector banks; incentive incompatibility due to possibility of making up for shortfall
through NABARD, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), etc.; and wide interpretation of
directed  lending  to  include  investments.  It  is  proposed  to  prepare  a  technical  paper  analysing  the
current situation, the problems and prospects.
Rationalisation of current account facility
At  present,  current  account  facility  in  RBI  is  extended  to  banks  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  their
statutory  obligations,  settlement  of  transactions  with  RBI/Government  and  inter-bank  transactions.
Besides  banks,  non-banks  like  insurance  companies,  mutual  funds,  primary  dealers,  National
Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. etc., are also extended current account facility for such purposes
as  same  day  settlement  as  well  as  use  of  funds  on  the  same  day  for  call  money  transactions  and
facilitating  development  of  the  government  securities  market.  However,  in  the  context  of  the
recommendations of the Technical Group on phasing out of non-banks from call/notice money market,
the setting up of Clearing Corporation and the proposed opening up of membership of INFINET to all
institutions  which  are  maintaining  current  account  and/or  SGL  account  with  RBI,  it  is  felt  that  the
present policy of current account facility needs a review. Accordingly, a Working Group has been set
up by the RBI to examine the issues of rationalisation of current account facility provided by the RBI.
The Group, inter alia,  would examine the objectives and practices in regard to  extension  of  current
account facility, study international practices and make suitable recommendations.
Clearing and settlement system
Recognising the importance of clear-cut legal framework to govern payments system, RBI’s proposals
for amendment to Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 include empowerment of the Bank with appropriate
8
BIS Review 32/2001
regulatory and supervisory powers in respect of payments and settlement system in the country. The
amendments,  once  approved  will  provide  the  necessary  legal  framework  consistent  with  emerging
complexities and  technological  developments  in  such  systems  globally.  More  recently,  the  Advisory
Group on Payment and Settlement System (Chairman: Shri M.G. Bhide) which examined the existing
status of major systemically important payment systems in the country has also recognised a number
of shortcomings, including lack of a well-founded legal framework and absence of risk management
system in our Clearing House operations.
Without prejudice to these developments, it is felt necessary to consider several operational aspects.
Thus, existing arrangements relating to eligibility norms for admission of new members/sub-members
into the Clearing House, level of cash/market value of securities to be maintained as collateral with the
RBI  by  the  members  to  ensure  safety  of  settlement  etc.,  need  a  thorough  review  to  safeguard  the
integrity  of  payment  system.  Hence,  it  has  been  decided  to  constitute  a  Working  Group  to  evolve
suitable  criteria  for  membership  and  recommend  appropriate  prudential  safeguards  including  risk
management systems for Clearing House operations. The Working Group will, inter alia, include select
members of the Clearing House under the aegis of the RBI and will submit its report in three months.
Review of regulatory and supervisory arrangements
World  over,  financial  innovations,  technological  development  and  blurring  of  distinction  between
financial  institutions  have  resulted  in  increasing  integration  of  financial  services  and  markets.
Technical  advances  have  also  resulted  in  accelerated  pace  of  innovations  and  complexities  in
financial products besides the multi-fold increase in volumes and turnover. Indian financial system is
catching  up  fast  with  these  developments  in  the  post-reform  period.  The  regulatory  regimes  and
supervisory systems in the changing environment face new challenges in safeguarding the integrity,
efficiency, soundness and stability of the financial system. This calls for a study of the regulatory and
supervisory arrangements. In India, the regulatory and supervisory arrangements have been rendered
complex  in  view  of  the  existence  of  various  types  of  financial  intermediaries  with  differing  charters
owing their origins to pre-reform plan strategies.
Currently, institutions that are broadly under the regulatory ambit of Reserve Bank fall in the following
categories.  (a)  Public  sector  banks  which  are  governed  by  statutes  with  close  involvement  of
Government  though  regulated  by  RBI.  (b)  Foreign  banks,  which  are  registered  as  branches  and
private banks incorporated under Companies Act and regulated by RBI. (c)Urban Cooperative banks,
both  scheduled  and  non-scheduled,  which  are  under  dual  regulation  of  RBI  and  the  State
Governments/Central  Government.  (d)  Non-banking 
incorporated  under
Companies Act which have been recently brought legally within RBI’s regulatory framework. Housing
Finance companies, however, are regulated and supervised by National Housing Bank. (e) Regional
Rural  Banks  and  State  and  District  Central  Co-operative  Banks,  which  are  regulated  by  RBI,
supervised  by  NABARD  and  additionally  by  Central  Government  and  State  Governments;  and  (e)
Development Financial Institutions, some of which are under statute and some under Companies Act,
which had been under Government control till recently. RBI has of late brought them to some extent
within its regulatory and supervisory ambit.
Both  the  Madhava  Rao  Committee  and  the  Capoor  Committee  had  addressed  issues  of  regulation
relating  to  co-operative  banks;  but,  several  legislative  actions  are  still  to  be  initiated.  Within  the
financial sector, concerns about systemic risk tend to focus on banks particularly in view of their role in
the  payments  and  settlement  system.  The  regulatory  oversight  should,  therefore,  duly  take  into
account  the  role  of  the  financial  institutions  in  the  payments  system,  which  is  the  backbone  for  an
efficient  financial  system.  In  addition,  the  regulatory  regime  should  also  recognise  the  functional
orientation  and  governance  structures  of  different  types  of  institutions.  In  this  context,  it  will  be
possible  to  categorise  the  financial  intermediaries  under  RBI’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  umbrella
into three categories. First, scheduled banks including cooperative banks that are part of the payment
system. Second, commercially-oriented financial intermediaries, i.e., NBFCs and DFIs which have to
be  regulated  keeping  in  view  primarily  the  protection  of  depositors’  interests  and  to  some  extent
systemic implications in regard to larger entities. Third, cooperatives which are large in number with
some hierarchic structures and widely dispersed and, essentially meant to cater to local areas which
need to  be regulated essentially to ensure protection of members’/depositors’ interests, unless they
happen to be scheduled banks. It is proposed to work on a technical paper covering various aspects
keeping in view the complexities indicated above and the existing arrangements.
financial  companies 
BIS Review 32/2001
9
Lenders obligations and liability
While  there  has  been  significant  attention  to  the  problem  of  credit  recovery  and  wilful  default  and
diversion of funds by borrowers, especially by large borrowers, sufficient attention has not been paid
to  the  problems  that  small  and  medium  borrowers  face  in  their  relations  with  lending  entities.  It  is,
therefore,  considered  necessary  to  prescribe  the  obligations  and  liability  of  lenders,  particularly  in
terms of transparency, notice, confirmation, service, etc. It is proposed to study international practices
and  obtain  views  of  commercial  banks  and  other  interested  parties  to  help  formulate  its  technical
paper and parameters for an appropriate legislation.
Conclusion
In  conclusion,  I  have  deliberately  chosen  a  place  other  than  Mumbai  for  explaining  these
developments since I believe that this policy has the potential to truly integrate different centres of the
country through the technological and institutional measures contemplated.
10
BIS Review 32/2001
