Bruno Gehrig: Moving among currency giants – a Swiss perspective
Speech by Prof Bruno Gehrig, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at
the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, Zurich, 16 January 2001.
 First  of  all,  I  should  like  to  thank  you  for  the  pleasure  and  delight  of  being  invited  to  speak  to  you
today. At the same time, I should like to emphasise how much I appreciate the exemplary and highly
successful  activity  of  the  Swiss  American  Chamber  of  Commerce.  Your  organisation  plays  an
invaluable part in the economic, political and - most important of all - in the personal relations between
US and Swiss citizens.
In my speech entitled "Moving among currency giants" I should like to outline a few ideas under four
different headings. I shall start out with a few remarks on the system of floating exchange rates, which
we have more or less learned to live with since 1973, the time of the breakdown of Bretton Woods.
This will be followed by some considerations on the always topical subject of short- and medium-term
currency movements. After this bird's eye view of general developments, the frog perspective will be
highlighted.  I  will  deal  with  the  special  features  of  our  small  currency,  and  end  by  drawing  a  few
conclusions for the SNB's monetary policy.
of 
he 
30 
years 
stated 
hopefully 
international 
economics,  when 
Floating exchange rates: perception and experience
Views on how floating currencies behave and what the implications of their implementation are have
changed  over  the  past  30  years,  in  the  light  of  current  experience.  Early  protagonists  had  fairly
idealistic expectations with respect to floating. For example, Harry G. Johnson, one of the grand old
men 
ago:
"a  freely  flexible  exchange  rate  would  tend  to  remain  constant  so  long  as  underlying  economic
conditions (including government policies) remained constant: random deviations from the equilibrium
level would be limited by the activities of private speculators…"1
This  optimistic  view  was  based  on  two  convictions.  For  one,  on  the  notion  that  exchange  rate
distortions are primarily triggered by inconsistent government policies oriented to short-term effects. In
actual  fact,  the  economic  developments  of  the  late  sixties  and  of  the  seventies  promoted  the
perception  of  a  fundamental  contrast  between  inherently  stable  private  markets  and  a  destabilising
public  policy  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  most  economists  were  profoundly  convinced  that  free
exchange rate movements would be clearly dominated by inflation differentials with no lasting impact
on  real  exchange  rates.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  30  years  ago  the  play  of  global
financial  markets  so  forcefully  driven  by  expectations  was  still  in  its  infancy.  At  that  time  it  was
inconceivable what we witness today: namely, that a couple of sunny days on the stock market are
able to produce a gain in wealth potentially several times the size of an entire years' deficit or surplus
in the current account.
Thirty years later, the assessment of floating exchange rates is more differentiating. The system with
all  its  advantages  and  despite  its  drawbacks  is  now  firmly  established  and  has  even  become
increasingly widespread in the past twelve years. The number of countries which allow their currency
to float more or less freely without a formal peg has risen from just over 30 to approximately 100.
By  and  large,  the  experience  gained  with  floating  exchange  rates  may  be  summarised  in  two
statements:
First, the system occasionally generates large real exchange rate shifts that last longer than just a few
days  or  weeks.  They  may  extend  over  several  quarters  or  even  years,  long  enough  to  cause
considerable  harm  to  the  real  economy.  Such  distortions  are  not  only  observable  in  emerging
economies but also between the currencies of the Big Three.
One of the most spectacular distortions in the past decade was the rise and fall of the USD against the
yen: Up 80% from April 95 to August 98, then down 31% until the end of 99. More recently, the long-
awaited  appreciation  of  the  euro  in  the  past  12  weeks  amounts  to  13%  against  the  USD  and  20%
                                                     
1 
"THE  CASE FOR FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES", IN: FURTHER ESSAYS IN MONETARY ECONOMICS, CAMBRIDGE (MASS.) 1973, P.
208
BIS Review 2/2001
1
as 
such 
factors 
against  the  yen.  It  took  place  in  an  environment  where  neither  current  nor  expected  inflation
differentials have changed to any noticeable extent.
Second, the volatility of floating exchange rates by far exceeds the volatility of the fundamentals. It is
impossible  to  explain  short-  and  medium-term  exchange  rate  fluctuations  with  the  aid  of  traditional
fundamental 
differentials.
Against  the  background  of  such  experiences,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  two  considerations
characterise 
regimes.
First:  Floating  versus  pegging  is  not  a  question  of  right  or  wrong. What  seems  appropriate  for  one
country may be a bad choice for another economy.  Structural differences in trade flows,  productive
capacities,  features  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  credibility  of  the  political  process  may  result  in
different  choices.  Second:  Even  among  ardent  protagonists  of  floating  the  dogmatic  position  that
central banks should take an attitude of benign neglect towards exchange rate movements is out of
favour. The exchange rate is generally regarded as a core determinant of monetary conditions to be
carefully taken into account when money market interest rates are set. This aspect of policy making is
of particular importance in small and medium-sized, open economies.
productivity 
discussion 
currency 
ongoing 
inflation 
and 
the 
on 
trade imbalances
cyclical leads and lags
asset price bubbles
events and announcements in politics
a broad range of differentials, preferably in interest rates, productivity and inflation
Short- and medium-term adjustments – Muddling through in ignorance
Taking the Forex environment into account, however, does not mean actively steering exchange rates
by fine-tuning. Such an endeavour would not only jeopardise stability goals. It would be bound to fail
due to our poor understanding of the process of short-term exchange rate determination.
Given this state of ignorance, ongoing Forex dicussions inevitably suffer from a lack of analytical and
systematic  rigour.  Reasons  given  for  exchange  rate  movements  remind  us  of  a  self-service  shop
offering all kinds of goodies that always fit the need of the moment: ice cream when the sun burns and
hot coffee when it gets cold. The shopping list includes:
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
and all this both effective and expected.
One  chooses  the  story  that  best  fits  a  specific  situation  in  the  hope  that  something  is  better  than
nothing. This opportunistic selection, reinforced by communicative herding, gives the Forex discussion
the  character  of  a  sequence  of  scenes  with  different  key  subjects  that  influence  expectations  to  a
varying  extent,  thus  also  possibly  causing  exchange  rate  distortions.  Exchange  rate  developments
between the USD and the euro in the past two years once again are a good example in this respect.
I am not cynical, but humble. Day-to-day or month-to-month exchange rate movements seem to be a
marvellously  complex  process,  a  highly  unstable  interaction  of  facts  and  expectations.  The
globalisation of capital markets has, if anything, added to this complexity by amplifying the impact of
expectations.
Some  old  habits  in  explaining  FX  rates  no  longer  make  much  sense.  For  example,  the  concept  of
fundamental factors that determine the current account, whose balance is then equilibrated by capital
flows. This vantage point usually rests on the implicit assumption that trade flows are the "real" and
causative side of the coin, while capital flows are a flexible gap filler, a sort of second round financial
mechanism set off to match any given trade imbalance. In a world of integrated capital markets one
may also have good reason to argue the other way round. Why are long-term capital flows, driven by
perceived rates of capital productivity, less "real and fundamental" than trade flows? Would it not also
be possible to argue - based on recent experience - that capital flows to the United States were, for a
long time, the fundamental causative change which effected  - as a consequence - the deterioration in
the current account?
Be that as it may, traders, investors and central bankers would be well advised to accept the fact, and
be  prepared  for  it,  that  in  the  short-  and  medium-term  surprises  are  always  possible  in  the  Forex
markets. This was so in the past and will continue to be so in the future.
Smallness and connectedness: some facts
Let me now talk about the SFR, about  its main features as a currency  which  is  traded  and  held  in
international portfolios.
The SFR plays a minor part on the stage of the global currency game - it is a dwarf among giants, so
to speak. Its position may be described by means of three indicators. First, by the SFR's share in the
global turnover in foreign exchange trading.
Volume composition in Forex
(Daily foreign-exchange transactions, $ billion
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
430
300
291
267
158
118
M
D
Y
 Trading with other
currencies
Trading with US
dollar
101
79
F
H
C
73
58
R
F
F
44
42
D
U
A
This chart is based on data collected by the BIS in 1998, i.e. during the period prior to the introduction
of the euro. The columns illustrate the composition of an average daily volume of approximately 1.5
trillion  USD  by  currencies.  The  USD  clearly  predominates.  This  is  shown  by  the  size  of  the  lower
areas, which represent the respective trading volume vis-à-vis the USD. It seems very likely that the
advent of the euro has not significantly changed the pre-eminence of the dollar. The new figures to be
expected this year will be instructive in this regard.
The SFR accounted for USD 100 billion, i.e. approximately 7% of the total daily volume in 1998. This
may seem modest, but relative to the size of our economy it is a very respectable figure. The Swiss
franc is trading currency number 5, ranging behind the Big Three and Sterling, but well ahead of the
currencies of much larger countries like Australia and Canada.
Economically more important than the trading volume is - second - the position of a currency held in
international portfolios. Relative to the size of our country, the SFR occupies an unusually prominent
position in international institutional and private portfolios. This position is the combined result of an
above-average  stability  record,  an  efficient  financial  centre  and  the  commitment  to  an  independent
monetary  policy  which  lends  the  SFR  special  diversification  characteristics  in  global  portfolios.  This
certainly is a sign of strength, a sound basis for value creation, especially in our financial industry. At
the same time, its strong position makes the SFR particularly sensitive to global capital movements.
Thirdly,  due  to  relatively  low  interest  rates,  the  Swiss  franc  -  like  the  yen  -  periodically  plays  an
important  role  in  the  short-term  financing  of  trading  positions.  Currency  and  securities  traders  take
short positions in our money market to finance long positions elsewhere. This is a rather volatile game,
often reinforced by herd effects, which comes and goes with short-term exchange rate expectations.
These so-called carry trades from time to time generate a significant amount of short-term exchange
rate  volatility.  In  the  recent  past,  however,  such  strategies  have  lost  their  appeal,  probably  as  a
combined  consequence  of  last  year's  increase  in  money  market  rates  and  the  appreciation  of  the
Swiss franc.
In a broader perspective which also includes impacts on the real sector, three points of view will be
moved to the fore.
First and foremost, trade relations with Euroland have always been strong, on the export as well as on
the  import side.  Under  the  new  bilateral  agreements,  our  connectedness  with  the  EU  may  become
even stronger in the years to come. Given these structural conditions, it is clear that our economy is
highly susceptible to shocks in the SFR/euro exchange rate. In actual fact, this marked dependence is
the  strongest  economic  argument  of  all  those  wishing  to  substitute  the  euro  for  the  Swiss  franc  as
soon as possible.
BIS Review 2/2001
3
A second relevant perspective for the real sector is to be seen in the trend towards a real appreciation
of the SFR since the transition to floating.
Real exchange rate index CHF
 Export weighted, November 1977=100
real appreciation 0.6% p.a.
Jan 76
Jan 79
Jan 82
Jan 85
Jan 88
Jan 91
Jan 94
Jan 97
Jan 00
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
Jan 73
The rising trend - measured by the index of the real trade-weighted SFR exchange rate - averaged
0.6%  per  annum.  Its  main  causes  seem  to  be  two  special  features  of  our  economy.  One  is  the
extraordinarily  high  external  surplus  of  approximately  10%  of  GDP,  which  generates  a  steady  net
demand  for  SFR.  Second,  in  Switzerland  -  as,  incidentally,  also  in  Japan  -  the  so-called  Balassa-
Sammelson  effect  probably  also  plays  a  role.  It  rests  on  the  fact  that  the  productivity  trend  in  the
internationally  active  part  of  our  economy  proved  to  be  much  more  vigorous  than  in  the  less
competitive domestically-oriented sectors. It remains to be seen whether, and if so, to what extent, the
deregulation of various formerly protected areas of our economy will cause this effect to disappear.
The  upside  trend  of  our  exchange  rate  development,  however,  is  not  really  a  problem.  This  is
evidenced by the remarkably strong performance of the export sector since 1973  as  well as  by  the
favourable trend of our terms of trade which showed an average improvement of 0.8% per year. On
the contrary: the appreciation is a clear sign of the confidence placed in our currency. It has a positive
effect on prosperity since the purchasing  power of a given  income in  Swiss francs increases in the
wake of falling import prices.
By contrast, the individual periods of massive and prolonged deviations from the trend proved to be a
serious handicap for macro-economic development. No doubt, such shocks are a major stability risk
for our open economy even if, fortunately, they are a rare occurrence.
Conclusions for monetary policy
Let me now turn to monetary policy, focusing first on recent developments followed by some long-term
considerations.
The pattern of the 3-month Libor rate illustrates how we have proceeded since the euro was launched.
3 M LI BOR and Target  Band
 4 .5
4 .0
3 .5
3 .0
2 .5
2 .0
1 .5
1 .0
0 .5
04.01.99
04.04.99
04.07.99
04.10.99
04.01.00
04.04.00
04.07.00
04.10.00
04.01.01
Until the latter  part of 1999,  the  interest rate path  was  shaped  by  our  concern  about  the  economic
downside  risk.  We  aimed  at  a  generous  setting  of  the  monetary  conditions  by  means  of  very  low
money market rates. We were therefore not unhappy that during this time the Swiss franc remained
consistently  stable  vis-à-vis  the  euro,  while  weakening  against  the  USD.  During  the  -  surprisingly
vigorous - recovery that set in in winter,  we  increased the 3-month Libor rate  in several steps from
around  1%  to  3.5%  in  June  2000.  In  this  phase,  we  pursued  a  more  restrictive  course  than  our
colleagues  at  the  European  Central  Bank. We  considered  this  course  to  be  adequate  because  our
economy was practically back at full employment.
Since  June  2000,  we  have  not  adjusted  interest  rates.  In  retrospect,  that  was  an  adequate  policy.
Even though, in August and September, there was still frequent talk of an imminent overheating and
markets were expecting a further increase in interest rates, we did not become active. It seemed likely
to us that the signs of a slowdown would soon become more marked both in Switzerland and abroad.
This stance was not  without risks. In  monetary  policy,  as  elsewhere,  one  occasionally  needs  some
good luck.
In the current environment, we consider the position of the target band to be appropriate. The Libor
rate has sufficient leeway in the 3% to 4% bracket to reflect current fluctuations driven by the market.
Of course, we will carefully observe and analyse ongoing developments and take action if necessary.
Our mission is clearly oriented towards achieving a high degree of price stability in the medium term
while taking into account the economic development.
Two years of experience with the euro has taught us that living as a dwarf moving among giants is a
reasonable strategy. It has allowed us to implement our own policy and at the same time to retain our
traditional interest rate bonus, a significant economic advantage. Rather than obstructing our monetary
policy during this time, the floating exchange rate has facilitated, even supported it.
When we  wanted  to pursue an expansionary course  in  1999,  the  Swiss  franc  remained  weak.  And
when, in the first quarter of 2000, we took corrective action by adopting a more restrictive course, it
appreciated  against  the  euro  without  overshooting.  Without  this  exchange  rate  support,  we  would
undoubtedly have had to impose bigger changes in interest rates. Prior to the launch of the euro, we
made it abundantly clear that in the event of a massive exchange rate distortion, which would have
posed a serious threat to internal stability, we would be ready to take action in the foreign exchange
market. We have not had to make use of this measure of last resort at all.
CHF Exchange Rates
1.85
1.80
1.75
1.70
1.65
1.60
1.55
1.50
1.45
1.40
1.35
USD/ CHF
EUR/ CHF
1.99
3.99
5.99
7.99
9.99
11.99
1.00
3.00
5.00
7.00
9.00
11.00
1.01
Finally,  not  even  the  marked  decline  of  the  USD  in  the  past  months  has  led  to  any  undesirable
tremors. The effect, registered fairly regularly in the past, that a weakening of the USD is reinforced by
an appreciation of the SFR vis-à-vis the DM, has been almost absent. It remains to be seen whether
this undoubtedly destabilising "coffee cup effect" has disappeared for good with the advent of the euro.
Do  we  want  to  maintain  our  own  currency  even  in  10  or  20  years'  time?  That  is  certainly  a  good
question.  In  economic  respects,  it  seems  advisable  to  remain  noncommittal  for  the  time  being.  Not
only on the financial markets do available  options  have  a  positive  value.  They  should  not  be  given
away lightly. That, however, is precisely what those are doing who are pressing for an early - as early
BIS Review 2/2001
5
as  possible  -  decision:  adopting  the  euro  as  the  country's  currency  as  soon  as  possible  or  a
commitment to run  our own currency system for ever. These  two  radical  alternatives,  however,  are
fraught with considerable uncertainties. It therefore seems much more rational to adopt a wait-and-see
attitude during which experience is gained, and to delay the decision until such time as its implications
may be assessed with greater accuracy than is possible today.
If you don't yet know where Berne is and whether you will like it there or not, don't take a non-stop
intercity train. Rather board a train that will stop once in a while, giving you a chance to make up your
mind. Perhaps you will want to leave the train in Olten and go on to Basel instead, or you may prefer
to get off in Lenzburg and return to Zurich. With this little side leap into option theory - or should I say
common sense? - I shall close my remarks.
I thank you for your patience.
