Lee  Hsien  Loong:  Credibility,  confidence,  dynamism:  MAS  in  the  new
economic and financial landscape
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, at the MAS 30th Anniversary Conference, Singapore, 20 July 2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to MAS’ 30th Anniversary Conference. We are honoured
to have with us so many distinguished central bankers, financial supervisors, market participants and
economists.
A  new  economic  and  financial  landscape  is  emerging.  Financial  markets  are  becoming  globalised;
cross-border  capital  flows  are  larger  and  faster;  financial  institutions  are  consolidating  and
restructuring  on  a massive scale;  and new and complex financial  products  are  emerging,  driven  by
technology  and  market  pressures.  Amidst  these  upheavals,  MAS’  goals  as  a  central  bank  remain
unchanged: low inflation for sustained economic growth, and a sound financial sector for markets to
grow and thrive.
MAS is a unique organisation  – it  is the only institution  in the  world  that combines responsibility for
monetary  policy  with  supervisory  oversight  of  the  entire  financial  sector –  banking,  insurance  and
securities. In addition, it has the task of promoting the development of Singapore as an international
financial centre. I shall describe how MAS has met its responsibilities in these three areas over the
past  30 years,  some  of  the  key  events  that  have  shaped  our  policies,  and  how  we  intend  to  move
forward in the new economic and financial landscape.
Building confidence and credibility
Monetary policy
MAS  was  born  in  turbulent  times.  It  was  1971.  The  US  dollar  was  under  intense  pressure,  due  to
mounting  inflation  and  balance  of  payments  problems  brought  on  by  the  Vietnam  War  and  Great
Society  programmes.  In  August  1971,  just  months  after  MAS  was  formed,  the  US  suspended
convertibility of the US dollar into gold, plunging international currency markets into turmoil. In June
1973, the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates finally collapsed, and the Singapore dollar
was floated.
Having witnessed these tumultuous events and the instability they caused, the Singapore Government
enshrined  a  strong  and  credible  currency  as  one  of  the  key  pillars  of  macroeconomic  policy,  and
charged  MAS  with  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  it.  Tight  fiscal  discipline,  a  healthy  balance  of
payments, and a vibrant Singapore economy underpinned the steady strengthening of the Singapore
dollar.
A  second  defining  moment  in  the  evolution  of  MAS’  monetary  policy  came  in  1981  when  global
inflation  accelerated  in  the  wake  of  the  second  oil  shock.  Dr Goh Keng Swee,  who  took  over  as
Chairman of MAS, clarified low inflation as the key policy objective, and shifted the focus of monetary
policy  onto  the  exchange  rate  as  the  principal  policy  instrument.  The  high  import  content  of  our
domestic expenditures meant that domestic inflation in Singapore was largely determined by changes
in  foreign  prices  and  the  exchange  rate.  Traditional  monetary  policy  instruments  such  as  money
supply and interest rates were ineffective in controlling output and prices given the openness of our
economy. As Dr Goh explained: “in 1981 there was a clearer recognition that the way to beat inflation
is to have a strong Singapore dollar”.
Internationally too, a hard currency was an important sign that the Singapore Government pursued a
disciplined  economic  policy,  and  that  Singapore  was  different  from  the  many  developing  countries
which chronically outspent their revenues and depreciated their currencies.
At  the  same  time,  a  new  international  consensus  on  monetary  policy  had  emerged  with  a  greater
awareness of the costs of inflation. The notion that mild inflation might be good for growth had been
debunked by the experience of industrial countries in the 1970s. Instead, the industrialised countries
BIS Review 67/2001
1
the 
the 
lowest 
inflation  such  as  Germany  and  Switzerland,  had  experienced 
lowest
with 
unemployment  rates.  The  simple  Philips  Curve,  which  implied  a  trade-off  between  inflation  and
unemployment, went out of fashion.
In line with our emergence as an international financial centre, we progressively dismantled exchange
controls  in  the  1970s,  until  the  last  restriction  was  removed  in  1978.  The  absence  of  exchange  or
capital  controls  made  the  conduct  of  an  exchange  rate  centred  monetary  policy  that  much  more
difficult. Our small and open economy was especially vulnerable to sharp swings in the exchange rate
or  speculative  attacks.  We  could  not  afford  to  assume  that  speculation  in  international  financial
markets was invariably self-stabilising, and that speculators  who bet  wrongly  against  the  Singapore
dollar would automatically be punished.
Therefore,  MAS  maintained  an  explicit  policy  of  not  encouraging  the  internationalisation  of  the
Singapore dollar. It limited the extension of bank credit in Singapore dollars to non-residents except for
economic activity, and buttressed this with some restrictions on interbank Singapore dollar derivatives,
such as currency and interest rate swaps and options, which might have helped financial players to
leverage  or  hedge  their  positions.  This  policy  made  it  harder  for  would  be  speculators  to  short  the
Singapore dollar, and signalled unambiguously our disapproval of such speculation.
This framework served us well. That we encountered very few speculative attacks in practice perhaps
showed  that  the  policy  was  effective.  The  strength  and  stability  of  the  Singapore  dollar  instilled
confidence  and  kept  inflation  low.  Price  stability  provided  the  foundation  for  sustained  economic
growth, which in turn provided the basis for continued strengthening of the Singapore dollar.
We  benefited  immensely  from  this  virtuous  cycle.  Over  the  past  two  decades  since  1981,  the
Singapore dollar has risen steadily by more than 70%, on a trade-weighted basis. Domestic inflation
has been among the lowest in the world, averaging 2.0% per annum compared to 6.5% for the OECD
countries. In real terms, GDP growth averaged 7.6% a year, while GDP per capita in 2000 was two
and a half times the level in 1981.
Financial supervision
MAS’ second responsibility is oversight of the financial sector. MAS was an integrated supervisor long
before this became internationally fashionable. When it was formed in 1971, MAS was responsible for
both monetary policy and the supervision of banks. It took over supervision of the insurance industry in
1977, and the securities industry in 1984.
From  the  beginning,  MAS’  approach  to  supervising  the  financial  sector  was  centred  on  a  strict
admission  policy,  high  prudential  requirements,  and  rigorous  enforcement.  We  sought  not  only  to
maintain systemic stability, but also to  protect  individual  institutions  from  failing,  and  the  public  and
investors from losses. Lacking any track record, this approach was necessary to establish credibility
with international financial institutions and their home regulators. When it emerged that Singapore had
been spared the fallout from the collapse of BCCI because MAS had steadfastly refused BCCI entry
despite persistent lobbying, MAS’ reputation as a thorough and uncompromising regulator went up.
But despite our best efforts, we did have one major failure – the Pan-El crisis in 1985. Pan Electric
Industries, or Pan-El, was a holding company with interests in hotels, property and marine operations.
It went into receivership in November 1985, threatening the solvency of many stockbroking firms with
whom it had forward contracts. MAS closed the stock exchange for 3 days while a lifeboat fund was
organised. The four major local banks agreed to provide a standby line of credit, to aid the affected
stockbrokers and restore market confidence.
Pan-El showed up certain weaknesses in our regulatory framework. Following Pan-El, MAS revamped
the  Securities  Industry  Act,  raising  standards  and  putting  in  place  mechanisms  for  the  proper
regulation of the market. MAS considerably tightened its supervision of the stock exchange and the
securities industry. To some extent this tighter approach permeated beyond the securities industry to
other parts of the financial sector, and continued right up to 1997, when we shifted course.
Development of the financial industry
MAS’ third responsibility was to promote the development of the financial industry. Singapore did not
become  a  financial  centre  by  accident  or  luck.  The  Government  saw  an  opportunity  to  develop
Singapore as a regional financial centre. We had a time zone advantage, bridging the gap between
the close of markets in the US and the reopening of business the next day in Europe. We were also
2
BIS Review 67/2001
well-placed, with our good infrastructure and political stability, to serve as a point of intermediation for
fund flows in an industrialising Asia.
We started by  permitting  banks  to  establish  Asian  Currency  Units  (ACUs)  to  accept  non-Singapore
dollar deposits. This paved the way for the creation of the Asian Dollar Market, the counterpart of the
Eurodollar Market in London. We attracted international banks to set up ACUs here,  and abolished
withholding tax on interest income earned by non-resident depositors. We introduced a lower tax rate
of 10% for offshore income1. From these modest beginnings, the Asian  Dollar  Market expanded, to
reach total assets of US$ 500 billion today.
Another  major  initiative  was  the  creation  of  SIMEX.  In  1984,  the  Gold  Exchange  of  Singapore
expanded beyond trading of gold futures to include financial futures, and renamed itself the Singapore
International  Monetary  Exchange  (SIMEX).  SIMEX  was  the  first  financial  futures  exchange  in  Asia.
Well before exchange linkages became the norm, SIMEX co-pioneered the world’s first mutual offset
trading  link  with  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange,  facilitating  round-the-clock  trading.  Renamed
SGX-DT, the derivatives exchange today trades a broad range of interest rate, fixed income, equity
and energy derivatives.
A later initiative was the programme launched in 1994 to develop the fund management industry  in
Singapore.  Our  fund  management  industry  was  small  compared  with  other  financial  centres.  The
Central Provident Fund (CPF) system was absorbing the bulk of the population’s long-term savings,
and  starving  the  private  fund  management  industry  of  local  funds.  The  Government  liberalised  the
rules to  allow CPF  savings  to  be  invested  in  approved  unit  trusts  and  fund  management  accounts.
MAS and GIC went on to give modest mandates to external fund managers, although these could only
be the seed money to grow the industry. At the end of 2000, the total assets managed by Singapore-
based financial institutions was $276 billion, four times the $66 billion in 1994 when we embarked on
the programme.
New directions
The approaches that we took in monetary policy, financial supervision and development have served
Singapore well. We maintained low inflation and a macroeconomic environment favourable to growth.
Our capital markets have grown rapidly over the past few years, while our forex market is one of the
largest  in  the  world.  With  over  200 banks  and  merchant  banks,  150 insurance  companies  and
160 investment advisors in Singapore, we have become a major financial centre.
But  past  achievements  will  not  extrapolate  into  future  successes,  unless  we  update  our  policies  to
meet  changing  conditions.  Policies  that  worked  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  needed  rethinking  by  the
1990s. In 1997, we began a comprehensive review of MAS’ policy framework and approach,  which
has  led  to  fundamental  changes.  Our  work  is  far  from  done,  and  we  anticipate  many  challenges
ahead.
Credibility and dynamism – MAS’ approach to future challenges
Monetary policy
In monetary policy, certain verities are not likely to change. We will continue to manage the exchange
rate as our principal policy variable. The primary objective will still be to maintain price stability and the
purchasing power of the Singapore dollar, over the medium term. We will continue to guard against
destabilising speculation in the Singapore dollar.
However, the international environment has changed. We are witnessing larger capital flows and more
volatile financial markets. G3 currencies have tended to undergo prolonged periods of misalignment,
followed  by  sharp  corrections.  For  a  while  after  the  Asian  crisis,  when  currencies  that  were  quasi-
pegged to the US dollar collapsed in a disastrous contagion, a consensus was growing that the only
sustainable exchange rate regimes for emerging markets are either a hard currency peg or a totally
free float.
                                                     
1
In 1973, we reduced the corporate tax for ACU interest earnings from overseas loans from 40% to 10%. We extended this
to fees and commissions received by ACUs in 1976.
BIS Review 67/2001
3
These  corner  solutions  are  not  suitable  for  Singapore.  A  free  floating  exchange  rate  would  mean
relinquishing our most effective inflation-fighting instrument. On the other hand a fixed exchange rate,
pegged  say  to  the  US  dollar,  would  lock  our  economic  fortunes  to  US  monetary  policy,  with  no
assurance  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  the  state  of  our  economy.  The  intermediate  option  of  a
managed float remains the best approach for us.
In our experience, a managed float helps to buffer the adverse effects on the economy of short-term
financial volatility, and to avoid sustained currency misalignments that can be damaging to our export
sector. Managing the float requires us to lean against the wind at times, but provided our exchange
rate  policy  is  aligned  with  economic  fundamentals,  and  our  ability  and  determination  to  counter
destabilising speculation is not in doubt, we need to intervene less than might be expected.
Until recently, MAS did not reveal its view of the exchange rate, what it had done, or what it intended
to do. But going forward, MAS recognises the need to be more communicative and less opaque about
its  exchange  rate  policy.  Hence  we  have  been  making  half-yearly  monetary  policy  statements
announcing  our  prevailing  policy  stance.  We  have  also  published 
the
trade-weighted  Singapore  dollar,  hitherto  a  closely  guarded  secret.  We  envisage  that  if  market
participants  and  the  public  understand  our  policy  stance  better,  there  will  be  less  uncertainty,  and
policy implementation will be more effective.
We have also reviewed and refined our policy on the internationalisation of the Singapore dollar. The
balance of risks between not relaxing the non-internationalisation policy on the one hand, and lifting
some  specific  restrictions  in  a  progressive  manner  on  the  other,  has  shifted.  With  a  more  mature
financial industry and a more internationalised economy,  corporate  players  and  financial  institutions
have a greater need for Singapore dollars and its derivatives for commercial transactions. At the same
time,  the  economy  and  financial  system  have  grown  and  become  more  resilient  and  our  ability  to
manage the exchange rate has strengthened.
This  is  why  MAS  has  liberalised  the  non-internationalisation  policy,  leaving  only  the  most  essential
restrictions  in  place.  This  has  enabled  the  bond  market  to  take  off,  with  foreign  players  raising
Singapore dollar bonds, but swapping the proceeds into a foreign currency before taking them out of
the country. We will continue to fine-tune the non-internationalisation policy from time to time, but the
policy  is  no  longer  a  significant  constraint  on  the  development  of  our  capital  markets  or  financial
sector.
the  movements  of 
Financial supervision
MAS has also, since 1998, been reviewing and updating its approach to regulating and supervising
the  financial  sector.  First,  we  have  instituted  a  fundamental  shift  in  emphasis  away  from
“one-size-fits-all” regulation of institutions to risk-focused supervision, and from merit-based regulation
of products to a disclosure-based regime. Second, we have embarked on a programme to liberalise
access  to  all  parts  of  the  financial  industry  to  stimulate  greater  competition  and  dynamism.  These
reforms  are  aimed  at  providing  a  more  conducive  environment  for  innovation  and  enterprise  while
promoting  high  standards  of  risk  management,  so  as  to  help  make  Singapore  a  premier  financial
centre in Asia.
But these changes are just the beginning. MAS must continue to review and update its regulatory and
supervisory framework, to appropriately address the risks and exploit the opportunities presented by
the changing financial landscape. Let me outline three major challenges, and their implications for our
regulatory and supervisory framework.
Future challenges
The first challenge is that institutions will be larger and more complex. Singapore banks are merging,
in  search  of  greater  scale  and  efficiency.  They  are  following  a  worldwide  trend.  Bigger  banks  are
better-placed to attract high-calibre talent, invest in cutting-edge technology, and diversify their risks.
But they will also require tighter management and closer supervision, and the systemic consequences
of difficulties in a large bank are more severe.
Secondly, the soundness of Singapore’s financial system will increasingly depend on factors outside
MAS’ control. As our institutions expand their presence in the region,  their financial strength  will be
tested by their exposure to regional markets. At the same time, we are opening our markets further to
foreign players. This will also increase the risk of contagion as the soundness of foreign institutions is
dependent on their home market and global operations.
4
BIS Review 67/2001
Thirdly, we have to cope with new business models and financial products that are emerging faster
than  ever.  Technology  and  competition  are  transforming  the  way  in  which  financial  services  are
produced  and  distributed,  and  driving  the  convergence  of  financial  products  and  service  providers.
The traditional divides between banks, securities firms, and insurers are blurring. Securities firms are
offering deposit-like products; banks are selling  insurance under the rubric of ”bancassurance”; and
insurance  companies  are  offering  investment-linked  products  as  substitutes  for  unit  trusts.  As
Mr Andrew Crockett, General Manager of the BIS, said recently, the challenge for regulators will be to
”create rules of the game that are robust to fad, fashions and arbitrage”2.
How should MAS respond?
How  should  MAS  respond  to  these  challenges?  Our  objective  remains  to  promote  a  sound  and
progressive  financial  sector.  Our  approach  to  rule-setting  must  adapt  to  new  developments,  be
sensitive to the effects of regulation on industry, and be focussed in identifying and addressing risks.
We have already broadened the limits within which institutions have free play. We must now aim to
develop a pro-enterprise supervisory framework that will encourage innovation and dynamism without
compromising the safety and soundness of the financial system. Such a framework will comprise the
following elements:
 
 
 
 
Let me elaborate on these elements of the new framework.
risk-focussed, consolidated supervision;
harmonised regulation;
sound corporate governance; and
effective market discipline.
Risk-focussed, consolidated supervision
We are adopting a risk-focussed, consolidated approach to the supervision of financial institutions. We
will place more emphasis on understanding and evaluating an institution’s risk management systems
and internal controls. And we will apply this approach on a consolidated group-wide basis across all
constituent institutions, local or overseas.
At the micro-level, MAS is improving the processes and techniques it uses to systematically evaluate a
bank’s operations and risk profile to determine the key areas that require attention. At the macro-level,
MAS is enhancing its financial surveillance capabilities, to help identify emerging vulnerabilities, and
assess  how  they  will  affect  individual  institutions  or  business  activities,  so  that  we  can  devote
adequate supervisory resources to these areas.
Harmonised regulation
MAS  will  also  develop  a  more  harmonised  and  integrated  approach  to  regulation.  Consistency  in
regulation  across  similar  financial  activities  and  products  will  help  level  the  playing  field,  lower
compliance costs, and reduce the scope for regulatory arbitrage. In this regard,  MAS has begun to
streamline the licensing regime and put in place a risk-based capital framework across the financial
sector.
The new Securities and Futures Act will introduce a single, modular licensing regime for securities and
futures intermediaries. The Financial Advisors Act will provide a single licensing regime and a more
flexible and integrated regulatory framework, with consistent standards of business conduct for entities
engaging in financial advisory activities for all investment products. But this is not a one-off process.
As the industries and products continue to evolve, our laws and regulations will have to evolve with
them.
We are making progress in applying the concept of risk-based capital. In banking, where risk-based
capital standards already exist, MAS is working with the local banks to implement the proposed New
Basel  Capital  Accord.  In  insurance,  securities  and  futures  trading,  we  are  revising  the  existing
disparate  capital  frameworks,  to  replace  them  with  a  consistent  risk-based  approach  based  on
common principles and objectives.
                                                     
2
 “Issues in Global Financial Supervision”, Remarks at the 36th SEACEN Governors' Conference in Singapore, 1 June 01.
BIS Review 67/2001
5
Effective corporate governance
Over  time,  we  should  rely  more  on  corporate  governance  and  market  discipline  to  complement
prudential regulation and supervision. Good corporate governance is critical to fostering a strong risk
management culture and effective internal controls. Going forward, MAS  will  further  raise  corporate
governance  standards,  particularly  with  regards  to  enhancing  the  independence  of  boards  and
institutionalising professional management. But this must be phased in judiciously. We cannot impose
these standards in a vacuum without regard to the institutional and cultural realities in our corporate
sector.
Effective market discipline
Market discipline imposes external incentives on financial  institutions  to  conduct  their  business  in  a
sound  and  efficient  manner.  For  market  discipline  to  work,  there  must  be  timely  and  accurate
disclosure  of  relevant  information.  Investors  must  be  sophisticated  enough  to  make  good  use  of
disclosed information, and make considered investment decisions appropriate to their needs and risk
appetites.  MAS  will  progressively  raise  disclosure  standards  in  the  financial  sector  to  meet
international best practice.
Development of the financial industry
MAS  continues  to  be  charged  with  the  development  of  Singapore’s  financial  sector.  In  1998,  we
established a new department to focus our efforts on actively promoting the industry, identifying areas
of opportunity, and profiling Singapore as an international financial centre.
The task ahead is daunting. External conditions are presently not favourable. The global economy is
slowing down. Southeast Asia is taking longer than we had hoped to implement structural reforms that
are essential for sustained growth. Investors are waiting to see how events unfold. There are fewer
opportunities for institutions to service our immediate region, whether in offshore lending, mergers and
acquisitions, or treasury operations.
We can and must look beyond immediate problems, and press on to upgrade our infrastructure and
capabilities, so that institutions and investors will have stronger reasons to site activities in Singapore
and use our financial markets. Then as Southeast Asia recovers, which in time it will, we will be ready
to play our part in its pick up.
We have come a long  way  since  1968  when  we started promoting the Asian  Dollar  Market.  As  we
evolve into a full-service financial centre, it will become more difficult to identify individual projects or
areas to pursue. Our approach is therefore to establish a conducive overall environment, within which
market forces can operate and private sector innovation can thrive. We have to:
 
 
 
Such  a  competitive  and  pro-enterprise  environment  will  bring  out  the  areas  in  which  we  have  a
competitive advantage. We  cannot  predict  in  advance  which  activities  will  take  off.  But  when  some
activities succeed we can promote and encourage their development, always pushing in the direction
of market forces, and not against them.
develop efficient, comprehensive and world-class infrastructure;
put in place a sound but pro-enterprise regulatory framework; and
attract, nurture and retain top talent, both local and foreign.
Conclusion
MAS has built a reputation for credibility, prudence and competence over the last 30 years. But major
challenges  lie  ahead.  We  have  to  manage  exchange  rate  policy  in  an  increasingly  volatile  market,
build a sound and responsive regulatory environment that allows the financial industry to thrive, and
promote Singapore as a financial centre even in the midst of adverse external conditions.
It is always easy to shelter from change, to reject anything new and to adopt a risk adverse approach.
But if the sole objective of a captain is to protect his ship, then his vessel would never leave port. Over
the last few years, we have altered our course – opening up to, rather than sheltering from, the winds
of change.
6
BIS Review 67/2001
To navigate in this dynamic environment, MAS will have to continue to strengthen its own capabilities.
The pace of change is intense, and the demands on MAS’ resources, expertise and judgement  will
only grow. We must broaden our contacts and consultation with market participants and fellow central
bankers and regulators. This is the  way to keep abreast of the  latest  developments  in  the  financial
industry, and evolving best practices in central banking and financial supervision.
We  must  groom  a  corps  of  competent  and  committed  economists,  supervisors,  and  investment
managers within MAS. But this will not be sufficient. We also have to reinforce our team with talent
from industry and abroad. We already have foreign and mid-career professionals among our ranks,
but  we  must  attract  more  such  persons.  Only  by  building  a  truly  world-class  MAS  team,  will  we
succeed in our mission – to promote macro-economic stability, and a sound and progressive financial
centre.
BIS Review 67/2001
7
