Christian Noyer: First experiences with the euro
Speech  by  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  delivered  at  the
International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, held in Geneva, on 20 March 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am pleased and honoured to be able to speak to such a distinguished and varied audience today. I
am sure you will appreciate in what an exciting and important time we are living. In slightly more than
nine  months,  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  be  in  the  hands  and  pockets  of  all  citizens  of  the
participating  Member  States.  The  euro  will  thus  become  tangible  in  the  personal  dealings  of  300
million Europeans and cease to exist only on computer screens or in the press headlines. Travelling
from the sunny islands of the Mediterranean to the icy lakes of Scandinavia will no longer require any
stop at a bureau de change. This is no little achievement, to my mind.
While  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  certainly  bring  about  a  quantum  leap  in
people's  acceptance  of  the  euro  and  change  their  psychological  attitude  towards  it,  we  should  not
forget that a great deal has already been done and that Monetary Union is already fully-fledged reality.
I am by no means an impartial observer, but I think that the first two years of Monetary Union have
been a success. I hope to have convinced you of that by the end of my talk. The euro - the crowning
achievement of the Single Market programme - has de facto created a common market of 300 million
consumers, one of the two most important economies in the world. This reinforces the possibilities for
producers  to  exploit  the  economies  of  scale  that  -  at  least  since  the  work  of  Adam  Smith  -  are
regarded  as  one  of  the  main  engines  driving  economic  growth  and  technological  progress.
Competition  is  being  fostered  and  will  be  fostered  even  more  in  the  future  by  the  increased  price
transparency that the introduction of euro banknotes and coins will bring about.
During the first two years of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in Europe, we have dealt with the
difficult task of consolidating a new central bank, the European Central Bank (ECB). This has been by
no means easy, also because the ECB plays a role of global importance and is continuously in the
limelight of public attention. In my view, the ECB has proved to be very well equipped to tackle the
challenges  it  is  confronted  with  in  a  successful  manner.  An  important  contribution  to  this  is  to  be
attributed to the drafters of the Treaty, who have devised an institutional setting which is optimal for
the maintenance of price stability and the achievement of high levels of economic growth and welfare
in the euro area. I will come to that in a moment.
The transition to Stage Three of EMU in 1999 was a complete success from a technical point of view.
A  fully  integrated  euro  area  money  market  -  an  essential  prerequisite  for  a  monetary  union  -  was
reality from the very first day of the introduction of the euro. The overnight interest rate, a key indicator
of the monetary policy stance,  has been  practically the same across the countries in the euro area
since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  in  January  1999.  This  was  certainly  not  obvious  ex  ante.  It
required a substantial amount of preparatory work, not only by the central banks in the euro area, but
also by other economic agents, most notably the banking sector and the governments.
The main  yardstick for any evaluation of the success of  the  euro  is,  of  course,  the  maintenance  of
price stability in the euro area. This is the ECB's primary objective under the Treaty. The monetary
policy strategy of the ECB was designed in such a way as to ensure the fulfilment of this objective. As
a first element of the strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB defined price stability as "a year-on-
year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%".
This  definition  serves  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  provides  a  framework  against  which  the
ECB can be held accountable. Short-term fluctuations in the inflation rate are not under the control of
the central banks. Therefore, it was also announced that price stability is to be maintained over the
medium term, imparting a medium-term orientation to the strategy as a whole. In order to attain the so-
defined  objective,  the  ECB  is  pursuing  what  is  known  as  a  two-pillar  approach.  The  first  pillar  is  a
prominent  role  for  money.  The  second  is  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments and risks to price stability. Giving money a prominent role in monetary policy analysis is
something  quite  natural  for  a  central  bank  geared  towards  price  stability.  Inflation  is  ultimately  a
monetary  phenomenon.  The  prominent  role  for  money  is  signalled  by  the  announcement  of  a
BIS Review 22/2001
1
reference value for the annual rate of growth of the broad monetary aggregate M3. In December 2000,
the Governing Council of the ECB reconfirmed the reference value of 4 1/2% annual growth. While the
reference value plays an important role in monetary analysis, the assessment of the first pillar goes
beyond the evaluation of deviations of M3 growth from the reference value. It encompasses a variety
of approaches which assign a central role to money, as well as a detailed analysis of the components
and counterparts of M3.
Monetary  data  on  their  own  do  not  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  information  on  the
economy  required  to  set  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  for  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.
Therefore, in parallel with the careful analysis of monetary variables, a broadly based assessment of
the outlook for price developments and of the various risks to price stability in the euro area plays a
major role in the ECB's strategy. This assessment is made on the basis of a wide range of variables
influencing future price developments. This range includes, inter alia, the exchange rate, wages, unit
labour costs, bond prices, the yield curve, fiscal policy indicators, various measures of real economic
activity,  price  and  cost  indices.  In  addition  to  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  individual  indicators,
macroeconomic  projections  for  real  GDP  growth  and  inflation  are  regularly  made.  While  such
projections facilitate the structuring and summarising of some of the individual factors, they can only
provide a partial summary of the state of the economy. Hence they are only one element of the second
pillar. Overall, the two-pillar approach has proven to be successful in the first just over two years of
Stage  Three,  which  were  characterised  by  an  above-average  degree  of  uncertainty.  The  ECB's
strategy  is  certainly  rather  complex,  but  -  at  the  same  time  -  it  has  the  crucial  advantage  of
guaranteeing that no piece of relevant information is left out in the policy analysis.
Regarding actual  price  developments,  we  have  to  admit  that,  after  very  moderate  inflation  in  1999,
HICP inflation has been standing above 2% since June 2000. However, this is due mainly  to  direct
effects stemming from the external oil price shock. Such a shock cannot be prevented by monetary
policy. It is very positive under these circumstances that the public's trust in the ability and willingness
of the ECB to maintain price stability has never faded. This is signalled, for instance, by the low and
stable  inflation  expectations  implicit  in  long-term  interest  rates.  A  high  level  of  anti-inflationary
credibility has been obtained in no easy times, which were characterised by an increase in headline
inflation in the euro area in 2000 due to the oil price shock and the protracted depreciation of the euro.
This is important, especially in view of how oil price shocks in the not too distant past have sparked
long periods of higher inflation in Europe. In the long run, of course, there is no substitute for a track
record of price stability to bolster monetary policy credibility. This is what the ECB has been and will be
consistently aiming for. From this perspective, it is clearly too early to come to an assessment after
only two years of experience.
The outlook for the euro area economy remains positive at the current stage. Real GDP growth was
relatively strong in 2000. However, output growth was lower in the second half of last year than in the
first. At the same time, the overall level of confidence in the euro area has remained high. Economic
indicators relating to developments around the turn of the year support the view that economic growth
will remain fairly robust. The high overall rate of capacity utilisation, continuing employment creation
and  lower  unemployment  should  contribute  to  supporting  investment  and  consumption.  Looking
ahead,  for  this  year  and  2002,  we  continue  to  expect  that  positive  fundamental  factors  such  as
favourable real disposable income developments and long-term financing costs will underpin growth in
domestic demand. At this juncture, there are no signs that the slowdown in the US economy is having
significant and lasting spillover effects on the euro area. Nevertheless, the deterioration of the external
environment of the euro area constitutes an element of uncertainty, against the background of which
growth prospects in the euro area should be carefully monitored. As regards the medium-term outlook
for price stability, risks appear to be more balanced than in late 2000, mainly due to the moderation of
monetary growth.
The credibility of the ECB has also been fostered by the sound institutional setting envisaged in the
Treaty, as I have just hinted at some minutes ago. In particular, the clear assignment to the ECB of the
task  of  safeguarding  price  stability  and  its  independence  are  important  in  this  respect.  This  is
facilitated  by  the  fiscal  discipline  brought  about  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  by  the  "no
bailout" clause in the Treaty. The Stability and Growth Pact requires government budgets to be close
to  balance  or  in  surplus  in  normal  circumstance.  The  soundness  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies
represent  the  cornerstone  of  an  institutional  setting  which  should  foster  non-inflationary  growth  in
Europe in the future. It is important to recall that the design of this setting took stock of decades of
historical  experience  and  of  academic  research;  in  short,  it  took  advantage  of  a  long,  cumulative
process of learning.
2
BIS Review 22/2001
The  euro  has  become  one  of  the  two  most  important  currencies  in  the  global  economy  in  a  short
period  of  time,  as  is  signalled,  for  example,  by  the  massive  issuance  of  euro-denominated  bonds
worldwide. This position has been facilitated  by  the  economic weight  of the euro area in the  global
context. Some commentators have pointed out that the international role of the euro accrues to the
ECB's mission and gives it a compelling "global" responsibility. Let me stress that, while the use of the
euro as an international currency is likely to increase, the Eurosystem (i.e. the ECB  and the twelve
national central banks of the euro area) has adopted a neutral stance in this respect. We will neither
hinder  nor  actively  promote  the  international  role  of  the  euro,  but  leave  its  development  to  market
forces. However, by gearing its policy towards the maintenance of price stability in the euro area, the
Eurosystem  provides  a  sound  basis  for  the  euro's  external  value  in  the  medium-term  and  thereby
indirectly fosters the euro's international role.
Within the euro area, the euro is certainly acting as a catalyst to promote the integration of product and
capital markets. There is evidence, for instance, that the introduction of the euro has led to a strong
increase in corporate euro-denominated bond issues, a segment of the market where Europe was and
is still significantly lagging behind the United States. There is also evidence of an acceleration of the
process of restructuring the banking sector in some euro area countries, although really pan-European
mergers and acquisitions have hardly taken place. Finally, some evidence also points to  a reduced
"home bias" in investors' portfolios since the start of Stage Three of EMU. This would be a signal that
the creation of a truly area-wide financial market is on its way.
Despite all these successes, there is of course no reason to be complacent. Quite the contrary, a lot
remains to be done and the right attitude is to roll up our sleeves and go on working. The ECB and the
national central banks of the Eurosystem face many challenges ahead in their efforts to ensure that
the euro will be a lasting success. Let me now deal with some of these challenges.
At the current stage, the most obvious and immediate challenge on our agenda is obviously the cash
changeover, an enterprise of historic relevance that will change the life of 300 million Europeans in a
lasting  manner.  You  will  certainly  know  that  after  E-day  (1  January  2002)  the  euro  and  the  legacy
currencies will circulate in parallel for at most two months. The euro will become the only legal tender
in  the  twelve  participating  Member  States.  The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  are  actively
engaged on two fronts, the production of the banknotes and the information campaign (the "Euro 2002
Information  Campaign").  The  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  is  an  unprecedented
logistical challenge for all the parties involved, since around 15 billion banknotes and 50 billion coins
have to be produced. In order to support a smooth distribution of banknotes and coins, the ECB has
set up  procedures for the frontloading  and  sub-frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  inside  the
euro  area  as  from  1  September  2001.  We  are  all  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  there  will  also  be  a
considerable  demand  for  euro  banknotes  by  non-euro  area  residents.  Therefore,  the  Governing
Council  also  decided  on  some  general  principles  for  the  distribution  of  frontloaded  euro  banknotes
outside the euro area.
The  "Euro  2002  Information  campaign"  is  aimed  at  familiarising  the  general  public  with  the  new
currency  and  at  making  sure  that  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  are  well  received  by  euro  area
residents. The message of our campaign concentrates on four main issues, namely the detailed visual
appearance  of  the  banknotes  and  coins,  the  main  security  features  (which  will  be  unveiled  in
September  2001),  the  denominations  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  and  the  changeover
modalities. Let me assure you that we are taking the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins very
seriously. We are well aware that, in one year's time, the public at large will tend to identify the euro
and the ECB through the uniform image of the euro banknotes. Therefore, next year is of paramount
importance for the public image of the ECB as an organisation.
It should be stressed that the responsibility for the cash changeover does not fall exclusively on the
euro  area  central  banks.  Other  parties  (banks,  firms,  governments)  are  also  involved  in  the
changeover. Actually, the Member States have the ultimate responsibility for the changeover, with the
European Commission and the Eurogroup monitoring the whole process. This decentralised approach
is  reasonable  because  it  assigns  clear  responsibilities,  favouring  an  efficient  division  of  labour  and
fostering the accountability of all the parties involved.
Looking beyond the immediate future, there are still other challenges. For the ECB, maintaining price
stability is a permanent challenge. Building up a positive track record in this respect will be essential
for its medium-term credibility. Of course, other  policy-makers also face a number of challenges. In
particular,  it  was  decided  at  the  Lisbon  meeting  of  the  European  Council  that  all  possible  actions
should  be  taken  in  order  to  make  the  European  economy  the  most  advanced  knowledge-based
BIS Review 22/2001
3
economy  of  the  world  by  2010.  The  ECB  shares  the  view  that  this  should  be  the  most  important
ultimate  objective  of  policy-makers  in  Europe.  Enlarging  Europe's  growth  potential  is  the  main
yardstick for evaluating the pros and cons of different policies. At the same time, the ECB is convinced
-  and  I  think  for  very  good  reasons  -  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to
sustaining non-inflationary long-term growth is to maintain price stability in the euro area.
Europe's  main  problems  are  not  of  a  cyclical  nature;  its  main  problem  is,  in  fact,  the  high  level  of
structural unemployment. In the first two years of Monetary Union, the euro area countries have found
themselves in the best economic situation they have had since at least a decade, with robust output
and employment growth, low inflation and no major economic imbalances. What is needed now is the
enhancement of the growth potential of the economy over the medium term. The main task remaining
on  the  governments'  agendas  is  therefore  to  promote  the  structural  reforms  that  are  essential  to
increase  the  flexibility  and  competitiveness  of  the  European  economies,  and  to  make  them  more
permeable to the introduction of new technologies and business practices.
The area of labour markets is particularly  important if  the  unemployment  rate  is  to  be  lowered  in  a
lasting manner. A well functioning labour market should always ensure that general wage increases
are compatible with the objective of price stability (what I would define as "macro"-efficiency) and bring
about  flexibility  and  an  optimal  allocation  of  resources  (what  I  would  label  "micro"-efficiency).  I  will
concede that all these matters are not, strictly speaking, related to the euro; they would, very plausibly,
have been on the agenda of European governments anyway. The euro, however, makes them more
compelling,  forcing  European  governments  to  speak  to  one  another  even  more  frequently  and
together to find creative solutions as soon as possible.
Efforts to bring about further integration in the product and capital markets by harmonising regulation
across Europe are also very important. They contribute to making Europe really "one market" and to
providing further economies of scale.
Fiscal  developments  are  monitored  very  closely  by  the  ECB.  We  have  noted  that  a  number  of
governments need to reinforce their efforts to proceed along the path of fiscal consolidation in order to
achieve  the  objectives  of the Stability and Growth Pact. By  increasing the  level  of  ambition  of  their
stability  programmes,  especially  in  respect  of  expenditure  restraint,  they  would  free  resources  for
productive  investment  and  reassure  the  public  with  regard  to  future  tax  developments,  thereby
fostering economic growth.
I have already expressed the view that the ECB's best contribution to economic welfare in Europe is to
maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The  ECB  will  continue  to  address  governments  and  other
policy-makers, convinced as we are that monetary policy does not act in a vacuum and that the task of
maintaining  price  stability  is  much  easier  in  a  flexible  and  competitive  economy.  In  this  regard,  we
have taken note that, while some countries have implemented structural reforms, much remains to be
done if the objectives set at the Lisbon meeting are to be attained.
One  area  where  further  progress  is  needed  is  the  integration  of  the  equity  and  securities  markets.
There  is  still  a  certain  degree  of  fragmentation  in  Europe's  financial  markets.  The  Eurosystem  is
directly involved in the area of securities and settlement systems, because of the repercussions these
may have on the conduct of the common monetary policy. The Eurosystem is also active in ensuring
that  retail  payments  systems  are  harmonised  across  Europe.  At  the  moment,  cross-border  retail
payments cost more and take longer than payments effected within countries; this is incompatible with
a  well-functioning  monetary  union.  All  these  aspects  represent  important  challenges  for  the
Eurosystem and the financial sector at large.
In  conclusion,  I  hope  that  my  presentation  of  the  challenges  the  ECB  and  other  European  policy-
makers are facing has not distracted you from the assessment in the first part of my talk. It is perhaps
useful to restate my main findings. The introduction of the euro has been a notable success, and I am
sure that the euro will contribute to raising economic growth in Europe in a lasting manner.
4
BIS Review 22/2001
