The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: What the Bank of England is trying to do
through the Monetary Policy Committee in its conduct of monetary policy
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Yorkshire
Forward/Bank of England Regional Dinner, for Yorkshire and the Humber Business and Civic Leaders
and MPs, held in Sheffield on 16 January 2001.
 Mr Chairman, I am delighted to join  with  you  in  welcoming everyone to dinner  this  evening  here  in
Sheffield, and I should like to begin by thanking you, Master Cutler, for allowing us to host the event
here in the Cutlers’ Hall. I have had the pleasure of speaking here before – some five years ago, at the
Cutlers Feast – and it is indeed a privilege which we greatly appreciate. Thank you.
Since  then,  of  course,  the  Bank  of  England  has  been  subject  to  new  legislation.  The  new  Bank  of
England  Act  confers  upon  us  –  specifically  upon  the  newly-created  Monetary  Policy  Committee  -
independent responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy; but it also expanded and increased the
role  of  our  Court  of  Directors,  including  giving  an  oversight  responsibility  to  the  Non-Executive
Members of Court to ensure that the Monetary Policy Committee has collected the regional, sectoral
and other information necessary for the purposes of formulating monetary policy. These changes, inter
alia,  have  made  the  Bank  especially  conscious  of  the  importance  of  its  regional  presence.  As  you
know, we have a branch office up here in Yorkshire, in fact in Leeds, which serves as a part of our
network of eyes and ears and indeed voices at 13 locations throughout the UK. The new responsibility
made  us  more  conscious  than  ever  of  the  importance  also  of  visits  around  the  country  by  senior
members of the Bank in  London, including members of the MPC  and  indeed our Directors,  both  to
inform themselves about local economic conditions and to explain locally what it is that we are trying to
do.  That  explains  why  you  have  been  seeing  much  more  of  us  in  recent  years  and  it  explains  in
particular tonight’s invasion  of  Yorkshire,  by  11  of  our  16  Directors  and  6  of  the  9  members  of  the
MPC.  Tomorrow  in  Leeds  will  in  fact  be  the  third  occasion  on  which  our  Court  has  held  one  of  its
monthly meetings outside London since the new legislation was introduced in 1998, a practice which
we intend to continue.
So that I hope explains why we are here – and I hope that you will avail yourselves of the opportunity
to bend the ears of our representatives where you can – but preferably not until I’ve finished speaking
to you! For my purpose tonight is to explain what it is that the Bank through the MPC is trying to do in
its conduct of monetary policy, to say something about where we are and to explain some of the risks
and uncertainties that we are facing as we look forward.
What then are we trying to do? The MPC’s mandate from the Government is to maintain price stability
(currently  defined  as  an  inflation  rate  of  2½%  -  on  a  specific  measure  of  retail  price  inflation)  and
subject to that to support the Government’s economic policies, including its objectives for growth and
employment.  Now  no-one  can  reasonably  suppose  that  inflation  could  be  held  precisely  at  2½%
consistently over time. But we are consistently to aim at that target. Now what that involves essentially
is trying to keep aggregate nominal demand in the economy more or less continuously in line with the
overall supply-side capacity of the economy – as a whole – to meet that demand. In fact, although our
objective is defined narrowly in terms of price stability – the 2½% target – we can only hope to achieve
it  by  maintaining  stability  in  a  much  broader  sense  –  that  is  by  consistently  maintaining  a  balance
between  overall  demand  and  supply.  That,  essentially,  is  how  best  we  can  contribute  to  the
Government’s objectives for growth and employment.
It is in fact a necessary condition for maintaining the steady economic progress that we have seen in
recent years.
There is not a great deal that we can do – through monetary policy – directly to affect the supply-side
of  the  economy,  the  underlying  rate  of  growth  that  we  can  hope  to  sustain.  Maintaining  a  stable
monetary environment can certainly help, but that is essentially determined by the ingenuity and skills
of  our  business  managers  and  our  workforce,  by  the  whole  range  of  Government  policies  and
importantly too, Mr Chairman, by the imagination, energy and enthusiasm of organisations like your
own Yorkshire Forward in developing and putting into effect your Regional Economic Strategy. Our job
–  as  I  say  –  is  to  keep  overall  demand  in  the  economy  growing  broadly  in  line  with  supply-side
capacity.
BIS Review 2/2001
1
So how then are we doing?
First  on  inflation.  Since  we  came  out  of  the  last  recession,  in  1992,  retail  price  inflation  (on  the
Government’s  target  measure)  has  averaged  2.7%;  it  has  in  fact  been  marginally  below  the  2½%
target for much of the past two years and was 2.0% in the latest 12 months to December. Short-term
interest rates - which went up to 12% (and tentatively even to 15%) before we left the ERM in 1992
have been stable at 6% for the best part of a year. Helped by a decline in inflationary expectations, UK
10 year Government bond yields have fallen to around 4¾% which, apart from a brief period at the
beginning of 1999, is the lowest they’ve been for nearly 40 years. They are now just about as low as in
any major industrial country with the exception of Japan.
At the same time our economy has now grown continuously quarter by quarter for over 8½ years at an
average annual rate of 3%, which is well above most estimates – at least until recently – of a longer
term trend rate of 2¼-2½%.
And the number of people in work has recently been at an all-time high in the UK as a whole, and
close to its high point in your own region; while the rate of unemployment, on a claimant count basis, is
at a 25 year low in the UK as a whole and at its lowest for 20 years in Yorkshire and Humberside.
The question now of course is – can we keep it up?
The answer to that question depends on developments both at home and abroad, but let me comment
first on the international situation which is currently the focus of a great deal of attention.
As  I  explained  in  a  speech  last  night  in  Edinburgh,  the  bounce  back  from  the  world  economic
slowdown in 1998/1999 was such that in the year just ended world economic activity grew at a rate of
some 4½% which equals the fastest rate for 16 years – and compares with an average rate of some
3¼% over the last 10 or 20 years. In large part this recovery was underpinned by unusually strong
growth in the US, averaging some 4½% over the past 4 years and surging to a peak of some 5½% at
an annual rate in the first half of last year – compared with an average rate of 2¾% over the preceding
decade. This remarkable strength of the US economy was possible, without overheating, against the
background of unusually rapid productivity growth as investment in IT spread through the US economy
improving  its  supply-side  capacity.  These  developments  together  implied  higher  corporate  earnings
growth  in  the  US  pushing  up  the  stock  market  and  at  the  same  time  attracting  massive  direct  and
portfolio  capital  inflows  into  the  US  –  substantially  from  the  Eurozone  –  which  comfortably  over-
financed a burgeoning US current account deficit and underpinned the strong dollar.
However helpful all this was in supporting the world economy it clearly could not continue for ever or
without limit. At some point – and no-one could know at all precisely at what point – demand in the US
would begin to outstrip supply and the growing external imbalance between the US and the rest of the
world  would  become  unsustainable;  relative  asset  prices  –  including  the  dollar’s  exchange  rate  –
would over-discount prospective US corporate earnings growth and both equity and foreign exchange
markets would then become vulnerable to abrupt correction.
Against that background it has been clear for some time that there needed to be a slowdown in the
growth of the US economy to a rate which was more sustainable, both in the US itself but also in terms
of the imbalance within the global economy – and the debate turned to whether it would come as the
“soft landing”  we  would all welcome or a more  disruptive  “hard  landing”  which  we  could  all  well  do
without.
And slowdown, of course, is what we have seen over the past six months. In the third quarter US GDP
growth fell to an annualised rate of some 2¼% - less than half that in the earlier part of last year, and
much of the more recent data suggest a further weakening. This slowdown has been reflected in a fall
in  equity  prices  –  including  a  sharp  fall  in  the  previously  hugely  overblown  “tech-heavy”  NASDAQ
index; and this in turn has contributed to a typically rapid escalation in the language of commentators,
from slowdown, to imminent downturn or recession, to possible slump.
Of course it is always possible that it will come to this – no-one has a crystal ball – and it goes without
saying that we are all watching what’s happening very carefully. But that is not my own view of the
most likely outcome, nor that of my central bank colleagues from around the world when we met in
Basel  a  week  ago.  We  met  in  the  wake  of  the  Fed’s  move  to  cut  interest  rates  which  was  widely
welcomed as timely and appropriate, demonstrating sensitivity to the possibility of a spiralling decline
in  financial  market  and  business  and  consumer  confidence.  We  noted,  too,  that  in  announcing  its
move  the  Fed  had  made  a  point  of  emphasising  its  expectation  of  continuing  relatively  strong
productivity  growth,  giving  it  more  room  for  manoeuvre  than  it  would  otherwise  have.  Against  that
background, the view was that, while the US economy might be in for a bumpy ride over the next few
months, associated for example with inventory adjustment in the motor industry, the likely outcome for
this  year as  a  whole is  that  the  US  economy  will  continue  to  grow,  by  perhaps  2-3%,  and  that  the
overall  world  economy  –  helped  by  steady  growth  in  the  Eurozone  –  would  again  this  year  grow
probably at somewhat above its longer-term average rate. That, certainly, is a slowdown in the recent
rate of growth – and a downward revision of earlier expectations of growth for the current year; but it is
not a downturn in the sense of contracting activity. On this view, the slowdown in prospect would have
relatively benign effects in terms of the longer term sustainability of the global economic expansion;
and developments so far have already had positive effects both in terms of their impact on the world
oil  price,  and  in  terms  of  their  impact  on  the  pattern  of  exchange  rates,  notably  by  reducing  the
exaggerated weakness of the euro.
On that basis the global economic environment should provide a reasonable background for our own
economy. We – and our partners in the European Union – would be relatively little affected by the US
economic  slowdown.  The  world  economy  as  a  whole  would  certainly  be  helped  by  the  somewhat
softer oil price. And the recovery of the euro – including its recovery against sterling – will help to ease
the  severe  imbalance  within  our  own  economy  between  the  domestically-orientated  sectors  which
have typically been doing relatively well and those businesses and sectors that are most exposed to
competition from the Eurozone and which have been having a rough time. That imbalance is, I know, a
real concern to many up here in Yorkshire, including many of you here in Sheffield. It has, for some
time, been one of the most difficult issues confronting us in conducting monetary policy.
What then are the major domestic uncertainties? There are really three key areas:
• 
First, there is uncertainty about what in fact is happening on the supply-side of the economy,
that’s to say how rapidly can aggregate demand be allowed to increase before it begins to
run ahead of supply and put upward pressure on inflation or, alternatively how rapidly must
demand increase in order  not to run  below supply-side capacity and cause inflation to fall
significantly short of the inflation target. The target is, of course, symmetrical;
Secondly, and specifically in relation to the labour market, at what point does the growth of
employment  or  the  fall  in  unemployment  lead  to  a  rate  of  increase  in  pay  settlements,  or
earnings  growth,  which  would  subsequently  lead  to  accelerating  inflation  in  goods  and
services markets; and
Thirdly, what is happening or is likely to happen to the rate of growth of aggregate demand in
the economy anyway.
  Now, as I said earlier, there is not a great deal that we – through monetary policy – can do directly to
affect the first two of these areas of uncertainty, which relate to the supply-side of the economy. The
major challenge for us in these areas is in assessing – or quantifying – their impact. And that’s not at
all  easy  because,  while  the  effects  gradually  become  apparent  over  time,  many  of  the  relevant
developments cannot be directly observed or measured; nor therefore can they be predicted with any
great confidence. But we are sensitive to the fact that certainly over the past two or three years price
pressures in both product and labour markets have been less than we would have expected based on
earlier  experience,  given  the  strength  of  demand.  You  might  explain  this  in  terms  of  more  intense
competition and lower margins in product markets; or in terms of an increase in the rate of productivity
growth, perhaps related to the application of new technology, such as we have seen in the US; and
you  might  explain  the  recent  relatively  benign  real  earnings  growth  in  terms  of  the  more  flexible
functioning of labour markets. But we cannot be sure of the explanation, nor of how large or persistent
the relevant effects will prove to be. We are nevertheless sensitive to these possibilities; we do indeed
try to allow for them in our forecasts and in our policy judgements, based upon careful scrutiny of all
the  latest  information  that  we  have.  But  the  process  remains  necessarily  judgmental,  and  that,  of
course, leaves us vulnerable  to assertions that  we don’t give sufficient  weight  to  this  or  that  factor.
That,  some  of  our  critics  maintain  is  why  inflation  has  been  below  target  for  much  of  the  past  two
years. In fact the undershoot has been marginal – given the uncertainties - and can just as well be
explained by the unexpected strength of sterling’s effective exchange rate, reflecting the weakness of
the euro, which has both directly dampened the price level and constrained external demand.
We, of course, can and do actually affect the third main area of uncertainty – the nominal demand side
of the economy – by setting short-term interest rates. But here, too, we have to rely to a considerable
extent upon judgement, given the uncertainties
BIS Review 2/2001
3
   about what is currently happening to demand, given the lags and contradictions in the data
and the fact that they are in many cases subject to later revision;
about the strength and persistence of the underlying forces driving demand looking ahead;
and
about the sensitivity of the various components of demand to changes in the level of interest
rates.
It can’t be said too often that the operation of monetary policy is an art rather than a precise science,
although practising that art needs to be – and is – informed by as much science as we can bring to
bear.
For  what  it  is  worth,  at  the  time  of  our  last  forecast  in  November,  our  central  projection  –  on  the
assumption of 6% interest rates – was for output growth of around 2½% over the next couple of years,
with RPIX inflation remaining modestly below target this year but rising to 2½% in 2002. There was, of
course, a good deal of uncertainty around that central projection, as there always is, for the reasons
that I’ve tried to explain. But on the basis of that forecast the short answer to the question: can our
steady economic progress be maintained, over the next couple of years anyway, is a cautious “yes”.
Since that forecast was completed things have gone in different directions. The prospect for external
demand has somewhat weakened and so too has the oil price. There are mixed messages relating to
tightness in the labour market, but earnings growth has so far remained reasonably well contained - as
it  must  continue  to  do.  On  the  domestic  demand  side,  private  consumption  growth  has  remained
stronger than we had supposed, while the growth in private investment has been weaker; meanwhile it
is not clear that underlying public sector demand has – at least yet – picked up as rapidly as planned.
The exchange rate has fallen, and so, too, have market interest rates.
I would not venture to suggest how these – and all the other developments we look at – will influence
our next forecast in February; and it would be pointless to anticipate possible future policy decisions. I
would be surprised if they radically altered the broad prospect of relatively steady progress over the
next two years. But I can assure you of one thing: if the prospect – or the balance of risks around it –
were to change significantly – either in the context of our February forecast or subsequently – we will
promptly react to that change. Despite the fact that we left interest rates on hold again last week, we
have certainly not gone to sleep!
