Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent developments in the Danish economy
Speech by Mrs Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, at the Annual Meeting of
the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, held in Copenhagen on 19 April 2001.
 Wherever  economists  currently  meet,  they  discuss  the  development  in  the  US  economy  and  its
significance  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Not  only  is  the  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  development
considerably  greater,  but  there  is  also  great  uncertainty  about  how  serious  the  current  situation
actually is. Some of the key data on which assessments are based, such as stock prices and other
financial data, can be monitored hour by hour, while other key figures are available only after several
weeks or months have elapsed.
After many years of strong growth the US economy has slowed down. Most notably, stock prices have
declined. One year ago, the general perception was that stock prices, especially for IT stocks, were
excessively high. Nonetheless, the downturn has given rise to concern, since it impacts demand from
both consumers and business enterprises.
Numerous  economic  forecasts  are  drawn  up  by  national  and  international  authorities,  analysis
institutes and financial institutions.
Experience  shows  that  it  is  very  difficult  for  economists  to  predict  cyclical  reversals.  It  is  virtually
always the case that forecasts are only adjusted on the brink of the turnaround.
On the basis of the forecasts a “consensus estimate” is drawn up. As the basis for assessing growth
prospects for 2001 a number of forecasts are collated in order to aggregate the forecast data. In the
following month new forecasts will have appeared, and a new set of aggregate figures is prepared.
Viewed over a period, a picture is gained of the expectations of growth in the USA in 2001 (Chart 1).
In the first half of 2000, growth of just over 3 per cent was expected for 2001. The figure was even
higher, at 3.7 per cent,  when  the forecasts available  in  September  were  assessed.  Since  then,  the
expected growth in the current year has been reduced month by month, and the expected growth rate
is now 1.7 per cent, which is less than half the growth forecast for 2001 made in September 2000.
US growth prospects have thus been subject to extensive downward revision. However, it is important
to  bear  in  mind  that  it  has  long  been  considered  necessary  to  achieve  a  “soft  landing”,  after  the
unusually strong boom over many years. Currently lower growth, but not negative growth, is expected
in 2001. In view of the many years of growing accustomed to high growth, the current development is
nonetheless still perceived as rather dramatic.
BIS Review 32/2001
1
The Federal Reserve has reacted to this slowdown. In 2001 it has reduced its official interest rate in
four stages by a total of 2 per cent to 4½ per cent.
By lowering its interest rates the Federal Reserve is seeking to revigorate the economy and create
positive  expectations  of  the  future  economic  development.  However,  the  very  fact  that  the  Federal
Reserve  found  it  necessary  to  lower  interest  rates  so  rapidly  and  dramatically  emphasises  that  it
considers the situation to be serious and that there is a reason for the negative expectations held in
many quarters.
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  lower  interest  rates  together  with  other  initiatives  will  ensure  that  the
slowdown in the USA is short-lived. Many American forecasts are quite optimistic in this respect, and
expect a return to stronger growth by the end of year. The reasons given are that this is considered to
be a brief period of adjustment due to excessive stockpiling and expansion of the capital stock. Other
forecasts are less optimistic, however, and expect a prolonged cyclical slowdown.
Not only the development in the USA is subject to uncertainty: there is also great uncertainty of the
extent to which it will affect Europe.
The traditional source of influence is foreign trade. However, as a major market with a single currency,
the euro area has become less dependent on trade with the USA.
There can also be an impact via the financial markets, where movements in bond and stock prices are
homogenous across national borders. However, European consumption is significantly less sensitive
to the development in stock prices than US consumption.
Finally, it is clear that the strong media focus on trends in the USA in itself can contribute to affecting
expectations  in  Europe  too.  In  view  of  the  tax-relief  measures  already  adopted  by  many  European
countries the situation is more robust than in the USA, however. But it may be hazardous for Europe
to allow itself to be infected by US expectations and make things out to be worse than they are.
However, it is a fact that growth expectations for Europe in 2001 have also been adjusted downwards.
The curve (Chart 2) showing consensus estimates for euro-area growth in 2001 has thus been revised
downwards. In August-September the forecast average was 3.2 per cent, and now it is 2.6 per cent.
The  downward  adjustment  is  not  as  strong  as  in  the  USA,  and  both  the  OECD  and  the  European
Central Bank still expect solid economic growth in Europe in 2001. Against this background the ECB
has maintained its benchmark interest rate, the minimum bid rate, at 4.75 per cent.
However,  the  ECB  has  also  stated  that  the  inflation  risk  is  diminishing.  Overall  the  ECB’s  position
regarding interest-rate adjustments can be characterised as “neutral”, or “wait and see”.
Denmark’s unemployment rate is currently very low compared to rates in most European countries.
This has led to pressure on the  labour market, so that development in prices and  wages has  been
slightly higher than the average for the euro area. The tight labour market imposes limits on the level
of growth which is possible without jeopardising balance in the economy.
2
BIS Review 32/2001
A few years ago, we discussed the need to brake the economy, a “soft landing”, and this is what we
have  in  fact  experienced.  So  for  the  time  being  a  lower  growth  rate  in  Denmark  should  not  be
considered a problem.
Consumption has risen slowly, and growth has been driven by investments and exports in particular.
This has also benefited the balance of payments, and the deficit seen in 1998 has been replaced by
sound surpluses.
Should Europe suffer a serious economic downturn, Denmark will naturally also be affected. However,
there is reason to believe that the reaction will be more subdued in Denmark. Many companies are
close to their capacity limit and will not encounter any major problems in the face of more subdued
growth in demand.
Moreover,  government  finances  show  a  favourable  surplus,  allowing  the  automatic  stabilisers  to
counter any tendency for a downturn.
As a consequence of the fixed-exchange-rate policy Denmark’s monetary policy is closely linked to the
monetary policy of the euro area. Danmarks Nationalbank therefore matches the ECB’s interest-rate
policy and since October 2000 has held the discount rate at 4.75 per cent.
The  foreign-exchange  market  has  been  stable  since  the  euro  referendum.  Danmarks  Nationalbank
could therefore reduce the interest-rate spread vis-à-vis the ECB’s minimum bid rate to 55 bp.
In 2000 Danmarks Nationalbank played a very active role in the foreign-exchange market in order to
stabilise the krone and avoid any unrest in the period up to and just after the referendum. In recent
months the market has become better at matching demand and supply itself. For some periods this
has entailed slightly wider day-to-day price variations, but overall there is good balance in the foreign-
exchange market.
Currently,  the  concept  of  “benchmarking”  is  very  popular  in  management  literature.The  Ministry  of
Finance  evaluates  public  institutions  and  ministries  by  benchmarking.  Shareholders  and  boards  of
directors ask companies to  draw  up  key  figures  as  a  basis  for  peer  comparisons.  Benchmarking  is
considered to be good management practice.
This  concept  is  also  applied  to  assessment  of  a  country’s  economic  policy.  The  convergence
requirements  of  euro-area  participants  include  absolute  benchmarks  such  as  the  well-known  3-per-
cent maximum budget deficit, and relative benchmarks such as the inflation criterion.
The financial markets are no exception. The results achieved by a portfolio manager in an insurance
company or another financial investor will be compared with those of others in the same sector. When
investment funds publish their results, they are compared with benchmark portfolios.
This implies a tendency for all investors to do more or less the same. This herd-like behaviour is used
to  explain  the  often  very  substantial  fluctuations  in  prices  for  stocks,  and  to  a  smaller  degree  for
bonds, as well as the exchange rates between the major currencies.
It can sometimes be difficult to explain major fluctuations by underlying economic fundamentals and in
such cases more psychological reasons are given such as expectations or herd-like behaviour.
Portfolio managers tend to buy and sell the same securities as all the others. They know that they are
measured against the others, and there is good reason not to go against the flow. If things go badly,
they can always point out that others are in the same boat, and blame it on the market. On the other
hand, if they have taken an alternative strategy and things go badly, their reputation will be seriously
undermined.
As so often before, we have to conclude that what goes around comes around. In 1936 Keynes wrote:
“... it is better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally”.
During  the  last  decade  the  mortgage-credit  sector  has  experienced  several  waves  of  conversion,
utilising fluctuations in short-term interest rates. A change in rules and the strong decline in interest
rates  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  made  conversion  an  attractive  option.  In  the  following  years
fluctuations  in  the  level  of  interest  rates  were  used  in  order  to  convert  mortgage  loans.  Today,
borrowers have become more aware of the opportunities available. When a loan is raised, the future
conversion potential will be one of the underlying considerations.
Moreover,  mortgage-credit 
information  material  on  conversion
opportunities as soon as interest-rate conditions approach a situation where this might be favourable.
institutes  and  banks  publish 
BIS Review 32/2001
3
Bond  purchasers  are  naturally  aware  of  the  conversion  risk  and  therefore  a  higher  interest  rate  is
required for these bonds.
This higher interest rate has to be paid by both minor and major borrowers. Typically major borrowers
will benefit most from the conversions, since in relative terms they are subject to the lowest costs.
Investors would be willing to accept a lower  yield on uncallable bonds. However, experience shows
that the borrowers are not interested. They are willing to pay for the conversion right.
The mortgage-credit institutes must not grant callable loans financed by uncallable bonds, since this
would be in conflict with the balance principle which is a cornerstone of the mortgage-credit system.
The balance principle has been subject to minor adjustments on other grounds, however.
The fundamental requirement of a high  degree of accordance between the terms for loans and  the
issued bonds has been maintained. In Danmarks Nationalbank’s view this is of great significance if the
traditional status of mortgage-credit bonds as gilt-edged securities is to be maintained. This structure
was one of the key reasons for Moody’s recent upgrading of Danish mortgage-credit bonds.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the mortgage-credit  institutes on this upgrading.
This emphasises once again that the Danish mortgage-credit system is fundamentally sound at a time
when financial innovation is the name of the game.
Cooperation between Danmarks Nationalbank and the mortgage-credit sector concerns many different
topics. During the past  year, special focus has been on the new balance-sheet statistics, called the
MFI  statistics.  This  has  brought  us  a  good  step  forward  towards  more  detailed  and  comparable
statistics for both banks and mortgage-credit institutes.
On behalf of Danmarks Nationalbank I would like to thank the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks
and its members for the excellent spirit of cooperation that has prevailed during the past year, both at
management level and in the committee on the balance principle, and in committees on other financial
topics as well as issues of a more technical nature.
4
BIS Review 32/2001
