Jürgen Stark: The ECB and other European institutions and the future of the
euro
Address by Dr Jürgen Stark, Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 3rd Euro Capital
Markets Forum in Amsterdam on 2 April 2001.
 Introduction
In my statement I intend, in particular, to address the following two questions:
1. 
Almost three years after the establishment of the ECB, how is that institution to be rated in
terms of its strategy and policies?
What  are  relations  like  between  the  ECB  and  other  EU  institutions  or  fora,  especially  the
European Parliament, the ECOFIN Council and the Eurogroup?
2. 
I do not propose to address the future of the euro in the way you are probably expecting. Instead, I
shall  go  briefly  into  the  question  of  how  to  ensure  the  lasting  success  of  Economic  and  Monetary
Union (EMU).
My overall verdict on the first question will not come as a surprise: right from the start, the ECB has
done good work. EMU is functioning. Yet the challenges remain great, and the ECB still has to pass
the real acid test.
At a certain distance in time from the launch of the ECB and from the transition to Stage Three of EMU
in Europe, the sheer dimensions of the project must be called to mind once again.
First of all, the political dimension of EMU:
The highest degree of monetary integration was reached in the shape of monetary union. The member
states of the euro area have agreed to share a common fate. There is no way back. In other words,
EMU is “doomed to success”. Moreover, the residents of the euro area still have to be won over to the
euro.
The  new  political  “regime”  is  not  simple:  a  single  monetary  policy  is  being  accompanied  by  largely
decentralised economic and fiscal policies. But this regime is necessary, and it works, even if it is often
difficult to make clear to non-European observers. Close coordination of economic and fiscal policies
is  essential,  but  not  necessarily  a  Europeanisation  of  those  policies.  Potential  problems  posed  by
national and regional disequilibria within the euro area will have to be solved by greater flexibility at the
national level.
By contrast, any Europeanisation of economic and fiscal policies would call for Community instruments
– especially the instrument of financial transfers – and an efficient supranational institution. Neither is
provided for – quite deliberately – in the EC Treaty. Consequently, there is no “representative vis-à-vis
the outside world” of the non-existent single economic and fiscal policy of the euro area. I shall revert
to this point.
Besides the political dimension, there is also a technical dimension:
The internal preparations for Stage Three of EMU at the national central banks entail immense efforts.
The  numerous  technical  problems  had  to  be  resolved  by  means  of  close  cooperation  between  the
national central banks. Only those with insight into those preparations can judge the true dimensions
of  that  task.  In  EMU,  different  “cultures”  collided.  For  instance,  close  coordination  was  needed
between different modes of procedure in market operations, in payments, in settlement systems and of
course in exchanges of views on the different transmission mechanisms. Given the potential technical
risks associated with the launch of EMU, this has all worked unexpectedly well.
Despite these observations, the ECB and the Eurosystem have been exposed to significant criticism in
various  respects  in  the  past  few  years,  particularly  from  academic  economists  and  Anglo-American
commentators. That criticism covered:
BIS Review 27/2001
1
  firstly, the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem,
secondly,  the  transparency  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s  decisions,  and,  in  that
connection,
thirdly, the relationship of the ECB with the European Parliament, in particular.
The monetary policy strategy
1.
The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem is tailored to the specific situation of the euro area.
The  transition  to  the  euro  signifies  a  radical  regime  shift  for  monetary  policy.  Hence  the  monetary
policy strategy had and has to take due account of uncertainties relating to potential changes in the
transmission  mechanism.  These  factors  must  be  borne  in  mind  in  any  assessment  of  the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy.
Under  the  terms  of  the  EC  Treaty,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  is  serving  an
unambiguous objective: price stability. That strategy is based on two pillars: the growth of the money
stock  M3,  which  plays  a  prominent  role,  and  a  broadly-based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  future
price movements.
Some critics consider this to be confusing, and call for a clear orientation towards the money stock,
whereas others demand an orientation towards an  inflation target. It must, however, be made clear
that the two-pillar strategy is an autonomous European approach. The money stock plays a prominent
role  within  the  Eurosystem.  It  is,  however,  only  fitting  that,  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  changes  in
money-holding patterns owing to the introduction of the euro, consideration of the money stock should
be supplemented by an assessment of inflation prospects based on a broad range of indicators.
It is only the combination of the strict orientation of monetary policy towards an unambiguous objective
–  price  stability  –  and  a  pre-announced  strategy  –  the  two-pillar  strategy  of  monetary  growth  and
inflation prospects – that guarantees the transparency of the monetary policy decisions taken by the
Eurosystem, and their public control. In addition, the Eurosystem informs the public regularly about its
assessment of risks to stability (through press releases, press conferences, etc.), thereby contributing
further to the transparency of its monetary policy decisions.
The policies of the Eurosystem are often compared to those  of other systems. But the  Eurosystem
need not shrink from comparison with other monetary policy strategies. Incidentally, in this connection
the  question  has  already  been  raised  as  to  which  monetary  policy  strategy  other  Central  Banks
pursue, if not “looking at everything”.
The transparency of the ECB Governing Council’s decisions
2.
Transparency  is  an  ambivalent  concept.  An  “excess”  of  information  may  also  result  in  less
transparency  of  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  the  debate  on  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy,
quantity  and  quality  are  often  confused.  More  information  does  not  automatically  imply  more
transparency. On the contrary: more information may easily give rise to confusion, and  thus to less
transparency. Hence “natural limits to transparency” exist: perfect transparency would imply that the
central  bank  must  make  available  all  the  information  which  contributed  to  its  decisions.  For  purely
practical reasons, this is impossible. In practice, therefore, transparency is invariably partial, and can
never be complete and perfect in the sense of the theoretical models.
Criticism  of  the  alleged  non-transparency  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy,  and  calls  for  the
publication  of  minutes,  are  heard  particularly  often  from  the  Anglo-American  press  and  academia.
Remarkably,  the  disagreements  about  assessing  inflation  forecasts  between  the  members  of  the
decision-making bodies of those Central Banks that publish their minutes have engendered confusion
precisely  among  those  commentators  who  insist  on  the  publication  of  the  minutes  of  the  ECB
Governing Council.
In  the  specific  situation  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  publication  of  minutes  would  pose  particular  risks.
Whereas the entire euro area is considered in the ECB Governing Council, national viewpoints are the
rule among the general public, and also among policy-makers and the parties to pay settlements. That
is  illustrated  by  the  frequently-asked  question  “is  a  change  in  interest  rates  good  for  our  country?”
Hence the publication of minutes involves the risk of  political  or  public  pressure  on  national  central
2
BIS Review 27/2001
bank  governors  (on  the  mistaken  assumption  that  they  should  represent  the  interests  of  their  own
country), and thus of a “re-nationalisation” of monetary policy in Europe.
Besides,  it  must  be  said  that  the  informative  value  of  the  minutes  of  individual  central  banks,  as
published hitherto, cannot be compared to that of the “introductory remarks” of the President of the
ECB  at  the  ECB  press  conferences  following  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council,  in  which  the
arguments put forward during the discussions in the ECB Council are summarised. Moreover, these
summaries are published directly after a meeting of the Council – i.e. virtually “in real time”.
Excessive  transparency  can  make  the  central  bank  a  “hostage”  to  market  sentiment.  In  monetary
policy,  therefore,  transparency  is  not  synonymous  with  short-run  predictability.  Central  banks  would
then be constrained to react solely in order to meet short-term expectations. Hence there are limits to
central  bank  predictability,  as  monetary  policy  makers  must  have  the  option  of  taking  the  financial
markets  by  surprise  in  the  short  run,  to  ensure  that  the  central  bank  can  counteract  undesirable
developments. In the long run, however, monetary policy must be predictable.
Predictability  does not  result  in  greater  credibility.  Credibility  arises  in  a  process  whereby  monetary
policy has to prove that it can achieve its objective of preserving price stability in a complex economic
environment  fraught  with  uncertainties.  Monetary  policy  must,  therefore,  work  on  its  credibility  by
consistently accomplishing its stabilisation task.
Relations of the ECB with other European institutions and fora
3.
A new supranational institution in Europe also has to be assessed in terms of its relations with other
institutions. Particularly with the European Parliament, the ECOFIN Council and the Eurogroup.
Relations with the European Parliament and the ECOFIN Council are governed by the EC Treaty. The
crucial principle is that the independence of the ECB must not be called in question. The consequence
of that high degree of independence is that only the principle of ex post reporting is enshrined in the
EC Treaty, but not that of accountability.
Because the ECB has a mandate, and is independent in order to fulfil it, it has to be held accountable,
and  is obliged  to explain  and justify its  decisions ex post. Hence any  idea  of  putting  the  “monetary
dialogue” between the European Parliament and the ECB or between the Eurogroup and the ECB in
the  service  of  the  ex  ante  coordination  of  a  specific  policy  mix,  including  monetary  policy,  must  be
rejected. The actions and decisions of monetary policy makers can only be judged in terms of their
objective.  Under  the  Treaty,  that  is  unambiguously  price  stability.  Any  attempts,  especially  by  the
European Parliament, to “reinterpret” Article 105 of the EC Treaty in such a way as to suggest that
price stability and growth are monetary policy objectives of equal status are quite misleading. On the
one hand, that would impair the transparency of monetary policy, which would no longer be pursuing a
single  clear-cut  objective,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  dangerous  in  terms  of  democracy
theory  to  leave  the  decision  as  to  which  of  its  two  objectives  it  should  pursue  with  priority  to  an
independent  institution.  Both  in  terms  of  constitutional  law  and  in  terms  of  democracy  theory,  the
independence of the central bank can be justified only by setting an unambiguous objective.
Overloading  monetary  policy  with  several  objectives  would  also  be  risky  in  macroeconomic  terms.
Stability is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to fostering growth and employment.
Additional growth potentials can be opened up by further budget consolidation and structural reforms.
Independence must not be impaired by accountability. Pursuant to Article 108 of the EC Treaty, the
independence  of  the  central  bank  is  regulated  unambiguously.  That  provision  of  the  Treaty  also
applies,  of  course,  to  the  European  Parliament.  The  ECB  must  likewise  be  independent  of  the
European Parliament.
The ECB’s ex post reporting requirements are regulated definitively by the EC Treaty (Article 113 (3)):
“the ECB shall present to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, and also to the
European  Council,  an  Annual  Report  on  the  activities  of  the  ESCB  and  on  monetary  policy  in  the
previous and current year. The President of the ECB shall submit the Report to the Council and the
European Parliament, which may carry out a general review on that basis. The President of the ECB
and the other members of the Executive Board may be consulted by the responsible committees of the
European Parliament at the request of the European Parliament or on their own initiative.”
In practice, the Eurosystem goes well beyond these Treaty obligations. Besides submitting the Annual
Report  to  the  plenary  session  of  the  European  Parliament,  the  ECB  President  appears  before  the
BIS Review 27/2001
3
European Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs at quarterly intervals in order to
expound the Eurosystem’s monetary policy. Other members of the Executive Board may also report to
the Committee, and have already done so on specific topics.
In  view  of  the  ECB’s  general  willingness  to  cooperate  with  the  European  Parliament  on  this  issue,
there is no justification for any more far-reaching demands.
Monetary policy, the value of money, has deliberately been removed from national and supranational
parliamentary control in order to keep money and the currency out of the purview of day-to-day politics
and the clutches of pressure groups. This is a modification of the democracy principle for the sake of
safeguarding  the  currency.  In  the  current  debate  in  the  European  Parliament,  that  fact  should  be
recalled  whenever  there  is  talk  of  “democratic  accountability”.  In  order  to  rule  out  politicians’
intervention from the outset, the responsibility for the monetary system was assigned to the central
bank. That constituted an attempt to “de-politicise” monetary policy, to put it in the hands of experts
who, thanks to their long terms of office, are independent of day-to-day political concerns and have to
gear their policies to an objective.
These principles must be borne in mind whenever attempts are made to involve the ECB more closely
in macroeconomic coordination in the euro area.
In order to preclude misunderstandings, the following should be pointed out:
Stability-oriented monetary policy must be buttressed by responsible economic, fiscal and pay policies
to  ensure  the  lasting  success  of  EMU.  Since  those  policy  areas  have  remained  national
responsibilities, coordination is in the best interests of all those concerned, as I said at the beginning.
In line with article 99 of the EC Treaty, member states therefore regard their economic policies as a
matter of common concern. The functioning of EMU must not be jeopardised by the economic policies
of individual member states.
Coordination  is  accomplished  in  an  annual  cycle,  at  the  centre  of  which  are  the  “Broad  Economic
Policy  Guidelines”;  they  are  adopted  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  on  the  recommendation  of  the
Commission  and  after  discussion  by  the  European  Council.  The  broad  guidelines  define  the  main
economic policy objectives and the basic policy orientations. EU member states are required under the
EC Treaty to gear their economic policies to those guidelines.
Pursuant to the EC Treaty, the ECOFIN Council is the key coordinating body. It makes comments or
recommendations to the member states, and may, if necessary, also publish them – as it did recently
in the case of Ireland.
The enhanced coordination of economic and fiscal policies in the European Union (EU) is a serious
and  warranted  concern  of  the  ministers  of  finance.  The  EC  Treaty  specifies  the  procedures,
instruments and institutions envisaged to that end. In addition, the informal Eurogroup was set up in
1998, composed only of the ministers of finance of the member states of the euro area, in order to
intensify the exchange of views and coordination. The Eurogroup is, however, not a decision-making
body. Pursuant to the EC Treaty, decisions can be taken only by the Council, which is made up of the
ministers of all EU member states.
Thus,  the  Eurogroup  has  no  formal  duties.  Even  so,  the  debates  held  there  and  peer  pressure
emanating  from  that  body  are  important  and  useful,  especially  in  the  national  implementation  of
consistent fiscal and structural reform policy. This is why the Eurogroup should focus on that area.
The strengthening of the Eurogroup, which has been under discussion at the political level for several
months now, and which has also been called for by the EU Commission, must be firmly resisted
firstly, if the work of the Eurogroup is to be formalised, i.e. given an official status, and
–
–
secondly, if the independence of the ECB is to be adversely affected.
The formalisation of the Euro group is incompatible with the role of the ECOFIN Council as envisaged
in  the  EC  Treaty.  The  independence  of  the  ECB,  in  turn,  is  never  called  in  question  in  public.  But
neither must it be undermined in effect by changes in the procedures, instruments and institutions of
economic and fiscal policy coordination.
The Eurogroup is presumably to be strengthened primarily in its relations with the ECB. That would
definitely be inconsistent with the provisions on EMU, especially those governing the independence of
the  ECB.  The  ECB  has  no  need  of  any  political  corrective.  All  those  bearing  political  responsibility
today in Europe, including the EU Commission, must be reminded of the stipulation included in article
4
BIS Review 27/2001
108  of  the  EC  Treaty.  In  that,  “the  Community  institutions  and  bodies  and  the  governments  of  the
member states undertake to respect the principle of independence, and not to seek to influence the
members of the decision-making bodies of the ECB or of the national central banks in the performance
of  their  tasks”.  Hence  coordination  between  monetary  policy  and  other  policy  areas  is  out  of  the
question.  Likewise  influence  on  the  ECB  through  a  so-called  “triumvirate”.  A  glance  at  the  Treaty
would help to prevent false political ambition.
Already today, the dialogue between the Eurogroup and the ECB is intensive. It cannot and must not
be transformed into coordination including monetary policy. The young currency euro needs political
influence least of all. The much-vaunted “political visibility” of the Eurogroup exists. And yet, as I may
recall at this juncture: the only spokesman for the euro is the President of the ECB. He is “Mr Euro”.
Any political attempt to involve the ECB ex ante in political decisions or to create a second “Mr euro”
(namely, the Chairman of the Eurogroup) would only lead to a blurring of responsibilities and thus to
confusion.
Conclusion
1. 
Right from the start, the ECB has demonstrated responsibility, reliability and consistency in
its  monetary  policy.  The  ECB  is  close  to  its  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  and
keeping inflation below 2 % in the medium run. The inflation rate in the euro area is likely to
drop  back  below  2  %  in  the  second  half  of  2001.  The  ECB  is  pursuing  its  own  strategy,
geared to European conditions. Its decisions are based on its own analyses. It is not sailing
in the wake of the Fed. Up to the present, it has pursued a policy of “steady as she goes”.
Hectic  responses  by  central  banks  transmit  themselves  to  the  markets  and  increase
volatility.
The ECB must go on working to enhance its credibility and to strengthen the confidence of
the markets and residents. To accomplish that, it is important to withstand political pressures
and to defend the independence constitutionally enshrined in the EC Treaty against political
“attempted  embraces”.  In  this  respect,  the  ECB  should  be  less  modest.  It  should  be  less
reluctant to issue public clarifications whenever concealed attacks on its independence are
concerned. That is to say, the ECB must be prepared, to a greater extent than in the past, to
carry out conflicts with the European Parliament and the Eurogroup in public. The increasing
political demands being made on the ECB must be met with greater self-assurance. Failing
that, the young institution will run the risk of being forced on to the defensive in the event of a
serious test.
Politicians  are  not  doing  themselves  any  favours  by  making  demands  on  the  ECB  going
beyond  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  Instead,  the  politicians  should  concentrate  on  the  major
challenges arising in their own fields of responsibility in order to ensure the lasting success
of  EMU.  That  means:  the  right  order  is  to  be  given  to  the  political  agenda.  Too  many
resources are going into the question of how fiscal and monetary policy can be coordinated
to obtain the right policy mix, and to the question of who is to speak on behalf of the euro,
and who is to represent the euro area vis-à-vis other countries and international institutions.
Some  politicians  regard  these  questions  as  important  –  I  have  my  doubts  about  their
relevance. Answers to those questions are certainly irrelevant to the operation of EMU. The
fact  is:  there  is  a  Mr  euro,  the  telephone  number  of  the  euro  is  known,  and  there  is  no
common European economic policy; so a second Mr euro is not needed.
Instead, the politicians of the euro area should endeavour to continue their good approaches
to the further deregulation and liberalisation of the markets, for instance in the energy market
(where some rather disappointing signals are  emanating from Stockholm)  and  to  enhance
the  flexibility  of  the  labour  markets.  Tax  relief  and  reform  of  the  social  security  systems
remain on the agenda. As far as the Political Union is concerned progress has to be made.
In  this  respect,  the  stage  of  intergovernmental  cooperation  must  be  overcome.  The
prospects of a lasting success of EMU will be improved if
firstly, every country devotes itself in full to its own reform tasks,
secondly, every institution performs to the best of its ability the duty assigned to it by the EC
Treaty, and
2. 
3. 
4. 
 BIS Review 27/2001
5
 thirdly, the political integration process proceeds  apace  and  the  national  egoisms  become
manageable and ultimately are overcome.
6
BIS Review 27/2001
