Matti Vanhala: Old age, new economy and central banking
Speech by Mr Matti Vanhala, Governor of Suomen Pankki (Bank of Finland), at a CEPR/ESI
conference, Helsinki, 14 September 2001.
 A shrewd title for the conference! You see, ”Old Age”, in its ambiguity, is meant to be the gracious way
to  include  central  bank  decision  making,  and  the  occasional  central  bank  governor  in  these
discussions.  For  this  I  am  thankful.  My  colleagues  in  the  Bank  know  that  long  ago  Juha  Tarkka
converted  me  to  the  view  that  policy  oriented  research,  and  constant  dialogue  with  other  research
institutions,  is  increasingly  important  for  us.  The  policy  relevance  of  this  particular  conference  is
certainly proof of this. In order to engage productively with the academic world, central banks have to
allocate sufficient resources to research, and, as Juha Tarkka has argued in this institution, in order for
such an effort to be worthwhile, the investment must be on a consistent, long term basis, and it must
be strictly focused.
I appreciate the privilege of being allowed to address this gathering.
Coming to the topic of the conference, let me admit straight away that the more I read and hear about
the  New  Economy,  the  more  my  own  interpretations  shift  towards  the  conclusion  that  the  New
Economy is neither unique nor new. Even the exuberant rate of return expectations and the related
over-investment into itc in the second half of the 90’s seems a repetition of behaviour in connection
with major technological advances in the past.
As is to be expected from a central banker, I would certainly be very sceptical about monetary policy
doctrines carrying New Age connotations. Nevertheless, the operating environment of monetary policy
has changed. But it has been a very gradual change, resulting at least as much from deregulation and
internationalisation as from the adoption of its technology. That process has been going on for a long
time, long before anyone had invented the ”New Economy”. From a monetary policy point of view the
two important elements of that long term change are, in my view, first, that markets’ access to relevant
information  is  identical  to  that  of  policy  makers,  in  real  time  and  with  few  exceptions;  second,  that
trading in financial markets has become (technically) ever more efficient and indeed on a globalized
basis.
Although  most  of  this  got  under  way  long  ago,  it  may  be  that  on  the  official  community  started
adjusting to this change in the environment rather slowly, often reluctantly. Not least for this reason,
the  relatively  recent  prominence  of  credibility,  transparency  and  accountability  in  research  agendas
has  been  such  an  important  development.  It  had  to  emerge  as  a  major  issue  in  the  wake  of  the
changed environment, and in the light of some painful regime failures in the early 90’s. The greater
emphasis on price stability and the independence that in a great number of countries was thought to
be necessary for a central bank’s credibility and effectiveness certainly were an important elements in
promoting interest in accountability and transparency.
I would not say that this globalized situation is a more difficult environment to cope with for a central
bank,  but  it  is  certainly  different.  It  is  a  healthier  situation  in  many  repects.  The  very  existence  of
market anticipations and real time reactions is a powerful force tending to weed out what one might
call ”rhetorical and political window dressing” from policy making. The real time flow of information by
itself brings a kind of inevitable de facto transparence and at least a measure of accountability. It is
easy for the market to see and to assess economic policy in general and monetary policy in particular.
This is a healthy development; after all, all interest and exchange rate policy impact households and
companies in major way.
Also  the  macroeconomic  behaviour  of  economies  changes,  although  in  subtle  and  less  easily
identifiable ways.
Some  say  that  productivity  growth  has  shifted  the  Phillips  curve  inward,  in  the  US  and  perhaps  in
some other economies, possibly for a lengthy period, meaning that higher productivity growth would
coincide with – or could be made to coincide with - a widespread expectation of solid price stability
continuing,  allowing  lower  unemployment  without  fuelling  inflation.  –  This  would  be  an  extremely
attractive prospect. But we really cannot judge whether, in what social and political circumstances, and
where, this is at all likely. And where all would seem to turn out nicely, prudently we would have to
BIS Review 77/2001
1
assume that at some stage the constellation would turn around and real wage demands would catch
up with productivity growth.
What we do know is that every assumption about productivity growth, for the next few  years at the
very least, will be uncertain, to say the least.
This means that some of the standard pillars of policy debate, like output gaps and nairu’s, are eluding
us. They may remain useful conceptually but are nevertheless neither quantifiable nor a priori stable
enough to be useful when it comes to deciding responsibly on policy.
And  what  about  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy?  We  have  identified  a  number  of
channels and effects, but how much do we really know about their relative importance in the kind of
fluid world in which we live – in that ”slice” of a constantly evolving constellation that we happen to
inhabit at any given moment, with balance sheets, market structures, institutions, behaviour patterns
shifting all the time. How much of the accumulated analytical research could possibly provide ground
solid enough to allow reasonable assessment of the likely consequences of alternative policy choices?
Analytical work is advancing impressively on all fronts, but at the same time the world has gone into a
mode of continuous change.
Thus there is probably less and less of theory that one could responsibly commit monetary policy to.
Fortunately, as we take on board all these vagaries, at the same time we seem to be getting rid of
some  inconvenient  ballast  that  perhaps  looked  a  little  bit  too  conspiratory  for  comfort,  namely  the
notion that unanticipated policy may reduce real disturbances. What a relief. Unanticipated policy is
not an enormously credible possibility in the kind of world into which we have been moving. Ambiguity
is  a  poor  policy  to  sell;  it  assumes  an  uninformed  public  and  an  uninformed  professional  market.
Fortunately, we do not have that.
All  clearly  specified  monetary  policy  decision  rules,  like  the  popular  Taylor  rule  along  with  all  its
variants,  depend  on  reasonably  solid  knowledge  about  key  inputs,  one  being  the  output  gap,  or
equilibriu real interest rates, etc. My lay impression is that not much of that is available with the kind of
probability that one would look for in public policy discussions.
This means that the credibility of monetary policy cannot be based on a central bank locking itself in by
means  of  a  specific  irrevocable  commitment.  The  possibility  of  such  locking  in  of  the  central  bank
features prominently in analytical debate outside the central banking community, but it is probably an
illusion, a will-o’-the-wisp? (Currency board regimes being a separate regime altogether, and I do not
think we are generally looking for last resort regimes.)
All this is not a problem for the ECB in particular. It is a reality for all central banks operating in market
economies. This will be clear to those who have read Bob Woodward’s recent account of monetary
policy making in the US in the 90’s. I suggest that it be read with professor Mankiw’s recent essay as a
companion.
Whenever monetary policy really matters, i.e.. when the outlook is a cause for great concern, there is
so much uncertainty in the air about current and future behaviour, including previous policy decisions
still working themselves out in the pipeline. Any policy measure to be taken will overlap and interact
with many other past and future decisions.
So there we are, pretty naked (or perhaps: naked, but not pretty).
xxx
Obviously,  so  are  those  who  analyse  and  comment  on  central  bank  policy.  For  that  reason,  the
commentary  does  not  always  advance  our  understanding  of  what  would  be  a  way  forward.  This
applies equally to criticism as well as the occasional approval.
There is another reason: It is often difficult to precisely pinpoint the target and focus of a comment.
Quite often a comment is not really about how the ECB conducts policy but about whether and how
Maastricht  should  be  changed.  Often  a  desire  to  achieve  a  shift  in  the  objectives  of  ECB  policy  is
involved, away from the primary role of price stability.
I am of course more interested in suggestions as to how we might best accomplish the task within our
mandate,  by  which  we  are  bound.  Of  course  the  mandate  may  also  be  an  interesting  subject  of
inquiry, but it belongs in a different compartment.
2
BIS Review 77/2001
For the ECB, there can be no question about the primacy of price stability as an objective. The Treaty
is  very  explicit  on  this  point.  Other  possible  objectives,  including  the  exchange  rate,  are  strictly
subordinated.
I have some difficulty imagining how we would in practice pursue secondary objectives in parallel with
a primary goal, having only an interest rate at our disposal. There would occasionally be scope to let
those secondary concerns weigh in the setting of rates, but it could never be anything systematic and
consistent. One wonders whether analytically a case can credibly be made for such on/off occasional
fine  tuning  of  occasional  objectives.  In  popular  political  debate,  there  are,  as  you  know,  constant
demands of this kind, so this is not an impertinent remark to make.
Having  expectations  of  low  inflation,  i.e.  monetary  stability,  firmly  in  place  is  really  irreplaceable  in
providing  the  conditions  for  pursuing  all  those  other  policies  immediately  concerned  with  the  real
economy and human welfare. This is in my view no minor point.
Getting expectations of monetary stability firmly is in itself an enormous job for monetary policy. My
personal prejudice is that, apart from good faith, transparency is more important than anything else.
We cannot hope to forecast accurately. Nor can we be sure about the precise impact of our decisions.
And since the public knows this, and is in any case more enlightened than we the establishment like to
think, it does not enhance credibility to pretend that we know everything and are always fully in control.
It is enough, but then also very important, that the public knows that the central bank is not shy about
adjusting its view as the facts change.
Transparency clearly means different things to different people. To me, its essential content is that the
broad public has
• 
clarity about the objective(s) of monetary policy
• 
clarity about the central bank’s diagnosis of the economic situation and the outlook
• 
certainty about the central bank’s determination to pursue consistently its declared objective.
Communication  then  becomes  quite  important.  Above  all  else,  it  has  to  be  open,  and  it  has  to  be
directed  to  a  broad  public,  because  this  is  where  the  expectations  of  price  stability  have  to  be
anchored. It goes without saying that correctly guiding the “markets” is also important, but this is so for
somewhat different reasons, and it is a less difficult job. The financial markets are sophisticated in this
area and I would claim, that whatever their posturing, they are rarely misled.
Communication is an area where the ECB is often faulted by the media and the markets. This being
the case, we should take it seriously, of course.
But  perhaps  the  critics  are  both  right  and  wrong.  It  is  not  helpful  if  the  public  and  the  markets  are
confused by what they perceive as possibly contradictory statements about the intents and reasoning
in monetary policy, or if the information is too scant to allow the public to make an assessment of the
policy. This is an area in which the ECB probably can and should improve.
But there is also another angle to this. Every policy decision results from weighing a number of pros
and  cons.  In  the  end  a  judgement  is  made.  It  is  an  unambiguous  outcome  that  can  and  will  be
communicated as it comes out from the discussion. But, it is also a fact that the pros and cons remain,
along  with  the  mass  of  partly  contradictory  indicators,  as  the  basis  of  the  decision.  We  should
therefore perhaps not be shocked if the members of the decision making body, in their efforts to “open
up the decision” for the public by explaining the various considerations that went into it, use their own
words and thereby risk being interpreted  as  representing  different  nuancings.  It  is  self  evident,  and
desirable, that members of a decision making in the the area of public policy bring their own views to
the table, as the input for the process of coming to common decisions.
Some  of  the  central  banks  practising  inflation  targeting  even  publish  summary  minutes  or  voting
records. Outside analysts have not been of the opinion that this would have reduced their credibility,
quite the contrary. A relatively broadly based engagement with the media and the broad public is a
hallmark of the ECB. This is in part due to its non-federal institutional basis. But it is also more in tune
with a world in which everyone who so wishes has equal and real time access to facts, information,
analysis and forecasts, and in which we know that nothing, literally nothing but the trivial, is certain.
In  line  with  what  I  earlier  set  out  regarding  transparency,  I  believe  in  accepting  and  indeed
encouraging open debate in all areas of public policy.
BIS Review 77/2001
3
So, even if some of the debate about the ECB’s transparency and its communication profile has been
tongue in cheek, it is, as usual in an engaged debate, for a good cause, with great conviction and in
good faith.
My  personal  conclusion  from  all  this  is  that  a  devoted  involvement  on  the  part  of  the  academic
community is highly desirable. If it is to weigh in public debate, it must of course be visible, which by
the way is important also as a counterweight to the populist brand of debate that tends to get more
attention.
My second conclusion is that central banks, the Eurosystem central banks included, should consider
own research as fundamental to their ability to participate in the shaping of policy and in the debate.
Their involvement in the public debate is needed; otherwise the academic community has no one to
debate with.
4
BIS Review 77/2001
