David Dodge: Current developments in the Canadian economy
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the annual meeting of the Bank’s
Board of Directors, Ottawa, 21 September 2001.
 For reasons explained in our media advisory of 17 September, the annual out-of-town meeting of the
Bank’s Board of  Directors that was to take place  on  19 September in  Moncton was held in Ottawa
instead.  A  scheduled  speech  by  Governor  Dodge  to  the  Moncton  Chamber  of  Commerce  was
postponed. The following is the section of that speech dealing with current economic developments.
Right  now,  last  week’s  tragic  events  in  the  United  States  are  uppermost  in  people’s  minds.  Like
millions of people around the globe, Canadians are very concerned about the situation. We all share in
the sheer horror of what has happened.
In circumstances like these, part of our job as Canada’s central bank is to respond by addressing the
financial needs of the country. That is why the Bank of Canada, like other major central banks, moved
swiftly last week to provide liquidity to ensure that financial markets continued to function effectively. In
addition,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  agreed  to  temporarily  increase  the
amount of their existing swap facility to provide liquidity in U.S. dollars to Canadian banks, should they
need  it  to  settle  their  U.S.  dollar  transactions.  And  this  past  Monday,  we  took  action  to  counteract
potential effects on confidence in the aftermath of the extraordinary  events  in the United  States, by
lowering our key policy rate outside our normal schedule of announcement dates.
Clearly, the events in the United States have increased the uncertainty surrounding global economic
prospects  in  the  short  run.  It  is  important,  however,  that  we  look  through  the  short  term  to  the
longer-term trends and potential of our economy.
The first decade of the twenty-first century will continue to bring to Canada and to the rest of the world
important  technological  changes—changes  that  will  transform  our  economies  through  the  widening
application  of  new  information,  communications,  and  other  general-purpose  technologies.  This
transformation can be expected to raise the potential of our economy to grow and to generate income
gains in  the  decade  ahead.  Once  the  cyclical  forces  that  are  currently  constraining  investment  and
innovation  are  behind  us,  we  should  see  productivity  and  income  gains  from  past  investments  and
adjustment. And the way will be clear for further innovation and growth.
In  addition,  Canada  has  made  great  progress  over  the  past  decade  in  strengthening  its  economic
foundations:  low  inflation  has  been  firmly  established;  the  fiscal  health  of  governments  has  been
largely restored; and Canadian businesses have undertaken major restructuring.
Thus,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  growth  in  output,  employment,  and  incomes  in  Canada  is  very
favourable.
Let me now put the short term in perspective.
Around  this  time  last  year,  both  the  Canadian  and  the  U.S.  economies  were  pushing  against,  or
through,  their  capacity  limits.  Because  of  that,  some  slowing  was  anticipated,  and  indeed  was
desirable, to keep inflation in check. However, the economic slowdown in the latter part of 2000 was
more abrupt than had been foreseen, especially in the information and communications sectors.
At the beginning of 2001, the Bank of Canada expected that the economic slowdown in this country
would  continue  through  the  first  half  of  the  year  and  that  inflationary  pressures  would  therefore  be
reduced. Thus, we began to lower interest rates.
We also expected that, as the process of adjusting inventories and excess capacity was completed in
most industries, capital spending in the United States, which had been sharply curtailed, would begin
to recover in the second half of 2001.
With the pace of economic expansion thus picking up in the United States, we expected that growth in
Canada would also rebound—to above the growth of the economy’s production potential—during the
first half of 2002. Consequently, the small output gap that had opened in 2001 would begin to close.
The economic data received through last winter and spring were broadly consistent with this scenario,
and the pace of monetary easing was set accordingly.
BIS Review 79/2001
1
By  mid-summer,  however,  evidence  began  to  accumulate  that  the  U.S.  slowdown  would  be  more
protracted than anticipated and that economic activity outside North America would be much weaker.
At the same time, there were indications that domestic demand in Canada,  which had  held up  well
through the first part of the year, was softening.
In view of these  developments, at the time of our last fixed announcement date, on 28 August,  we
revised  down  our  expectations  for  economic  growth  in  the  period  ahead.  We  projected  that  output
growth in the second half of 2001 would be only slightly stronger than in the first half. The pace of
economic  expansion  would  then  start  to  gain  momentum  in  the  first  half  of  2002  and  would  move
above potential growth in the second half. This meant more economic slack going into next year than
we had previously anticipated, and it would take longer to absorb.
In  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  lowered  interest  rates  again,  at  the  end  of  August,  to  support
domestic demand growth and to keep inflation near the target of 2 per cent over the medium term. And
in our press release of 28 August we indicated that, given the continuing uncertainties in the global
economy, particularly the timing and strength of the recovery in investment in the United States, and
the  uncertainty  surrounding  domestic  demand  growth  in  Canada,  we  would  continue  to  monitor
developments closely.
Last  week’s  tragic  developments  in  the  United  States,  and  their  reverberations  around  the  world,
obviously  bring  with  them  further  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  timing  and  extent  of  a  rebound  in
economic activity.
Although  it  is  too  early  to  fully  assess  the  likely  consequences  for  our  economy,  the  Bank’s  initial
efforts  involve  trying  to  estimate  the  direct  effects  of  disruption  in  sectors  such  as  transportation,
finance, and tourism. The terrorist attacks on the United States will also affect consumer and business
confidence worldwide, including here in Canada. It is precisely for this reason that we moved promptly
this  week  to  lower  interest  rates  by  one-half  of  one  percentage  point.  This  action,  which  leaves
short-term  interest  rates  2  1/4  percentage  points  lower  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  aims  to
provide further support for economic growth in Canada.
The Bank also recognizes that a key factor in preserving the confidence of Canadians in the prospects
of  our  economy  is  a  financial  system  that  continues  to  function  effectively.  That  is  why,  as  I  said
earlier,  we took steps, together  with the other G-7 central banks, to inject liquidity into the  financial
system to support its smooth functioning  in  the  wake  of  the  tragic  events  in  the  United  States. We
stand ready to do so whenever necessary. But it is encouraging that at this juncture, with each passing
day, we seem to be moving back to a more normal state of affairs in the financial system.
Right now, it is difficult to look too far ahead in terms of the economic implications for Canada of last
week’s events. Nevertheless, economic growth in the third quarter will likely be close to zero or slightly
negative, and we will continue to feel the adverse effects into the fourth quarter. With the economic
slack that is opening up, we continue to see core inflation falling to about 2 per cent by year-end. We
also project that total CPI inflation will drop to close to 2 per cent over the same period, assuming that
energy  prices  remain  near  current  levels.  There  is  a  risk  that  world  oil  prices  could  rise  sharply,
depending on the fallout from last week’s events.
A more complete analysis of the impact of last week’s events on the Canadian economy, including the
effects  on  output  and  inflation  in  2002,  will  be  carried  out  as  we  prepare  for  our  next  policy
announcement on 23 October. This analysis will be presented in our November 2001 Monetary Policy
Report. Clearly, there are adverse effects that need to be assessed, but there will also be offsetting
factors, from such activities as rebuilding in the United States and a return to more normal operations
in  both  Canada  and  the  United  States,  that  need  to  be  considered.  Given  the  uncertainties
surrounding all these elements, there will be a wider-than-usual confidence band around the economic
outlook for next year.
2
BIS Review 79/2001
