Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Statement on renomination to the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
Testimony of Mr Roger W Ferguson Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 13 June
2001.
 Chairman Sarbanes, Senator Gramm, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before
you today as President Bush's nominee to serve on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System. I am honored that the President has nominated me to serve a full term as a member of the
Board.
As a Governor, I am particularly mindful that the policy decisions of the Federal Reserve influence the
economic  well-being  of  all  Americans.  It  has  been  my  privilege  to  serve  our  fellow  citizens  in  this
capacity since 1997, giving this role my undivided attention, and I hope to be able to continue in that
service.
During  my  tenure  we  have  faced  a  rapidly  changing  environment  in  many  of  our  areas  of
responsibility,  and  I  would  like  to  review  briefly  some  of  those  developments  and  our  responses  to
them.
Congress  has  given  the  Federal  Reserve  three  monetary  policy  objectives:  maximum  employment,
stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. We have viewed these objectives as congruent
with  a  goal  of  maximum  sustainable  growth,  which  can  occur  only  in  the  context  of  long-run  price
stability. Fostering financial conditions in which Americans can realize the full productive potential of
our  economy  has  presented  a  number  of  challenges  in  recent  years.  The  most  important
developments have been a step-up in the advance of technology – both in terms of the production of
new  goods  and  the  more  effective  harnessing  of  past  innovations  –  and  a  rapid  accumulation  of
physical  capital.  These  developments  have  made  workers  increasingly  more  productive.  But  faster
productivity  growth  fed  back  on  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  ways  that  complicated  the
calibration  of  monetary  policy.  Faster  growth  in  productivity  and  the  reactions  of  businesses  and
households  to  this  acceleration  of  productivity  have  combined  with  other  forces-particularly  those
associated  with  the  growing  interconnectedness  of  the  global  economy-  to  require  substantial
adjustments in the Federal Reserve's policy interest rate in recent years. But those adjustments in our
policy instrument have been in the service of our objective of promoting maximum sustainable growth.
Making monetary policy has been only part of the challenge. During my tenure at the Federal Reserve
we have also worked diligently to communicate to the public what we are doing with policy and why.
Transparency  in  policy  making  is  a  key  part  of  the  democratic  process,  as  well  as  being  helpful  in
fostering efficient decision making in the private sector. Becoming more transparent has been a goal
of the central bank in recent years, keeping in mind that we must balance the need to be open and
accountable with the need to maintain an effective process of decision making by the Federal Open
Market Committee. Transparency  requires  that  we  periodically  review  our  procedures,  as  we  did  in
1999,  to  ensure  that  they  appropriately  balance  these  considerations.  I  do  not  know  what  future
changes,  if  any,  might  be  called  for  in  how  we  communicate,  but  I  am  confident  that  the  Federal
Reserve  will  continue  to  look  for  ways  to  communicate  clearly  our  policies  and  our  supporting
rationales.
While  macroeconomic  conditions  are  of  overriding  importance,  the  role  of  the  Federal  Reserve  is
broader than monetary policy. Financial stability is an essential precondition for maintaining a strong
economy, and the Federal Reserve has important supervisory and regulatory responsibilities for our
nation's  banking  system.  The  Federal  Reserve,  and  other  regulators,  must  continue  to  foster  a
competitive environment that will benefit the users of financial services,  while  also promoting safety
and soundness. I believe that we must achieve these goals with a minimum of regulatory burden and
without leaving the impression that any institution is too big to fail. To minimize regulatory burden and
achieve our other objectives, we should encourage what to my mind are the best regulators, namely
market discipline and management accountability. Of late, our challenge has been to meet these goals
as  we  implement  the  financial  modernization  law.  In  my  opinion,  Congress  wisely  removed  several
antiquated barriers to a modern financial structure in the United States, and now we need to design
BIS Review 53/2001
1
regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  that  reflect  the  will  of  Congress  and  deal  effectively  with  a
changing financial services industry.
Technology  and  deregulation,  forces  for  change  that  I  have  just  mentioned,  have  encouraged
consolidation in the financial sector. With central bank and treasury officials from twelve other major
industrial economies, I have reviewed the likely effect of the global trend toward consolidation and its
implication for central banks and regulators. Because financial systems will continue to consolidate, as
the  forces  that  motivate  that  evolution  are  unabated,  the  regulatory  community  needs  to  monitor
developments  closely.  But  our  study  also  found  that  existing  policies  appear  adequate  to  allow
regulators to maintain safe and sound financial industries now  and in the intermediate  term and for
monetary policy to work through many of the same mechanisms as in the past.
More than the structure of the financial services industry has changed of late. That sector has found
uses  for  consumer  information  and  created  an  array  of  financial  products  and  services  unimagined
even a few years ago. These developments, in turn, raise some new concerns, and have re-ignited
some existing ones, among consumers and legislators. Congress grappled with one of these issues,
privacy,  in  the  financial  modernization  law.  Concerns  about  abusive  lending  practices  have  also
re-emerged  of  late.  In  all  areas,  but  particularly  in  areas  as  sensitive  as  these,  regulators  should
faithfully  administer  consumer  protection  laws  as  written.  Any  necessary  regulations  should
adequately inform consumers and protect them against abusive practices while also not discouraging
legitimate extensions of credit, especially to those who might previously have been denied access to
such credit. Financial literacy will certainly play an important role in avoiding the growth of abusive or
deceptive  financial  practices  and  in  allowing  consumers  to  protect  their  interests.  I  believe  that
legislation,  careful  regulation  and  education  are  all  components  of  the  response  to  these  emerging
consumer  concerns.  I  also  hope,  however,  that  businesses  recognize  that  it  is  in  their  long-term
interest to maintain the confidence of consumers by avoiding deceptive and abusive practices and by
respecting the privacy of their customers.
Finally, our payment system affects every consumer and business. This system too has been, and will
continue  to  be,  changed  greatly  by  emerging  technologies.  From  the  time  of  its  very  founding,  the
Federal Reserve has had the responsibility to foster an efficient, safe and accessible payment system.
During  much  of  1998  and  1999,  our  primary  objective  in  this  regard  was  to  help  banks  and  other
participants in the payment system maintain smooth operations as the century date change passed.
Domestically, we achieved this goal by working directly with the banking sector. Internationally, I was
privileged  to  work  through  multilateral  groups  to  raise  the  awareness  of  the  international  regulatory
community  of  the  nature  of  the  Y2K  challenge.  Now,  we  can  take  a  longer-term  perspective  and
consider how we might facilitate innovation in the payment system.
As an overseer and regulator, the Federal Reserve needs to approach payment system innovations
with an open mind and a willingness to adapt. In a dynamic economy, markets need to play a key role
in  guiding  the  development  of  infrastructure.  This  means  that  innovation  and  competition  will  be
central to the future development of the payment system – as they are in other areas of the economy.
Regulators  should  strive  to  remove  barriers  to  innovations  when  we  can  do  so  without  sacrificing
important  public  policies.  We  should  take  every  opportunity  to  foster  competition  and  maintain  the
integrity of the payment system, but public policy should not be built on a single vision or prediction of
the future. Ultimately, consumers and businesses as well as service providers will determine the range
of payment services that best meet their needs.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, during my  years on the  Board of Governors, I  have
done my best to contribute positively to all aspects of the Federal Reserve's many responsibilities. I
look forward to the opportunity to continue to work with you and serve the nation as a member of the
Board  of  Governors.  Thank  you  for  your  attention  and  for  considering  my  nomination.  I  would  be
pleased to respond to questions.
2
BIS Review 53/2001
