David Dodge: The Bank of Canada and financial stability
Remarks  by  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Montreal  Society  of  Financial
Analysts, Montreal, Quebec on 20 March 2001.
 I am pleased to be in Montréal today. Last month, in my first public speech as Governor of the Bank of
Canada,  I  talked  about  our  contribution  to  good  economic  performance  through  low,  stable,  and
predictable inflation. I also stressed the importance of frank dialogue with financial markets and the
general public in helping the Bank formulate and implement monetary policy successfully, particularly
at times of increased uncertainty.
While monetary stability through low inflation is crucial to good economic performance, our economy
cannot function properly unless it is also supported by an efficient and stable financial system. And as
the world economy becomes increasingly interconnected, sound macroeconomic policies and sound
financial systems across all countries are even more essential.
Today, I would like to talk about the Bank's contribution to financial stability at home and abroad. I will
also comment briefly on the current economic situation.
Canada as an international player
As an open economy, Canada is very much affected by what goes on in the rest of the world. So we
have more than a passing interest in promoting a sound and robust international environment.
Since more than 80 per cent of our foreign trade is with the United States, it is developments in that
country that have the most profound impact on our economy. Recent experience, however, has shown
that even events in faraway places can reverberate back home. The Mexican peso crisis of 1994–95
and  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997–98  are  cases  in  point.  In  both  instances,  Canada  was
sideswiped by those events.
If this somehow leaves the impression that globalization - the increasing integration of economies and
financial markets - has been of questionable value, I hasten to add that this is not how I see it. On the
contrary,  I believe that globalization  has been, and  will continue to be,  a  source  of  opportunity  and
growth for Montréal, for Canada, and for the rest of the world.
Recent episodes, however, have highlighted certain vulnerabilities in the global financial system. And
we must deal with them, if the benefits of economic and financial integration are to be fully realized by
everyone  in  today's  "global  village."  Let  me  tell  you  what  the  Bank  is  doing  to  promote  financial
stability.
The importance of sound financial systems
In addition to pursuing monetary stability through a low-inflation policy, all central banks, including the
Bank  of  Canada,  have  a  responsibility  to  promote  the  stability  and  soundness  of  their  country's
financial system.
A market economy,  like ours, cannot function  well  without the support  of a strong financial  system.
Sound  financial  institutions,  a  robust  financial  infrastructure,  and  efficient  financial  markets  are
necessary to facilitate transactions and to properly channel savings into investments. For an economy
to perform well, individuals and businesses must be confident that money and financial claims can be
reliably and efficiently created, held, transferred, and settled.
Now, if the arrangements that are in place do not work properly, the financial system can turn into a
channel through which shocks are amplified as they are transmitted from one part of the system to the
next and also beyond national borders. Whether such shocks are of an economic nature or whether
they  originate  in  the  financial  system  itself,  they  can  end  up  having  an  important  impact  on  the
economy as a whole.
BIS Review 23/2001
1
So there are good reasons why countries should ensure that their financial systems work well and that
they do not trigger or spread instability domestically and internationally.
The Bank's contribution to domestic financial stability
In Canada, the Bank shares the responsibility for financial stability at the federal level with three other
entities  -  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance
Corporation, and the Department of Finance. Various provincial bodies also play an important role.
The  Bank  focuses  its  attention  mainly  on  macro  financial  stability  issues,  leaving  the  principal
responsibility for micro issues to the other entities. The Bank's overriding concern is to ensure that the
financial system is sound and that it works efficiently. In this context, we provide liquidity to the system,
in both ordinary and extraordinary situations. We give policy advice to the federal government on the
design  and  development  of  the  financial  system.  Through  our  oversight  of  major  clearing  and
settlement  systems,  we  act  to  make  sure  that  the  failure  of  a  participant  does  not  lead  to  domino
effects and to generalized instability. And we provide banking services to these systems and to their
participants. Finally, we collaborate with other domestic and international bodies that work on financial-
stability issues.
Thanks to the collective efforts of all those charged with the promotion of financial stability in Canada,
we  have  a  financial  system  that  is  efficient  and  robust.  And,  as  recognized  by  the  International
Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1999, it complies with all major international standards.
But the financial landscape is constantly changing. Under pressure from greater global competition,
and with the benefit of new information technology, more sophisticated financial products are  being
developed, and new ways to deliver financial services are continually being devised.
What does this mean in terms of the Bank's commitment to financial stability? It means that we, and
the  other  federal  and  provincial  agencies  responsible  for  the  health  of  our  financial  system,  must
monitor these developments and understand their potential implications for financial stability. And we
must continue to strengthen the ability of our financial system to withstand shocks. Moreover, since,
despite  our  best  efforts,  there  will  be  rare  occasions  when  difficulties  will  develop,  it  also  means
devising effective, cost-efficient ways of resolving problems. Because even if the probability of such
difficulties is low, the consequences could be major.
The bank's contribution to global financial stability
Let me now turn to the ongoing efforts to reform the international financial architecture  and  tell  you
about the Bank's involvement in this area.
In the aftermath of the financial crises of the 1990s, new international bodies have been created, and
existing ones strengthened, to help identify and deal with weaknesses in the global financial system.
The Bank of Canada has been an active participant in several international forums where issues of
financial  stability  are  debated.  And  we  have  worked  closely  with  other  members  to  develop
frameworks for the prevention, management, and resolution of international crises.
I would highlight in particular our  participation in two new  international groups formed in 1999 - the
Group of Twenty and the Financial Stability Forum. The Group of Twenty, currently chaired by Finance
Minister Martin, brings together  national  authorities  from  both  industrial  and  major  emerging-market
economies to discuss key issues that are important for the proper functioning of the global economy.
Such issues include exchange rate regimes, good practices on transparency in fiscal, monetary, and
financial policies, and the role of the private sector in crisis resolution. The Financial Stability Forum is
responsible  for  identifying  system-wide  vulnerabilities  and  has  dealt  with  such  issues  as  offshore
financial centres, capital flows, and international financial standards and codes.
The bank's focus in fostering global financial stability
Given our expertise, the  Bank's focus in international forums  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  on
three  key  issues  -  exchange  rate  regimes,  financial-system  infrastructure,  and  private  sector
involvement in crisis resolution.
2
BIS Review 23/2001
In  light  of  our  long  experience  with  flexible  exchange  rates  and  our  strong  reputation  in  inflation
targeting, a number of emerging-market central banks have asked for, and received, assistance from
the Bank in developing and operating policy frameworks based on inflation targets. We expect this to
continue in the future.
In  the  area  of  financial-system  infrastructure,  parallel  to  our  work  on  the  oversight  of  major
payments systems and the provision of liquidity in Canada, we have been studying these issues from
a global perspective as members of various committees at the Bank for International Settlements. And
we have been contributing to the development of standards for the sound operation of such systems.
The Bank has also been closely involved in international efforts to reduce the risks associated with the
settlement of foreign exchange and securities transactions.
Finally, there is the issue of private sector involvement in crisis resolution. We all recognize that, even
with the best prevention efforts, we will not totally eliminate the possibility that foreign economic and
financial disturbances will affect national economies around the world. In the event of an emergency,
the  international  community  has  agreed  to  new  assistance  facilities  for  distressed  IMF  member
countries. IMF resources, however, are not limitless. So there is a need for the private sector to play a
key role in the resolution of crises.
Greater clarity about the size of available official assistance is essential to encourage private sector
debtors  and  creditors  to  work  together  to  find  solutions  in  difficult  circumstances.  And  although  we
hope that most situations could be resolved voluntarily, it is important to recognize that, under certain
conditions,  an  orderly  standstill  (a  temporary  suspension  of  debt-service  payments)  may  be
appropriate  to  give  a  distressed  debtor  country  some  breathing  space  in  which  to  take  steps  to
address its problems.
Broad international consensus on limits to official lending and on standstills is still lacking. So we will
continue to work away at these issues.
Before summing up my main points today, I would like to give you a quick update on the Canadian
economy.
Recent economic developments
In  assessing  the  near-term  course  of  the  Canadian  economy,  we  are  all  facing  a  number  of
uncertainties. The most important relates to the abruptness and extent of the slowdown in the U.S.
economy.
The fact that the recent economic data for North America are mixed adds to this uncertainty. While
these data confirm a slowing in the pace of activity, some have come in weaker, and some stronger,
than expected. This is certainly the case here in Canada. But even in the United States there have
been both negative and positive reports.
In the United States, the number of positive indicators, while not decisive, provides some hope that the
end  of  the  slowdown  may  not  be  far  off.  We  continue  to  believe  that  U.S.  economic  growth  will
rebound  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  supported  by  the  decline  in  interest  rates  and  by  the
moderation in energy prices. The exact timing of the U.S. recovery, however, remains uncertain and
will depend importantly on how consumer confidence evolves in that country.
Here in Canada, the latest national accounts data, which incorporate revisions to the growth profile in
the first three quarters of last year, show that the level of economic activity was not quite as high at the
end of 2000 as we had estimated earlier. And, based on more recent indicators, the pace of economic
expansion in the first quarter of 2001 will be slower than in the final three months of last year.
We can see this clearly in the automobile industry, where there have been production cutbacks mainly
in  response  to  weaker  demand  and  excess  inventories  in  the  United  States.  Electronic  goods  and
telecommunications products are two other areas where activity has slowed - although from very high
levels - and where world production has been running ahead of demand.
All  three  are  high-profile  sectors.  So  naturally  they  attract  a  lot  of  attention,  especially  in  parts  of
Canada where there is a heavy concentration of these industries. But to keep things in perspective,
there is still considerable strength in a number of other areas that are important to our economy. For
example, investments in the energy sector and orders in the aerospace industry here in Quebec are
BIS Review 23/2001
3
extraordinarily strong. Or take retail sales other than autos, or housing, or non-residential construction:
in all those areas, and in most other service industries, the level of activity remains high.
When we considered the balance of this evidence earlier this month, we concluded that there was, in
the near term, room for greater monetary stimulus without putting pressure on capacity and inflation.
Therefore, we lowered the Bank Rate by 50 basis points on 6 March, bringing the total decline since
January to 75 basis points.
In  taking  this  action,  we  also  considered  the  uncertainties  attached  to  the  timing  and  extent  of  the
expected recovery in the United States and their implications for growth of total demand in Canada.
The Bank continues to believe that the reduction in our interest rates and rising disposable incomes,
bolstered by recent tax cuts, should help to support the expansion of domestic demand in Canada in
the second half of the year.
This additional stimulus to economic activity is consistent with keeping the core rate of inflation close
to the 2 per cent midpoint of the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range. As for total CPI inflation,
we still  expect it to move  down to  about 2 per cent in  the  second  half  of  2001,  assuming  world  oil
prices remain at about current levels.
Thus, as we look ahead through this year and into the next, we remain positive about the prospects for
the Canadian economy. But, given the uncertainties, we will continue to closely monitor developments
at home and abroad.
Concluding thoughts
Let me now conclude.
The  growing  interdependence  of  national  economies,  massive  capital  flows,  and  new  sources  of
potential  risks  in  a  globalized  environment  have  brought  into  full  relief  the  importance  of  sound
macroeconomic policies and robust and efficient financial systems.
Canada's  monetary  policy  approach  of  inflation  targets,  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  and  policy
transparency has proven its worth through the difficult times of the past decade.
Canadians can also take pride in a financial system that is universally acknowledged as sound and
efficient. To keep it that way, we must ensure that as financial markets evolve, those of us charged
with financial stability evolve with them.
The Bank of Canada will continue to work closely with its domestic and foreign partners to strengthen
financial stability at home and abroad. For to paraphrase John Donne: these days, no country is an
island!
4
BIS Review 23/2001
