Eva Srejber: The role of the banking system in monetary policy
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Färs  &  Frosta
Spüarbank AB, Lund, 25 September 2001.
 Firstly, I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here. Today I intend to speak
about the role of the banking system for the Riksbank and in particular their role for monetary policy.
The Riksbank has been assigned by law the task of safeguarding the value of money. We also have
the task of promoting a safe and efficient payment system. The banks play a central role in both of
these tasks. The objective for monetary policy has been specified by the Executive Board as a CPI
inflation rate of 2 per cent, with a deviation interval of plus/minus 1 percentage point. The instrument at
our disposal for achieving the inflation target is the interest rate. Of course we also have the possibility
of using currency interventions as a means of achieving our objectives, but this is a monetary policy
tool we would not normally use in the current monetary policy regime.
I have on previous occasions discussed in general terms the mechanisms that enable a central bank
to  influence  price  trends  in  its  own  economy.  Here  I  would  just  like  to  start  by  very  briefly  running
through the channels through which we assume that monetary policy takes effect. Although we believe
we  know  which  channels  these  are,  we  have  very  little  knowledge  of  the  strength  and  time-scale
involved. There is clear empirical evidence monetary policy  does affect inflation  with some time lag
and with a certain efficacy, but why monetary policy has an effect is more difficult to clarify.
Within  the  Riksbank's  way  of  thinking,  consumer  prices  are  influenced  primarily  by  the  degree  of
resource utilisation, by import prices and by inflation expectations. Monetary policy is assumed to have
an effect on these factors, and thereby on inflation, through many different channels. This is known in
the academic world as transmission mechanism. One usually talks of monetary policy having an effect
via the interest rate channel and via the exchange rate channel. This is the traditional description of
the transmission mechanism.
In addition, inflation expectations probably play a prominent role in price setting. And here confidence
in the ability of monetary policy to meet the price stability  target is  extremely important.  Stable, low
inflation expectations should have an effect on both company pricing behaviour and wage formation. If
inflation expectations are stable, the consequence may be that the degree of resource utilisation in the
economy can vary considerably without showing any impact on inflation. In this case, monetary policy
can also influence, via the credibility of the  price stability  target, the exchange  between  growth and
inflation.
One way of maintaining credibility and support for the price stability target is, in our opinion, to show a
high level of openness and clarity with regard to conducting monetary policy. Openness involves, for
instance, reporting which considerations we make with regard to prospects for the business climate,
etc. when we make decisions regarding interest rates. However, it also means that we are transparent
with  regard  to  the  sources  of  knowledge  we  use  as  a  basis  for  our  decisions.  Clarity  is  also  often
aimed  at  creating  the  right  conditions  for  analysts  in  the  banking  sector  to  forecast  how  monetary
policy will react to various types of new information. Consistent and symmetrical actions with regard to
monetary  policy  increases  confidence  in  the  price  stability  target,  which  in  turn  should  have  a
stabilising effect on inflation expectations.
My speech today should be seen as part of our endeavour to achieve openness. In many cases, I will
raise questions to which we do not have answers. Our ambition is to increase our knowledge both by
studying existing research and by stimulating our own and others' research in this field.
The banks are important for the Riksbank's tasks
I  will  now  move  on  to  speak  about  the  significance  of  the  banks  for  our  capacity  to  maintain  price
stability.
The banks play an important role in enabling monetary policy to maintain price stability, in a number of
ways. Firstly, the banks are central to the capacity to make payments in the economy generally. All
activity  in  the  economy  leads  to  payments  and  it  would  not  be  possible  to  maintain  price  stability
BIS Review 80/2001
1
without a functioning payment system. It would be too lengthy to go into further detail here on the role
played by the banks in the payment system and the connections between the Riksbank's two tasks.
But I would in any case like to point out here that financial stability is a necessary condition for price
stability. Secondly, it is through the banks that participate in the Riksbank's system for large payments
- the RIX system - that we can in practice affect the interest rates companies and households meet
when choosing between savings, investment and consumption. Thirdly, the banks' own credit granting
and their lending rates play an important role for activity in the economy.
Thus, the banks play an important role in the interest rate channel. Here I will first describe how the
Riksbank's steering of interest rates works through the shortest interest rate in the interbank market.
After this I will discuss what significance this has for the banks' credit granting.
The Riksbank steers the shortest market rate
The  fact  that  the  central  bank  has  a  monopoly  on  issuing  money  is  usually  stated  as  a  necessary
condition for being able to determine price trends in its own currency - e.g. calculated by how many
goods can be purchased for a particular sum of money.  It is  intuitively  easy  to  understand  that  the
amount  of  money  in  the  economy  is  a  decisive  factor  for  the  price  of  the  goods  produced  in  the
country.  In  modern  economies,  where  payments  are  largely  made  electronically,  the  monopoly  on
issuing banknotes is no longer an equally evident condition for enabling monetary policy to determine
price trends. Today, it is instead the right to determine the terms in the systems for large electronic
payments  between  banks  and  the  opportunity  to  influence  how  much  the  banks  shall  borrow  or
deposit in the Riksbank that enable us to steer interest rates. For electronic payments to be able to
function as money, it is necessary for the central bank to be perceived as guarantor for these means
of payment in the same ways as with banknotes. This role can only be fulfilled by a central bank and in
this way one can say that the possibility to determine price trends in  the  economy still lies  with the
monopoly on issuing money.
The Riksbank governs the shortest interest rate in the interbank market, so that it normally remains
close to the monetary policy-steered repo rate. The fact that the Riksbank can steer the interbank rate
is  primarily  due  to  the  fact  that  each  individual  bank  participating  in  the  system  handling  large
interbank payments - known  as the RIX system - always has an opportunity  to borrow and  deposit
money in the Riksbank overnight at the lending and deposit rates set by the Riksbank. These lie at
75 points above and 75 points below the repo rate respectively. The difference between the lending
and deposit rates is sufficiently large for the banks normally to view it as more profitable to balance
deficits and surpluses in their payments at the end  of the day  on the  interbank  market,  rather  than
utilising the Riksbank's lending and deposit facilities. Both a bank with a surplus and  a bank with a
deficit  win  by  depositing  or  borrowing  in  other  banks  at  rates  between  the  Riksbank's  deposit  and
lending rates. The fact that the interbank rate normally lies at the centre of the corridor, i.e. close to the
repo  rate  is  because  the  Riksbank  usually  offers  the  banks  the  opportunity  to  borrow  or  deposit
sufficient funds at the repo rate so that no bank will need to utilise the more expensive alternatives
offered  by  the  deposit  and  lending  facilities.  The  condition  for  this  is  that  the  possibilities  in  the
interbank market have been exhausted.
Outstanding notes and coins and other items on the Riksbank's balance sheet mean that the banking
system currently has to borrow from the Riksbank. To avoid the necessity of converting a large loan
stock every day, the Riksbank every week offers the banks the possibility of borrowing via repurchase
transactions with a duration of one week at the monetary policy-steered repo rate. In addition, through
what are known as fine-tuning operations, the Riksbank normally offers the banking system financing
or investment of the deficits or surpluses that can arise in the daily payment flows between the banks
and the Riksbank at a rate close to the repo rate. The Riksbank uses its advertisement of the repo rate
to  provide  signals  regarding  monetary  policy.  The  repo  rate  is  now  usually  changed  only  after  the
monetary policy meetings held  by  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank,  which  means  that  the  rate
remains the same for 6-8 weeks. To summarise, therefore, the interbank market rate is steered so that
it closely follows the repo rate.
The Riksbank's steering of interest rates – in common with that of many other modern central banks -
differs from the models described in most macroeconomic textbooks. There the starting point is often
that the central bank affects the volume of money or liquidity in the economy by buying  and selling
bonds on the market. According to the simple textbook model, the banks maintain a liquidity buffer in
the central bank in the form of a deposit with no interest compensation - known as reserves. When the
central bank buys or sells bonds via the banks, the payments are made through the banks' deposit
2
BIS Review 80/2001
accounts in the central bank– the central bank can thus steer the size of the reserves the banks have
invested in the central bank. However, for the banks to be prepared to buy or sell the amount of bonds
the central bank desires - in exchange for money in their non-interest bearing deposit accounts in the
central bank - the interest rate must be adapted. A lower interest rate will increase the general public's
demand for means of payment and this leads to an increase in the banks' requirement for a liquidity
buffer,  while  the  opposite  will  occur  if  interest  rates  rise.  The  textbook  therefore  assumes  that  the
central bank affects the interest rate by influencing the banks' balance on non-interest bearing deposit
accounts in the central bank.
However, the design of our steering interest rates system and the terms in the payment system mean
that Swedish banks do not need to invest money as a reserve, i.e. liquidity buffer, in deposit accounts
at  the  Riksbank.  The  banks  can  finance  the  deficits  in  payment  flows  arising  during  the  day  via
interest-free  loans  from  the  Riksbank  against  collateral  in  securities.  Instead  of  holding  a  liquidity
buffer  with  no  interest  compensation,  the  Swedish  banks  can  hold  a  liquidity  buffer  in  the  form  of
securities  that  can  be  pledged  to  the  Riksbank  –  at  full  yield.  While  the  cost  of  the  banks'  liquidity
buffer in the textbook model is comprised of the nominal interest rate – the alternative is to invest in
assets which provide interest- the cost of the liquidity buffer in the Swedish system is limited to the
interest rate  difference between, for instance, treasury bonds  and lending. The costs for the  banks'
payment services should thus, all else being equal, be lower in Sweden than in countries that apply
systems similar to the textbook one. We can therefore say that our system is more cost-effective than
the textbook's system.
Following the tragic events in the USA the other week, some central banks announced that they were
prepared to supply liquidity to avoid a shortage of liquidity on the market. During periods of unease the
demand  for  risk-free  investments  normally  rises.  This  leads  to  investors  demanding  higher
compensation for taking credit risks. It can also lead, as a consequence, to an increase in the interest
rate on the interbank market. In extreme situations, access to  liquidity can be valued so  highly that
banks and other market participants are not prepared to lend money at any price. As a result of the
great uncertainty prevailing, the daily lending market in US dollars functioned very poorly during the
days following the terrorist attack, daily rates rose and there were indications that some banks were
experiencing  difficulty  in  obtaining  dollars  at  all.  Given  these  developments,  the  Federal  Reserve
offered the US banks increased opportunities to borrow dollars from the central bank. However, the
European  banks  were  also  affected,  and  therefore  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  the  dollar  market
function,  a number of central  banks, including the  Swedish  Riksbank,  offered  a  dollar  facility  to  the
market.
In  a  corresponding  manner,  one  can  imagine  a  hypothetical  situation  where  one  or  more  Swedish
banks chooses to invest a surplus in kronor in the Riksbank at the deposit rate rather than lending the
money to other banks. Those banks that cannot find financing on the interbank market are then forced
to use the Riksbank's lending facility. Firstly, loans in the Riksbank are more expensive and secondly,
they require collateral. To avoid the interbank rate rising, the Riksbank has recourse to a number of
different measures. In certain strained situations, we have previously chosen to increase the supply of
loans  at  the  monetary  policy  determined  interest  rate  via  our  normal  operations.  If  a  bank  should
choose to invest its surplus in the Riksbank instead of providing loans on the interbank market, where
loans are normally  offered  without  collateral,  the  Riksbank  might  choose  to  offer  the  corresponding
credit  volume  on  the  interbank  market  at  the  rate  we  are  aiming  for.  The  condition  is  that  a  bank
borrowing from the Riksbank can offer eligible assets as collateral. At the start of the new millennium
when,  as  some  of  you  might  remember,  there  was  great  unease  over  a  possible  liquidity  shortage
arising, the Riksbank extended its list of eligible collateral. In our system this can be said to mean that
we  increased  the  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  as  this  measure  increased  the  possibilities  for
borrowing  from  the  Riksbank.  The  extension  of  the  list  of  eligible  assets  the  Riksbank  accepts  as
collateral has now been made permanent,  which should mean that liquidity  in the  Swedish  banking
system is good.
For a Swedish bank to choose to bear the cost of placing large surpluses in its deposit account at the
Riksbank would assume that lending money  on the interbank market was assessed to be  a  poorer
alternative. One reason for this could be a fear that the bank wanting to borrow would not be able to
repay in time, or at all. Another reason could be that the bank with a surplus was unwilling, or unable
for some reason, to provide loans requiring capital cover in accordance with capital adequacy rules
and therefore chose to deposit the money at no risk in the Riksbank. Normally, however, there would
be very little risk of this happening - firstly, Swedish banks have good solidity and secondly they are so
few in number that they have a good knowledge of one another.
BIS Review 80/2001
3
The Riksbank also has the opportunity - in situations where the financial system faces a risk of serious
disruption  -  to  provide  loans  at  special  terms  to  a  bank  that  for  some  reason  experiences  such
unexpectedly large deficits in its payments during the course of a day that the bank is unable to offer
sufficient  already  approved  collateral  to  borrow  from  the  Riksbank  at  normal  terms.  However,  the
condition  is  that  the  bank  is  considered  by  the  Riksbank  to  be  sound.  The  Riksbank  has  a  crisis
organisation to enable it to make rapid decisions in this type of situation.
The banks' lending is important
Another reason why the banks are particularly interesting in monetary policy terms is that lending from
the  banks  plays  an  important  role  for  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  interest  rate  changes.  If  the
Swedish banks for some reason reduce the supply of credit, companies and households cannot fully
replace  this  loss  with  financing  for  consumption  and  investment  elsewhere.  Smaller  companies  are
particularly dependent  on the  Swedish  banks and the customer relations they have built up. Larger
corporations, on the other hand, have access to other sources of financing, such as borrowing in the
bond market, from foreign banks or via new share issues.
The banks' supply of credit and their setting of interest rates can therefore influence how quickly and
how much monetary policy affects activity in the economy and thus inflation. We can begin by stating
that the repo rate is one important determining factor when the banks decide on their lending rates.
When  the  lending  rates  are  determined,  the  bank's  own  internal  rate  is  crucial  and  it  is  normally
determined  by  the  repo  rate.  This  is  because  the  banks'  financing  of  deficits  and  investment  of
surpluses arising at the end of the day can normally be done in the interbank market, where pricing
depends on the repo rate. If a bank lends money to  a  company,  the  loan  could  be  financed  in  the
interbank  market.  Even  loans  with  a  longer  duration  could  in  principle  be  financed  by  short-term
borrowing on the interbank  market.  The  lending  rate  in  the  interbank  market  will  thus  comprise  the
bank's  financing  cost  for  this  loan  and  is  therefore  an  important  factor  when  the  bank  decides  the
lending  rate  it  will  offer  the  company.  For  loans  with  a  longer  fixed  term,  expectations  of  the
development of the repo rate during the duration of the loan will affect the financing cost and thus the
lending rate the bank sets for a longer term loan. A bank that has a surplus to invest can in the same
way choose between investing it in the interbank market and lending money. The interbank rate will
thus  influence  the  lending  rate  the  bank  offers  households  and  companies  as  it  comprises  an
alternative yield.
In  addition  to  the  interbank  rate,  however,  the  banks'  lending  rates  are  determined  by  many  other
factors. When setting interest rates, the banks must of course compensate themselves for the credit
risks connected  with the loan  and  at the  same  time  reserve  funds  in  their  own  capital  to  meet  any
future losses. The fact that banks from time to time make differing assessments of borrowers' credit
rating  should  not  in  itself  affect  how  much  the  banks'  lending  rate  changes  when  the  repo  rate  is
raised. The impact from monetary policy should not, therefore, change merely as a result of the banks
changing their assessments of the credit risk.
However, many theories indicate that monetary policy in itself can affect the banks' setting of interest
rates over and above the channel that goes via the interbank rate. One theory is that when interest
rates are at a high level, the percentage of unreliable borrowers increases – borrowers who are aware
that they will not be able to repay their loans and are therefore insensitive to high interest rates. To
compensate for this, the banks can raise the interest rates on all loans more than is motivated by the
monetary policy steered rates, or they can reduce the amount of credit they supply.
Another  theory  suggests  that  borrowers'  creditworthiness  via  their  balance  sheets  is  affected  by
changes in interest rates. The idea is that a company that has, for instance, a high level of debt, will be
less creditworthy if the interest rate rises. Actually profitable investment projects may thus not get off
the  ground  because  the  company  applying  for  a  loan  for  the  project  is  already  heavily  in  debt  and
therefore has to pay a high credit risk premium, or is refused a loan.
Yet another theory indicates that a hike in the interest rate increases the banks' financing costs when
the general public's deposits decline. A larger percentage of the financing thus has to be obtained in
the bond market. The banks are also assumed in this case to have a motive to raise the interest rates
more than the central bank does.
Other mechanisms that in certain situations can reduce the impact of monetary policy from its normal
level include the banks tightening their credit  standards  -  known  as  a  credit  crunch  -  because  they
cannot  increase  their  credit  risk  exposure,  for  example,  as  a  result  of  the  capital  adequacy  rules.
4
BIS Review 80/2001
Following a long period of a strong expansion in credit, based on lenders' expectations of continued
growth  and  high  wealth  levels,  a  severe  downturn  in  the  economy  and  falling  asset  prices  can,  for
instance, lead to the banks limiting their lending  due to uncertainty over the  quality of their  existing
loan  stock.  With  hindsight,  the  banks  can  conclude  that  they  have  probably  misjudged  credit  risks
earlier and thus lent money at an interest rate that was too low, as well as failing to reserve sufficient
funds  to  cover  future  losses.  Monetary  policy  relief  can  in  such  situations  have  less  impact  than
otherwise, as the banks are not prepared to make loans even to profitable investments.
To summarise, there is good reason to try to learn more about what affects monetary policy's impact,
for instance,  via the banks, in different situations. Developments on the financial markets over time
and  differences  between  various  countries  indicate  that  the  impact  on  demand  and  inflation  of  a
particular monetary policy measure should differ between periods and between countries. It is difficult
to estimate how the impact of a change in interest rate on growth and inflation will differ at different
points in time and in different countries, but the attempts to do so indicate major differences. Given the
fact  that  the  composition  of  households'  financial  portfolios,  their  method  of  financing  their
accommodation,  the  significance  of  bank  lending  for  corporate  investments  and  the  formulation  of
regulations and taxes differ substantially between different periods in time and different countries, this
is hardly surprising. As I pointed out earlier, inflation expectations probably also play an important role
in price setting. It therefore seems reasonable to assume that the exchange  between interest rates
and  inflation  is  less  in  countries  where  monetary  policy  has  been  aimed  at  stabilising  inflation
expectations than in countries, and points in time, with large fluctuations in the inflation rate.
There  is  also  a  monetary  policy  interest  in  being  familiar  with  the  banks'  methods  for  credit
assessment,  to  aid  forward-looking  assessments  of  growth  under  the  assumption  of  unchanged
monetary policy. When the Riksbank makes decisions on the formulation of monetary policy, these are
based on, for instance, assessments of how households and companies will react to rising prices on
shares  and  property.  One  important  condition  for  enabling  optimism  regarding  future  growth  and
increase in wealth to be converted into consumption and investment is that this can be financed. This
is where the banks' assessment of credit risks comes in. The extent to which the banks are prepared
to mortgage shares and property is of no minor significance. If the banks manage to capture the risks
connected with fluctuations in asset prices in their credit risk management, this reduces the likelihood
of such fluctuations also being reflected in variations in production and employment.
I have mainly devoted my speech today to the role the banks play in monetary policy. Nevertheless,
from what I have said it becomes clear that there are many, close links between the Riksbank's two
tasks – to promote price stability and to promote financial stability. This is an area of analysis that we
are endeavouring to develop further at the Riksbank. However, I shall have to return to this another
time.
BIS Review 80/2001
5
