Lee Hsien Loong: Building one financial world
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, at the 42nd ACI World Congress, held in Singapore on 25 May 2001.
 Managing financial integration: Asia’s experience
The last 25 years has seen the emergence of an increasingly borderless, integrated financial world.
The collapse of the Bretton Woods system set in train the deregulation of domestic financial markets
and  the  removal  of  barriers  to  cross-border  finance.  Overall,  the  outcome  has  been  positive.
Globalised financial markets have helped to integrate national economies into a global trading system,
and finance growth through better allocation of world savings. But the benefits have not come without
hazards. Shocks are now transmitted quickly from one financial system to another. Large speculative
flows threaten to destabilise economies from time to time. The margin for policy error is narrow, and
the penalty severe.
One  consequence  of  greater  financial  integration  is  that  countries  can  no  longer  count  on  sound
macroeconomic fundamentals alone to attract foreign capital. When deciding whether to lend or invest
and at what price, international players increasingly look to the stability of countries' financial systems,
the  degree  of  transparency,  the  quality  of  the  legal  framework  and  the  standards  of  corporate
governance. On these counts, Asia has much catching up to do.
For  too  long,  East  Asian  countries  directed  their  domestic  banks  to  lend  to  well-connected  family-
based  firms  and  conglomerates.  Even  when  the  countries  deregulated  financial  systems  and  freed
their  capital  accounts,  they  did  too  little  to  strengthen  financial  supervision  and  regulation,  develop
liquid  markets,  and  promote  sound  corporate  governance.  International  creditors  were  eager  to
participate in the Asian miracle, and accepted a close nexus between borrowers and lenders as the
"way" business was done in Asia. But lending on the basis of familiarity and relationships is prone to
abuse and a recipe for financial mishaps. The Asian crisis of 1997/98 vividly brought home the risks of
this approach.
The  Asian  crisis  is  now  past,  but  we  are  not  back  to  the  status  quo  ante.  The  situation  today  is
troubled, but it is different from that in 1997/98. Unlike then, there is no contagious financial panic, no
more  hot  money  to  flee  the  region,  crashing  currencies  and  economies  one  after  the  other.  The
markets  are  more  subdued,  although  they  are  not  immune  to  shocks,  especially  from  political
developments.  Global  investors  and  traders  have  been  chastened  by  the  experience  of  the  97/98
crisis, and now differentiate more carefully between economies, the different problems that they face,
and the varying degrees of seriousness with which they are tackling their problems.
Part of the current problem is cyclical: Asian countries are major exporters to the US, and have been
affected by the current slowdown in the US economy. This will pass when the US economy picks up.
But many Asian economies also have serious structural problems, especially in their financial systems.
Resolving these problems will be an arduous task. Countries need to establish rigorous supervisory
regimes,  foster  a  sound  credit  culture  in  banks,  and  apply  international  standards  of  accounting,
disclosure, and loan classification and provisioning. Complicated and deeply entrenched ties between
the state, banks and industry will have to be untangled.
In Indonesia the priority is a still more fundamental one: to resolve the political and security crisis, re-
establish an effective government, and restore confidence. Only then will basic preconditions exist to
begin to tackle Indonesia's economic problems,  which  in  themselves  are  daunting  enough,  and  will
take considerable time to overcome.
While  Asia  struggles  with  its  problems,  the  rest  of  the  world  has  moved  on,  especially  the  OECD
countries. Their financial industries are being rapidly transformed, and progressively although not fully
integrated with one another. This has presented a special challenge to Singapore, a major financial
centre in the midst of a troubled region. We cannot totally insulate ourselves from the problems of our
neighbours.  Yet  we  have  to  keep  up  with  developments  in  other  financial  centres,  to  preserve  and
strengthen our position. Our regulatory environment must stay in line with best practices elsewhere,
BIS Review 45/2001
1
and our domestic financial institutions must gear up to cope with competition from formidable foreign
players. Otherwise, we risk being sidelined.
Fortunately, when the Asia crisis struck our financial system was basically sound, so the banks and
other financial institutions emerged relatively unscathed from the storm. This gave us the flexibility to
press  on  with  reforms  and  liberalisation.  I  will  highlight  three  main  dimensions  along  which  greater
integration  is  taking  place,  and  discuss  Singapore's  policies  and  responses  in  each  of  them:  the
emergence and consolidation of international banks, regulatory cooperation and  harmonisation, and
the shakeout in the location of financial activities.
Dimensions of greater integration and Singapore’s response
Emergence and consolidation of international banks
The  first  dimension  is  the  emergence  and  ongoing  consolidation  of  large  international  banks.
International banks are seeking scale and scope through mergers and acquisitions. This is driven by
deregulation,  technology,  and  large  economies  of  scale,  as  well  as  by  the  demand  for  one-stop,
integrated financial services from banks' customers who are themselves globalising. The ability to offer
clients access into several markets in different classes of financial instruments has become a valuable
competitive edge.
The wave of mergers has included Citibank and Travellers, Chase and J. P. Morgan, Deutsche Bank
and Bankers' Trust, BNP and Bank Paribas. In Japan, the city trust and long term credit banks have
merged into  4 major groups, in search of efficiency and rationalisation. In some smaller economies
that have opened up their financial industry, most if not all of the domestic banks have been absorbed
by foreign players. This has occurred in New Zealand, Mexico, and Argentina. Whether this is a happy
development is yet to be seen.
But worldwide, this process of consolidation has not been carried to the limit, nor is it likely to. Most
mergers and acquisitions have taken place in the OECD countries, and often within the same country.
Cross-border tie-ups like the Deutsche Bank-Bankers' Trust merger have been relatively few. Even in
Europe, with economic integration far advanced, hurdles to cross-border consolidation are high.
In  Asia,  the  process  of  consolidation  has  barely  begun  even  within  the  same  country,  much  less
internationally. The public, regulators and governments are generally wary of encroachment by foreign
banks  on  their  domestic  turf.  Some  of  their  reservations  may  be  protectionist  and  nationalist.  But
countries  do  have  genuine  concerns,  ranging  from  financial  stability  to  issues  of  macroeconomic
management and customer protection. These will have to be addressed if the banks are to be allowed
to pursue mergers and consolidation in accordance with economic logic.
In Singapore, we have responded to the international consolidation not by trying to shut out foreign
players, nor by a totally laissez faire approach, but by a phased liberalisation of our banking sector.
We  have  opened  it  to  greater  foreign  competition,  while  simultaneously  pushing  the  local  banks  to
strengthen and upgrade themselves.
The stronger local banks have concluded that they need to develop into significant regional players, in
order to diversify their earnings and exploit new growth opportunities. A few have taken the first steps
in this direction. Not all their ventures have been successful. But mistakes are the price of experience,
and the banks must learn from them, rather than abandon the effort to grow abroad.
We have also encouraged the local banks to consolidate among themselves. The domestic market is
too  small  to  sustain  five  local  banks  of  adequate  size  to  compete  regionally.  Only  one  merger  has
taken  place  so  far,  between  DBS  and  POSBank.  But  I  know  that  all  the  banks  are  alive  to  the
competitive trends, and are continually reassessing their position. It  is a  dynamic  situation,  and  the
present configuration is unlikely to be permanent.
Regulatory cooperation and harmonisation
The second dimension of financial integration is the trend towards greater regulatory cooperation and
harmonisation.  Starting  in  the  1980's,  a  series  of  international  fora  were  created  for  regulators  and
policymakers  to  share  experiences,  cooperate  with  one  another,  and  harmonise  regulations  and
2
BIS Review 45/2001
policies. Among the multilateral initiatives, the efforts of the Basle Committee and IOSCO are probably
the best known.
The Basle Capital Accord of 1988 helped to increase the capital held by internationally active banks,
and to create a more level playing field for banks under different regulators. The new Basle standards
now being finalised will remedy the weaknesses of the 1988 Accord, and enable banks to set aside
capital in accordance with the riskiness of their assets.
IOSCO  has  provided  securities  regulators  globally  with  a  useful  platform  to  exchange  views  and
enhance cooperation on issues relating to the regulation of the securities markets. It has developed a
common set of objectives and principles of securities regulation, which enhance mutual understanding
among  securities  regulators  and  commissioners.  IOSCO  has  also  been  actively  involved  in
promulgating standards of public disclosure, and facilitated cross-border capital raising and listings.
The Asian crisis has added impetus to the harmonisation of regulatory standards. It demolished any
argument  that  disparities  in  credit  processes  and  banking  regulations  across  countries  reflected
differences  in  cultural  and  social  norms,  and  that  therefore  harmonising  regulations  was  misguided
and  futile.  Everybody  now  acknowledges  that  the  core  principles  of  sound  banking  practices  and
banking regulation are universal. There should be due diligence in credit decisions. A banker should
not lend unless he is highly confident that the loan will be repaid. The factors that affect the probability
of default will differ across countries. But regardless of the country in which the bank operates, lending
based on relationships or names without proper due diligence is simply unsound banking.
More needs to be done to improve regulatory cooperation and harmonisation, to achieve the vision of
"One Financial World". There are two elements of improvement. The first is a clearer distribution of
responsibilities  among  regulators  for  prudential  oversight  of  international  financial  institutions.  The
Basle  Concordat  lays  out  the  allocation  of  responsibilities  between  parent  and  host  supervisory
authorities for banking institutions. But with the advent of the internet, and more generally globalised
banking, it has become harder to pinpoint exactly where financial transactions are being carried out,
and which supervisor has responsibility over them. In this environment, supervisors need to cooperate
more closely with each other to ensure effective consolidated supervision of the institutions under their
charge.
The  second  element  of  improvement  is  the  harmonisation  of  practices  and  standards  across
jurisdictions. This will  lower compliance costs for  financial  institutions,  arising  from  having  to  satisfy
different  regulatory  and  legal  regimes  in  different  countries.  Unfortunately  such  harmonisation  is
extremely difficult, even if we confine ourselves to a small subset of countries. The issues are far too
intricate and complex to be resolved in a multilateral setting. Institutional structures, market practices
and philosophical approaches differ from country to country. And each country guards its regulatory
powers  jealously,  and  wants  the  freedom  to  set  and  enforce  its  own  rules.  The  multiple  national
regulators that exist in the European Union are a good example.
Short of complete harmonisation of regulations, one practical approach to pursue is mutual recognition
of  regulatory  regimes.  Mutual  recognition  need  not  be  all  or  nothing.  It  can  be  applied  to  specific
areas, starting from cross-border offerings of financial products such as collective investment schemes
and suitable initial public offerings. Institutions can save half or more of their compliance costs, if they
only  have  to  comply  with  one  set  of  regulations  recognised  by  both  regulators.  This  benefits  both
markets by deepening liquidity and broadening product offerings.
Singapore  has  participated  actively  in  international  efforts  to  harmonise  regulations  and  policies
across  jurisdictions.  As  a  small  country,  our  ability  to  push  the  envelope  on  regulatory  practices  is
limited. But we have conscientiously kept abreast of global regulatory initiatives, and adopted the best
international  standards  and  practices  for  regulating  and  supervising  our  financial  institutions  and
capital markets, taking into account the specific circumstances of our financial industry.
In some instances, we have found it possible to adopt standards and practices of international bodies
and  foreign  regulators  wholesale.  For  instance,  the  Committee  on  Disclosure  and  Accounting
Standards,  a  private  sector  led  body  formed  to  review  disclosure  and  accounting  standards  in
Singapore, has recommended that Singapore should adopt International Accounting Standards (IAS)
as the accounting standards for Singapore.
In terms of mutual recognition, we are currently exploring with Australia an agreement for the mutual
recognition  of  our  regulatory  regimes  in  certain  activities  of  the  securities  market. We  are  ready  to
conclude similar arrangements with other like-minded regulators.
BIS Review 45/2001
3
Consolidation of financial centres
The third dimension is consolidation of financial activities in fewer locations. Before the collapse of the
Bretton  Woods  system,  financial  institutions  had  predominantly  domestic  clienteles  and  tended  to
locate in their respective financial capitals, for easy access to clients. So the largest centres tended to
be financial capitals of countries with the largest economic bases. But as the structure of the financial
industry  evolved  post-Bretton Woods,  there  has  been  a  decoupling  between  the  size  of  a  financial
centre  and  the  size  of  its  economic  base.  Institutions  now  need  to  service  customers  from  many
countries. It is not feasible for international players to maintain a major presence in every jurisdiction
where  they  operate.  So  the  financial  centres  that  are  able  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  their
constituent firms are the ones that thrive. Proximity to clients has become less critical. What counts
now  are  intangibles  such  as  market  information  networks,  quality  of  regulation  and  supervision,
credibility, as well as a critical mass of skilled and innovative professionals.
London is a prime example of this phenomenon. Despite not being part of the Eurozone, and having a
smaller economic base than financial centres on the continent like Frankfurt and Paris, London has
thrived,  and  by  all  indications  will  continue  to  grow  as  a  financial  centre.  In  Asia  too,  the  trend  is
towards consolidation of activities in fewer centres, resulting in keener competition between financial
centres. This overall consolidation reflects the  economics of the industry. But  which particular cities
emerge  as  major  centres  depends  also  on  the  competitive  advantage  which  they  create  for
themselves,  i.e.  the  policies  they  pursue  and  the  activities  they  promote,  to  gain  a  headstart  over
rivals.
Singapore  has  therefore  taken  a  pro-active  approach  to  building  ourselves  up  as  an  international
financial centre, and not relied passively on financial institutions choosing to set up here. Our vision is
for Singapore to provide a full-range of financial services for East Asia. Obviously, we cannot match
London, New York or Tokyo in terms of size or depth of domestic markets. But that should not stop us
from becoming a key global node in certain areas. Our approach has been twofold: first, to set fair and
transparent  rules  for  the  industry,  and  provide  a  conducive,  open  and  competitive  operating
environment. And second, to catalyse the growth of promising sectors of the industry, with incentives
and promotional support. We have sought to push in the direction of market forces, rather than against
them.
Asset management
One good illustration of how we have sought to promote and develop our financial centre is our efforts
to develop Singapore into an asset management hub. We assessed very early on was that there was
good potential for growing the asset management industry in Singapore. A rising affluent class across
Asia would have assets needing to be managed. Most of the savings in Asian countries are still in the
form of bank deposits. There is considerable scope for diverting some of these funds for professional
management.
There was also an opportunity for managing the Asian mandates of global portfolio investors, an area
where  no  clear  leader  had  emerged.  We  believe  that  global  funds  and  institutions  would  find
Singapore a good location from which to manage their Asian portfolios. Although for now the region is
not a hot destination for inbound investments, this will change as the region picks up again.
We therefore carried out a comprehensive strategy to strengthen our fund management industry. We
streamlined  licensing  requirements  for  fund  mangers,  and  provided  more  room  for  indigenous  fund
managers to grow. We introduced tax incentives, especially for fund managers managing substantial
amounts  of  discretionary  funds  out  of  Singapore.  We  leveraged  on  our  domestic  savings,  both
government and private, to attract fund managers here. Over the last three years, the Government of
Singapore Investment Corporation, or GIC, committed to place out S$25 billion, and MAS to place out
S$10 billion, to be managed by fund managers based in Singapore. We progressively liberalised rules
governing the Central Provident Fund, to allow Singaporeans to invest their retirement savings under
professional management, instead of leaving them with the Government.
These  policies  and  initiatives  have  yielded  good  results,  and  attracted  new  players  who  have
contributed to the depth of our asset management industry. Despite difficult market conditions in the
year 2000, Singapore's wealth management industry has remained resilient. The MAS' latest Survey
of the Asset Management Industry shows that total assets under management in Singapore did not
decline last year, but continued to grow, albeit slowly. As at end-2000, total assets under management
in Singapore amounted to S$276 billion. Discretionary assets under management showed a decrease,
4
BIS Review 45/2001
reflecting the decline in market valuations in the region, but this was more than offset by an increase in
advisory assets.
Incumbent managers in Singapore have adopted a long-term perspective. They have increased  the
scale of their operations, priming for a market upturn. The pool of talent in the industry has grown, with
the number of investment professionals located here growing by about 10% in 2000, to a headcount of
1,000. 24 new fund management outfits were established over the last year, bringing the total to 215
companies.
Electronic financial services
Another  promising  area  is  electronic  financial  services.  The  adoption  of  info-communication
technologies is changing the global financial landscape. New technologies have broadened the scope
and utility of financial products. New delivery channels have emerged. Traditional business models are
being challenged. The conventional value chain has been disaggregated. Some players are focussing
on specific segments of the value chain, such as processing or distribution, seeking to exploit scale
economies. Niche and specialised areas have emerged, that open opportunities for a diverse range of
innovative  players,  often  start-ups  or  smaller  players  nimble  enough  to  exploit  opportunities  by
adopting new technology.
It is difficult to predict who will be the winners and losers in this new landscape. Not all the new ideas
or business models will eventually succeed. But technology, automation and the internet will likely be
central to the success stories.
MAS  is  keeping  a  close  watch  on  these  developments.  As  new  business  models  and  entities
emerged, we have issued policy notes setting out our views on the electronic provision of services in
the areas of banking, capital markets, risk management and third-party aggregators. In March 2001
we released formal supervisory guidelines on the use of the internet in banking ( the Internet Banking
Technology Risk Management Guidelines), after extensive consultation with the industry in Singapore
and abroad, and have been contributing actively to the evolving thinking among regulators on these
issues.  We  are  introducing  a  new  consolidated  Securities  and  Futures  Act  to  account  for  global
developments influenced by  technology. We seek to clarify in  advance  what  we  might  or  might  not
regulate, in order to help entities to roll out their services.
Our  regulations  are  reactive;  necessarily  so  because  we  have  to  respond  to  market  and  industry
developments.  However,  we  must  respond  to  market  changes  promptly,  and  complement  prompt
reaction  with  a  forward-looking  perspective,  seeding  innovation  and  attracting  players  in  electronic
financial services (EFS).
The  MAS  intends  to  set  up  a  venture  capital  fund  and  a  grant  assistance  scheme,  to  incentivise
electronic  financial  services  in  Singapore.  Our  purpose  is  to  position  Singapore  as  a  test-bed  for
innovative  electronic  financial  services,  and  a  centre  for  incubators  of  electronic  financial  services
start-ups. The fund is not  intended  to  replace  the  venture  capital  industry,  but  will  instead  act  as  a
catalyst  to  develop  Singapore  into  a  leading  EFS  hub.  The  objectives  of  these  two  schemes  are
twofold:
• 
• 
We  aim  to  build  a  strong  industry  base  of  major  EFS  players,  develop  in  the  requisite  skills  and
expertise,  build  supporting  e-frastructure,  and  "electronicise"  existing  brick-and-mortar  financial
services.
To raise efficiency of financial sector players through the employment of EFS technology.
To attract players to base their regional or global capabilities in Singapore.
Conclusion
Barring  mishaps,  the  global  industry  trend  towards  greater  integration  and  openness  will  continue.
This will confront both regulators and industry practitioners with complex challenges. The regulator's
role is to ensure systemic stability, the integrity of the payments systems, and fair rules of competition,
while promoting a conducive environment for the growth of the financial centre. The industry's role is
to  compete,  innovate,  and  enhance  the  value  of  their  business.  But  both  seek  a  more  integrated,
efficient  and  sound  international  financial  system.  I  hope  your  deliberations  at  this  conference  will
contribute to this goal.
BIS Review 45/2001
5
