Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Update on the Singaporean economy
Statement  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of
Singapore, delivered at the MAS Annual Report 2000/2001 media conference in Singapore on 12 July
2001.
 Introduction
1
MAS has had an eventful year, shaping monetary policy in a challenging and uncertain environment
and continuing to liberalise and enhance standards in the financial sector.
Monetary policy
2
In January this year, MAS decided to maintain the existing exchange rate policy stance of allowing a
modest  appreciation  of  the  trade-weighted  Singapore  dollar  within  an  unchanged  policy  band.  This
policy was aimed at capping medium-term inflationary pressures, while continuing to be supportive of
economic activity as growth came off its cyclical high and moderated to a slower pace.
Economic  activity  slowed  much  more  in  the  first  half  of  2001  than  was  expected,  causing  market
sentiment  to  shift  against  the  Singapore  dollar.  Strong  demand  for  US  dollars  to  fund  merger  and
acquisition activities by domestic corporates, and a strengthening of the US dollar against the major
currencies, exerted further downward pressure on the Singapore dollar. The S$NEER weakened over
the period, from the top of the policy band at the start of the year to the lower half of the band at end
June. This trend was consistent with the change in underlying economic and market conditions.
Against  the  backdrop  of  a  weaker  external  economic  environment  and  a  more  protracted  global
electronics downturn, near term growth prospects for the Singapore economy have turned significantly
weaker while inflationary pressures are subsiding. The slowdown reflects a decline in demand, not an
erosion of competitiveness. There is no reason for any persistent weakening of the Singapore dollar.
MAS has therefore shifted to a neutral exchange rate policy stance, with a policy band centred on a
zero  percent  appreciation  of  the  S$NEER.  MAS  will  continue  to  guide  the  S$NEER  within  this
exchange rate band, and stands ready to intervene to dampen excessive volatility should this become
necessary.
Financial sector supervision and development
3
MAS' financial sector policies seek to promote a sound and resilient financial system while facilitating
innovation, dynamism and competition. Recent and ongoing initiatives by the MAS have focused on:
 
 
 
 
 
harmonising regulation across the financial sector;
liberalising access to the domestic industry;
promoting corporate governance and market discipline;
implementing a risk-focused supervisory framework; and
developing talent in the financial sector.
Harmonising regulation
Convergence  of  financial  activities  and  consolidation  of  financial  institutions  have  made  a  more
harmonised  and  integrated  approach  to  regulation  more  urgent.  Consistent  regulatory  treatment  for
similar products and activities  will help  level the playing field;  it  will also lower compliance costs  by
streamlining  relevant  regulations  and  reporting  requirements  across  activities.  As  an  integrated
regulator, MAS has made significant progress in harmonising regulation. Recent and ongoing efforts
have focused on the areas of licensing and capital adequacy.
On licensing, there have been two major initiatives: the new Securities and Futures Act (SFA) and the
new Financial Advisers Act (FAA). Public consultation documents and draft legislation of the SFA and
BIS Review 63/2001
1
FAA were released in March 2001. The Bills will be tabled in Parliament soon and are expected to be
enacted by the end of this year.
The SFA rationalises and consolidates into a single comprehensive legislation the Securities Industry
Act, Futures Trading Act, and provisions in the Companies Act related to capital raising. It introduces a
single,  modular  licensing  regime  for  securities  and  futures  intermediaries,  which  will  enhance
competition and lower compliance costs. The new legislation will also reflect initiatives that take into
account industry developments brought on by globalisation and technological advancements.
The FAA provides a single licensing regime and a more flexible and integrated regulatory framework
for  entities  engaging  in  financial  advisory  activities  for  all  investment  products,  and  facilitates  the
setting of consistent professional standards across the industry. Similarly, consistent business conduct
standards will govern the sale of unit trusts and life insurance across financial institutions licensed by
MAS.
With the proposed streamlining in licensing, financial institutions and market participants will no longer
need  different  licences  to  undertake  different  classes  of  financial  activities.  However,  they  have  to
abide  by  common  regulatory  standards  relevant  to  the  financial  activity  they  engage  in,  including
activities where they are exempted from holding licences.
On  capital  adequacy,  MAS  is  putting  in  place  across  the  financial  sector  a  risk-based  framework
based  on  common  principles  and  objectives.  The  existing  capital  frameworks  for  insurance
companies,  securities  dealers,  and  futures  brokers,  are  being  revised,  so  as  to  move  towards  a
risk-based approach, not dissimilar to banking.
In insurance, industry working groups are looking into the valuation and solvency framework for both
life  and  general  insurance  business.  In  securities  and  futures,  MAS  has  been  working  with  the
Singapore  Exchange  to  establish  a  risk-based  capital  adequacy  framework  for  licensed  securities
dealers  and  futures  brokers.  This  framework  will  allow  the  brokers  to  better  manage  the  risks  they
face,  in  the  light  of  market  and  product  developments.  The  new  framework  is  expected  to  be
introduced  in  the  second  half  of  2001,  and  will  take  into  account  comments  and  findings  from  two
rounds of consultation with the industry.
In banking,  where risk-based capital standards already exist, MAS  welcomes the key thrusts of the
proposed New Basel Capital Accord. It has been working closely with the local banks to develop their
capabilities and resources, so as to implement the internal ratings based approach.
Liberalising access
Liberalisation efforts have kept pace. A more open and competitive environment will spur innovation
and enterprise in the financial centre as well as provide Singaporeans with quality financial services.
The insurance industry is completely open. The securities industry has been substantially liberalised
and will be completely open from January 2002, when remaining trading restrictions on new members
admitted  to  the  Singapore  Exchange  will  be  removed.  In  banking,  MAS  has  announced  its  second
liberalisation package which will free up the wholesale market and considerably enhance competition
in the retail market.
Promoting corporate governance and market discipline
Sound  corporate  governance  and  effective  market  discipline  will  complement  MAS'  prudential
oversight,  in  fostering  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions.  MAS  has  taken  several
initiatives to improve corporate governance and information disclosure.
The  Banking  Act  has  been  amended  to  give  legislative  effect  to  the  policy  requiring  separation  of
financial  and  non-financial  activities  in  Singapore  banks  and  the  unwinding  of  cross-shareholdings.
This will limit the contagion risks to the banks, enhance market discipline, increase transparency and
ensure that bank managements focus their attention on the core banking business.
Local banks, in consultation with MAS, are adopting corporate governance standards that will, in areas
such as the independence of the Board and Board committees, go beyond the recommendations of
the Corporate Governance Committee. For financial year 2000, local banks improved their disclosure
of  directors'  remuneration,  related  party  transactions,  and  risk  management  practices.  They  will
disclose  further  details  on  these  areas  next  year,  putting  them  on  par  with  their  international
counterparts in terms of public disclosure.
2
BIS Review 63/2001
Implementing risk-focused supervisory framework
Recent regulatory reforms by MAS have also been motivated by the shift away from a "one-size-fits-
all" regulation to a more risk-focused approach. MAS is now developing a new risk-focused liquidity
supervision framework that will set a bank's liquidity requirement in line with its liquidity risk profile and
liquidity  risk  management  capabilities.  This  shift  away  from  a  "one-size-fits-all"  minimum  liquidity
requirement would be in line with international best practices for liquidity risk management. The new
framework will be announced in the second half of this year. Its implementation will be phased out to
minimise potential disruptions to financial markets.
As  business  models  and  technologies  continue  to  evolve,  MAS  has  kept  close  touch  with  market
participants and discussed with them the possible risk implications of new activities. We have avoided
pre-empting market developments with premature regulation. Regulation has to be responsive but it
cannot prejudge how the market will develop and business strategies will crystallise.
MAS  has  issued  regulatory  guidelines  on  the  provision  of  financial  services  through  new  delivery
channels.  Examples  include  the  policy  statement  on  capital  treatment  of  internet-only  banks;
guidelines on technology risk management for all institutions engaging in internet banking; and sound
practice  guidelines  on  internet  securities  trading.  The  proposed  SFA  will  introduce  an  authorisation
regime  to  cater  to  new  trading  systems,  often  referred  to  as  Alternative  Trading  Systems,  so  as  to
increase the scope of products available to investors.
Developing talent
Attracting and developing talent, both Singaporean and foreign, is critical to fostering innovation and a
vibrant financial centre.  In January this year, MAS announced that a Financial Network for Excellence
in  Training  (f-NExT)  would  be  established  to  encourage  greater  collaborative  efforts  in  enhancing
workforce capabilities within the financial sector. The Institute of Banking and Finance (IBF) will take
on a new role as the central executive  arm of f-NExT. f-NExT will  assess the training  needs of the
financial sector holistically, and  identify gaps in skills requirements. f-NExT will also strive  to attract
world-class training providers to set up in Singapore. Reputable training providers will be encouraged
to  set  up  more  training  centres  to  meet  the  industry's  demands  for  specialised  courses.  IBF  will
gradually  phase  out  training  courses  which  overlap  with  programmes  offered  by  other  training
providers.
International profile
4
As  a  leading  financial  centre,  Singapore  has  a  stake  in  a  sound  and  stable  international  financial
system. MAS is actively involved in the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), and initiatives undertaken by
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  to  strengthen  national  and  cross  border  supervisory
standards and capital adequacy of banks, market surveillance, and payments and settlement systems.
MAS  participates  actively  at  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),
contributing to its  work in developing  principles  and  guidelines,  which  serve  as  global  best  practice
standards. MAS is also an Executive Committee member of the International Association of Insurance
Supervisors (IAIS), which is the global standards-setting body for insurance supervision.
Singapore is actively involved in regional financial fora, including ASEAN, APEC, the South East Asia
Central  Bank  (SEACEN)  Governors,  and  the  Manila  Framework  Group.  MAS  is  also  engaged  in
expanded technical assistance to central banks and regulators in the Asia-Pacific over the past year,
including training programmes on macroeconomic management and financial supervision.
As part of Singapore's efforts to forge bilateral free trade agreements with strategic partners, MAS has
engaged in talks on financial services liberalisation and cooperation, including with Australia, Canada,
the European Free Trade Association, Japan, Mexico and the US.
5
MAS annual accounts
Assets & liabilities
On MAS' annual accounts, total assets increased by $15.2 billion to $130 billion as at 31 March 2001.
The main components of the increase were due to a $12.1 billion increase in foreign assets and a $3.3
BIS Review 63/2001
3
billion  increase  in  our  holdings  of  Singapore  Government  Securities  (SGS).  As  in  the  last  financial
year,  the  increase  in  SGS  holdings  reflected  MAS'  strategy  of  building  up  SGS  to  engage  in  more
repurchase agreement (repo) transactions for our money market operations.
On  the  liabilities  side,  there  was  an  increase  of  $14.7  billion  in  Government  deposits  with  MAS,
reflecting mainly increased issuance of SGS through the Authority.
Income & expenditure statement
For the financial year ended 31 March 2001, MAS registered profits of $2.1 billion compared to $3.6
billion in the previous year. The decrease resulted from translation effects arising from the strength of
the Singapore Dollar against major currencies other than US Dollar over the financial year as a whole.
The organisation
6
MAS has strengthened its corporate planning process. We formed several cross-specialisation teams
comprising  more  than  60  staff  to  evaluate  developments  and  challenges  both  in  the  external
environment and within the organisation. MAS' corporate priorities for the year have been developed
on the basis of these external and internal environment scans. These include programmes to enhance
Singapore's  position  as  a  world  class  financial  centre  and  to  create  flexible  and  forward-looking
organisational practices for a more cohesive and dynamic MAS.
4
BIS Review 63/2001
