David Dodge: Update on economic and monetary developments in Canada
Opening statement by David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 1 May 2001.
 I am pleased to appear before this Committee for the first time since my appointment as Governor of
the Bank, on the occasion of the release today of our spring Monetary Policy Report. Mr. Knight and I
hope to be able to return on the day of, or shortly after, the publication of our Report every May and
November.
The  Report  provides  our  latest  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  and  inflation  in
Canada. Before I give you a flavour of that assessment, I would like to say a word about the objective
of Canadian monetary policy and how we go about achieving it.
The Bank of Canada has a commitment to contribute to the economic well-being of Canadians. Thus,
we must conduct monetary policy so that it fosters sustained economic growth by creating conditions
that favour rising output, employment, and incomes, and a more stable macroeconomic environment.
The  unique  contribution  that  the  Bank  can  make  to  sound  economic  performance  is  to  preserve
confidence in the future value of money. Canadians should be  able to go about their business fully
expecting that their central bank will keep future inflation low, stable, and predictable. In this way, they
will  be  able  to  make  sounder  economic  decisions.  And  this  will  lead  to  better  overall  economic
performance.
The Bank pursues low inflation within a monetary policy framework based on an inflation-control target
and supported by a flexible exchange rate. The current target is to hold the trend of inflation inside a
range of 1 to 3 per cent, with emphasis on the midpoint of 2 per cent.
Inflation-control targets help to anchor policy and to anchor people's inflation expectations. And they
provide the Bank with an effective mechanism for assessing demand pressures. In this way, we can
take action to prevent overheating when the economy is strong and is pushing against capacity limits,
and to support growth when the economy is weak.
At  the  same  time,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  allows  our  economy  to  adjust  to  disturbances,  such  as
changes in foreign demand for our products or changes in the relative prices of our exports compared
with our imports. And it helps us to adjust with less overall fluctuation in output and employment than if
the exchange rate did not move.
With  this  brief  overview  of  Canada's  inflation-control  strategy,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  economic
situation.  When  my  predecessor  appeared  before  you  in  May  2000,  our  economy  was  growing
vigorously, bolstered by strong domestic and U.S. demand. Indeed, with signs of emerging capacity
pressures, and with the need to sustain non-inflationary economic growth in Canada, the Bank raised
interest rates the day after our appearance before this Committee.
These  higher  interest  rates  led  to  some  cooling  off  in  domestic  demand  in  Canada.  What  we,  and
most other analysts, did not anticipate was the abrupt slowing in U.S. economic growth. This is the
factor that has contributed to a greater-than-expected moderation in economic activity in Canada.
Since February, the Bank has been saying that we expect growth in the first half of this year to be very
modest. And we have indicated that, by the middle of 2001, the Canadian economy will probably be
operating somewhat below potential. Overall, the information received to date is broadly in line with
the Bank's expectations. The monthly numbers have been volatile: some have been weaker and some
have  been  stronger  than  anticipated.  But  they  are  generally  consistent  with  our  view  that  the
weakness in the first half will be mainly associated with inventory adjustments in markets facing soft
demand—in particular, motor vehicles—and with adjustments in other industries—notably electronics
and telecommunications equipment.
The Bank continues to believe that, after very modest growth in the first half of 2001, economic activity
in Canada will pick up in the second half and strengthen further in 2002. Let me explain what we are
basing this on. Despite lower production in the three high-profile sectors I just mentioned, aggregate
economic activity continues to  grow,  buttressed by underlying strength in other areas, including  the
energy  sector,  retail  sales,  housing,  non-residential  construction,  and  most  service  industries.
BIS Review 35/2001
1
Supported by recent tax cuts that boost disposable income, final domestic demand should continue to
expand. And we expect a recovery in foreign demand in the latter part of the year, encouraged by the
substantial  reductions  in  U.S.  interest  rates.  Nonetheless,  there  are  uncertainties  about  the  exact
timing and strength of the pickup in U.S. growth.
Here in Canada, we have lowered interest rates significantly to support growth in total demand in line
with our objective of keeping inflation close to 2 per cent over the medium term. Since January, the
Bank of Canada has cut rates by a total of 100 basis points, bringing the overnight rate—the rate that
corresponds to the U.S. federal funds rate—down to 4¾ per cent.
With this monetary easing and with the strengthening in the pace of economic activity in the second
half of the year, we now project annual average growth of between 2 and 3 per cent in 2001. For next
year, we see output expanding at a rate slightly above the Bank's estimate of potential output growth
of 3 per cent.
Consistent  with  the  Bank's  expected  path  of  output  growth,  core  CPI  inflation  will  likely  average
somewhat below 2 per cent over the remainder of 2001, then move back up to 2 per cent by the end
of 2002. Total CPI inflation is expected to be volatile over the next few months, before moving down to
about 2 per cent by the end of the year if world energy prices remain close to current levels.
I would now like to say a word about recent developments in financial markets. These developments
have  essentially  reflected  the  increased  concerns  and  uncertainty  surrounding  world  economic
prospects. In the circumstances, global investors have, once again, sought the safety and liquidity of
U.S. financial assets. And this has led to an appreciation of the U.S. dollar against all major currencies
despite the marked economic slowdown in that country. Although the Canadian dollar has remained
firm against other major currencies, the decline in its value against the U.S. dollar until just recently
has been the subject of much public commentary in Canada. Since the exchange rate is a key price in
our  economy,  the  Bank  recognizes  that  movements  in  its  value  can  be  a  source  of  concern  for
Canadians. I want to assure you that the Bank monitors market developments very closely. And we
carefully  assess  the  implications  of  currency  movements  for  aggregate  demand  and  inflation  in
Canada.
In  closing,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  Bank  remains  generally  positive  about  Canada's  economic
prospects in the period ahead. We continue to expect a pickup in growth in the second half of this year
and  further  strengthening  in  2002.  The  main  risk  to  this  outlook  is  the  timing  and  strength  of  the
projected  pickup  in  U.S.  growth.  Given  this  uncertainty,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  developments
closely and we will respond appropriately.
2
BIS Review 35/2001
