David Dodge: Canada’s monetary policy approach: it works for Canadians
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Edmonton  Chamber  of
Commerce, Edmonton, Alberta, 26 June 2001.
 I welcome this opportunity to talk to you today. In recent months, the debate over Canada's exchange
rate system has heated up and calls for the adoption of a common currency with the United States
have attracted a lot of attention.
Today, I would like to revisit the issue of the appropriate exchange rate regime for Canada and to set
out as clearly as possible the Bank's position. I propose to frame my discussion in terms of Canada's
approach to monetary policy. I will conclude with some comments on the current economic situation.
The goal of monetary policy and how to achieve it
The  Bank  of  Canada's  commitment  is  to  contribute  to  the  economic  well-being  of  Canadians.  This
means  conducting  monetary  policy  so  that  it  fosters  sustained  economic  growth  –  by  creating
conditions  that  favour  rising  output,  employment,  and  incomes,  and  a  stable  macroeconomic
environment.
Low, stable, and predictable inflation
Experience over time and across countries has taught us that the best contribution monetary policy
can make to a sound economy is to preserve confidence in the value of money. Fundamentally, this
means  that  Canadians  should  be  able  to  count  on  their  central  bank  to  keep  future  inflation  low,
stable,  and  predictable.  In  this  way,  they  can  go  confidently  about  their  affairs,  making  sound
economic decisions. This, in turn, should lead to better economic performance nationally.
Seen in this light, the focus on low inflation is not an end in itself, but rather a means to an end – the
end being the advancement of the economic well-being of Canadians.
Of course, a low-inflation policy by itself is not sufficient to guarantee the best economic outcome for
Canada.  Fiscal  prudence  and  other  policies  that  aim  to  improve  the  structure  and  flexibility  of  the
economy  are  also  essential.  But  low  inflation  provides  a  crucial  underpinning  to  a  well-functioning
economy.
If the goal of monetary policy is to achieve and preserve low inflation, how would the central bank go
about it?
Anchors for monetary policy
When a central bank raises or lowers its key policy interest rate, it sets in motion a series of events
that starts with the financial markets, works through changes in spending,  output, and employment,
and  ends  with  an  effect on the rate of inflation. This series  of events is known as the  transmission
mechanism of monetary policy.
The problem is that the transmission process is lengthy. So it takes time for monetary policy actions to
affect output and inflation. Some effects are felt relatively quickly. But the full effects are not felt for
some time – 3 to 6 quarters in the case of output  and 6 to 8  quarters in the case  of inflation. This
means that, as central bankers go about their day-to-day business of implementing monetary policy,
they must look ahead and anticipate what is likely to happen down the road. They have to work with
assumptions and make judgment calls about future economic developments and about the timing and
final outcome of any monetary policy action they take. All of this involves considerable uncertainty.
This being said, as we look around the world, there have been different ways to focus the conduct of
monetary policy and to give people greater comfort that things are on track, thus helping to tie down or
"anchor" inflation expectations.
Most  countries  have  now  adopted  some  kind  of  explicit  target  or  anchor  for  monetary  policy.  The
major exception is the United States, where a statement of general intentions with respect to inflation
BIS Review 59/2001
1
has, in recent years, proven sufficient to anchor monetary policy, in light of the U.S. Federal Reserve's
strong credibility.
In terms of explicit anchors, there have been targets for monetary aggregates, fixed exchange rates,
and inflation targets.
 . . . targeting monetary aggregates
Most  industrialized  countries,  including  Canada,  have  in  the  past  tried  to  target  the  rate  of  money
growth.
However, in both Canada and the United States, targets for money growth have not proven to be an
effective  monetary  anchor.  Deregulation  and  financial  innovation  have  weakened  the  reliability  of
money  measures,  and  the  relationship  between  money  growth  and  the  rate  of  inflation  has  proven
unstable. But we still look at money for its information content about current and future developments
in output and inflation.
For  all  practical  purposes,  then,  there  are  only  two  options  today  in  terms  of  explicit  anchors  for
monetary policy: fixing the exchange rate or targeting inflation.
. . . fixing the exchange rate
For many countries, especially smaller ones, tying their currency to that of a larger neighbour or major
trading partner with a history of low inflation is one way to achieve a low rate of inflation.
There  are,  of  course,  different  forms  of  fixed  exchange  rates.  They  can  range  from  'softer'
systems  –  such  as  a  peg  –  to  'harder'  fixes  that  lie  at  the  opposite  extreme  from  a  free  floating
currency. These harder fixes can be a currency board, the outright use of another country's currency
("dollarization"), or a full monetary union.
Pegged  exchange  rates  that  can  be  adjusted  (that  is,  revalued  or  devalued)  have  been  the  most
widely used anchor since the Second World War. They were the prevailing order under the Bretton
Woods system, which was established after the war and lasted until the early 1970s, when it finally
collapsed in the face of increasingly open financial markets, large capital flows, and U.S. expansionary
policies.
The problem with a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate is that it does not guarantee that the value of
the  currency  relative  to  other  currencies,  and  thus  its  purchasing  power,  will  not  rise  or  fall.  For
example, the currency could come under downward pressure if it is pegged at a level that is out of line
with  the  country's  economic  situation  (say,  because  of  large  and  growing  fiscal  deficits  and  debts).
Should  the  markets  then  begin  to  question  the  authorities'  commitment  to  the  peg,  domestic  and
foreign investors would scramble to get out, triggering a currency crisis. There is no shortage of such
examples in recent history: repeated episodes in Latin America since the 1980s, crises in Europe in
1992 and 1993, and in Southeast Asia and Russia in 1997–98.
Because pegs have proven problematic, a more realistic approach would involve adopting one of the
more rigid fixes. I will have more to say about this later. But let me move on now to the third option for
an explicit monetary policy anchor – inflation targets.
. . . targeting inflation
Among a number of industrialized countries that, like Canada, are operating a floating currency, there
has  been  a  tendency  over  the  past  decade  to  adopt  explicit  inflation  targets  as  the  anchor  for
monetary policy. The same tendency  is  now  evident  among  a  growing  number  of  emerging-market
economies that have recently moved to flexible exchange rates following the collapse of their pegged
rates. The objective is to consistently maintain low and stable inflation, while the flexible exchange rate
helps the economy to adjust to shocks.
Why inflation targets and how do they work to guide monetary policy?
In such a framework, the central bank targets the rate of inflation – say, 2 per cent – several quarters
ahead. Then, based on its judgment of the current and projected strength of demand relative to the
economy's production capacity, as well as the implications for future inflation relative to the target, it
will take action now – because of the long lags involved – to ensure that the target is achieved down
the road.
2
BIS Review 59/2001
The value of the inflation target as an anchor: the Canadian experience
In  Canada,  explicit  inflation  targets  were  jointly  introduced  by  the  Government  of  Canada  and  the
Bank of Canada in 1991. Since 1995, the goal has been to keep the trend of inflation inside a target
range of 1 to 3 per cent.
In adopting the targets, the Bank expected that they would provide a useful framework within which to
assure Canadians that inflation would remain low and stable, thus leading to less fluctuation in output
and  employment. We also  expected  that  the  targets  would  provide  a  precise  goal  against  which  to
measure the conduct of monetary policy, thus helping to increase the Bank's public accountability.
After a decade of experience, it is clear that inflation targeting has proven to be an effective way of
keeping inflation low, and that an inflation target provides an anchor for inflation expectations.
Moreover,  that  target  has  supplied  the  Bank  with  a  mechanism  for  assessing,  and  dealing  with,
demand pressures on future inflation in a way that helps to keep the economy on a more even keel.
Indeed, there is already some evidence that the pronounced ups and downs in economic activity, so
typical of the past, have diminished.
Here's how the target helps the Bank to ‘stabilize' the economy. When demand pushes against the
economy's capacity to produce and seems likely to put upward pressure on future inflation relative to
the target, the Bank will raise interest rates. This will help to moderate demand and reduce inflation
pressures. Equally importantly, when demand is weak and seems likely to put downward pressure on
future inflation relative to the target, the Bank will lower interest rates, thus providing more room for the
economy to expand.
In short, the  emphasis on inflation control allows  the  Bank to support  growth  when  the  economy  is
weak  and  to  prevent  overheating  when  the  economy  is  strong  and  is  pushing  against  capacity
constraints.  Now,  this  goes  back  to  what  I  was  saying  at  the  beginning  –  that  monetary  policy
contributes to sound economic performance by means of its focus on low inflation.
With  a  low-inflation  climate  encouraging  further  initiatives  by  Canadian  businesses  to  improve  cost
control, efficiency, and productivity, and with marked fiscal progress by all levels of government, our
economy  has  performed  well  over  the  past  several  years.  And  it  has  generated  solid  gains  in
employment and incomes.
In  light  of  the  important  economic  and  social  benefits  that  low  inflation  and  inflation  targets  have
delivered, the federal government and the Bank of Canada recently agreed to retain the current target
of 1 to 3 per cent. To increase the chances that inflation stays inside that range, the Bank will now be
aiming expressly at the 2 per cent midpoint. Moreover, the new agreement runs for five years, instead
of  three,  to  the  end  of  2006.  Both  of  these  changes  should  help  to  increase  predictability  and  to
reassure Canadians that low inflation will be a continuing feature of the domestic economic scene.
Now, let us see how the exchange rate fits in all this and why Canada needs a floating currency.
Why do we need a floating exchange rate?
If we want to set our own goal for inflation or, what's more relevant (since today all industrial countries
pursue a similar low-inflation objective), if we want to run a monetary policy suited to our own distinct
economic  circumstances,  we  need  monetary  independence.  Monetary  independence  can  exist  only
within a flexible exchange rate system.
The real value of a floating currency for Canada lies in helping our economy to absorb some of the
impact of external shocks. A classic example would be a sharp movement in the value of our exports
relative to our imports, such as occurred in 1997–98, when world commodity prices plummeted in the
wake of the Asian crisis. In that instance, a downward movement in the value of the Canadian dollar
helped  offset  some  of  the  losses  suffered  by  our  commodity  producers.  More  importantly,  it
strengthened  the  competitiveness  of  Canadian  manufacturers.  They,  in  turn,  were  able  to  expand
production and offset some of the downward pressure on output and incomes from the decline in the
commodity sector. In this way, our national economy was able to adjust more quickly, and with less
overall fluctuation in output and employment, than if the exchange rate did not move.
Consider what would have happened under a fixed exchange rate. With the exchange rate not allowed
to move, domestic wages and prices would have had to decline to restore external competitiveness.
BIS Review 59/2001
3
And  since  neither  wages  nor  prices  are  flexible  enough  to  adjust  quickly,  much  of  that  adjustment
would have had to come through declines in output and employment.
In a world where capital is free to move across national borders, a floating  exchange rate can  also
help  to  absorb  some  of  the  pressures  stemming  from  large  capital  flows  and  to  facilitate  any
necessary economic adjustments. Indeed, I would remind you that the decision to float the Canadian
dollar  in  1950,  and  again  in  1970,  was  taken  in  the  context  of  large  capital  inflows  (and  rising
commodity  prices)  that  were  causing  concerns  about  their  inflationary  effects  on  our  economy  and
were putting strong upward pressure on our currency.
The key point in all this is that Canada cannot insulate itself from external shocks. Whether we are on
a flexible or a fixed exchange rate, the reality is that those shocks require a domestic adjustment. And,
in the end, that adjustment will be made – one way or another.  But,  without the flexibility a floating
currency can provide, it will take longer, be more difficult, and cost more overall in terms of lost output
and jobs.
Now, when the exchange rate moves up or down, there has to be some way to anchor expectations
about its value. Otherwise, the freedom of the currency to float could, in the context of a downward
movement, undermine confidence in its value on world markets and at home. Under our approach to
monetary  policy,  the  domestic  inflation  target  serves  as  that  all-important  anchor  for  the  exchange
rate.
The inflation target and a floating currency work well together – indeed, they reinforce each other. And
they both have very significant economic benefits for Canada.
These days, the advantages of a monetary policy approach based on inflation targets and supported
by a flexible exchange rate regime are being increasingly recognized by others around the world. And
Canada  is  often  held  up  as  a  model. Why  then  the  calls  in  this  country  to  go  back  to  pegging  our
currency to the U.S. dollar or to enter into a currency union with the United States?
Pegging would mean losing the macroeconomic benefits of a flexible exchange rate, without gaining
the assurance that the exchange rate will not move in the future.  So  what people  are talking about
now is a currency union with the United States.
On the face of it, the prospective gains from such an arrangement would seem to be attractive. After
all, Canada is one of the most open economies in the world, exporting over 40 per cent of its output
and importing about as much. Moreover, 80 per cent of this trade is with the United States. So, yes, by
adopting  the  U.S.  dollar,  Canadians  could  save  on  the  transactions  costs  of  converting  national
currencies  and  hedging  against  currency  movements.  There  could  also  be  some  other  advantages
linked to the improved efficiency that can result from reduced exchange rate uncertainty.
The crucial question, however, is whether the savings from such an arrangement would compensate
for the loss of monetary policy independence and for the loss of the buffer that a flexible exchange
rate provides against economic shocks.
Research  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  by  many  outside  analysts  confirms  that  Canada  benefits
significantly from having a separate currency and a floating exchange rate. It is true that Canada and
the  United  States  share  many  characteristics.  But  when  it  comes  to  economic  structure,  there  are
many important differences. Not only is our economy far more open than that of the United States, but
Canada is also more dependent on raw materials. Moreover, while we are net exporters of primary
commodities, the Americans are net importers. Sharp swings in world commodity prices have a much
greater impact on economic activity in Canada and, more importantly, they affect us differently than
our neighbours. It is very clear that the structure of our economy is sufficiently distinct from that of the
United States that a flexible exchange rate can play a key role in facilitating the domestic economic
adjustment to such shocks.
From a strictly economic perspective, it is always possible that, at some future time, the structures of
our two economies could converge to a point that the benefits of a common currency could outweigh
the macroeconomic costs of abandoning our flexible exchange rate. But it is also possible that those
structures could diverge further (if more trade led to greater specialization). We simply do not know. I
would emphasize,  however, that the crucial factor here is  not  the  extent  of  the  integration  between
Canada and the United States, but rather how close or how far apart our economic structures are, or
will be.
Former Bank of Canada Governor Thiessen put it well last December when he said that "as long as
we  remain  a  major  producer  of  primary  commodities,  and  as  long  as  we  want  to  pursue  separate
4
BIS Review 59/2001
economic  policies  that  are  suited  to  our  own  circumstances  and  that  require  differing  monetary
conditions, the shock-absorber element of a floating currency will serve us well."
I  fully  associated  myself  with  this  view  during  my  appearance  last  month  before  the  House  of
Commons Standing Committee on Finance. I said: "it's quite clear that at this stage in our evolution, a
floating  currency  for  Canada  vis-à-vis  the  United  States  .  .  .  is  a  great  advantage  because  the
structures of our economies differ."
Thus, one may not argue that, for all time and under all circumstances, a floating currency will be the
right solution for Canada. But, what I can say is that, given the structure of our economy, for now and
for  as  far  into  the  future  as  I  can  see,  the  advantages  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  anchored  by  a
domestic  inflation  target,  clearly  outweigh  the  benefits  of  a  currency  union.  And  they  will  certainly
always outweigh those of a peg.
I hope that I have made it clear today that Canada's monetary policy approach of a flexible exchange
rate, anchored by an inflation target, works. There is no need to fix it.
Let me now conclude my presentation by giving you our latest reading of the economy.
Recent economic developments
Since  late  last  year,  the  pace  of  economic  expansion  in  Canada  has  slowed  substantially,  mainly
because  U.S.  demand  for  our  products  has  been  much  weaker  than  anticipated.  Canadian
manufacturers, particularly of motor vehicles, electronic products, and telecommunications equipment,
have had to make very significant adjustments. At the same time, final domestic demand in Canada
has  remained  firm,  buttressed  by  underlying  strength  in  the  energy  sector,  retail  sales,  housing,
non-residential construction, and most service industries. National accounts data to the end of March
and more recent indicators show that our economy has been expanding at a moderate pace since the
last quarter of 2000.
As we look ahead, we see domestic demand in Canada continuing to grow, supported by the easing
that has taken place in monetary conditions, the recent tax cuts that are boosting disposable incomes,
gains in employment, and the projected completion of the current inventory adjustment.
We also continue to see U.S. demand growth picking up in the second half of 2001, given substantial
reductions  in  interest  rates,  relatively  high  levels  of  consumer  spending,  the  expected  end  of  the
inventory correction, and recently announced tax cuts (which include rebates beginning in July). But
because of the ongoing weakness in U.S. capital investment, there is still uncertainty about the exact
timing and strength of the projected pickup in U.S. growth in the second half of the year.
While that uncertainty poses some risks for Canada, we continue to expect that the pace of economic
expansion  here  will  pick  up  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  and  strengthen  somewhat  further  in  the
course of 2002.
Total CPI inflation has recently been above the top of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range because
of rising energy prices, including higher electricity rates. Total CPI inflation will probably remain volatile
over the next couple of months, before moving down to about 2 per cent by the end  of the  year,  if
world prices for crude oil and natural gas stabilize around current levels.
The  main  risk  to  the  Canadian  economic  outlook  continues  to  be  the  possibility  that  the  projected
pickup  in  U.S.  growth  may  be  delayed.  At  the  same  time,  even  though  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and
natural gas have eased from their recent peaks, the Bank will need to stay alert to any signs of energy
costs  spilling  over  into  other  consumer  prices,  and  thus  putting  upward  pressure  on  the  trend  of
inflation. In light of these risks, the Bank will have to continue to monitor the situation very carefully.
In sum, the Bank remains positive about Canada's economic prospects. We continue to expect that
the economy will grow by between 2 and 3 per cent this year and return to a somewhat higher growth
path  in  2002.  This  judgment  is  based  on  recent  evidence  that  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  Bank's
expectations. And it is supported by the marked improvement in our economic fundamentals, which
gives Canada a very good chance to weather the current economic difficulties.
BIS Review 59/2001
5
