Christian Noyer: Current issues in monetary policy
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the
occasion  of  a  conference  organised  by  l'Université  Robert  Schuman,  Institut  des  Hautes  Etudes
Européennes (IHEE) Strasbourg, 6 February 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 (Introduction)
It is both  a pleasure and an  honour for me to speak here at  the conference of "L'Observatoire des
politiques économiques en Europe" in Strasbourg and to have the opportunity to present some of the
"current  issues"  surrounding  the  Eurosystem  and  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  before  such  a
distinguished  audience.  For  a  central  bank,  it  is  essential  to  attain  public  understanding  and
acceptance,  so  the  ECB  is  endeavouring  to  explain  its  policy  to  a  broader  public.  We  believe  that
communication and transparency are key elements of modern central banking.
The ECB's monetary policy strategy has been a much-debated issue. Therefore, I should like to begin
with  this  topic.  In  designing  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  ability  to  deal  with  structural
changes  and  with  the  issue  of  uncertainty  has  been  of  the  utmost  importance.  I  shall  elaborate  on
these  issues  later.  Finally,  I  shall  turn  to  our  assessment  of  the  current  economic  and  monetary
situation in the euro area.
The ECB's two-pillar strategy
The ECB  has chosen its  own strategy to  best suit  its particular circumstances. The strategy is  well
equipped to deal with the uncertainties surrounding monetary policy in general and the introduction of
the euro in particular. It provides a clearly  defined framework for  guiding  monetary  policy  decisions
and for explaining these decisions to the public.
Let me briefly recall the principal features of our strategy.
First of all, the ECB has given itself a forward-looking, medium term-oriented strategy aimed at fulfilling
its primary objective: price stability. The first element of the strategy is the quantification of what the
Governing Council understands by price stability. This is defined as an annual increase of below 2% in
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area. This definition serves to anchor
inflation  expectations  and  provides  a  framework  against  which  the  Eurosystem  can  be  held
accountable.  It  clearly  emphasises  the  euro  area-wide  focus  of  monetary  policy.  Short-term
fluctuations  in  the  inflation  rate  are  not  under  the  control  of  central  banks.  Therefore,  it  was  also
announced  that  price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  imparting  a  medium-term
orientation to the strategy as a whole.
In order to fulfil its primary objective, the ECB's monetary strategy relies on two pillars. The first pillar
assigns  a  prominent  role  to  money.  A  central  bank  has  a  natural  interest,  but  also  a  comparative
advantage  in  analysing  monetary  developments,  because  money  is  -  if  I  may  say  so  -  the  central
bank's "output". There is broad empirical evidence of a long-term stable relationship between money
and  prices and  good  leading  indicator  properties  of money  in  the  euro  area.  The  prominent  role  of
money  is  signalled  by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  the
broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  This  reference  value  represents  a  visible  public  commitment  to
analysing and explaining monetary developments and their implications for price stability in detail. In
December 2000, the Governing Council of the ECB reconfirmed the reference value of 4 1/2% annual
growth.  This  rate  should  be  consistent  with  price  stability  in  the  medium  term. While  the  reference
value plays an important role in monetary analysis, the assessment of the first pillar goes beyond the
evaluation  of  the  deviation  of  M3  growth  from  the  reference  value.  It  encompasses  a  variety  of
approaches  which  assign  a  central  role  to  money  because  of  the  ultimately  monetary  nature  of
inflation, as well as a detailed analysis of the components and counterparts of M3. Thus, an in-depth
analysis of the overall liquidity conditions in the euro area is provided.
BIS Review 10/2001
1
Despite  broad  consensus  on  the  fact  that  inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon,  the
assessment  of monetary  developments  alone  does  not  give  an  accurate  picture  of  the  state  of  the
economy  and  of  the  potential  risks  to  price  stability.  Therefore,  for  a  robust  strategy,  it  is  useful  to
analyse additional  indicators relevant for future price stability  and to combine  them under a second
pillar.
The second pillar of the ECB's strategy ensures that the interplay between supply and demand in the
real  economy  is  sufficiently  taken  into  consideration  when  evaluating  the  risks  to  price  stability.  It
comprises  a  variety  of  predominantly  non-monetary  factors,  which  are  relevant  for  future  price
developments. Some of the factors of the second pillar can be especially relevant in the short term, for
example the development of oil prices. For monetary policy decisions, it is important to know whether,
for example, shocks originate from the supply side or from the demand side of the economy, whether
they exert a temporary or permanent influence on prices, or whether they result from a domestic or an
external  source.  As  we  have  experienced  in  the  past  few  months,  an  oil  price  shock,  which  is  an
external shock from the supply side, can exert a  significant  direct  influence  on  consumer  prices.  In
such a  situation,  the  central  bank  has  to  assess  whether  this  direct  effect  will  remain  temporary  or
whether it will translate into a more permanent impact on prices. This depends to a large extent on the
ability  of  central  banks  to  keep  inflation  expectations  low.  Other  indicators  of  the  second  pillar,  for
example the development of labour costs, have a more medium-term content.
Under  the  second  pillar  of  the  strategy,  the  production  of  macroeconomic  projections  for  real  GDP
growth and inflation enables some of the factors considered to  be structured and summarised. The
staff of the ECB and the national central banks have already been providing twice-yearly projections to
the Governing Council since the start of Monetary Union. Starting with the December 2000 issue of the
ECB Monthly Bulletin, these projections are now regularly made available to the public alongside other
indicators  and  other  forms  of  analysis  underlying  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  decisions.  Let  me
emphasise  that  the  publication  of  projections  reflects  the  ECB's  commitment  to  openness  and
transparency  in  sharing  the  information  and  analyses  underlying  its  monetary  policy  decisions.
Furthermore, it does not in any way change the ECB's monetary policy strategy.
The  projections  are  only  one  element  of  the  second  pillar  considered  by  the  Governing  Council.
Economic projections can only provide a partial summary of the state of the economy. They cannot
possibly  contain  all  the  information  needed  to  take  appropriate  policy  decisions.  In  particular,  the
results  do  not  in  themselves  reveal  the  nature  of  a  shock  hitting  the  economy.  The  appropriate
monetary policy to maintain price stability should always depend on the specific circumstances and the
nature and magnitude of a threat. For example, the appropriate response to a one-off increase in oil
prices may differ from that given to a wage-price spiral, even if both have the same impact on inflation
projections.  Therefore,  projections  must  always  be  supplemented  by  economic  assessments  and  a
detailed analysis of individual indicators.
The  ECB's  strategy  has  sometimes  been  criticised  for  being  rather  complex.  However,  we  are
convinced  that  a  simple  approach  would  not  have  been  appropriate.  Neither  a  purely  monetary
approach  nor  a  purely  non-monetary  approach  to  the  analysis  of  risks  to  price  stability  is  able  to
deliver the best possible results for monetary policy. In the beginning, we were sometimes criticised for
"not having decided" between a strategy clearly based on a purely monetary objective and one based
on pure inflation targeting. However, I strongly believe that we have made the right decision, as we
have only one primary objective: price stability. We have also decided in favour of a robust strategy in
order  to  achieve  our  objective.  This  enables  us  to  use  a  variety  of  approaches,  involving  different
analytical frameworks and indicators, which are relevant for our primary objective of price stability in
our decision-making process, and to cross-check the results. This approach provides the best possible
basis for monetary policy decisions.
So far, both pillars have given broadly similar indications with regard to the primary objective of price
stability. However, this does not necessarily have to be the case. Let us suppose that both pillars were
to point in different directions. Would it really be better if only one of these signals were available? This
would undoubtedly make the decision process easier. But, seriously, faced with uncertainty - and that
is an essential characteristic of the world we live in - I do believe that it is advantageous to take more
than one approach into consideration and not to rely on a single analytical framework. That is basically
the rationale for our two-pillar strategy. Furthermore, over the first two years of Monetary Union, there
has come to be greater understanding that this is indeed a sensible approach.
2
BIS Review 10/2001
Monetary policy in an environment of structural change
Central  banking  entails,  by  definition,  acting  under  uncertainty.  While  this  statement  holds  true  in
general, it is particularly the case for the ECB. The introduction of the euro had the potential to trigger
structural changes in financial, goods and labour markets, which are in part already visible today and
may evolve further in the near future.
With regard to financial markets, the integration of national money markets into one area-wide money
market has been almost without friction since the very start of Stage Three, which has allowed for an
efficient implementation of monetary policy decisions. In the other segments of the financial markets,
considerable  progress  has  been  made,  although  the  integration  process  is  far  from  complete.  The
removal of barriers to exchange rate risk between the countries of the euro area helped to facilitate the
standardisation  of  debt  instruments  and  widen  the  range  of  investment  opportunities.  Portfolio
allocation strategies within the euro area are now mainly oriented towards a sectoral selection and, to
a  lesser  extent,  a  national  selection  of  assets.  That  is  an  impressive  indication  of  the  ongoing
integration of financial markets in the euro area. This trend, in turn, enhances the liquidity of markets
and affects the financing decisions taken by companies. Direct financing via capital markets is growing
in  importance, even  though  banks are still the most important source of financing  in the euro  area.
Such changes in the financial landscape make the allocation of funds more efficient and are hence
most welcome. At the same time, however, they alter the transmission mechanism of monetary policy,
and insofar as this alteration is difficult to measure, add uncertainty to monetary policy decisions.
Apart from the financial environment, the real economy in the euro area  is also currently subject to
significant  change.  Monetary  Union  has  enhanced  competition  between  economic  agents  in  the
participating countries. Price transparency between the countries has increased. Both consumers and
companies are becoming increasingly more aware of price differences and are reacting accordingly.
Greater  price  differences  will  be  harder  to  justify  and  maintain,  even  though  differences  in  the  tax
systems and in product specifications will continue to exert an influence on price setting.
Fiscal policy may be affected, both by increased competition between countries  and  by  the general
need to foster employment and growth in order to comply with the challenges of ageing populations.
These realities have triggered tax cuts and the start of more fundamental benefit reforms. However,
these efforts must be accompanied by a structural reduction in expenditure in order to support price
stability, make further progress in fiscal consolidation and boost economic growth.
Overall, the increase in competition, less rigidity and a more flexible structure of the economy should
lead to an increase in the sustainable rate of economic growth. However, it is difficult to evaluate the
extent of these structural changes and to gauge how quickly their impact will be felt on medium-term
growth, particularly at an early stage.
In  addition  to  the  specific  factors  resulting  from  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  rapid  change  in
information and communication technology is likely to add further potential for structural changes in
the  economy.  The  possible  emergence  of  a  "New  Economy"  may  raise  the  economy's  productive
capacity  temporarily  or  on  a  more  permanent  basis.  Much  faster  data  transfer  and  the  increased
transparency of information in a knowledge-based society could enhance efficiency. Even if some of
the euphoria surrounding the start of a new economic era has dissipated, as could be seen in stock
market developments over the  last  few  months,  there  remains  a  remarkable  potential  for  economic
change in the future. To date, however, clear evidence of positive effects on the supply side, which
may lead to a temporary or even permanent higher potential output growth, is still lacking for the euro
area. In addition, it should be borne in mind that the expectation of higher growth and positive wealth
effects may also lead to inflationary pressures from the demand side of the economy. Therefore, the
implications of the "New Economy" for monetary policy are far from clear.
Monetary policy-makers, whose aim is to maintain price stability, need to exercise particular caution in
such  an  environment  of  change.  I  am  confident  that  the  ECB  is  well  equipped  to  cope  with  this
challenge, not least due to the "full information approach" chosen in the form of the two-pillar-strategy.
Of course, not only central bankers face uncertainty, but also private agents. Given this situation, the
central bank itself must be an even greater source of stability. It must not only avoid any actions which
may  bring  uncertainty  to  the  economy,  but  must  try  to  stabilise  the  expectations  of  private  agents.
When private agents are uncertain about the objective and the commitment of the central bank to this
objective, they tend to shorten their planning horizons. They therefore become less predictable, which
ultimately leads to a less foreseeable economic environment.
BIS Review 10/2001
3
Thus, it is crucial for a central bank to define its policy objective and its strategy clearly and to provide
a stable and broadly predictable pattern of behaviour to the public. In addition, central banks should
avoid pursuing an activist monetary policy, i.e. they should avoid attempts to fine-tune the economy. In
general,  the  limited  knowledge  of  the  monetary  transmission  process  favours  a  clear  medium-term
orientation in order to accurately assess the risks to price stability.
The current monetary and economic situation in the euro area
Let me finally turn to the current monetary and economic situation and its implications for monetary
policy. As you are no doubt aware, the ECB has kept interest rates unchanged since the beginning of
October  last  year.  This  policy  reflects  the  fact  that  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  have
become more  balanced  over  the  past  few  months,  although  some  factors  which  may  pose  upward
risks still remain.
Starting with the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB, monetary data for December
2000 confirmed the moderation of monetary dynamics, which has been observed since the spring of
last  year.  The  three-month  average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3,  covering  the  period  from
October to December, stood at 5.0%, slightly lower than the 5.1% for the period from September to
November 2000. Hence, the risks to price stability from the monetary side have become increasingly
more  balanced.  However,  some  caution  is  still  warranted,  given  the  previous  protracted  period  of
upward deviations of M3 growth from the reference value of 4 1/2%.
Broadly similar indications are emerging from the second pillar. This year, real GDP growth may be
somewhat weaker than last year, and inflationary pressures stemming from previously higher oil prices
and a low external value of the euro may  gradually  disappear. Nevertheless, there is also need for
some caution.
The external environment of the euro area is currently surrounded by a  high degree  of uncertainty.
After several years of impressive economic growth in the United States, the slowdown in growth there
may  be  more  significant  than  previously  anticipated.  Obviously  a  considerably  weaker  economic
performance of the United States,  which accounts for slightly  more  than  20%  of  world  GDP,  would
have implications for world economic growth.  However,  on  the  basis  of  the  information  available  at
present, it is likely that world economic activity will remain at an acceptable level this year. In addition,
it should be borne in mind that the euro area itself is also a large domestic market - it is, in fact, the
second largest in the world - accounting for over 15% of world GDP. Exports of goods and services
only amount to around 17% of euro area GDP: this implies that the influence of external trade on real
economic  growth  is  limited.  Instead,  euro  area  economic  activity  is  mainly  influenced  by  domestic
factors.
Economic growth  in  the  euro  area  has recovered considerably since the second  half of  1999.  Real
GDP growth is expected to have been around 3 1/2% in 2000, compared with an average real GDP
growth of 2% in the 1990s.
Real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  slowed  down  somewhat  since  the  second  half  of  2000,  as
demonstrated in recently published GDP data and short-term indicators, such as industrial production
and,  to  some  extent,  the  European  Commission's  industrial  confidence  indicator.  However,  at  the
same time, this indicator, together with the capacity utilisation rate, have remained at a high level and
continue to give a relatively favourable picture.
Regarding  private  consumption, 
indicator
recovered on average in December and January, following a dip in the previous months. In particular,
private  households  were  more  optimistic  about  the  future  economic  situation  as  well  as  their  own
financial  situation.  The  data  confirm  the  view  that  the  earlier  decline  in  consumer  confidence  was
mainly due to the adverse effects of the increase in oil prices until November 2000, which dampened
private  household  real  disposable  income  growth.  Overall,  consumer  confidence  has  continued  to
remain at a high level, reflecting favourable financing conditions and improving conditions in the labour
markets.  The  latter  is  indicated  by  a  robust  growth  in  employment  and  a  further  decline  in  the
unemployment rate. In addition, tax reductions in a number of euro area countries can be expected to
fuel domestic demand this year.
All in all, it seems likely that real GDP will continue to expand at a robust pace this year. Hence, there
is reason to be optimistic with regard to further economic developments in the euro area.
the  European  Commission's  consumer  confidence 
4
BIS Review 10/2001
Turning  to  price  developments,  inflation  fell  to  2.6%  in  December,  down  from  2.9%  in  November,
reflecting the decrease in oil prices in euro terms. Provided that this drop in oil prices and the recovery
in the effective exchange rate of the euro are sustained, the annual rate of consumer price inflation is
expected to fall to below 2% in the course of the year. However, this may take some time. Over the
short term, the process may be slowed down by the delayed impact of previous import price increases.
Given the present situation, potential second-round effects remain a risk to price stability. Against this
backdrop, it is important to proceed with wage moderation. Moreover, it is essential that fiscal policy
meet  the  obligations  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Continuing  progress  in  fiscal  consolidation
should be achieved by containing public spending growth, allowing for both a reduction in remaining
budget deficits and an alleviation of the fiscal burden on corporations and private households.
Concluding remarks
Overall,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  first  two  years  of  the  euro  have  been  a  success.  At  the  start  of
Monetary Union, the economic environment in the euro area was still in the aftermath of the Asian and
Russian crises, rendering  considerable  uncertainty  to  world  economic  development.  At  present,  the
economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  is  much  more  favourable,  even  though  uncertainties  from  the
external  environment  have  increased  recently.  Admittedly,  consumer  price  inflation  currently  stands
above 2%. However, this development is mainly due to direct effects stemming from the external oil
price shock, which cannot be prevented by monetary policy. It is very positive for the credibility of the
ECB that under these circumstances inflation expectations have remained contained, as reflected, for
example, in financial market indicators and survey data. This shows that the ECB's stability orientation
is properly understood by the markets and by the public at large.
I  am  also  optimistic  about  the  future.  The  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  will
contribute  significantly  to  the  achievement  of  sustainable  economic  growth  and  to  the  economic
welfare of the population in the euro area. If other policy areas also play their part, we have reason to
be confident about the future of the euro area.
Finally, I should like to draw your attention to one particular challenge which will take place this year
or, to be more precise, at the end of this year: the introduction of euro banknotes and coins and the
general changeover to the euro as the new unit of currency. As far as the Eurosystem is concerned, it
is our responsibility to ensure that the printing of around 14.5 billion euro banknotes, representing a
value  of  some  EUR  650  billion,  and  the  bringing  into  circulation  of  the  banknotes  and  coins,  is
successfully completed. In order to achieve this, we have planned an information campaign, with the
aim of familiarising those living both inside and outside the euro area with the new currency. Beginning
on 1 September 2001, euro area banknotes and coins will be frontloaded to credit institutions, which
will then sub-frontload them to professional groups (retailers, cash-in-transit companies and the cash-
operated machine industry). From the second half of December 2001, the  general public  in several
Member States will receive starter kits containing a mixture of denominations of euro coins in order to
facilitate initial purchases in 2002. I am truly convinced that the visible introduction of the euro will be a
decisive step in the further integration of the euro area, as well as in increasing the acceptance of the
euro by the population of the euro area and abroad.
BIS Review 10/2001
5
