LS Ipangelwa: Does the banking industry play a developmental role in
Namibia?
Address by Mr LS Ipangelwa, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Namibia, to the Namibian Economic
Society, held in Windhoek, 13 March 2001.
 Mr Chairman, Members of the Panel, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I’m delighted to take part in this well-directed and well-timed discussion. As a central banker I am glad
to  see  so  much  attention  being  paid  to  this  important  topic  -  “Does  the  Banking  Industry  Play  a
Developmental Role?”
I compliment the Namibian Economic Society in choosing this coveted theme as a topic for discussion.
Central bankers are often tipped as conservative in their approach. Let me see how I would be able to
breach this barricade by indulging in fresh thinking on the subject.
Role of finance in economic development
Before we initiate a well articulated and meaningful discussion on the subject, it would, in my view be
befitting  to  clearly  understand  the  theoretical  underpinnings  underlying  the  role  of  finance  in  the
process  of  growth.  Views  of  economists  on  this  important  issue  viz.  the  inter-relationship  between
finance and growth, however, diverge.  While some economists feel that finance drives the wheels of
economic  growth,  others  opine  that  the  process  of  economic  growth  itself  induces  financial
development.
The available evidence seems to strongly suggest a  bi-directional relationship  between finance and
development.  In  other  words,  growth  drives  the  evolution  of  the  financial  super  structure  and  the
financial super structure, by meeting the financing requirements of the economy, facilitate the process
of growth. In the latter case, it is well appreciated that if the financing requirements of the economy are
not adequately met and in time, it would affect the growth process adversely.  Against this backdrop, a
brief digression on my part, in elaborating on the role of finance in economic development may not be
out of place.
As you know, the financial institutions, of which the banking system is an integral part, play the major
role of financial inter-mediation.  In this regard, their traditional role consists of mobilizing resources
from the sectors generating surpluses and channeling them to the sectors that need them. Thus, by
meeting the investment requirements of the economy, they facilitate the process of capital formation.
When domestic savings fall short of the investment requirements of the economy, the gap is closed
through  net  capital  inflow  i.e.;  the  gap  is  met  by  way  of  borrowing  from  abroad.  Banks  play  an
important role in this sphere too by facilitating international trade and service payments.
In  recent  years,  however,  the  conventional  view  that  financial  intermediaries  should  confine  their
traditional role of mobilizing resources and  attracting capital  inflows seems to have lost much  of  its
ground. A global perspective on the role of banks reveals a more pro-active and positivist approach to
the bank’s role in facilitating the achievement of broader goals of economic development and making
them a matter of reality.  In the words of King and Levine, “financial intermediaries determine which
economic organizations will survive and which will perish, which entrepreneurs will control organization
and  which  will  not,  which  types  of  investment  can  be  made  and  which  cannot,  and  which  new
economic  products  can  be  introduced  by  firms  and  which  cannot”.  This  statement  is  very  much
relevant  to  our  situation  here  in  Namibia  and  hence  there  is  good  reason  for  the  public  to  be
concerned about the role and behavior of those who are in charge of the financial sector in general
and the banking industry in particular.
It is also pertinent to examine as to the precise role and responsibilities of banks in the economy in
general  and  in  the  specialized  function  of  credit  extension,  in  particular.  A  pertinent  issue  that  has
often been discussed in the literature and policy circles in this regard is whether the focus on the mode
of financing should be bank-based finance or market based finance. There is no precise answer to the
issue as to the relative preference of one to the  other. Nevertheless, a pragmatic evaluation of this
BIS Review 24/2001
1
issue could only be made after taking note of the state of development of the economy, and a critical
assessment of the emerging credit requirements not only in terms of quantum but also in terms of their
diversity  and  priority.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  credit  requirements  of  the  economy  are  dynamic  in
nature  and  are  basically  a  function  of  the  way  the  economy  expands  in  terms  of  infrastructure
development,  commodity  specialization  and  productivity  gains.  Further,  as  development  gains
momentum, there is a need to step up the resource mobilization process as well. The structure and
level of interest rates and the level of ‘efficiency’ (as measured in terms of the spread between the
lending and deposit rates) achieved by  the  banking  system  thereof  gains  utmost  attention  of  policy
makers in this regard.
The role of commercial banks
Before  we  examine  the  role  of  the  banking  system  in  Namibia  against  the  above  backdrop  let  me
briefly review the primary functions of commercial banks. The main traditional function of a commercial
bank is that of accepting deposits and granting of loans. They accept deposits of various kinds ranging
from demand to fixed deposits, and lend this money to those who are in need. That’s being a broker
and a dealer in money. It should also be noted that, a banker is a custodian of others surplus funds, so
while earning a profit he should not forget that he is doing business with other people’s money. He
must always be ready to meet his liabilities at all times. In case of a banker not able  to honour his
commitment, he will not only suffer a shock of such a failure, but the shock will also be transmitted to
the rest of the economy very  quickly. The systemic risks arising from that need  to be eliminated or
minimized. Besides, bankers are creators of money in the sense that credit creation leads to deposit
generation, which, in turn, leads to credit creation, and the process ultimately would have implications
for the monetary framework.
It’s therefore important that, a banker should always and at all times bear in mind that, he is a guardian
of a very important mechanism. A mechanism, which not only bears relevance for monetary policy but
also paves the way for future economic growth and development and any disruption or deviation in this
regard, could create economic or financial chaos.
Do Namibian commercial banks play a developmental role?
The  traditional  functions  of  Commercial  Banking  in  Namibia  have  undergone  rapid  transformation
since independence. The total assets of commercial banks currently operating in the system increased
from N$1.9 bn in 1990 to about N$10 bn in 2000 with branches now numbering about 101 and the
total number of employees reaching close to 3000.
Commercial  banks  real  credit  to  the  private  sector  grew  at  an  average  rate  of  about  10  per  cent
between 1990 and 2000. In nominal terms, the total commercial bank credit as a percentage of GDP
currently stands at about 45 per cent. This is quite high compared with the norm of 13 per cent in sub-
Saharan African countries. Except for South Africa and Mauritius, the ratio of credit to GDP in Namibia
is the highest among the SADC countries. Although substantial credit is still allocated to individuals,
there has been of late, a favorable shift in the allocation of credit to the manufacturing, real estate and
construction in the last 10 years. Credit extended to the productive sectors of the economy has not
been that encouraging. This is the area  that  needs  our  immediate  attention  and  where  we  need  to
work together to find our way through in exploring an ideal solution for resolving the issue.
As with real credit to the private sector, the total deposits, on an average, witnessed a higher growth
rate since independence of about 13 per cent as compared with about 3.7 per cent (on an average) for
the period 1980-89. If the rate of growth of deposits is an indicator of the ability of commercial banks to
mobilize  deposits,  the  performance  of  commercial  banks  in  Namibia  has  been  quite  commendable.
However, it is worthy to note here that there has been a considerable shift in the structure of deposits
particularly since 1995 with a noticeable slide in the growth rate of time deposits. This would tend to
suggest, that despite the high growth in the overall deposits level, the commercial banks are no longer
able to mobilize substantial long-term deposits particularly in the wake of competition brought about by
the introduction of unit trust and other products of non-bank financial institutions.
As you all know the most important indicator of the soundness of the banking system is the bank’s
operating efficiency. Research conducted by the research department of the Bank of Namibia shows
that  commercial  banks  in  Namibia  are  characterized  by  high  gross  margins,  high  return  on  assets,
high cost-asset ratios and moderately high equity capitalization ratios. With a gross margin of about
2
BIS Review 24/2001
9.0 per cent, a return on asset of 3.5 per cent and return on equity of 54.2 per cent, commercial banks
in Namibia outperform their  counterparts  in  Lesotho,  Botswana,  Swaziland  and  South  Africa.  It  has
been argued that the cost of delivering services is also quite high in Namibia. On a comparative note,
this could only be true when weighed against the situation in Botswana. It is, however, encouraging to
note  that  cost  ratios  are  lower  in  Namibia  than  in  Swaziland,  Lesotho  and  to  a  large  extent,  South
Africa.
Emerging economic paradigm - need for transformation of banking
From the point  of view  of  the  central  bank  and  based  on  a  review  of  banks’  performance  reflected
through major indicators, one could conclude that Namibia enjoys a robust and stable banking system.
Having taken stock of the bank’s ability to perform in the emerging economic scenario, may I reiterate
the point that this is the most appropriate time for us to reflect on some of the major issues as a matter
of introspection and with a view to reaping optimal benefits from our strengths?
As you are aware, credit extension is very important for rapid economic development particularly in a
bank-based  economy  like  ours.  The  volume  of  credit  as  well  as  its  allocation  to  key  sectors  of  the
economy  can  help  to  stimulate  productive  activities.  Although  our  statistics  show  that  the  ratio  of
private sector credit to GDP is quite high in Namibia, more still needs to be done especially in the area
of long term loans. There is a strong need to direct credit to the previously disadvantaged people who
because of the accident of history may not possess the specified collateral required by banks.
As a logical step forward towards transforming the banking system, there seems to be a greater need
for a review of our lending procedures, practices and credit assessment mechanisms with a view to
ensuring  supply  of  credit  to  the  genuine  clients  and  particularly  to  the  hitherto  neglected  sectors.
Available  evidence  shows  that  most  of  the  credit  extended  by  commercial  banks  is  mainly  used  to
finance properties and other personal items. There are also reports by loan applicants that banks do
not  carry  out  proper  investigation  on  project  viability  particularly  when  this  has  to  do  with  projects
falling  outside  the  purview  of  their  traditional  areas  of  financing.  The  application  of  venture  capital
gains  relevance  in  this  context.  There  is  therefore,  a  need  for  both  the  commercial  banks  and  the
policy makers to explore ways of evolving appropriate assessment mechanisms and credit evaluation
techniques with view to extending credit to all viable projects.
These steps would result in deploying the high level of financial savings in the economy and reaping
the best possible advantage in terms of gearing the economy towards the optimal growth path.
Mobilization of resources
Let  me  now  turn  to  mobilization  of  resources  for  the  purpose  of  funding.  This  is  another  area  that
needs our urgent attention and calls for the extension of banking services to population group-wise as
well as spatially. An increase in the number of bank offices can mean channeling of a greater fraction
of the nations savings into investment through the mediation of the banking system, which in turn, may
lead to initiation of increasing number of investment projects.
Available figures show that in the sub-region, apart from South Africa, Namibia posts a low ratio of
population  per  bank  branch.  This  in  itself  would  indicate  that  banking  services  are  available  to  a
greater  percentage  of  the  population.  This  paradoxical  situation  mainly  stems  from  the  lop-sided
distribution of the available branches. As you know, Windhoek alone accounts for close to 25 per cent
of the total number of bank branches and 4 out of the 13 regions account for about 67 per cent of total
branches. The two regions with the largest population viz., Ohangwena and Omusati, however, are
sparsely  banked.  This  is  a  situation  that  deserves  attention  by  commercial  banks,  as  spread  of
banking  is  imperative  for  greater  deposit  mobilization  in  years  ahead.  There  will,  of  course,  be
appropriate support from the authorities in this regard.
Banks have made substantial efforts at reducing the spread between the  lending  and  deposit rates
particularly in the past two years but again in this regard the efforts so far are inadequate. The spread
between the lending  and  the  deposit rates fell from 8.96 to  7.48 per cent between 1998 and 2000.
However, what is worth noting, is that the level of spread seems to be still high as compared to an
average level of around 3 to 4 per cent observed in the case of many developing countries.
Narrowing  of  spreads  is  reflective  of  the  efficient  management  of  the  bank  through  minimization  of
operational costs. The smaller the spread, the greater could be the stimulation for loan demands for
BIS Review 24/2001
3
from 
those  areas/regions  which 
industrial  development.  It  will  also  be  easier  to  provide  the  necessary  stimulus  to  the  process  of
deposit  mobilization,  particularly 
though  endowed  with
surpluses/savings but have no investment/saving outlets. Thus, savings could be appreciably boosted
by  exploring  ways  of  garnering  hitherto  untapped  saving  potential  across  the  various  regions  in
Namibia.
Commercial  banks  in  Namibia  have  been  able  to  meet  the  credit  requirements  in  the  economy,
particularly,  the  short-term  financing  requirements.  However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  situation
regarding  mobilization  and  allocation  of  resources  for  meeting  the  medium  and  long-term  financing
requirements of the economy has not been that encouraging.
While realizing the fact that commercial banks in Namibia are efficient, the fact remains that, financing
gap still exist in the economy. An effort to meet this financing gap requires the creation of appropriate
institutional structures. Else such financing gaps continue to exist, hampering the growth process. This
is  reflected  in  high  unemployment  rate  and  disappointing  performance  of  the  manufacturing  and
services  sectors  that  are  in  dire  need  of  long-term  capital.  A  review  of  the  contemporary  global
experience with the banking systems also suggests the need for resolution of such financing gaps in
economic development on an urgent footing.
Regulatory environment
The  underlying  problem  in  this  context  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  commercial  banking  system
normally operates under certain regulatory framework. The regulatory framework requires that banks
should pursue  prudent  lending  activities.  This  in  most  cases  has  meant  adherence  to  strict  lending
norms as per regulatory requirements. Further, the short-term nature  of the liabilities of commercial
banks dictates that the term structure of their loans should be tailored to suit their balance sheets. It is
very  important  that  banks  should  pursue  a  policy  of  maintaining  a  most  appropriate  asset-liability
structure.  In  other  words,  there  should  be  a  consistency  between  the  asset  structure  and  liability
structure in terms of maturity and  yield structure. These requirements very  often constrain banks in
fulfilling  the  medium  and  long-term  requirements  of  financing  or  in  extending  loans  to  deserving
sections of the society even-though their requirements are genuine.
The widening of the financing gaps: options open and the way out
It  needs  no  emphasis  that  all  identified  viable  projects  need  be  encouraged  and  financed.  For  the
reasons outlined above and based on a host of other considerations, the encouragement of the growth
of other financial intermediaries outside the banking system is imperative. A case in hand is the plan to
establish a development bank. Later, we deal with the need for creation of other financial institutions.
The development bank
There  are  currently  two  main  options  available  to  the  authorities  in  re-organizing  developmental
financial  institutions  in  Namibia.  The  first  option  is  to  create  a  development  bank  and  make  the
Development  Fund  of  Namibia  (DFN)  part  of  it  and  leave  out  Namibia  Development  Corporation
(NDC)  to  remain  as  the  government-implementing  agency  for  industrial  and  other  development
projects.
The second option is to create a development bank by consolidating or converting the NDC and the
DFN into one strong, well capitalized, and well structured development financial institution to be called
a “Development Bank” or “Industrial Development Bank”, the name does not matter.
In my view, the first option is sub-optimal. It is an expensive and unaffordable option for the size of our
economy and given the limited resources at our disposal.
The second option is much more realistic and optimal in my view. It means consolidation of available
expertise under one roof. Consolidations of funding streams and resources. It also means savings on
bureaucracy.
The  consolidation  of  these  two  institutions  into  a  viable  development  bank  will  help  to  channel
resources to well-targeted developmental priorities and supply the missing link between bank finance
4
BIS Review 24/2001
and  long-term  capital  requirements.  It  is  in  this  regard,  that  one  views  the  on-going  attempt  at
establishing a development bank as a step in the right direction.
My view on the development bank
I believe that, the institution should  be  developmental  oriented  but  run  on  business  principle  where
possible. As a leading agency of the Government it should trigger medium and long-term projects for
developmental purposes. It should be charged with the responsibility of channeling scarce capital into
selected industries, prohibit/minimize risk taking through issuance of guarantees, for medium term and
long-term  loans.  Its  structure  should  ensure  that  resources  flow  widely  and  efficiently  to  promising
sectors that are capable of creating additional employment and value addition to the economy.
Such an institution shall be owned by the public sector in the majority. This is important to enable the
institution to raise funding at low costs and have credibility with other Developmental agencies at the
regional and international arena such as African Development Bank, Southern African Development
Bank,  IDC,  etc.  Other  institutions  of  super  national  nature  or  institutions  owned  by  foreign
Governments could be invited to participate as minority shareholders. Private sector agencies could
also be encouraged to work together with this Institution by way of subscription to preferential shares
and debentures of the institution. What is important here again, is that, the institution should be well
capitalized,  because  without  sufficient  resources,  it  will  never  be  able  to  perform  its  assigned
responsibilities as per expectations.
Yet unfinished agenda: the role of other financial institutions
Commercial banks alone will not solve the deficit in demand for long-term credit nor the development
bank  could  meet  the  overall  financing  requirements.  Financing  needs  being  diverse  and  specific  in
nature, there is a need for other types of institutions like venture capital, private debt equities, etc.
Venture capital can play a major role in providing equity capital to finance high-risk investments e.g.
grape projects, ostrich and many others. Advantage of venture capital allows investors to share more
fully  in  the  rewards  to  a  successful  venture  and  also  helps  firms  in  avoiding  cash-flow  problems
associated  with debt financing. This is one  of the options that need to  be  looked  into  by  the  policy
makers. In this light, a tax system that recognizes, the authorities should consider the effort of venture
capitalist. The same could be applicable to leasing and factoring companies.
Private  Debt  securities  market  can  also  enhance  the  availability  of  long-term  capital.  A  well-
established  private  debt  securities  market  can  improve  the  capacity  of  domestic  capital  markets  to
accommodate large and more complex funding arrangements and diversify the process of financing
away from the banking sector. Private bond market would allow companies to obtain long-term fixed
rate financing at a much lower cost relative to bank credit. This will be quite a challenging task to all of
us.
Conclusion
The Namibia financial sector is still under-developed. It is still dominated by the commercial banking
institutions. Though there are a few specialized financial institutions, a well-designed financial super-
structure is yet to evolve.
On your question as to whether commercial banks do play a developmental role, my answer would be:
Yes,  commercial  banks  have  played,  are  playing  and  would  play  a  much  greater  and  much  more
proactive role in economic development. In this context, what needs to be addressed now is as to how
to improve their contributing to economic development further, given the fact that their contribution to
GDP is still below their potential. Some of the thoughts outlined by me earlier deserve attention in this
regard and provoke further thinking on the subject. Yes, they need to do more. Yes, they need to be
innovative in order to increase their participation in economic development.
Yes, there still exists a  wide financing  gap.  But  that  gap  cannot  just  be  filled  by  commercial  banks
alone. Commercial banks may not have sufficient resources to provide long-term loans for investment
purposes because of the structure of their balance sheets as explained by me earlier. Other players do
need to play their role as well, including the authorities.  The challenge is for all of us to come up with
workable but lasting solution.
BIS Review 24/2001
5
I thank you for your rapt attention.
6
BIS Review 24/2001
