Masaru Hayami: Challenges for Japan's Economy - The Central Bank's
Perspective
Speech  given  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Keizai  Club  on
22 December 2000.
 Introduction
We have just a week or so to go until the end of the year. I would like to present my own thinking on
what has been achieved over the past year and what remains to be done. At the same time, I would
also like to explain our basic stance regarding the conduct of monetary policy in order to deepen your
understanding in this respect.
1. Three Features of the Current Economic Recovery Economic developments this year
Economic developments this year
The first thing to be emphasized is that Japan has finally reached a stage where there are emerging
signs of an economic recovery.
At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  GDP  statistics  based  on  a  new  calculation  method  (SNA93)  were
released. GDP growth on this new basis was -0.6% for fiscal 1998 but turned positive in fiscal 1999
(+1.4%) and the corresponding figure for the third quarter of this year stands at +1.5%. What should
be  noted  in  this  connection  is  how  private  demand  and  public  investment  have  contributed  to  this
recovery trend.
When the Bank of Japan adopted the zero interest rate policy around two years ago, public investment
for the first quarter of 1999 increased (+13.3%) compared with the previous year. In contrast, private
demand  such  as  household  consumption  and  business  investment  declined  (-2.0%)  in  the  same
period.  However,  this  contrast  has  been  gradually  reversed  during  the  last  two  years.  In  the  third
quarter  of  this  year,  public  investment  decreased  (-4.1%)  on  a  year-on-year  basis  while  private
demand grew (+1.1%). In other words, the gradual upturn in private demand is strengthening while the
fiscal stimulus has turned negative.
Under these conditions, corporate profits as a whole are expected to record a double-digit increase for
the second consecutive  year. At  the same time,  employment  and  household  income  conditions  are
slowly  improving,  as  demonstrated  by  the  positive  growth  of  wages  since  this  spring  and  a  slight
decrease in the unemployment rate from its all-time high.
Some of you might not feel comfortable with my diagnosis of the present economic situation and we
are fully aware that such a perception does exist. In our opinion, this perception typically reflects the
very characteristics of the ongoing recovery phase.
'Polarization' of economic recovery
The first feature of the ongoing recovery is that there remains considerable divergence among various
sectors  or  segments  of  the  economy  regarding  the  pace  of  recovery,  which  is  sometimes  called
'polarization.' At present, for example, the corporate sector is showing a notable improvement  while
the household sector is being left behind. This is clearly reflected in the fact that business investment
is markedly increasing although personal consumption remains lackluster. In other words, the recovery
trend now underway is being driven mainly by the corporate sector with the household sector lagging.
Moreover, the stark contrast between the IT-driven new economy and traditional old economy is also a
case in point, and the contrasting picture between large manufacturers and small and medium-sized
non-manufacturers is also often mentioned.
At this point, I would like to add further explanation of the sharp contrast between the corporate and
household sector. In the corporate sector, the profit improvement is becoming more pronounced and
business investment is on an upswing, though firms are not likely to immediately increase wages and
hiring. This is because the corporate sector is attaching top priority to eliminating over-indebtedness
BIS Review 1/2001
1
and  reinforcing  profitability  under  strong  pressure  from  financial  markets  in  this  rapidly  globalized
environment. I assume this is the main reason why household and consumption-related firms do not
feel any strong sense of a recovery at the present moment.
Vigorous  restructuring  and  the  resulting  recovery  in  the  corporate  sector  is  a  precondition  for
sustainable growth, but it is highly likely that improvements in employment and income conditions and
personal consumption will remain slow for some time to come. However, if income distribution to the
household sector is  overly constrained as a consequence  of aggressive  efforts to pursue  corporate
restructuring,  we  will  face  a  greater  risk,  at  a  macro  level,  of  personal  consumption  falling,  thereby
jeopardizing the nascent recovery. In view of the above, Japan's economy seems to be precariously
balanced in building the foundation for a sustainable upturn.
Price developments
The second characteristic of the present recovery phase is the continuing weakness of prices. Year-
on-year growth in CPI and the GDP deflator has been negative. Under these circumstances, even if
sales volume increases it will not likely result in any conspicuous increase in nominal sales. Lack of a
clear sense of recovery among business managers also reflects such a factor.
Yet,  we  can  detect  some  positive  aspects  in  the  current  soft  trend  of  prices.  For  instance,  the
expansion  of  new  distribution  businesses  -  often  called  'category  killers'-  is  offering  considerable
benefits  to  consumers  through  their  bold  pricing  strategy.  It  is  said  that  this  new  strategy,  making
extensive  use  of  overseas  networks  in  terms  of  procurement  and  production,  is  providing  a  new
business model for distribution firms. Furthermore, rapid progress in telecommunications technology is
also exerting downward pressure on prices, as is typically seen with PCs and IT-related goods.
The weak trend of prices can be explained under the supply and demand framework. With regard to
the demand side, downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand is markedly receding
unlike in the first half of last year when Japan's economy was on the brink of falling into a deflationary
spiral.  On  the  other  hand,  downward  pressure  on  prices  arising  from  supply-side  factors  such  as
technological innovation, the streamlining of distribution channels, and deregulation is increasing. This
downtrend caused by supply-side factors is not necessarily a new phenomenon. Indeed, if we look at
technological innovation, it is proceeding much faster in the United  States than  in Japan.  However,
given that Japan has various industrial sectors less exposed so far to competitive pressure, we cannot
disregard the possibility that the impact of technological innovation and economic globalization might
become  stronger.  In  addition,  as  the  current  recovery  is  still  gradual  with  a  substantial  output  gap
lingering, we are aware that downward pressure on prices has not been entirely subsided.
As factors stemming from both the supply side and demand side affect prices in a complex manner, it
is also becoming more difficult to grasp an accurate assessment of price developments. The Bank of
Japan has paid special attention to whether the downward trend of prices is aggravating the economic
situation through suppressing nominal income such as corporate profits and wages, thereby inducing
a  further  decline  in  prices.  In  other  words,  the  Bank  has  been  watchful  of  the  possible  risk  of  a
deflationary spiral. To make a correct judgment on this point, it is necessary to examine not only the
development  of  price  indexes,  but  also  the  underlying  supply  and  demand  balance  as  a  whole,
corporate profits and earnings, and the like.
At present, corporate profits are increasing and income conditions of households are gradually moving
toward  an  improvement.  In  highly  promising  sectors,  the  declining  prices  of  goods  are  helping  to
revitalize  corporate  activity.  Considering  these  phenomena,  we  judge  it  unlikely  that  current  weak
prices will translate into a deflationary spiral.
Financial Developments
The third feature of the present recovery is the slow growth of monetary aggregates and bank lending.
In  a  normal  recovery  phase,  new  risk-taking  activities  increase  against  the  background  of  positive
interaction between the real and monetary side of an economy. However, this pattern does not seem
to hold in the current situation because the financial system, still plagued by non-performing loans, is
not sufficiently robust to propel the recovery of the real economy.
I hasten to add that I do not mean to say that any severe financial constraint is acting as a drag on real
economic activity. This can be confirmed in our TANKAN survey, which shows that while the number
of small and medium-sized companies that feel the lending attitude of financial institutions is 'severe' is
2
BIS Review 1/2001
still more than those who think it is 'accommodative,' the figure is decreasing. As for large companies,
the number of firms that feel the lending attitude is 'accommodative' has been exceeding those who
think  it  is  'severe'  since  around  September  1999.  In  light  of  these  results  and  other  micro-level
information  on  corporate  financing,  corporate  funding  conditions  as  a  whole  seem  to  be  steadily
easing.
Yet,  the  pace  of easing in this regard remains slower than  warranted  by  the  extremely  low  level  of
interest rates. Without the resolution of financial system problems, we will continue to be susceptible
to  adverse  side-effects  on  economic  and  financial  conditions,  whenever  a  problem  in  financial
institution management surface. We have recently witnessed the successive failure of Japanese life
insurance  companies  and  credit  cooperatives,  and  such  incidents  tend  to  put  the  household  and
corporate sectors on the defensive.
In  connection  with  the  financial  conditions  just  mentioned,  I  would  like  to  briefly  explain  the  recent
trend of monetary aggregates in Japan. Over the past several years, the highest growth of monetary
aggregates  was  recorded  in  1998  when  Japan  was  suffering  economic  deterioration  and  financial
system instability. M2+CDs, the typical measure of monetary aggregates, was growing by roughly 5%
at that time, but gradually slowed to 3-4% in 1999 and further declined to the 2% level this year.
Undeniably, this monetary development does not fit well with the normal pattern in which economic
recovery  leads  to  higher  monetary  growth  through  robust  corporate  activity.  However,  there  are
several reasons for the recent downtrend of the monetary aggregates.
First,  although  corporate  cash  flow  remains  plentiful  thanks  to  recovering  profits  and  restructuring
effects, expenditures such as business investment are lower than this level. Second, until last  year,
there was a widespread tendency on the part of the corporate sector to hold precautionary liquidity on
hand amid prevailing concern over financial instability. But such accumulation of liquidity on hand has
peaked  due  to  the  effects  of  various  policy  measures  aimed  at  restoring  financial  stability
materializing, and more companies are striving to slash both external borrowings and cash on hand in
order  to  improve  balance  sheet  efficiency  bearing  in  mind  their  market  evaluation  such  as  credit
ratings. Thus, it might be possible, for the time being, that the growth rate of monetary aggregates will
further  dip  despite  improving  corporate  profits  and  abating  anxiety  over  the  financial  system.  This
paradoxical  development  regarding  monetary  aggregates  is  also  one  of  the  salient  features  of  the
current recovery phase in the sense that its root cause is associated with problems in Japan's financial
system.
2. Challenges for the Japanese Economy
Structural problems and implications of a gradual recovery
The  three  characteristics  of  the  current  economic  recovery  I  just  mentioned  are  closely  linked  to
long-standing structural problems in Japan's economy -- the disposal of non-performing loans created
by the bursting of the bubble -- and the necessary response to economic and financial globalization
and technological innovation. Thus, with those structural challenges in mind, I would like to think about
the future course of Japan's economy.
Since this October, the Bank of Japan has started to release "Outlook and Risk Assessment of the
Economy  and  Prices."  This  report,  to  be  published  twice  a  year,  presents  a  baseline  scenario  of
Japan's economy for the coming one to two years as envisaged by the Bank's Policy Board members,
and  also  gives their  assessment of various risk factors. In the  first  report  published  in  October,  the
Bank  judges  that  "Japan's  economy  will  continue  to  trace  a  gradual  recovery  mainly  led  by  private
demand," but "because of various structural adjustment pressures, including balance sheet problems
and continuing restructuring at firms and financial institutions, expansion of the economy is unlikely to
be vigorous."
Two important messages from this are worth mentioning.
First, Japan's economy at present is in a preparatory stage for sustainable future growth. Structural
adjustment has a variety of implications. On a macroeconomic level, such adjustment includes further
utilization of competitive mechanisms, deregulation and the review of existing regulations, and reform
of  the  industrial  structure.  As  for  individual  corporate  management,  on  the  other  hand,  adjustment
means  shareholder-focused  corporate  governance,  employment  adjustments,  and  personnel
relocation, all of which calls for a re-examination of the social and economic system. This process is
BIS Review 1/2001
3
inevitably  accompanied  by  pain.  In  addition,  the  persistent  burden  of  non-performing  loans  on
corporations  and  financial  institutions  cannot  disappear  overnight,  and  should  thus  be  alleviated  by
value added generated by economic activity each year.
In  a  nutshell,  although  structural  adjustment  requires  considerable  patience,  it  is  an  inescapable
challenge if we are to return to sustainable economic growth. Hence, from this viewpoint, the pace of
economic  recovery  is  likely  to  remain  slow  for  the  time  being.  Nevertheless,  we  must  remain  fully
committed  to  resolving  various  structural  problems  and  not  just  seek  higher  growth  in  a  myopic
manner.
At the same time, however, I would like to stress another essential point, which is the fact that it is
difficult to strengthen resilience to adverse external shocks, given the slow pace of recovery, which will
very  likely  remain  the  case  for  some  time  to  come.  Therefore,  we  must  closely  watch  the  world
economy  and  developments  in  international  capital  markets.  I  will  revisit  this  later  in  relation  to  the
conduct of monetary policy.
in 
that  how 
to  respond 
to  rapid  changes 
IT revolution
I would now like to turn to the issue of how to respond to the substantial changes commonly referred
to as the IT revolution in light of the implications for structural problems.
The  two  major  problems  I  have  described  -  the  disposal  of  non-performing  loans  and  reform  of
economic structure - have long been pointed out since the bursting of the bubble. With respect to the
reform of economic structure, its future direction has not been clear for some time, namely it has been
difficult  to  identify  areas  or  leading  industries  which  are  likely  to  support  future  growth.  However,  it
gradually  became  clear  recently 
the  area  of
telecommunication and how to utilize fruits resulting from such changes are important questions to be
tackled.
Since I am not an expert on IT, I would just like to give my comments from the viewpoint of economic
growth, which is obviously a concern for central bankers. There are two points.
First, considering that technological innovation has an enormous impact on the socio-economic fabric
as a whole, the IT revolution currently underway might be comparable to the Industrial Revolution in
Britain or the quantum leap of the US railroad industry. What is common in these  two cases  is the
large-scale migration of labor to the leading industry exhibiting higher productivity. In Britain during the
Industrial Revolution, this employment shift was mainly seen from agriculture to the textile industry. As
for the dramatic growth of the railroad industry in the US, it is well known that the numbers working in
the railroad and steel industries increased dramatically. Furthermore, among the 14 million increase in
the work force in the non-agricultural sector over the past five years in the US, nearly a half can be
attributed to an increase in service-related industries, reflecting the rapid growth of IT. Of this seven
million  increase,  three  million  was  seen  in  such  areas  as  software  design  and  the  provision  of
temporary staff.
As such examples typically illustrate, structural adjustment does not stop at referring to management
reform at an individual firm level, but can be regarded as a process through which production factors
such as labor, capital, and land are shifted to more efficient fields.
Second, technological advancement has much broader implications than the mere expansion of high-
productivity sectors and substantial increase in employment. The essence of the IT revolution is that it
triggers a rise in productivity of the economy as a whole, while at the same time inducing profound
changes in various entities including corporations and governments.
For example, Chairman Greenspan of the US Federal Reserve has repeatedly taken up the subject in
his speeches. The IT revolution is enabling companies to grasp their production lines and consumer
needs on a real-time basis. Moreover, it also makes it possible for them to slash precautionary buffers
such as inventories, funds, and workers, a point Chairman Greenspan emphasizes when discussing
the  benefits  of  the  IT  revolution.  In  short,  the  improved  efficiency  of  information  processing  has
reduced uncertainties for corporate management, thereby enabling the transfer of resources to more
productive  uses.  This,  in  his  view,  is  the  main  benefit  of  enhanced  productivity  at  the  macro  level
created by the IT revolution.
In  Japan,  discussions  are  likely  to  mainly  focus  on  the  past  development  and  performance  of
individual  IT-related  companies,  although  there  are  also  various  new  directions  being  seen.  For
instance,  some  companies  are  introducing  so-called  'supply  chain  management'  aiming  at  centrally
4
BIS Review 1/2001
controlling all planning, procurement, production, distribution, and sales not only  for  themselves  but
also for their clients. It will be interesting to see how this new system, just one example of recent new
directions, will evolve.
This reminds me of what J. Schumpeter, a great academic economist, wrote. He saw the process of
economic  development  as  'creative  destruction.'  As  a  driving  force  for  economic  development,  he
propounded  a  movement  which  he  called  'new  combination,'  which  comprises  five  elements:  new
products, new production methods, new markets, new resources, and new organizations. To borrow
his terminology, the most visible changes which we are currently witnessing in Japan are in the field of
'new products,' though such signs of change are also being seen in the other four areas.
Conditions for successful utilization of IT
Next,  I  would  like  to  spell  out  the  fundamental  conditions  through  which  we  can  pursue  structural
adjustment of the whole economy, aided by technological innovation in the IT sector.
First,  labor  mobility  needs  to  be  enhanced.  As  I  explained  in  the  examples  of  Britain  and  the  US,
successful  structural  adjustment  presupposes  the  smooth  reallocation  of  labor  to  more  productive
areas.  Recently,  part-time  jobs  and  temporary  workers  have  increased  substantially,  which  is
assessed  as  improving  the  mobility  of  labor  markets.  However,  mismatching  between  supply  and
demand in labor markets is still considerable, and, under such a situation, more efforts are required to
eliminate the obstacles to labor mobility.
Second,  it  is  necessary  to  rebuild  the  financial  system  and  revitalize  market  functions.  In  this
connection,  Schumpeter  put  great  emphasis  on  the  role  played  by  'bankers'  in  promoting  his  'new
combination.' In a contemporary context, 'bankers' in a Schumpeterian sense can  be  interpreted  as
the 'financial system' as a whole which includes banks as financial intermediaries as well as financial
and capital markets. To nurture new industries and businesses, a sound and robust financial system
through which capital and risks are efficiently allocated is pivotal.
The desirable financial system framework varies across time and countries. It cannot be set as a fixed
goal to  be  pursued. Nevertheless,  what I  would  like  to  stress  is  that  it  is  important  for  the  financial
system to foster and embed a culture that credit including deposits, loans, security investments, and
derivative transactions is provided with constantly taking account of the risk-return relationship.
Third,  various  institutional  obstacles  to  innovative  activities  should  be  removed  along  with  the
strenuous pursuit of deregulation. In this regard, various efforts by the private sector and government
have  been  bearing  fruit.  However,  there  are  not  a  few  points  to  be  examined  such  as  whether
institutional frameworks like accounting rules, taxation, and the legal system are compatible with the
new  era.  Viewed  from  this  perspective,  many  attempts  at  utilizing  IT  are  conducive  to  creating  an
environment in which corporations and individuals find it easy to bear risk. At the same time, this has
an important bearing on facilitating structural reform in Japan. In that sense, I think that the degree of
prevalence  of  IT  revolution  in  the  economy  can  be  a  measure  of  the  progress  in  the  structural
adjustment in Japan.
3. Role of the Bank of Japan
Conduct of Monetary Policy
Given the above, what role should the Bank of Japan play as a central bank in promoting structural
reform of Japan's economy?
We cannot expect much progress in structural reform when inflation  or deflation is developing. The
aim of monetary policy is to contribute to the sound development of the economy through the pursuit
of  price  stability,  which  is  the  biggest  contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  toward  accomplishing
structural  adjustment.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  some  challenges  facing  the
conduct of monetary policy.
The  Bank  of  Japan  lifted  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  last  August.  This  decision  signifies  "a  small
adjustment  to  the  degree  of  monetary  easing"  in  line  with  the  improvement  of  the  economy  as  I
mentioned at the outset, and that the Bank has not changed its stance to support economic recovery
through keeping accommodative monetary conditions.
BIS Review 1/2001
5
Looking  at  various  risks  surrounding  the  current  economy,  because  the  pace  of  recovery  is  still
gradual,  we  need  to  pay  due  attention  to  the  possibility  of  a  downswing  due  to  adverse  external
shocks or the rekindling of deflationary concerns.
While  the  risk  factors  which  the  Bank  has  been  paying  attention  to  were  explained  in  detail  in  the
"Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices," let me highlight two points  which I am
especially focusing on at the moment.
The first is the development of the world economy in general, and the US economy in particular. While
the  US  economy  has  been  expanding  at  an  above-potential  rate,  its  real  GDP  growth  for  the  third
quarter of this year (+2.2%) is slower than the previous high-growth path of four to five percent. The
deceleration  of  the  US  economy  per  se  has  been  considered  desirable  for  ensuring  sustainable
growth, as far as it is leading to a soft landing. However, at the same time, the slowdown of the US
economy  might  have  an  adverse  impact  on  Japan's  economy,  including  indirect  effects  channeled
through  the  Asian  economies  that  are  heavily  dependent  on  exports  to  the  US.  We  should  remain
vigilant as to  whether the economic slowdown  in  the  US  will  affect  sustainable  growth  of  the  world
economy.
The second risk to be noted is the continuous volatile movement of stock markets in and outside of
Japan. If falling Japanese stock prices dampen the sentiment of the business and household sectors
or undermine the risk-taking capacity of financial institutions and corporate entities, the recovery could
be  hampered.  At  present,  the  trend  of  increased  corporate  profits  has  been  maintained,  and  there
seems to be few signs of adverse effect on the real economy. Needless to say, however, we remain
watchful of stock market developments and their potential ramifications.
Monetary Policy and Structural Reform
As  I  have  discussed,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  closely  watching  various  risk  factors,  is  determined  to
conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner with the aim of supporting the nascent
economic recovery and preventing the Japanese economy from falling into a deflationary spiral.
At the same time, I would like you to understand that monetary policy is no panacea, and cannot be a
substitute for needed structural reform. Needless to say, over the long haul the source of economic
growth  should  be  found  in  the  full  realization  of  private  sector  vitality  with  the  support  of  various
innovations.  In  pursuing  structural  reform,  both  policy  efforts  and  corporate  endeavors  to  directly
address structural problems are imperative.
In that sense, as I mentioned, we need to continuously re-examine our social and economic system
and reduce uncertainties and anxieties surrounding various economic activities to the extent possible,
thereby creating an environment in which risk-taking is facilitated.
As  the  central  bank  of  our  country,  the  Bank  of  Japan  provides  a  variety  of  banking  services,  the
quality of which affects the course of Japan's economy. Therefore, we are willing to contribute to the
reform of financial systems by improving the functioning of financial markets and payment systems.
Currently, we are striving to introduce RTGS -- real-time gross settlement -- which will start on January
4th next year. At the same time, we are also exploring the possibility of adopting electronic systems to
carry  out  operations  related  to  treasury  funds.  I  hope  that  these  assiduous  efforts  will  bear  fruit  in
building an efficient and stable financial system.
Concluding Remarks
In reviewing economic developments in Japan, I have presented my view of the challenges facing us
and the basic stance concerning the conduct of monetary policy.
Now that we are close to the dawn of the twenty-first century, let me wind up my speech with a brief
overview of the economic developments of the past century.
Over  the  past  100  years,  annual  growth  has  averaged  3.3%  in  the  US  and  1.9%  in  Britain.  Both
nations experienced two world wars and several smaller ones. On the economic and financial fronts,
they both experienced rampant inflation and deflation, as well as severe financial disruption. And, it
was some twenty years ago that the decline of their national power was debated. As for the recent five
years,  however,  both  the  US  and  the  UK  have  achieved  average  growth  of  4.4%  and  2.8%,
respectively, both of which figures are one percentage point higher than the average growth for the
6
BIS Review 1/2001
whole  20th  century.  This  is  an  eloquent  demonstration  that  even  mature  economies  can  expand
vigorously if they are successful in rejuvenating the dynamism of the private sector.
In contrast, the average growth rate of Japan's economy for the past 100 years is 3.9%. The figure for
the last 50 years is 5.8%, and for the last five years, 1.4%. As such, the recent prolonged low growth
rate  has  provoked  a  pessimistic  view  with  respect  to  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  capacity  of
Japan's  economy.  However,  I  think  one  does  not  need  to  be  that  pessimistic.  As  is  evident  from
overseas  examples,  as  far  as  an  economy  is  an  embodiment  of  human  activities,  the  track  of  the
economy will be shaped depending on how we judge the prospects for the economy and how we act
on such judgement.
As  I  mentioned  today,  it  is  true  that  Japan's  economy  has  been  preoccupied  in  dealing  with  the
aftermath  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  in  the  past  ten  years  and  thus  might  have  not  adapted
appropriately to changes in the environment surrounding the  world  economy as represented by  the
term 'globalization.'
Therefore, if this was the case, what is necessary is to share a recognition, among ourselves, that we
cannot escape the pressure of global competition. With such a shared  view, the specific content of
structural adjustment which awaits to be tackled will emerge spontaneously. I strongly believe that if
the private sector takes the initiative in structural adjustment with the government's support in laying
the ground for such efforts, Japan's economy will regain robust growth.
I mentioned that the roles of the Bank of Japan in relation to structural reform are to make efforts to
realize economic stability as well as to improve banking services of the central bank itself. I would like
to conclude my speech by emphasizing that the Bank will bear these two roles in mind and continue to
make the utmost efforts for the development of Japan's economy.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
BIS Review 1/2001
7
