T T Mboweni: Observations on recent economic developments
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the Southern African-
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Cape Town, 13 July 2001.
 Introduction
1.
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. I thank you for inviting me here to address you today. I stand
before you at a rather uncertain global economic time. But despite the world economic slowdown and
the question marks over future growth prospects, trade between South Africa and Europe has been on
the increase. The Euro area has been less affected by the global slowdown, and South Africa, with its
close ties to the region, has also been somewhat cushioned.
South African imports from Europe rose by 20 per cent in April 2001 compared with April 2000. South
Africa’s exports to Europe rose by 34 per cent over the same period. Likewise, South African-German
economic  relations  have  prospered  over  the  past  year.  In  2000,  trade  between  South  Africa  and
Germany reached an all time high with combined trade amounting to DM13,4 billion, or R50 billion at
the current exchange rate. South Africa’s imports from Germany increased by 19,9 per cent and South
Africa’s exports to Germany rose by 23,2 per cent last year. This was the fifth consecutive year where
South  African  exports  showed  double-digit  increases.  Semi-finished  and  chemical  products  were
among the South African exports that showed significant increases. The biggest growing import items
were  manufactured  products  such  as  vehicles  and  transport  equipment  as  well  as  machinery  and
electric equipment. Clearly, Germany remains one of South Africa’s significant  trading  partners  and
German  companies  continue  to  invest  substantially  in  this  country.  Chambers  of  Commerce  and
Industry undoubtedly enhance the strong bilateral and trade relations between the two countries, such
as yourselves.
I see that over the past four years you have extended your activities to the neighboring countries in the
Southern  African  Development  Community  to  include  Botswana,  Malawi,  Namibia,  Seychelles,
Tanzania and Zambia, to name just a few. By viewing the region as a whole, you share our broader
vision of closer regional ties. SADC, as a region, strives to achieve economic growth and development
through sound economic policies and cooperation. Within this the South African Reserve Bank plays a
pivotal role. It chairs the Committee of Central Bank Governors in SADC. This Committee focuses on
issues  of 
finance  and  macro-economic
policies – important to boost the economic integration of the region. Regional integration will give the
region a stronger platform from which to participate in the global economy.
For  the  remainder  of  my  time  with  you,  I  am  going  to  give  you  some  observations  on  the  recent
economic developments in South Africa. This may  give you an indication as to  what the short-term
holds. But first let me return to the trends in the global economy. Forecasts of slowing growth abound.
In  the  IMF’s  world  economic  outlook  published  in  April  this  year,  it  noted  that  prospects  for  global
growth had weakened significantly since 2000. However, of some comfort is that the IMF expects the
slowdown to be short-lived. The second half of the year should see a pick up in US economic activity,
growth  in  Europe  is  expected  to  remain  “reasonably  robust”,  and  recovery  in  Japan  is  forecast  to
resume next  year. Japan faces the challenge of addressing structural  weaknesses, especially  in  its
financial and corporate sectors.
This global slowdown is bound to affect emerging market economies. And with this in mind, we must
be vigilant. In this environment, commodity prices, upon which so many developing countries depend,
are  expected  to  weaken.  Indeed,  the  IMF  notes,  that  prospects  in  these  developing  markets,  like
South Africa, depend on maintaining investor confidence. However, the IMF acknowledges that these
markets have made significant progress in reducing their  external and financial sector  weaknesses.
Many of them have moved towards sustainable exchange rate regimes and prudent debt and reserve
management policies.
Against  this  backdrop  of  slowing  world  economic  activity,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  composite  leading
business cycle indicator regained some momentum in the three months ending February. Similarly the
composite  coincident  business  cycle  indicator  was  on  a  definite  upward  trend  from  May  2000  to
February  2001.  Preliminary  indications  are  that  this  upward  momentum  persisted  in  the  following
months. However, by the end of the first quarter it became clear to us at the Reserve Bank that South
investment,  development 
financial  policy  and 
BIS Review 64/2001
1
Africa could not escape the world economic downturn as weaker international demand affected export
volumes in the first quarter.
Domestic output and domestic expenditure
2.
The decline  in export volumes contributed to  a decline  in  economic growth. From 4 per cent in the
third quarter of last year, growth slowed to 3 per cent in the fourth quarter. Growth fell further to 2 per
cent in the first quarter of this year. The slowing growth was largely restricted to the agricultural sector
in the fourth quarter of 2000. However, by the first quarter of this year, the weakness reached other
sectors of the economy.
Agricultural output dropped at an annualised rate of 6 per cent in the first quarter, coming off a high
base. Although mining output rose slightly, this was not near the levels seen at the beginning of 2000.
Demand for platinum and coal remained firm but diamond stockpiling continued in the face of weaker
demand. Of some worry is that the sector that bore the brunt of the slowdown was the manufacturing
sector.  The  growth  rate  in  this  sector  slowed  down  from  an  annualised  4,5  per  cent  in  the  fourth
quarter to a mere 1 per cent in the first quarter. This is somewhat puzzling because there appears to
be strong demand for manufactured goods.
Domestic demand remained strong in the first quarter with household and government consumption
expenditure  rising.  However,  the  growth  in  real  fixed  capital  formation  and  inventory  investment
accelerated. However,  it  was net inventory investment which  slowed  down  the  growth  in  aggregate
spending in the fourth quarter of 2000. An acceleration in inventory levels followed in the first quarter
of 2001. This suggests that producers are positive about South Africa’s future growth prospects and
anticipate an increase in domestic demand.
Household  spending  was  still  holding  firm  in  the  first  quarter  of  2001.  Real  final  consumption
expenditure by households increased at a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted and annualised rate
of 3 per cent in the first quarter, slightly lower than the 3,5 per cent recorded for the fourth quarter of
2000.  The  weakness  was  mainly  due  to  a  slowdown  in  spending  on  services  other  than
communications services. A rise of 28% in the purchase of cellular telephones over the past year was
not enough to cushion this.
The real gross fixed capital formation accelerated steadily in the 12 months to the first quarter. The
private and general government sector registered high fixed capital formation but there was a decline
in 
to  expand  communication
infrastructure. General government also increased their outlays on  infrastructure spending,  although
from a very low base. Total fixed capital formation amounted to approximately 15,5 per cent of GDP in
the first quarter.
the  public  corporations  sector.  The  private  sector  continued 
Employment and labour remuneration
3.
South Africa is labouring under a scenario of low growth that appears insufficient to create the levels
of  employment  we  would  like  to  see.  However,  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  drop  in  formal
unemployment does not necessarily imply an equal rise in the number of the unemployed. Often those
who  are  no  longer  employed  in  the  formal  sectors  of  the  economy  enter  the  informal  sectors  or
become self-employed.
From  1999  to  2000,  employment  fell  in  the  formal  private  and  public  non-agricultural  sector.  On
average,  public  sector  employment  fell  by  4,1  per  cent  in  2000.  Non-agricultural  private  sector
employment fell by 2,0 per cent from 1999 to 2000. The findings of the September 2000 Labour Force
Survey,  which  measures  total  employment  and  unemployment  and  tracks  the  trends  in  the  labour
market, concluded that 25,8 per cent of the economically active population was unemployed.
Wage  growth  presents  a  mixed  picture.  Nominal  wage  growth  in  the  private  sector  amounted  to
8,8 per cent in 2000. This is the lowest rate of increase in the past 30 years. However, public sector
pay  increases  outstripped  the  private  sector.  On  average,  public  sector  employees  earned  9,4  per
cent more in 2000 than in 1999.
But, on the positive side, labour productivity has been rising in the formal non-agricultural sectors. This
is  partly  due  to  efficiencies  gained  from  new  technologies.  On  average  labour  productivity  growth
reached 6,0 per cent in 2000 – the highest rate of increase in thirty years. As a result of the robust
growth  in  labour  productivity  and  moderate  increases  in  remuneration  per  worker,  the  growth  in
2
BIS Review 64/2001
nominal  unit  labour  costs  in  the  manufacturing  sector  slowed  down  to  a  year-on-year  rate  of  just
0,8 per cent in 2000. This has important positive implications for price stability and inflation.
Prices
4.
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  introduced  inflation  targeting  last  year.  Within  this  framework,  we
target CPIX inflation, which is headline consumer inflation excluding mortgage costs. This measure of
inflation must fall between 6 and 3 per cent on average in 2002. In assessing the inflation outlook, we
look  at  many  aspects.  These  include  global  oil  prices,  which  has  been  a  main  driver  of  inflation
recently, the exchange rate of the rand, private sector demand and nominal unit labour costs, among
other factors. During last year there was a significant rise in prices because of pressure from food and
energy prices.
At our Monetary Policy Committee meeting in the middle of June  we reduced  the repo rate  by  100
basis points. This caused the commercial banks, in turn, to  drop their consumer interest rates. The
repo  rate  decision  was  based  on  a  number  of  factors.  Among  these  were  clear  indications  that
consumer and production price  inflation  was  slowing.  Measured  from  quarter  to  quarter,  seasonally
adjusted and annualised, CPIX inflation came down from 8,8 per cent in the second quarter of 2000 to
6,1 per cent in the first quarter of 2001. The moderation in price increases was mainly the result of
more  moderate  rises  in  food  and  energy  prices,  which  had  shown  exceptionally  large  increases  in
2000. More fundamentally, the slowdown in inflation was related to the moderate rise  in  unit labour
costs  over  the  past  two  years.  In  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee  statement  we  noted  that  with
continued fiscal and monetary discipline, the target range of inflation in the year 2002 was achievable.
The  rate  of  imported  inflation  in  production  prices  has  declined  from  15  per  cent  year-on-year  in
December  to  11,8  per  cent  in  May.  Inflation  in  domestically  produced  goods  slowed  from  a
year-on-year rate of 8 per cent in November 2000 to 7,5 per cent in May. This was largely because of
declining food prices which had a positive impact.
Similarly, the headline CPI accelerated from 1,7 per cent in October 1999 to 7,8 per cent in February
2001 but declined to 6,4 per cent year on year in May.
Although  we  remain  reasonably  confident  of  meeting  our  inflation  target,  we  nonetheless  remain
vigilant. There are some forces at work that may obstruct the gradual decline we have witnessed up
until now. These include the faster growth in aggregate demand over output, uncertainties about the
stability of the oil price, and possible delayed second-round effects from the rand’s depreciation of last
year.
Although the rand depreciated by 1,3 per cent during the first quarter of this  year, it appreciated by
1,2 per cent against the basket of currencies during the second quarter. Against the dollar the rand
depreciated  by  5,9  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter.  However,  during  the  second  quarter,  the  rand
depreciated against the dollar by only 0,6 per cent.
Exchange rate of the rand
5.
Having  declined  from  a  level  of  about  R7,50  against  the  US  dollar  early  in  January  2001  to  levels
around  R8,00  at  the  end  of  May,  the  rand  seemed  to  stabilise  against  the  US  dollar  in  June.  The
monthly average exchange rate of the rand against the dollar in June 2001 was R8,05. However, from
3 July 2001 the rand weakened against the US dollar to a level of R8,2403 on 9 July reaching an all
time low of R8,2456 in intra-day trading. Subsequently the rand declined further to a level of R8,34 on
11 July 2001.
Since the beginning of the year, the rand has depreciated by about 9,5 per cent against the US dollar.
This is in line with a weaker performance of most currencies against the dollar in the first half of the
year.  The  general  weakness  of  currencies  against  the  US  dollar  is  demonstrated  by  comparable
depreciations of almost 8,7 per cent for the euro, 5,7 per cent for pound sterling and 8,6 per cent for
the  Australian  dollar.  On  a  trade-weighted  basis,  the  rand  is  weaker  by  3,6  per  cent  since  the
beginning of the year.
A factor which has recently cast a shadow over the rand has been a general increase in risk-aversion
by international investors. The increase in risk aversion is partly explained by weaker stock markets, a
deterioration  in  the  global  economy  and  by  developments  in  specific  emerging  markets  such  as  in
Argentina  and  Turkey.  South  Africa  is  certainly  not  the  only  emerging  market  to  be  impacted
BIS Review 64/2001
3
negatively.  In  particular,  the  currencies  of  Brazil,  Turkey  and  Indonesia  have  been  affected  much
more, and have declined by 28, 92½ and 18½ per cent respectively since the beginning for the year.
Foreign trade and payments
6.
South Africa’s surplus on the current account of the balance of payments widened from R2,5 billion in
the fourth quarter of 2000 to R6,9 billion or 0,7 per cent of GDP in the first quarter of 2001. This was
mainly because of the slight improvement in the trade surplus and a more substantial improvement in
the services account.
South Africa’s trade performance has been nothing short of stellar. The surplus on the trade account
increased slightly in the first quarter from R37 billion in the fourth quarter of 2000. This goes some way
to  fulfilling  our  hopes  of  an  export-led  recovery  for  the  South  African  economy.  However,  weaker
global demand has caused the physical quantity of exported goods to decline by about 0,5 per cent in
the  first  quarter  of  2001  compared  with  the  fourth  quarter  of  2000.  But  export  prices  in  rand  terms
increased by 3,4 per cent over the same period.
The country’s gold and foreign exchange reserves are on an upward trend, having risen from R69,1
billion at the end of December 1999 to R87,8 billion at the end of the first quarter this year. This is
equal to 16 week’s worth of imports. The Reserve Bank’s net open forward position in foreign currency
has been declining. We expect to see continued improvements in this position and we reiterate our
commitment to reduce this position to zero, as and when circumstances permit. From US$13 billion at
the end of December 1999 the NOFP fell to US$9 billion at the end of April. Our latest figures show
the NOFP at just over half of that, US$5,3 billion, at the end of June.
Of course, with foreign portfolio investment into South Africa remaining fairly volatile, we are obliged to
rely  on  more  permanent  inflows.  Foreign  portfolio  investment  into  South  Africa  changed  from  an
outflow of R1,8 billion in the fourth quarter of 2000 to an inflow of R3,5 billion in the first quarter of
2001. The acquisition of portfolio assets by South African residents, i.e. an outflow of capital, declined
from R3,1 billion to an estimated R0,2 billion over the same period.
The growth in broad money supply has been on an accelerating trend since November last year. From
year-on-year growth of 7,5 per cent in December, growth in money supply increased to 13,5 per cent
in May. The low base for year-on-year calculations in 2000 explains the return to double-digit rates.
Credit extension to the private sector, which forms the bulk of money supply in this country, registered
rises of more than 11 per cent in the last three months of 2000. However, in the first five months of this
year, credit extended to the private sector slowed to below 10 per cent.
Government finances
7.
The government’s revenues have been on the increase recently, mainly because of improved revenue
collection. The result of the higher-than-budgeted revenue and close-to-budgeted expenditure for the
2000/2001 fiscal year was a deficit before borrowing and debt repayment equal to 2 per cent of GDP.
This marked an improvement on the 2,3 per cent recorded in the previous fiscal year.
The reduction in the deficit to below 3 per cent of GDP coupled with government debt below the 60 per
cent  level,  which  is  deemed  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  participants  as  the  level  beyond  which  fiscal
health is at risk, paint a robust picture. National government debt has decreased from 48,1 per cent of
GDP at the end of March 2000 to 46,5 per cent at the end of March 2001.
Conclusion
8.
I will conclude by saying that within this economic picture, we at the Reserve Bank play a prominent
part. By maintaining financial and price stability, through inflation targeting, we contribute towards the
goals of sustained higher economic growth and the creation of employment opportunities. The primary
role of monetary policy is to keep inflation in check, which is an essential ingredient in the recipe for
sustainable economic growth.
There  is  some  reason  for  optimism  about  the  prospects  of  economic  growth.  As  we  noted  in  our
Quarterly Bulletin  of June 2001  the  economy has  been  in  recovery  mode  since  the  third  quarter  of
1999 and yet it has not exhibited some of the imbalances typical of previous expansionary periods.
4
BIS Review 64/2001
Inflation is on a declining trend and unit labour costs are contributing to this. The household sector is
in a financially  healthier position and  individual bankruptcies have fallen by 62% from April  2000  to
April 2001. Bank balance sheets are sound. And the deficit on the current account of the balance of
payments has turned into a surplus driven by the expansion in export earnings.
I am convinced that the Southern African-German Chamber of Commerce and Industry can likewise
make a contribution. By fostering trade and business ties between Southern Africa and Germany, and
specifically targeting small and medium enterprises, which must be the job creators in this economy,
you are contributing to putting this country and region onto a higher growth path.
Africa is now part of the global economy, which brings its own pressures. Often these pressures are
ones that we have no control over. We have a much more open economy, some trade barriers have
come down and we are no longer politically isolated. With the transition to a democratic South Africa,
confidence has begun to return with the mounting evidence that economic policies are prudent and
transparent. It is on these foundations that we will continue to  build upon. We count on  you as our
valued partners.
Danke. Rea leboga.
BIS Review 64/2001
5
