Y V Reddy: Reviving confidence in the Indian economy
First  Dr  S  Radhakrishnan  Memorial  Lecture  delivered  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the
Reserve Bank of India, sponsored by University Grants Commission and organized by the University
of Hyderabad, at Hyderabad on 5 September 2001.
 Respected Vice-Chancellor, Professor Rama Rao, distinguished academics and friends,
At the outset, I would like to express my grateful thanks to Professor Rama Rao garu for giving me the
privilege and honour of delivering the first Dr. S. Radhakrishnan Memorial Lecture sponsored by the
University Grants Commission and being organised by the University of Hyderabad on the occasion of
the Teachers’ Days this year. So much has been written and said about Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
that  any  narration  by  me  would  do  little  justice  to  one  of  the  greatest  philosopher-statesman  of
independent  India.  An  eminent  academician,  a  versatile  writer,  a  brilliant  orator,  a  renowned
philosopher,  a  respected  diplomat  and  a  remarkable  President  of  India,  Dr.  Radhakrishnan  had  a
reputation of weaving a spell on those who heard him. In fact, Bertrand Russell remarked that he had
never heard philosophy better expounded than by Dr. Radhakrishnan. Of particular relevance today is
not only that Professor Radhakrishnan was a great teacher but also the fact that he served in a vast
number of Universities. He had his apprenticeship in Madras and Mysore, went to Calcutta and well
before  he  was  forty  lectured  on  invitation  at  American  universities  and  also  at  Oxford.  He  set  up
Andhra University and was also Vice-Chancellor of Benaras Hindu University. The enormity of respect
that he commanded is evident from the fact that the British Government gave him a knighthood; he
was nominated to the League of Nations Committee on Intellectual Cooperation; was called to serve
on the Constituent Assembly and had a memorable stint as Ambassador to Moscow. I had been lucky
as  a  student  to  hear  Sarvepalli  Radhakrishnan  in  1954,  on  a  high  school  sponsored  excursion  to
Delhi;  and  I  still  possess  the  photograph  taken  with  him.  Later,  as  sub-collector,  Ongole,  I  made
elaborate arrangements at Chinaganjam railway station for him when he was proceeding to Madras in
1967 after laying down his responsibilities as President. In brief, my personal contact was limited but
he remains one of the greatest men I ever met in my life, especially since I started my career as a
teacher and once again, yearn to be a teacher.
Speaking of teachers, let me confess that I am here because of an invitation from someone, who like
Dr. Radhakrishnan  has  not  only  been  a  teacher  but  many  more  things  –  Professor  Rama  Rao.  An
eminent and internationally renowned scientist, a respected head of a regulatory body, a Secretary to
Government  remembered  even  after  a  decade,  a  builder  of  institutions,  a  great  contributor  to
advancement  of  professional  bodies  and  publications,  and  one  of  the  finest  human  beings  I  have
come across. There is lot in common between Prof. Radhakrishnan and Prof. Rama Rao, though one
is from the field of philosophy and the other from the realm of science.
Moving from teachers to teaching, the University and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) have assigned me
the pleasant task of inaugurating the Master of Technology course in Information Technology, devoted
to Banking Technology and Information Security - the first of its kind in India, and perhaps in the world.
The  pogramme  is  being  jointly  launched  by  the  University  of  Hyderabad  (UoH)  and  Institute  for
Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology  (IDRBT).  As  per  the  continuing  collaborative
activities  between  the  two  institutions,  a  2  Mbps  leased  line  connectivity  has  been  established
between the UoH and the IDRBT with a view to facilitating better and easy communication between
UoH and IDRBT, sharing library and other resources at UoH and IDRBT and also providing an avenue
for  video  conferencing.  This  programme,  fully-funded  by  IDRBT,  and  open  to  both  direct  and
sponsored candidates from the banking and financial sectors is a  multi-disciplinary  programme  that
seeks  to  merge  the  new  and  emerging  technologies  in  Information  Technology  with  the  domain
expertise in the ever-changing field of banking and financial services. Providing absolute Information
Security and IS Audit systems is a challenge, and is of immediate relevance and concern to banks,
especially  in  the  context  of  current  as  well  as  changing  business  environments  in  banking,  like
electronic payment systems, e-commerce, mobile banking, and Internet banking. Deploying of modern
and  evolving  technologies  would  require  the  banks  to  get  equipped  with  requisite  skills  on  a
continuous  basis.  Thus,  M.Tech.  provides  an  excellent  and  right  mix  of  the  various  aspects  of
Computer and Information Security that is essential for banking technology to succeed and survive.
The Reserve Bank of India, as a sponsor of IDRBT, is happy to be associated with the pioneering and
BIS Review 78/2001
1
path breaking collaboration between academia and practitioners and assures full support in its future
endeavours for mutual benefit.
In fact, IDRBT has already established a Corpus Fund with a seed amount of Rs. 50 lakh to promote
Higher Education and Research in Banking Technology and Management as a core area. Banks and
other financial institutions are expected to contribute significantly to the growth of this Fund.
It  is  customary  to  devote  a  Memorial  Lecture  to  a  theme,  which  has  fundamental  significance  and
contextual relevance. After consulting with the organisers and keeping in view the interests of the RBI,
the subject chosen for this occasion is:”Reviving Confidence in the Indian Economy”. It is necessary to
recognise that India remains one of the best performing economies in the world, in spite of the current
indications provoking a debate on the need for revival of the economy. It can be gathered from the
analysis  that  it  is  important  to  revive  confidence  in  the  economy  in  any  attempt  to  improve  the
performance. An approach in this regard can be discerned from the latest Annual Report of the RBI. In
the  true  spirit  of  philosophical  explorations  and  interpretations  propounded  by  Dr.  Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan, the concluding part of the lecture will be devoted to select structural issues critical to
restoration of confidence in the Indian economy.
Performance of Indian economy
India today is rated as the fifth largest economy in the world, measured in Purchasing Power Parity
terms. Only the U.S., Chinese, Japanese, and German economies are larger than ours. In terms of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rates, India was one of the ten fastest growing economies in
the world during the ‘eighties, and moved up to the eighth fastest during the period 1980 to 1998. In
regard to growth of GDP in per capita terms also, India's performance during the period is among the
top ten.
Furthermore, on the basis of data on income or consumption distribution (World Development Report
1998-99) for about 80 countries, and using both the ‘Gini’ coefficient and the share of the poorest 20
per cent as a measure of distribution, there are only 15 countries in the world, which have a  better
consumption/income distribution than India.
While growth is considered to be a key measure of macroeconomic performance, economic stability is
indicated  by  inflation.  In  the  ‘eighties,  India’s  average  inflation  rate  was  close  to  Asian  developing
countries,  above  developed  ones  and  lower  than  the  average  for  all  developing  countries.  In  the
‘nineties, inflation has been relatively low in the second half of the decade.
In the external sector, India, along  with China, has been  described as  “an  island  of  stability  amidst
seas of turbulence” in international currency markets in the recent years.
The ratio of debt to GNP in 1999 was 21.3, the only other developing country with a more favourable
ratio  being  China.  India  had  the  lowest  proportion  of  short-term  debt  to  total  debt  at  4.3,  while  for
China, it was 11.5.
In regard to fiscal position, however, India’s fiscal deficit is currently among the highest out of 74 major
countries  with  population  more  than  10  million.  And  of  these  only  two  are  higher  than  India.
Furthermore, public savings in the ‘nineties in India, which reached its peak of 2.0 per cent of GDP in
1995-96, became negative 1.2 per cent of GDP by 1990-2000.  The average rate of financial saving of
the household sector and of private corporate sector generally moved up during ‘eighties and ‘nineties.
There is also evidence of decline in the incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) from 4.2 in the 1980s
to 3.9 in 1993-2000.
There has also been an appreciable decline in poverty. The all-India poverty ratio fell to 27.09 per cent
in rural areas, 23.62 per cent in urban areas and 26.10 per cent at  the  all-India  level  in 1999-2000
from 53.1 per cent, 45.2 per cent and 51.3 per cent recorded during 1977-78.
Life expectancy has also moved up from 50.4 years in 1980-81 to above 61 years in the 1990s. There
has been an improvement in the life expectancy at birth for males from 50.9 years to 60.4 years and
for females from 50 years to 61.8 years.
The overall literacy has increased from 43.7 per cent in 1980-81 to 63.1 per cent in 1998-99.
Moreover, for the first time in four decades, population growth has decelerated to below 2 per cent and
this has been accompanied by a decline in the mortality rate from 12.5 per 1000 in 1980-81 to 8.7 per
1000 in the 1998-99.
2
BIS Review 78/2001
Yet, there is a sense of impatience if not despondency at our economic policies. The reasons are fairly
obvious. We start from a low base of GDP from which impressive rates of growth are noticeable. India
still accounts for a very large concentration of poverty and of illiteracy, and hence fruits of development
either  may  not  reach  or  are  inadequate.  While  employment  in  organized  sectors  has  virtually
stagnated,  in  recent  times,  insecurity  in  employment  has  crept  in.  Skill-irrelevance  of  most  of  the
manpower  to  the  emerging  needs  has  a  depressing  influence,  especially  when  coupled  with
downsizing.  Moreover,  significant  and  accelerating  expectations  have  been  created.  There  is
widespread  awareness  of  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  grow  rapidly  and  they  see  no  apparent
reason for slower than possible growth.
There  are,  thus,  discernible  reasons  for  the  current  debate  on  revival  of  the  economy,  centering
around the recent deceleration in the rate of growth, and certainly going beyond the simple exhaustion
of animal spirits of the business community in the country.
Why the current debate on revival of Indian economy
First,  the  deceleration  of  economic  activity  for  the  second  year  in  succession  has  raised  some
concerns about the feasibility of rapidly moving the economy to a higher growth path in the medium
term. Added to this is the public perception that  India  is not immune to the slowdown phase  of the
global business cycle.
Second, the agricultural sector has exhibited considerable volatility and recorded absolute declines in
the  last  two  quarters  of  1999-00  and  again  in  the  first  quarter  of  2000-01.  Agricultural  production
registered a negative growth on top of a decline in the previous year.
Third, the growth of industrial production decelerated during 2000-01and further to 2.1 per cent in the
first three months of 2001-02 from 6.1 per cent in April-June 2001.
Fourth, services sector, which accounted for a major share of GDP, exhibited a lower growth of 7.5 per
cent in 2000-01 as against 9.4 per cent in 1999-00.
Fifth,  there  has  been  lower  off-take  of  nonfood  credit  from  the  banking  system,  especially  since
January 2001.
Sixth,  imports  declined  by  0.2  per  cent  in  2000-01  as  against  an  increase  of  17.3  per  cent  during
1999-00. Non-oil imports declined by 8.5 per cent as compared with the increase of 3.2 per cent in
1999-00.
Seventh, export growth decelerated sharply to 1.7 per cent in April-June 2001-02 from 26.6 per cent in
the three months of 2000-01.
Eighth,  considerable  uncertainty,  arising  from  turbulence  in  stock  exchanges  and  apprehensions  of
liquidity/payments  problems,  the  problems  in  some  cooperative  institutions  and  the  largest  mutual
fund,  the  downgrading  of  the  rating  of  a  major  development  financial  institution  and  the  repayment
problems faced by another financial institution, has affected investor sentiment.
There are, however, some favourable developments in the economy that need to be highlighted to get
across  the  major  thrust  of  the  argument  viz.,  the  current  issue  is  significantly  one  of  confidence,
especially on the prospects.
First, real GDP growth when viewed in the context of the growth of other countries, is still one of the
highest in the world.
Second, inflation has remained stable and low.
Third, the financial sector has experienced declining interest rate environment.
Fourth,  despite  turbulence  in  the  stock  markets,  the  other  segments  of  the  financial  markets  have
remained stable and there have been no serious threats to systemic risks.
Fifth, the external sector  is clearly sustainable  with the current account  deficit continuing to be less
than 1 per cent of GDP.
Sixth, foreign investment sentiment does not seem to have been affected  with FII inflows recording
about $750 million during April-July 2001 as compared with $ 150 million during April-July 2000.
BIS Review 78/2001
3
Seventh,  the  record  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  at  nearly  $  45  billion  on  August  24,  2001,
stable exchange rate and money market rates provide less risky business environment.
Eighth,  foodstocks  have  reached  an  all-time  high,  improving  food  security  and  immunising  the
economy from transient supply shocks.
An approach to revival of confidence
It is customary for the Reserve Bank of India to present an Annual Report each year and that Report
for 2000-01, was approved by its Board of Directors on August 16. The Chapter on Assessment and
Prospects sets out a carefully constructed statement of the RBI Board’s perspective and this provides
a useful starting point to debate what needs to be done to revive confidence in the economy.
While noting the comfortable position of external sector and the possible moderate impact of global
developments, the need for addressing the predominantly domestic factors is flagged.
The present state of the economy reflects a combination of cyclical and structural factors with different
weights assignable.
The implication is that any solution should address both the cyclical and structural issues, though the
relevant importance and sequencing of the various components will have to be well crafted.
In  regard  to  structural  factors,  a  particular  mention  is  made  of  the  operation  of  the  institutional
constraints  on  growth.  The  suggestion  is  that  the  legal  framework  and  institutional  arrangements
would have to be accorded priority in the structural component.
As regards the relative role of macro economic and micro economic considerations, it is made clear
that both require to be addressed, but the Report focuses on importance of micro economic aspects in
as much as they are closely linked to institutional factors.
The  balancing  of  the  reform  in  financial  and  non-financial  sectors  is  also  highlighted  and  the
importance of accelerating the reform in real sector, particularly agriculture, is stressed.
More specifically, recognising that a large segment of the population is dependent on agriculture and
its performance in the recent past has been of considerable concern, the importance of augmenting
public investment in agriculture is emphasised.
In particular, the advantage of shifting public expenditures from subsidies to investment as a means of
efficiency,  equity  and  regional  balance  is  pointed  out.  Furthermore,  desirable  measures  for  the
creation  of  an  efficient  system  of  market  intermediaries,  quality-enhancement,  perhaps  through
certification, introducing insurance mechanisms, developing nation-wide multi commodity exchanges,
etc.,  are  listed  out.  In  a  sense,  therefore,  the  emphasis  is  on  attaining  a  quantum  jump  in  the
agricultural sector to meet global standards as a means of withstanding global competition and taking
advantage of emerging opportunities in international trade.
With regard to industry, the fact that public sector enterprises still dominate the economy is noted and
a  strong  plea  is  made  to  end  uncertainties  in  regard  to  the  future  of  public  sector  enterprises.  In
particular, the complementarities in public and private sector are emphasised.
The thrust is that enhanced resources should be made available to select public enterprises,  which
have  strategic  significance  or  strong  public  purpose,  while  clearly  and  promptly  disinvesting
Government's  equity  in  the  other  enterprises.  At  the  same  time,  the  creation  of  a  conducive
environment  for  industrial  revival  warrants  an  appropriate  regulatory  framework  to  improve
infrastructure.  By  implication,  one  of  the  approaches  advocated  is  that  if  labour  has  to  be
compensated, it should be done directly rather than incurring open-ended non transparent expenses
in the name of revival, through tax concessions, sacrifices by financial  institutions and  incentives to
induce sickness.
Finally, in the context of the new economy, the emphasis is on removal of procedural and institutional
constraints, thus warning against bureaucratization in the name of creating enabling environment.
In  the  external  sector,  there  is  considerable  cause  for  comfort  emanating  from  reasonable  level  of
reserves, low current account deficit and adequate level of capital flows, but the need for continued
caution and vigil is rightly noted. Above all, in the current account, improving the export performance
and in the capital account, attracting FDI are highlighted as necessary for medium-term sustainability.
By all accounts, the major constraints in regard to both these appear to be the institutional framework
4
BIS Review 78/2001
and uncertainties in regard to the policy framework, both of which need to be tackled urgently as part
of confidence boosting measures.
On fiscal policy, the major thrust is towards fiscal empowerment in contrast to fiscal enfeeblement to
realise the objective of durable fiscal consolidation. This would call for several steps to increase the
tax revenues, abolish tax exemptions, enhance the non-tax revenues by ensuring cost recovery, etc. A
case is thus made out for either obtaining adequate return on investments in public sector enterprise
or for disinvestment, unless a specific purpose in the interest of the public at large is served better by
public ownership.
In regard to public debt, a point is made that the size of government borrowings, though most visible,
is not the only one element in public debt management. Keeping in view the fact that only 80 per cent
of the central government’s liabilities are covered by assets even as per the government accounting
system which is cash based, the health of public finances is linked to the both formal guarantees, and
implicit guarantees. In other words, wherever the government is owner, directly or indirectly, there is
an inevitable obligation on the part of the government to the discharge of liabilities in order to avoid
reputational risk while declaring a government owned enterprise as insolvent. In brief, a holistic view of
assets and liabilities as well as incomes and expenditures of the public sector as a whole is canvassed
in  the  report,  which  would  warrant  significant  importance  to  accounting  practices,  disclosure
standards, and a degree of transparency in public sector as a whole.
In  the  matter  of  interest  burden,  the  Annual  Report  makes  a  reference  to  several  proposals  under
consideration  to  focus  on  instruments  that  currently  result  in  very  high  effective  cost  to  the
Government. Another area of concern, though not elaborated in the Report is the element of a Ponzi
scheme in small savings at high cost  to  the  Government  with  a  tendency  to  finance  the  ballooning
fiscal needs of State Governments, while imposing serious mismatches in the asset-liability maturity
profile of the Central Government.
The  concept  of  fiscal  impairment  is  clearly  of  special  significance  for  States  since  the  bedrocks  of
socio-economic  welfare  viz.  law  and  order  and  social  services  are  in  the  state  sector.  The  actions
needed  would,  therefore,  be  in  terms  of  expanding  public  goods  and  social  services  including
anti-poverty programmes with concomitant roll-back of fiscal activism in commercial activities.
In  regard  to  monetary  policy,  the  major  emphasis  is  on  flexibility  of  interest  rates  in  the  financial
system as a whole. The global developments in terms of oil prices and the domestic developments in
terms of  inflation  emerge  as  important  areas  to  monitor  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy. While  a
number  of  instruments  have  been  devised  and  operating  procedures  have  undergone  significant
changes, it is very clear that considerable sophistication and skill are essential in successful conduct
of monetary policy.
As  regards  financial  sector,  several  problems  warranting  attention  are  brought  out.  These  relate  to
perception of implicit sovereign  guarantee in regard to all financial  intermediaries, and lack of arms
length  relationships  and  lack  of  clear  demarcation  between  ownership  and  regulation.  In  particular,
there is a reference to complexities arising out of existence of various types of financial intermediaries
with differing charters owing their origins to prereform strategies, which virtually calls for a thorough
revamping  of  the  interface  of  government  and  Reserve  Bank  with  financial  intermediaries  that  they
own. Above all, the inadequacies in the present banking system, particularly in the cooperative sector,
in  meeting  the  credit  needs  of  agriculture  as  well  as  small  and  medium  industries  necessitate  a
fundamental change in the systems of their governance and functioning.
Exploration of some measures
There is a strong consensus  among  international  observers  that  there  is  a  weak  reform  process  in
India, which expresses itself in the form of relatively slow implementation of policies. Another view is
that the “tyranny of ten per cent”, namely the workforce of the organised sector, continues to resist any
change.  Yet  another  view  is  that  in  any  democracy,  reform  is  generally  a  slow  process  since  the
sacrifices  of  the  vociferous  minority  come  upfront  while  the  benefits  to  the  vast  but  relatively  silent
majority  accrue  with  a  time  lag.  Perhaps,  there  are  elements  of  truth  in  each  of  these  views,  but
without  doubt, the relevant issues are essentially in the  nature  of  political  economy  and  not  merely
matters  for  technical  analysis.  Yet,  there  is  merit  in  exploring  some  drastic  measures,  which  could
demonstrably improve the current sentiment.
BIS Review 78/2001
5
Reviving  the  economy  requires  boosting  of  confidence  by  combining  both  structural  and  other
cyclically relevant measures. While the latter are desirable, such measures must be combined on a
credible  basis  with  structural  measures.  In  this  address,  it  is  not  proposed  to  elaborate  on  either
cyclically relevant measures or the process of integrating them with structural measures, but confine to
structural issues.
It is possible to be illustrative and certainly not exhaustive even in regard to the structural measures.
The  intention  is  to  express  purely  exploratory  technical  views  in  five  of  the  areas  that  are  critical,
namely,  financial  sector,  regulatory  framework,  public  enterprises,  delivery  of  public  services,  and
overhang issues. These do not in any way constitute the official position of RBI.
Advisory on financial sector restructuring
It is useful to understand some features of the financial system in India. Most of the financial savings
still  comprise  deposits  to  the  banking  sector,  with  some  perceptible  flow  to  life  insurance,  mutual
funds, government small savings and Provident Funds. About three quarters of the banking deposits
go  to  government  owned  banks  that  currently  have  invested  over  one-third  of  the  assets  in
government  securities  and  a  perceptible  amount  in  PSU  bonds,  development  financial  institutions
cooperatives and government guaranteed enterprises. This gives place to a criticism that government
owned banks are operating  as  instruments  to  finance  high  public  sector  deficits.  Similar  arguments
can be advanced in respect of the largest mutual fund, viz., the Unit Trust of India and the insurance
giant  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  India  not  to  mention  the  General  Insurance  Corporation.  While
Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India  is  a  public  sector  statutory  corporation,  Industrial  Finance
Corporation of India’s major shareholding is by government owned Institutions. Industrial Credit and
Investment  Corporation  of  India  is  a  public  financial  institution  and  hence  has  a  special  status
accorded by Government.
While  public  tend  to  repose  confidence  in  these  institutions  by  virtue  of  their  status  as
Government-owned or backed entities, there is corresponding implicit direct obligation on the part of
the  Government  to  protect  the  interests  of  depositors/investors.  In  other  words,  any  vulnerability  in
regard to these institutions has an impact on government’s finances. Such a reasonable expectation is
not  only  justified  on  the  consideration  of  the  concept  of  "holding  out"  a  backing,  but  also  by  the
obligations  discharged  in  the  past  by  Government  of  India  in  several  cases  including  the  case  of
CanFina through Canara Bank.
The regulators of financial sector have some additional complexities in relation to public sector entities.
First,  in  the  case  of  statutory  bodies  including  public  sector  banks,  there  are  certain  regulatory
constraints. For instance, both for reasons of legality and reputational risk, the regulator cannot cancel
a licence, say to a public sector bank, even if it fails to meet capital adequacy norms. The recourse
open to the regulator in the case of owner’s unwillingness to inject capital to meet capital adequacy
standards is unclear and this often leads to regulatory forbearance. Second, as in the case of UTI and
Development Financial Institutions, the legal basis of jurisdiction of regulators is somewhat ill-defined.
Thirdly, Government tends to be closely involved in some operations of many of these institutions' and
overlapping  of  accountability  is  plausible.  Fourthly,  as  long  as  these  institutions  function  without
reference to sound principles of corporate governance though consistent with their individual statutes,
inherent  weaknesses  persist.  In  fact,  where  there  has  been  disinvestment  and  consequently  some
shares are held by the public, minority shareholder interests are not seriously factored in. Fifthly, the
Government expects the regulator to often function as an agent of owner (Government), which further
complicates accountability. Finally, the regulatory focus in respect of these institutions as set out by
Government itself is not well defined and diffused. The issue is whether defining the respective roles
and making their transactions more transparent would improve confidence in the financial sector  by
avoiding the criticism that they often take recourse to lending, investment, rescheduling and bailouts,
and extending guarantees as behest operations. It is against the above background that institutions
tend to be somewhat less than responsive to regulatory regime as well as market discipline.
Furthermore, the non-performing assets (NPAs) arising out of priority sector lending, which is in the
nature of directed lending and those covered by the Bureau of Industrial and Financial Restructuring
(BIFR)  together  account  for  well  over  fifty  per  cent  of  total  non-performing  assets  of  the  banking
system.  The  number  of  companies  referred  to  the  BIFR  by  three  major  Development  Financial
Institutions (DFIs) stood at 694 with a total loan outstanding of about Rs.6,275 crore as at end-March
2000. Above all, in view of their close interrelationships, the risks of contagion are high and hence the
need to overhaul them to inspire confidence.
6
BIS Review 78/2001
It  is  essential  to  recognize  the  constraints  under  which  these  entities  are  operating  in  a  highly
competitive  environment  induced  by  the  reform  process.  Apart  from  the  issues  of  diffused
accountability to the Government and regulator and multiple objectives to be pursued in order to justify
public sector nature, their management style is occasionally cramped by extraneous interventions. As
a  consequence  of  all  these  factors,  at  operating  levels  of  these  entities,  there  may  be  a  strong
incentive to inaction than action.
It  would  be  totally  inappropriate  to  conclude  that  these  institutions  are  more  vulnerable  now  than
before. In fact, their  vulnerabilities  were neither defined nor measured in the past and the pressure
built  on  them  by  the  financial  regulators  in  the  recent  past  has  enabled  them  to  improve  their
functioning  and  disclose  their  real  status.  The  dimension  of  the  problem  which  were  concealed  is
being revealed and there is perhaps a strong case for admitting and assessing the real status, and
take  corrective  actions  to  meet  the  overhang  issues  and  design  strategies  to  make  the  future
operations efficient, stable and accountable.
In regard to private sector banks including cooperatives, vulnerability of some of them is no longer an
impossible contingency. Hence, an interesting question that can arise is the appropriate response that
is  justifiable  in  case  there  is  a  run  on  such  a  bank.  The  primary  responsibility  of  the  regulator  is
two-fold, viz., protection of small depositors and avoidance of contagion resulting in systemic risk. In
case  of  such  problem,  the  regulator  should  attempt  to  identify  whether  it  is  due  to  illiquidity  or  an
insolvency problem. In case it is assessed as an illiquidity problem, the regulator may in exceptional
cases act as a Lender of Last Resort and consider infusing temporary liquidity to such a bank to tide
over the problem of mismatch. In case it is assessed by the regulator that a bank is insolvent or the
bank  itself  closes  its  branches  for  banking  operations,  the  logical  requirement  would  be  liquidation
unless  a  serious  contagion  resulting  in  systemic  risk  is  anticipated.  A  prompt  liquidation  operation,
whenever  warranted  by  these  considerations  would  ensure  two  aspects.  First,  retail  or  small
depositors upto Rs. 1 lakh would be able to recover their deposits quickly (perhaps in matter of days)
and  secondly,  depositors  with  over  Rs.  1  lakh  deposits  would  need  to  book  losses.  In  particular,
corporates or institutions that have placed deposits in banks may have vested interest in prolonging
the matter even at the cost of small depositors in order to avoid disclosure of losses in their balance
sheets. Under these circumstances, the regulator has to make difficult decisions/judgments at short
notice, often  with incomplete information.  Sometimes, liquidity  and solvency  issues get intermingled
with discomfort to the respective regulatory arms.
In India, very often, in case of such banks, for a variety of reasons, a softer approach is taken and
sometimes legal  hurdles are faced.  It  is  possible  to  argue  that  this  soft  approach  has  resulted  in  a
typical situation of moral hazard when the management tends to become inefficient and depositors do
not exercise adequate prudence. The depositors in banks should be encouraged to exercise at least
as  much  caution,  attention  and  time  when  they  place  deposits  as  they  do  when  they  purchase
vegetables. Thus, a clearer enunciation of effective policy in regard to vulnerable banks would enable
swift action by the regulator and exercise of more caution by depositors. In this context, insistence on
greater disclosure and the regime of Prompt Corrective Action would be relevant.
To  put  it  differently,  the  current  priority  for  policy  should  be  to  clarify  the  relationships  between  the
regulator,  regulated,  owner  and  government  as  well  as  a  well-defined  regulatory  focus  to  enable
healthy  development  of  financial  markets.  Perhaps,  this  needs  even  more  urgent  attention  than  a
debate on single versus multiple regulators. My experience as Chairman of Standing Committee on
International  Standards  and  Codes  has  provided  a  clue  for  this  purpose  in  the  form  of  Advisory
Groups. On the same analogy, the highest level in the country say the Prime Minister or the National
Development  Council  could  constitute  an  independent  Advisory  Group  on  Financial  Sector
Restructuring  with  eminent  non-officials  as  members  and  the  officials  should  be  available  only  to
facilitate the work of such bodies. Such an advisory body should be able to produce a blue print within
few months since substantial international experience and domestic research are already available in
this direction.
Zero regulation
As mentioned, one of our major achievements in this decade has been the strength and successful
management of the external sector. There are some lessons to be learnt from the experience. First,
there  was  initially  a  fear  that  liberalisation  of  imports  and  delinking  financing  of  imports  with  import
licensing would result in a surge in imports, but a few argued that such fears were unfounded and, in
fact,  the  import  bill  would  be  down.  The  results  vindicated  the  views  of  the  few  liberalisers  viz.,
BIS Review 78/2001
7
inventories went down as uncertainties in administration of import-regime were removed; moreover,
users of imports could  try  out  and  experiment  with  domestic  supplies  without  diluting  their  rights  to
import (since import permit was both on entitlement and on commitment). Second, import of gold was
virtually  prohibited  on  the  ground  that  gold  is  unproductive  and  hence  precious  foreign  exchange
should not be wasted on it. A few argued that there is a strong sentiment in favour of gold in India (for
mangala-sutra, for streedhan, as both a consumption and investment good) and hence was imported
in any case through unofficial channels resulting in significant trade and currency transactions beyond
the  pale  of  policy  and  law.  The  argument  of  the  few  that  allowing  of  import  of  gold  liberally  will
eliminate  such  unofficial  transactions  both  on  receipts  and  payments  side  of  the  current  account,
reduce the outflow of forex for transaction costs and improve the effectiveness of policy of exchange
rate management has been fully vindicated. At the same time, the caution expressed by the very same
few in regard to capital flows has also helped India in withstanding the volatility of international flows. It
is not the case that there are no anomalies left in the management of the external sector. For example,
while  an  Indian  resident  has  the  option  of  spending  a  generous  amount  of  foreign  exchange  on  a
holiday abroad or liberally send gifts, a resident is not permitted to use the same entitlement to acquire
a foreign financial asset. It must be relevant to recognise that the liberal regime for individual residents
on current account has not revealed any major abuse of the facilities or any major drain in terms of
foreign exchange outgo. Similarly, a tourist in India too is discriminated in airlines and hotels to the
extent payment has to be higher and in foreign currency, thus giving a signal that the Rupee is not a
valid  currency  for  some  transactions  within  India.  The  thrust  of  the  argument  is  that  appropriate
deregulation and well crafted restrictions are key to successful policy, and in India such an approach is
feasible when policy makers and bureaucracy recognise that they are dealing with people with their
preferences,  prejudices,  responses,  etc.,  and  that  every  regulation  needs  to  be  justified  that  its
demonstrable benefits exceed the costs of administering regulation  and overall costs of compliance
with regulation.
It is heartening to note that the Prime Minister has recognised the enormity of the issue of institutional
impediments in the revival of economy when he declared before the meeting of National Development
Council on September 1, 2001 : “We must quickly identify and eliminate all perverse laws, regulations
and  procedures  which  lead  to  unproductive  activities,  cost  increases  and  sap  the  energies  of  the
entrepreneurs".
In order to operationalise the suggestion, Parliament or Government may consider establishing “Zero
Regulation Advisory”, a person or a Committee of eminent non-officials who would take on board any
questioning  of  any  regulation  or  Law  as  excessively  intrusive  or  costly  or  unnecessary.  It  can  also
accept  suggestions  for  modifications  or  alternatives.  The  regulator  concerned  would  have  to  justify
continuance of such a regulation to the satisfaction of the Committee. The advise of the ZRA, which
should be made public should be binding unless countermanded by  a public speaking  order by the
authority  appointing  the  ZRA.  The  experience  of  Reserve  Bank  with  Regulations  Review  Authority,
though somewhat circumscribed, is very instructive in this respect. For example, ZRA could designate
Regulation  Review  Outpost  in  each  regulatory  organisation,  somewhat  on  the  lines  of  the  Chief
Vigilance Commissioner designating vigilance officers in various Ministries and organisations, though
the reporting and work methods would have to differ. No doubt, the ZRA would have jurisdiction over
the regulatory organisations also. Such a system needs to be applied for legislation also since most of
the enactments do not contain what are known as “sunset clauses”. While advocating zero regulation
as  a  process  at  this  juncture  as  part  of  general  review,  it  is  essential  to  devise  and  strengthen
appropriate  and  credible  regulatory  framework  wherever  essential,  such  as  in  regard  to  physical
infrastructure.
Portfolio management approach
As  explained  in  the  current  Annual  Report  of  RBI,  the  public  enterprises  are  uncertain  about  their
future and are starved of capital due to fiscal stress, both factors seriously affecting their morale. The
uncertainties in regard to the policy intentions as well as market response to disinvestment add to lack
of capital formation and sub-optimal performance. Moreover, experience indicates that Ministries lack
the incentive to divest, and even when they do, lack the expertise to see through the process. While
budgetary compulsion appear to give a push to disinvestments, in the process, several distortions may
take  place  such  as  selling  shares  with  assurances  of  monopoly,  selling  minority  share-holding,
intra-public sector transactions giving an erroneous impression of disinvestments, etc. Unfortunately,
all these tendencies, especially delayed processes could lead to loss of output in public enterprises,
reduced income to Government, adverse impact on workers, contagion to financial sector, especially
8
BIS Review 78/2001
public sector banks and erosion of share holder value culminating in possible deterioration of family
silver into family junk.
It must be noted that the functioning  of the public enterprises  impacts the fiscal situation both  on  a
continuing and contingent basis. The relationship between Government and Public enterprises as also
among the enterprises has followed and are still following what has been described as the joint family
approach,  which  undermines  transparency  and  accountability.  The  examples  of  input-output
relationship between coal production, railways, steel making, power generation, public sector banks
and  insurance  companies  are  enough  to  indicate  the  potential  for  operations  at  the  behest  of  non-
commercial  considerations,  many  of  which  are  not  even  properly  accounted  for  in  their  respective
balance sheets, profit & loss account etc. in a mutually consistent manner. Such linkages may have
persisted in the long process of disinvestment that has been undertaken. Considerable progress has
been made in imparting transparency and accounting for transactions on commercial considerations,
but the process is far from complete.
It is possible to enunciate some ground rules for defining the future of public enterprises (both financial
and  non-financial)  on  the  basis  of  what  may  be  termed  as  Portfolio  Management  approach.  First,
whenever  a  private  operator  is  permitted  to  enter  an  activity  and  compete  with  an  existing  public
enterprise, the unique rationale for continued public ownership is eroded as such enterprises form part
of commercial investment portfolio of government.
Secondly,  the  Government  should  have  the  prerogative  and  obligation  to  elaborate  and  define
considerations  that  determine  non-commercial  characteristics  warranting  public  ownership  on  a
subsisting basis.
Thirdly,  all  enterprises  in  commercial  investment  portfolio  have  to  be  operated  on  commercial
considerations  and  shareholding  may  be  continued,  reduced  or  expanded  on  commercial  (which
includes financial) considerations alone. To ensure this, ownership of all such enterprises need to be
transferred to what may be termed as Portfolio Management Company of India (PMCI). No doubt, the
organisational forms of all such enterprises would be companies under Company Law totally on par
with other competing entities. This procedure recognises that while Government or Ministry has the
responsibility to decide on public purpose  of an entity, disinvestment or operations of a commercial
entity require different set of expertise and processes.
Fourthly, PMCI would assess the expected cash flow over the years with continued total or majority or
minority  ownership  vis-à-vis  the  capital  receipts  expected  from  disinvestment,  from  time  to  time.
Naturally, the cost of funds for Government and by extension to PMCI will be a consideration. In other
words, the PMCI will replace the present advisory Disinvestment Commission and will operate as an
independent portfolio manager.
Fifthly, public interest considerations such as strategic presence and protection of interests of labour in
respect of each enterprise will have to be specified and mandated by Government while transferring
enterprises to the PMCI.
Sixthly,  PMCI  will  have  the  flexibility  to  provide  financial  resources  to  those  enterprises  which  can
perform well or those which have the potential to increase shareholder value.
Clearly, while the decision as to whether any enterprise should be in public or private sector is a policy
decision to be made by Government at higher level, in respect of those enterprises which are purely in
a commercial but competitive environment, the process of expansion, strengthening or disinvestment
are  essentially  operational  matters  and  hence  best  carried  out  by  professionals  with  due  regard  to
dynamics of the market and securities regulation. This should ensure that the total investment portfolio
of  the  commercial  enterprises  of  the  government  is  managed  efficiently  reconciling  commercial
objectives and sound fiscal management. This in brief is the logic behind the proposed PMCI.
Bypass and delivery of services
The importance of fiscal adjustment at State Level in enhancing the output and quality of services has
been  recognised.  The  popular  perception  of  effect  of  reform  and  thus  confidence  in  the  economy
appears to have been undermined by the deterioration in the quality of public services be it education
or  health  or  even  drinking  water. While  a  generation  ago,  most  of  these  facilities  were  sought  and
provided in the government sector, today, a large part of some of these facilities is available only on
commercial basis. Consequently, many, especially the poor are deprived of reasonable or in any case
equitable access to these services. In fact, even security of buildings is getting increasingly privatised
BIS Review 78/2001
9
in urban areas. In other words, there is a phenomenon of “bypass" of these public services since the
main  arteries  appear  choked,  on  which  enormous  sums  are  spent  by  Government.  There  is
sometimes  a  tendency  to  spend  energies  in  regulating  the  bypass  activities  for  ostensible  public
purpose  than  on  improving  the  quality  of  services  in  public  domain.  While  superfluous  regulatory
aspects would be considered by the proposed ZRA, there is a need for assessing, on a continuous
basis, the cost of inputs and the  quantity  as  well  as  quality  of  output  in  regard  to  delivery  of  these
public services. Perhaps, it is possible to devise mechanisms under the aegis of the Comptroller and
Auditor General to make such assessments on a continuing and scientific basis, by outsourcing as is
being done in respect of commercial audit of public enterprises. Indeed, the audit of delivery of such
public services deserve far greater energies and attention than many other sectors.
It  is  hoped  that  media  and  academia  would  join  in  such  efforts  to  assess  these  sectors,  which  are
critical to the nation’s well being.
Overhang issues
It  is  necessary  to  make  a  distinction  between  what  may  be  termed  as  “flow”  issues  and  overhang
issues. There is merit in insulating the overhang problem from flow issues and demonstrably solve the
flow problem upfront. For example, in regard to food stocks there is addition to buffer stocks virtually
on a continuous basis and a policy needs to be evolved to tackle this flow. Any attempt to sort out the
overhang accumulated excess stocks on an ad hoc basis would obviously have limited success. Any
solution to the overhang problem of large magnitude is bound to be operational over the medium-term
and may involve admission of the magnitude of possible losses to be incurred. Yet another example
relates to the power sector, where addition to capacities to generate without ensuring cost recovery
adds  to  the  problem  of  accumulated  losses.  Prima  facie,  the  other  major  areas  with  considerable
overhang problems are financial sector,  public  enterprises,  pension  and  provident  liabilities  and  the
cooperative sector. Since many of these issues require well crafted medium- to long-term actions, it
may be necessary to define the goals specifically and negotiate the process rather than move forward
in an ad hoc manner. In other words, disjoined incrementalism may not be mistaken for sequencing of
reforms  and  there  is  merit  in  coming  clean,  defining  destination  and  negotiating  as  part  of  political
process, the arduous but rewarding journey towards the sustainable and credible progress towards a
modern, humane, prosperous and egalitarian society.
Perhaps, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, the philosopher – Statesman – teacher would have endorsed
such a transparent but consensus based approach.
Thank you!
10
BIS Review 78/2001
