Ernst Welteke: The effect of the euro on the German economy – A view from
the Deutsche Bundesbank
Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the German-British Chamber
of Industry and Commerce in London on 29 May 2001.
 Ladies and Gentleman,
It is a pleasure for me to speak to such a distinguished audience today here in London. You may wish
to  hear  about  the  effects  of  the  euro  on  the  German  economy,  and  I  very  much  appreciate  the
opportunity to present my views on this.
Economic relations between the not-yet-euro zone country United Kingdom and the already-euro zone
country Germany are strong. Thus, you may be glad to hear that, judging from today’s perspective, the
euro  project  is  a  success  (story)  for  Germany  on  the  whole.  There  is,  however,  no  denying  some
work-in-progress aspects to the European Monetary Union itself and to Germany’s role therein. I shall
try to provide you with a balanced picture of Germany in the year three of the euro era.
Melting  eleven  local  currencies  into  a  single  currency  is  a  once-in-a-century  project.  Thanks  to
extensive  preparations  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  its  predecessor  organisation  the  European
Monetary Institute and eleven National Central Banks, there were no major technical glitches. Thus,
technically the changeover was a non-event for the general public. The smooth transition then gave
way to a successful start of a true European monetary policy.
In the ECB Governing Council, we cherish what we call the “Spirit of the Governing Council”. This is to
say,  my  colleagues  and  I  feel  and  decide  as  Europeans.  We  do  not  regard  ourselves  as  national
delegates. Rather,  we unequivocally pursue the  interests of the euro area as a  whole.  I don’t mind
admitting that we are proud of this spirit. What makes us all the more proud is that monetary policy is
up  to  now  the  only  area  in  European  politics  where  European  interests  clearly  predominate  over
national interests.
The  European  Central  Bank  is  unique  in  many  respects.  The  ECB  is  independent,  and  has  its
independence  guaranteed  in  the  EU  Treaty.  The  Treaty  also  stipulated  the  maintenance  of  price
stability as the primary goal of monetary policy. The European System of Central Banks defines price
stability as a change in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of less than 2 %. In 1999, with an
inflation rate of 1.1 %, that objective was met with ease. Today, the European Central Bank – more
than 300 years younger than the Bank of England – has already successfully established a reputation
for  guaranteeing  price  stability  in  the  euro  zone.  The  three-year-period  from  1998  to  2000  saw  an
average rate of inflation of 1.1 %. This early euro-period is remarkable: it was one of the three most
outstanding periods of price stability performance in Germany since the 1950s.
Since last summer high  energy costs,  in part linked to  the  external  value  of  the  euro,  and  demand
shifts due to the European food crisis have taken their toll. Thus, from today’s point of view, it looks
probable that in 2001 we will not be able to meet our target of holding inflation below the 2 % ceiling.
However, on May 10, the Governing Council decided to lower official interest rates by 25 basis points.
The interest rate for the main refinancing operation is now 4.5 %. This decision was based on the two-
pillar strategy, i.e. monetary growth  in the first pillar and the broader  assessment of the outlook for
price developments in the second pillar.
In the period since  last spring, monetary growth came ever closer to the reference  value  of  4.5  %.
Furthermore, indications that monetary growth is somewhat overstated have been confirmed recently.
Non-euro area residents’ purchases of negotiable paper included in M3 – that is money market fund
units and other marketable paper – are sizeable as well as rising. However, the relevant concept of
M3 is residents’ holdings. Once these distortions are accounted for, the first pillar indicates no further
risks for price stability.
The  second  pillar  also  points  in  the  direction  of  receding  upward  risks  for  price  stability.  External
developments  are  dampening  the  prospects  for  euro-area  growth.  Wages  are  rising,  but  only
moderately.
BIS Review 46/2001
1
On  balance,  both  pillars  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  strategy  paint  a  rather  favourable  picture  for  the
medium-term outlook for price stability. Thus, we are confident that the HICP will drop below the 2 %
threshold during the course of the next year.
In the run-up to European Monetary Union, prices in those European countries with a history of higher
inflation rates had been remarkably stable. All countries met the inflation criterion with ease. Recently,
the sustainability of this monetary convergence process has  been questioned. The spread between
the lowest and the highest inflation rates in the euro area is now  wider than  it  was at the  outset  of
monetary union. In January 1998, this difference reached a low of 0.7 %. By the year 2000, the gap
had widened to 3.5 %. France, at 1.8 %, and Ireland, at 5.3 %, showed the lowest and the highest
outcome, respectively. However, this method of measuring convergence is somewhat simplistic, as it
does not take the economic weight of individual countries into account.
Even  more  importantly,  it  may  well  be  necessary  to  allow  for  significant  gaps  in  individual  inflation
rates in a process in which some euro-area countries are catching up on living standards. As these
countries  typically  enjoy  high  rates  of  productivity  increases  in  the  tradeable  goods  sector  due  to
higher competition, enterprises are able to pay higher wages, which also lifts wage demands in the
non-tradeables sector. Thus, the general price level is rising faster than in more advanced member
states of the euro area. This so-called Balassa-Samuelson-Effect indicates real convergence. Inferring
increasing divergence in the euro area would be to misinterpret the facts.
From the very beginning, the ESCB has successfully built its reputation as a defender of price stability.
Hence,  inflation  expectations  converged  at  the  low  end  of  the  range  during  the  run-up  to  EMU.
Consequently,  the  gap  in  capital  market  interest  rates  shrank  enormously.  In  1995,  the  yield
differential in government bonds was 550 basis points. Now it is 55 basis points. Expectations of low
future inflation make for a low cost of capital. Today the remaining spreads in long-term rates reflect
differences  in  liquidity  of  the  issues  and  in  creditworthiness  of  issuers.  In  such  an  environment
investment activity, that is growth, can thrive.
There is a convergence dividend that comes in various forms. First, think of countries with a history of
high long-term interest rates and high government debt. Falling costs for servicing their public debt is
the  main  benefit  for  those  countries.  Then,  think  of  countries  like  Germany,  that  have  long  been
profiting from a stability culture. For us, the benefit is less obvious. Our convergence dividend comes
in the form of increased macroeconomic stability  in  our neighbouring countries,  which are  our most
important trading partners.
So the euro triggered important and beneficial developments even before it  was a  usable currency.
Now,  in  the  year  three  of  the  euro  era,  the  process  of  getting  used  to  the  new  currency  is  well
advanced at the enterprise level. In terms of value, euro-area enterprises denominate 40 % of their
international  non-cash-transactions  in  euro.  In  Germany,  the  figure  is  even  higher,  at  45  %  of
international  transactions.  As  for  domestic  transactions,  companies’  euro-denominated  payments
account for nearly one-fifth in terms of value. If the payments in terms of value are compared to the
much  lower  figure  in  terms  of  volume,  then  we  see  that  the  euro  still  tends  to  be  a  currency  for
wholesale payments. We expect this to change during the course of this year.
In contrast to enterprises, the consumer tends to be a little bit of a laggard when it comes to using the
euro for payments – which comes as no surprise. The advent of euro coins and notes in 216 days will
bring a tremendous change in consumers’ attitude towards the euro. Consumers will be able to pay for
a  taxi  ride  in  their  domestic  currency  in  many  European  capitals  and  they  will  be  able  to  compare
prices quoted in their home currency all over the euro area. They will hold euros and cents in their own
hands on January 1st.
Let  me  give  you  some  figures  on  the  logistical  challenge  of  the  euro  changeover.  2.6  billion
Deutschmark notes have to be retired. They could be stacked up to a pile about 180 miles high.
Once the changeover has been accomplished, the euro will finally become reality for the man in the
street. People will then experience the stable new currency as equal or even better in domestic use
and undoubtedly as superior in international use. We expect this to boost confidence rapidly.
The international financial community already makes ready use of the euro as a store of value. Today
one-third of all international debt securities are euro-denominated. This constitutes a ten-percentage
point gain over the aggregated share of the predecessor currencies at the start of Stage Three. The
situation is similar with regard to international bank assets, of which 22 % are now denominated in
euro, implying a six-percentage point gain over the situation at the outset of EMU.
2
BIS Review 46/2001
The  increasing  international  use  of  the  euro  owes  much  to  the  integration  of  major  parts  of  the
European financial markets. The  wholesale  market  for  interbank  liquidity  is  now  actually  one  single
European money market. The same holds true for the bond market. Increased size of average issues
and elevated activity of private issuers indicate gains in efficiency in allocating capital all over Europe.
Those parts of the financial markets that are crucial for the transmission of the Eurosystem’s monetary
policy are already working to our satisfaction.
However,  some  segments  of  the  financial  markets  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  until  they  can  be
regarded  as  fully  integrated.  Securitised  money  markets  and  stock  markets  are  among  them.
Differences in legal frameworks as well as in clearing and settlement systems are the usual suspects
and, indeed, these are the major actors in the impediment play.
The  process  of  translating  European  legislation  into  national  law,  making  securities  market  laws
compatible  among  the  members  of  the  European  Union,  is  currently  progressing  in  slow  motion.
Fortunately, progress towards integrated securities markets is in the offing. The “Committee of Wise
Man”  chaired  by  Monsieur  Lamfalussy  has  drafted  an  ambitious  plan  to  speed  up  the  legislative
process  of  the  EU  Commission’s  “Financial  Services  Action  Plan”.  This  plan  aims  to  create  a  fully
integrated financial market in Europe by 2005.  Priorities set  in the Lamfalussy plan will  bring us an
integrated and competitive European securities market as early as 2003.
Private sector action is called for as well. Efficient transnational clearing and settlement systems for
securities are a precondition for fully overcoming the fragmentation of European securities markets.
Currency  segmentation  is  no  longer  an  obstacle,  and  investor  behaviour  is  adapting  to  a  truly
European financial market. In this environment the process of consolidation in clearing and settlement
systems  should  accelerate  in  the  very  near  term.  Recent  cooperation  and  merger  activities  are  an
encouraging step in this direction.
What  has  all  this  got  to  do  with  Germany?  The  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  concomitant
developments  in  financial  markets  opened  several  windows  of  opportunity  for  our  economy.
Admittedly, not everything that has evolved and improved in the financial sphere in Germany during
the last couple of years is directly linked to the introduction of the euro. But try to get a feeling of what
it is like for the financial industry to have a new common currency in Europe.
We have seen an “equity culture” evolving in Germany that nobody would have deemed possible in
1995. One in five Germans today owns shares, in 1995 the ratio was one in ten. Thus, ordinary people
today take an interest in the discussion of business and economic topics. Would this really be the case
if it weren’t for the euro?
We have seen vigorous cross-border merger and acquisitions activity in recent years. M & A within the
euro area is no longer an issue of correctly assessing long-term exchange-rate developments. There
is an expectation that product markets – at least for big-ticket items – will integrate further once the
euro  is  legal  tender.  German  enterprises  are  setting  out  to  compete  in  the  European  market  by
realising economies of both scale and scope together with European partners.
We  have  seen  a  euro-denominated  corporate  bond  market  developing  quickly  since  the  outset  of
EMU. German enterprises actively play this market. From the perspective of a German corporation,
the  number  of  people  who  may  wish  to  buy  a  corporate  bond  in  their  home  currency  has  risen
threefold.
The  volume  of  outstanding  corporate  bonds  of  domestic  issuers  set  out  from  a  rather  low  level.  It
increased by 53 % in 1999 and, with an increase of 116 %, more than doubled in 2000. The huge
issues  of  the  telecom  sector  following  the  UMTS  licence  auctions  lie  behind  part  of  last  year’s
expansion.
Liquidity in this segment of the capital market is clearly on the rise, making it more attractive for both
potential issuers and potential creditors. We are seeing the emergence of a kind of new “credit culture”
besides  the  new  “equity  culture”.  Investors  are  complementing  their  fixed-income  portfolios  of
government bonds and bank obligations by buying corporate bonds.
The flip side of this coin is called “disintermediation”. Germany, as you all know, is well known for its
bank-centred system of corporate finance. With corporations taking advantage  of  the  opportunity  to
raise funds directly in a larger market due to the new single currency, we are now moving towards a
better balanced two-pillar-system.
At the same time, we have seen advances in the consolidation of the German banking sector. This is
both a notable and an important development. While the wholesale market in banking today is a rather
BIS Review 46/2001
3
integrated  European  market,  the  retail  market  is  still  fragmented.  You  all  know  about  the  German
banking  system  with  its  three  pillars  of  commercial  banks,  local  savings  banks  and  regional  credit
co-operatives.  Merger  activity  in  the  latter  two  groups  has  continued  to  be  vigorous,  reducing  the
number of institutions last year by 8%. The number of branches, however, was down only 3 %.
In Germany, we have a ratio of residents to outlets of 1,777, which – I admit – is rather high, at least if
compared to Great Britain, where one branch theoretically serves twice  as many  customers. These
numbers somewhat overstate the efficiency gains to be had from further consolidation. If we look at
bank  employment,  we  see  a  different  picture.  The  ratio  of  employees  per  1,000  residents  is  more
comparable  in  our  two  countries.  In  Germany,  9.2  bank  employees  serve  1,000  residents,  while  in
Great Britain, you have to content yourselves with 8.3 employees. Size and business strategies of the
banks lie behind these differences.
Information and communication technologies are advancing rapidly. Internet banking is on the rise, in
part  replacing  traditional  outlets  in  an  environment  in  which  all  major  banks  are  pursuing  a  multi-
channel sales strategy. Ten million bank accounts in Germany are now held with online banks. That is
an increase of 45 % over the  year  before and makes for a share of 12 %. This trend is continuing
unabated, and at the same time demand is shifting away from bricks-and-mortar outlets. Consolidation
in banks’ branch networks will accelerate further. Technology and the quest for economies of scale
are also behind many of the mergers among smaller financial institutions.
At the European level, merger activity in the banking sector picked up markedly in 1998, the very year
preceding the introduction of the euro. It may well take some time until we reach the point where we
will have one single integrated financial market in Europe. But there can be no doubt that the euro is a
powerful instrument for getting us there – be it sooner or a little later. Large financial institutions are
preparing for this situation by trying to find suitable partners in the euro area.
So you see, the introduction of the euro has entailed important developments in the financial sector in
Germany.  Our  model  of  stakeholder  capitalism  is  being  enhanced  by  elements  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
model  of  financial  markets.  This  is  good  news  for  our  economy,  insofar  as  incentives  are  being
adjusted.
Now,  what  about  the  impact  of  the  euro  on  the  real  economy  in  Germany?  Admittedly,  it  is  not
possible  to  isolate  the  effects  of  the  single  currency  on  one  national  economy  in  Europe  from  the
diverse  and  permanently  changing  influences  to  which  any  economy  is  exposed.  However,  we  are
pretty sure about the direction in which the euro is leading us – and we welcome this trend.
When Germany became a co-founder of European Monetary Union,  it  did so from a very  particular
situation. In contrast to many of today’s euro-area states, we enjoyed a high degree of price stability.
We had, however, a weak spot in not fully meeting the fiscal convergence criteria due to the high costs
of German reunification.
When east and west reunited in 1990, a high priority had been given to bridging gaps in income and
welfare. On the whole, these efforts were successful. If the east German states were still lagging at
the outset of EMU, this was in terms of output and productivity rather than in terms of living standards.
In  1999,  absorption  in  eastern  Germany  was  about  50  %  higher  than  domestic  output.  This  gap
between productive capacity and consumption was made possible by huge transfer payments. Hence
the costs.
Now that the east German states have been integrated, we are redirecting efforts towards structural
reforms  in  order  to  lift  potential  growth.  With  a  single  currency,  there  is  no  dodging  intensified
competition in Europe. Transparency is higher and will take another leap once the euro is legal tender
and all over the euro area prices are quoted in the home currency of more than 300 million people.
The rapid proliferation and application of new information technology will reinforce transparency.
Effects are already visible. The auto industry is best known as an example of huge price differences in
euro-area member states for almost identical products.  German  carmakers  are  currently  discussing
the introduction of a one-price policy for the entire euro-area. Price discrimination is no longer a viable
option for sellers of big-ticket items. Consumers are benefiting directly from this development.
Intensified  competition  is  a  situation  that  not  only  enterprises  are  facing.  The  same  holds  true  for
governments as they seek to position their countries as an attractive business location in an integrated
euro zone. And this brings us back to the issue of structural reform, in which we are pleased that the
euro is playing a role as a catalyst.
4
BIS Review 46/2001
The single currency framework, together with the Stability and Growth Pact, is giving our 6 billion euro
economy  a  degree  of  macroeconomic  stability  which  many  countries  had  never  previously
experienced. For the majority of the euro-area countries, the main benefit lies in the achievement of
price stability. Germany is taking advantage of the push towards fiscal consolidation. It is true that last
year’s general government budget surplus  was made possible by one-off proceeds from the  UMTS
licence auction amounting to 2.5 % of GDP. But the underlying deficit of 1 % of GDP constitutes a
remarkable  improvement  over  the  average  of  the  nineties,  which  were  plagued  by  the  post-
reunification costs.
Today the decision as to where to set up a business in the euro area can be made without having to
devote  massive  attention  to  exchange-rate  considerations.  We  are  now  a  large  economic  area,  we
have  the  single  market  and  we  have  a  common  currency.  Hence  other  criteria  now  play  a  more
prominent role in the choice of business location. Most of them revolve around structural issues. This
is clearly the economic area in which Germany stands to gain most from the introduction of the euro.
And we have already made our first gains. Let me point out three areas, beginning with reforms in the
product markets. The single market was a major project in the preparations for EMU. An important part
of this project was the deregulation of the network industries. The telecom sector, the electricity market
and the gas industry were all freed from regulations which were no longer in keeping with the times.
Government  monopolies  fell,  competition  arose,  prices  fell,  and  consumers  now  happily  enjoy  the
burden  of  choice.  Especially  the  telecom  deregulation  was  a  major  success,  not  least  in  terms  of
employment.
The second specific field relevant to being an attractive business location is tax policy. As you know,
Germany has launched a major reform of income and business taxation, the first stage of which came
into effect at the beginning of this year. With this reform we made a big leap from the high-tax group
right  into  the  middle  field  in  a  ranking  by  tax  rates.  Overall  efficiency  of  the  economy  has  been
remarkably  improved  as  the  combination  of  a  broader  base  along  with  lower  rates  decreases
distortions. By contrast, efforts aimed at minimising the individual tax burden are less rewarding.
The third field is our pay-as-you-go pension system. We are currently in the process of undertaking a
major overhaul of the public pension system. In this field the single currency is less of a driving force
than  it  is  a  lubricant.  Some  fifteen  minutes  ago  I  told  you  about  the  favourable  turn  European  and
especially German financial markets took once the euro was in the offing. The now wider, deeper and
more competitive capital markets provide the perfect environment for the strengthening of the pension
system through a new capital funded pillar that recently became law.
The area in which the euro still has to work its magic as a catalyst is for a more flexible labour market.
This  field  is  lagging  other  reform  projects.  Adjusting  incentives,  reducing  regulation  and  eliminating
rigidities are the instruments of choice for two imminent tasks. First, to lower the employment threshold
of growth, and, second, to lift the growth potential. Thus, labour market reforms will help us to fully
reap the benefits of the integration of our euro area, with its one-sixth share of world GDP.
As  I  have  explained,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  had  many  healthy  effects  on  the  German
economy.  On  the  one  hand,  Germany  is  profiting  to  a  considerable  extent  from  the  integration  of
financial  markets.  Enterprises  now  have  access  to  a  broader  and  deeper  capital  market  in  their
domestic currency. Transaction costs are lower and – of course – hedging costs have to be incurred
much less often.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  considerably  heightened  what  we  call
“Reformbereitschaft”, that is not exactly reforming zeal, but at least the readiness to carry out reforms.
Thus, under the euro framework Germany has become more attractive as a business location. The
same holds true for our fellow euro countries that adopted the euro.
Now,  what  about the United  Kingdom? Are there  gains to  be  had from joining  the  euro  area?  Yes,
there certainly are. The United Kingdom’s economy is closely linked to the continental economies in
Europe in terms of trade, in terms of foreign direct investment and in terms of portfolio investment.
The UK and the euro area are the most important trading partners for each other. More than half of UK
trade  in  goods  and  services  is  done  with  the  euro  area.  Thus,  integrating  financial  markets  and
product markets further by having a common currency makes sense to me. It makes sense for both
sides, so the UK’s joining the euro looks like a mutually beneficial deal. In terms of geography, Great
Britain may well be an island. In terms of economics, it is not.
BIS Review 46/2001
5
I am in no position to provide the UK with advice in the area of adopting whichever currency scheme.
However, in my opinion, due consideration should be given first and foremost to the advantages to be
had from joining the European Monetary Union. In Germany we already enjoy those advantages.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention..
6
BIS Review 46/2001
