Willem F Duisenberg: The euro and the greater Europe
Speech  by  Dr Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Parliamentary
Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe,  during  the  debate  on  the  theme  "The  euro  and  the  greater
Europe", held in Strasbourg on 24 January 2001.
 Dear President, Members of the Parliamentary Assembly, ladies and gentlemen,
I should first like to thank you, Mr. President, for your warm words of welcome. It is indeed a privilege
to address an audience as distinguished and truly pan-European as the Parliamentary  Assembly  of
the Council of Europe. I am happy to continue the exchange of views that commenced with the visit of
the  Committee  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Development  to  the  European  Central  Bank  in  April  1999,
which you mentioned. My presence here today - as with our meeting then - is intended to confirm the
great importance which the ECB attaches to the implications of the euro for the greater Europe. In my
brief remarks, allow me to elaborate on some of the issues that are raised in the draft resolution of this
Assembly, in the hope that I may enrich your discussion by providing an "insider's view".
The effects of the euro on the greater Europe will depend to a large extent on our ability to make the
euro  a  lasting  success.  I  say  "our"  ability,  because  I  am  referring  to  the  joint  efforts  of  all  relevant
actors within the European Union: not only the ECB and the national central banks, but also policy-
makers  in  EU  institutions  and  in  the  Member  States,  business  and  trade  unions,  financial  market
participants and the citizens at large. I am aware that the EU has been criticised for its obsession with
its own internal dynamics, and for having little regard for the greater Europe or for the rest of the world.
Nevertheless, allow me to start with a brief overview of what we have achieved with respect to our new
currency. Thereafter, I shall outline the challenges ahead, many of which are inextricably linked to the
prospect of EU enlargement.
By  a  number  of  measures,  the  euro  is  already  a  success  today.  First  and  foremost,  the  ECB  has
fulfilled  its  mandate  to  preserve  price  stability.  We  consider  this  a  substantial  accomplishment,  not
least in view of the sometimes adverse circumstances, such as the protracted depreciation of the euro
or  the  sharp  increase  in  oil  prices.  Both  led  to  sizeable,  although  only  temporary,  inflationary
pressures. We  are  also  witnessing  a  deepening  integration  of  the  financial  markets  within  the  euro
area and  increased efforts to adjust the  related  regulatory  structures  to  the  reality  of  the  euro.  The
ECB,  as  an  institution,  has  grown  in  stature;  it  has  defined  its  specific  place  within  the  institutional
architecture of the EU and is actively developing its international relations.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, while we undoubtedly regard the aforementioned achievements
with  a  certain  satisfaction,  we  are  far  from  becoming  complacent.  Already  during  our  exchanges  in
April 1999 in Frankfurt, I emphasised that the ECB does not anticipate settling down into "business as
usual"  anytime  soon.  In  fact,  a  great  number  of  challenges  remain,  not  only  for  the  ECB  as  an
institution, but also for the EU in its integration process and for the greater Europe.
Allow me to elaborate: our main  challenge,  as  "guardians  of  the  euro",  is  to  continue  to  maintain
price stability, and thus to provide the citizens of the euro area with a stable and trusted currency. In
the  coming  months,  our  focus  will  be  on  avoiding  possible  second-round  effects  of  the  temporary
increase  in  inflation,  which  was  due  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  and  the  oil  price  surge.  Even
though  we have recently seen  an  appreciation of the euro and  a  decline  in  the  price  of  oil,  we  will
nevertheless keep calling on the social partners to conclude moderate wage agreements. We will also
continue to closely observe developments outside the euro area, in particular in the United States and
in the world economy in general. Furthermore, the ECB  will continue  to urge governments to press
ahead with much needed structural reforms, in order to increase the growth potential of the euro area
economy.
The  ECB  also  faces  a  "communication  challenge".  As  I  have  pointed  out  on  various  occasions,
there is certainly room for improvement in communicating the ECB's policy decisions and measures.
The ECB is - I believe - already one of the most open and transparent central banks in the world. Our
recent decision to publish projections of economic developments, jointly produced by the staff of the
ECB  and  the  12  euro  area  national  central  banks,  certainly  underscores  our  efforts  in  this  respect.
Therefore, I would not see the availability of information about the ECB's thinking and policy outlook as
the principal difficulty. Rather, it is the multinational and multilingual environment of the euro area, with
BIS Review 4/2001
1
its widely differing communication practices and traditions - both at the sending and at the receiving
end  -  which  presents  a  particular  challenge.  A  single  monetary  policy  for  a  currency  zone  that
comprises 12 countries requires adaptation on all sides, though I am confident that we are moving up
a rather steep learning curve.
The  months  ahead  will  also  see  the  final  phase  of  our  preparations  for  the  introduction  of  euro
banknotes and coins. Guaranteeing an adequate supply of euro banknotes and coins for some 300
million citizens of the euro area, adapting cash dispensers (ATMs) and vending machines, switching
the  displays  of  retail  prices,  and  the  many  other  necessary  changes  -  all  this  adds  up  to  an
organisational  and  logistical  task  on  an  almost  unprecedented  scale,  not  only  for  the  ECB  and  the
national  central  banks,  but  also  for  the  Member  States'  governments,  the  banking  community  and
retailers. The preparations for these manifold challenges have now become a clear political priority.
The  true  "test"  of  the  euro,  however,  will  be  its  acceptance  by  the  European  citizens  as  "their"
currency. In order to familiarise the public with the new currency, its appearance and security features,
the ECB, the national central banks, the governments of the euro area Member States, the European
Commission as well as the banking community have embarked on a major information campaign.
The ECB and the 12 national central banks of the euro area alone have earmarked EUR 80 million for
their public relations efforts. In addition, we are preparing to open an ECB Information Centre at the
Eurotower in Frankfurt. In the weeks to come, we will also be launching a special "euro website".
Finally, in order to gain the citizens' trust in the euro,  we  will  have to "safeguard the currency"  in  a
broader sense, and that includes setting up a comprehensive system to protect our new currency
from counterfeiting. To this end, the ECB and the national central banks have joined forces with the
governments  of  EU  Member  States,  Europol  and  the  European  Commission,  and  the  necessary
provisions are being finalised.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, in addition to the ECB's immediate challenges, the longer-term
success of the euro is also linked to the wider constitutional evolution of the European Union. The draft
resolution of the Assembly, for instance, calls for the establishment of a true economic union as a
complement to monetary union. Unfortunately, the concept of "economic union" does not appear to be
very  well  defined.  In  fact,  I  would  argue  that  the  EU,  with  its  Single  Market  and  a  vast  number  of
common  rules  governing  economic  life,  has  already  reached  an  advanced  stage  of  economic
integration. With the introduction of the euro and the conduct of a single monetary policy by the ECB,
with the emergence of an increasingly integrated financial market and a single euro exchange rate, the
notion of an "EU economy" has gained real substance. As a consequence, the EU has come to be
recognised  in  the  world  as  an  entity  in  its  own  right.  Further  efforts  to  develop  a  "single  voice"  for
Europe in international economic and financial affairs are set to reinforce this perception.
With regard to deeper political integration, I believe that the EU demonstrated in Nice that it is ready
to  gradually  move  towards  strengthening  the  truly  European  element  of  decision-making  by
introducing  more  qualified  majority  voting  -  even  though  many  people  expected,  and  hoped  for,
greater progress on this issue. Seen from the perspective of independent central bankers - with their
necessary distance from politics - it appears that the main accomplishment of the Nice Summit was
not necessarily the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference on institutional reform. Rather, the
Summit's  main  success  lies  in  what  it  set  in  motion:  the  launch  of  a  thorough  and  comprehensive
discussion about "who does what" at the European, national and regional levels of government.
The  results  of  Nice  will  prepare  the  European  Union  for  the  arrival  of  new  members.
Notwithstanding certain flaws and shortcomings in the legal details, the greater Europe will have its
institutional  framework.  The  focus  of  attention  will  now  shift  again  to  the  candidate  countries'
preparations for EU membership.
While a certain impatience on the part of the candidate countries with regard to EU accession, and
even a speedy entry into the euro area, is understandable, the full impact of EU membership should
be realistically  assessed, in particular the consequences of  the  often  intense  competition  within  the
Single Market.
All candidate countries currently negotiating EU accession are committed to eventually adopting the
euro; there will be no "opt-outs". Provided that the future new Member States demonstrate their ability
to fulfil the Maastricht Criteria in a sustainable manner, they will, in time, replace their currencies with
the euro.  As I explained  in  our  previous  exchange  of  views,  the  euro  will  thus  indeed  contribute  to
healing the economic divisions in Europe. At the same time, it is clear to me - and I imagine you would
agree - that this will be a gradual process and a long-term rather than a short-term prospect.
2
BIS Review 4/2001
Nevertheless, in order to ensure that the prospective expansions of the euro area run smoothly, the
ECB,  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  take  a  keen  interest  in  developments  in
candidate  countries. Only  last month,  we continued the  high-level  policy  dialogue  with  our  central
bank colleagues from the accession countries at a seminar in Vienna. Through such contacts we seek
to  build  up  close  and  intense  professional  working  relations,  which  also  includes  offering  technical
assistance. In this way, we aim to contribute to developing a vision of the "greater Europe" specifically
within the field of central banking.
Such an understanding of the significance of the euro for Europe as a  whole  is essential, not least
since  many  countries  in  central,  eastern  and  southern  Europe  have  decided  to  use  the  euro  as  a
reference currency for their own monetary and exchange rate policies, as an anchor of stability and
credibility. This applies not only to the group of accession countries, but may increasingly also be the
case  for  countries  further  afield.  I  expect  this  international  role  of  the  euro  to  grow  in  the  years  to
come, not least since euro banknotes and coins - once they have come into circulation in 2002 - will
effectively replace the Deutsche Mark, which is widely used in the countries concerned as a means of
payment and a store of value.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, the unification of Europe has been, and continues to be, a "work
in progress". The introduction of the euro and the establishment of the European Central Bank form an
intrinsic part of this constant evolution. In fact, the dynamics inherent in Economic and Monetary Union
suggest that the euro might become a powerful catalyst for further integration. Our job at the ECB is to
contribute to making the euro a lasting success. In this way the euro will bring benefits to an enlarged
EU and beyond.
Thank you very much.
BIS Review 4/2001
3
