Ian Plenderleith: Monetary stability as a foundation for sustained growth
Speech by Ian Plenderleith, Executive Director of the Bank of England, to the National Association of
Pension Funds Investment Conference held in Eastbourne on 14 March 2001.
 The UK economy has embarked on the new millennium with much the same healthy stride as marked
its progress through the final years of the old.
Over the past year, we have seen the economy continue to achieve steady and sustainable growth.
We are, indeed, now in the ninth year of continuous positive growth in output. This remarkable track
record has brought with it a steady rise in employment, with the benefits being felt in high levels of job
creation throughout the regions of the country; and unemployment has fallen to the lowest levels we
have seen in decades. All of this has been achieved with inflation remaining low: the RPIX is currently
running a little below our target of 2 1/2% and has averaged 2.4% pa over the nearly-four years since
the  MPC  was  given  responsibility  for  managing  interest  rates.  In  the  process,  with  inflationary
expectations now anchored at low levels, 10-year bond yields have fallen to around 4 3/4%, as low as
can be found in any industrialised country except Japan.
What is particularly encouraging about the past year is not just that we have been able to continue on
the track of steady growth. More than that, developments during the year have helped in several ways
to  strengthen  the  prospect  of  our  being  able  to  sustain  this  improved  economic  performance  going
forward. A year ago, output was growing at over 3%, which is arguably faster than we can hope to
sustain for any length of time without running risks of generating inflationary pressures. We needed
therefore  to  see  some  degree  of  moderation  in  the  pace  of  overall  demand,  to  ensure  that  the
economy could continue to grow without generating strains. For preference, the moderation needed to
come principally in the area of consumption spending, which had been the major factor driving growth
through  last  year,  as  households  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  high  employment  and  rising  incomes.
Sustainable growth in household spending is, of course, highly desirable and very much the mark of a
healthy  and  growing  economy;  but  it  needed  to  be  balanced  against  the  equally  desirable  planned
increases  in  government  spending  on  public  services,  and  the  higher  levels  planned  for  public
investment on improved infrastructure, both made possible by the government's strong fiscal position.
The need was to ensure that all these sources of demand did not over-stretch the economy's overall
productive capacity. The evidence that consumption spending may indeed have moderated somewhat
towards the end of the year, and in parallel that there has been a resumption of growth in business
investment,  represents  an  improvement  in  the  balance  of  demand  in  the  economy  which  in  turn
improves the prospect of our being able to sustain growth going forward.
An improvement in the balance of the economy was also achieved last year from another source - a
welcome easing in the strength of sterling which itself had been a reflection of the persistent weakness
of the euro. As the euro has recovered somewhat over the past year, and sterling has moved back
from its peak levels, this has, at least in degree, eased some of the pressures faced by exporters and
by  businesses  most  exposed  to  import  competition.  The  result  is  a  better  balance  between  the
externally-exposed  sectors  of  the  economy  and  domestically-orientated  businesses,  between
manufacturing and services, and between different regions of the country.
Two  other  clouds  that  had  threatened  the  sustainability  of  our  growth  performance  also  receded
somewhat last year. One was the impact throughout the economy emanating from the steep rise in oil
prices, which abated as oil prices fell back from their peak levels. The other concern was that share
prices had risen to levels which many felt were not sustainable in terms of reasonable expectations of
future corporate profits. The fall in share prices during last year was not a comfortable experience -
falling asset prices rarely are - but it removed some of the sense of unreality. Of course, it is never
easy to judge  what  levels of financial asset  prices  are  realistic,  and  the  risk  of  volatile  adjustments
remains, as we have seen in recent days, but the important point is that the downwards adjustment
experienced  last  year,  which  could  have  been  abrupt  and  might  have  generated  wider  economic
effects, was in fact achieved without significant repercussions on the real economy. In both cases, the
result is a better foundation for the prospects for sustaining growth in the economy.
Let me now turn from the year past to the year ahead. I have stressed the encouraging performance of
the  economy  over  the  past  year,  and  the  confidence  we  can  hopefully  take  in  its  underlying
soundness, because we undoubtedly face serious challenges and a material increase in uncertainty in
BIS Review 22/2001
1
the  year  ahead.  Most  notably,  we  have  to  manage  the  UK  economy  against  the  background  of  an
international environment in which the US economy has begun to experience a sharp slowdown.
Each quarter the Bank of England publishes an Inflation Report which sets out the MPC's considered
view of the prospects for growth and inflation looking two  years ahead. Let me start from our latest
Inflation Report, published last month. That recognises that the weaker outlook in the US will depress
global demand and dampen growth prospects in other countries. The UK cannot, of course, expect to
be immune to this weakening process. Our central projection, on the basis that there are reasonable
grounds to expect the US to return to moderate growth in the latter part of this year, is that the impact
on the UK from the weakening of global activity should be moderate. But we judge that the risks are
weighted on the downside, principally on the basis that the pause in US growth could be deeper or
more prolonged than expected. Domestically, on our central projection we see reasons for domestic
demand to remain fairly well sustained. Overall, therefore, our central projection is for some slowdown
in  UK  growth,  to  around  2%  in  the  latter  half  of  this  year,  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  global
prospects, but thereafter a recovery in growth to around  its trend rate as  world  activity recovers. In
parallel, we project RPIX inflation running around 2% through this  year, but picking up to reach our
target of 2 1/2% at around our two-year forecast horizon. On this basis, recognising that the risks are
clearly on the downside of the central projection, we implemented a modest reduction in rates, from
6% to 5 3/4%, in February.
Decision-making under conditions of uncertainty lies at the core of any business activity, so I was once
taught, and that is just as much true of our job on the MPC as for yours. We all of us get used in our
professional lives to looking through a glass darkly. But in relation to prospects for the economy, that is
even more than usually the case now, given the uncertainties we face. Looking ahead, we can in a
sense see two rather different pictures, one superimposed on the other. One is the domestic economy,
where demand remains reasonably well sustained and now, as I have indicated, better balanced than
it was; employment remains high; and consumer and business confidence both seem reasonably up-
beat. The other picture is the international environment, where the US slowdown is likely to have a
dampening effect, but how quickly, and on what scale, and for how long, remains uncertain. Since the
UK is not, except literally, an island, these two pictures do not mesh. But it is not easy to see how they
will coalesce into a single image. The operation of monetary policy is often said to be more of an art
than  a precise science. But none  of us can claim  to  be  a  Michelangelo.  So  let  me  take  you  briefly
through three particular areas of uncertainty we face, in the hope that, when we get to the discussion
session, you will be able to add definition and colour to my half-formed sketches.
First, the slowdown in the US is an important area of uncertainty because, if the downside risk of a
deeper or more prolonged slowdown materialises, we would face slower growth and lower inflation in
the UK than we are projecting on our central projection. That would, of course, be grounds for us to
contemplate  further  easing  in  our  monetary  stance.  That  follows  because  our  inflation  target  is,
importantly, a symmetrical one: we need to be just as ready to contemplate easing if we see evidence
on the downside of the economy underperforming, and hence the likelihood of inflation running over
time materially below our 2 1/2% target, as we would be to exercise restraint on the upside. We take
this symmetrical nature of our responsibility very seriously and there is undoubtedly a significant risk
that the US slowdown could have a material dampening effect on UK activity.
Analysts  have  used  a  large  part  of  the  alphabet  to  try  to  describe  various  views  of  how  the  US
economy may develop. I am not sure that I find any of these pictograms particularly helpful, not least
because people are sometimes pretty vague about vital details like the dimensions of the letter they
favour or the angle of its  arms: a big V, after all, can feel  awfully  like  a  U  when  you  are  down  the
bottom and trying to find your way up again.
The short answer is that none of us can pretend to know precisely how the story will develop. It will be
important to keep an open mind and be prepared to adapt our assessment in the light of actual events.
But in doing so, there are four considerations that I would suggest are particularly germane to this first
area of uncertainty.
First, we need to recognise that we are talking of slowdown in the US from what have been extremely
buoyant  rates  of  growth,  maintained  for  several  years  past,  as  the  US  economy  has  reaped  the
benefits  of  the  application  of  information  technology  and  the  rise  in  productivity  growth  that  had
engendered - the new economy. There is plenty  of evidence that growth  in the US needed to slow
somewhat, to alleviate imbalances in the economy. So part of what is happening should be helpful in
providing a sounder base for sustainable recovery.
2
BIS Review 22/2001
Secondly, the new  economy  is,  in the US, a reality: there  plainly has  been a continuing  process of
improvements in efficiency, achieved by harnessing the benefits of IT, which have raised the growth
capacity  of  the  economy.  It  seems  unlikely  that  those  gains  will  vanish  into  the  night  and,  if  they
remain in place, they should provide a basis for a recovery in US growth when the present adjustment
has run its course.
That, of course, says nothing about how long the adjustment may take. But a third important feature is
that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  demonstrated  a  willingness  to  act  rapidly  and  vigorously  in  easing
monetary conditions in response to the downturn. Monetary policy cannot remove economic cycles.
But active and intelligent management of interest rates can help substantially to alleviate the severity
of the adjustment. And a fourth factor suggests that the markets share this view. In the situation where
some forecasts have been extremely pessimistic, one might expect markets to adjust correspondingly
in an abrupt fashion. In the event,  in the foreign  exchange markets the dollar  overall has remained
rather steady; and the short-term interest rate futures curve implies that rates are expected to bottom
out later this year and then begin to rise. Moreover, while the stock market has fallen back over the
past year from what many felt were unrealistic levels, and has been volatile again in recent days, the
downturn  in  the  mainstream  market  has  so  far  been  relatively  limited,  with  the  greatest  fall
concentrated  in  more  speculative  stocks.  Equity  valuations  are  always  uncertain  at  times  of
adjustment, and we could see some continued volatility in that area, but the overall picture is that the
markets  as  a  whole  are  "looking  through"  the  present  slowdown,  on  the  basis  that  they  see  a
reasonable prospect for a recovery in US growth after the present adjustment.
A second area of uncertainty lies much closer to home, and happily its ramifications are almost wholly
beneficent. This is the question of whether changes in the supply-side of the UK economy mean that
we can hope to achieve higher rates of sustainable growth, consistently with our inflation target, than
has been possible in the past.
One  essentially  empirical  argument  that  is  sometimes  made  to  suggest  that  we  can  achieve  faster
sustainable  growth  is  that  inflation  has  in  fact  run  a  little  below  our  target  for  most  of  the  past  two
years. This is not in itself a particularly powerful argument, because the undershoot has been marginal
and probably owes a great deal to the unexpected strength of sterling. Indeed, before we began to
track a little below the target, we had for around two years been tracking above it.
Nonetheless,  the  strength  of  demand  in  the  economy  does  seem  to  have  exercised  less  upwards
pressure  on  prices  over  the  past  two  years  or  so  than  we  would  have  expected  from  earlier
experience;  and  this  applies  both  to  prices  of  goods  sold  in  the  product  market  and  to  pay  and
earnings  in  the  labour  market.  Why  is  this?  In  the  product  market,  one  factor  may  be  greater
competition, which has caused producers and retailers to accept lower margins. Another factor may be
new forms of marketing and retailing, for example the spread of e-commerce. This may have cut the
cost  of  distribution,  and  it  may  also  have  intensified  consumers'  awareness  of  prices  and  their
resistance to price increases, by enabling them to compare prices more easily. Another possibility is
that we may be seeing an increase in productivity growth, perhaps stimulated by the pressures many
businesses faced from the strength of sterling, and perhaps also arising from the application of IT -
possibly  the  beginnings  of  the  arrival  of  the  new  economy  from  across  the  Atlantic.  In  the  labour
markets, reforms which have made possible greater labour flexibility, and competitive pressures which
have stimulated firms to adapt more quickly to changes in their business environment, may underlie
the more benign performance of real earnings growth. More widely, the greater stability the economy
has enjoyed in recent years from the medium-term framework that governs both fiscal and monetary
decisions may, by stabilising inflationary expectations at a low level, have made it less attractive, and
more risky, to try to raise prices even when demand is strong, and may also have enabled industry
and commerce to plan their business activities on a sounder and more forward-looking basis.
There is plenty of evidence that all these factors are, in varying degrees, at work in the UK; and they
offer the prospect of genuine improvements in the functioning of the economy. But the question is - on
what scale, and are the improvements temporary or here to stay? We take considerable care to try to
factor these developments into our decisions on interest rates, but the difficult judgment is to assess
how much faster the economy can grow as a result without jeopardising our inflation target. My own
view  is  that  supply-side  improvements  are  delivering  benefits,  but  the  process  is  a  gradual  and
progressive one, rather than any sudden leap forward. Miracles in the real world are pedestrian affairs,
arriving step by step. The appropriate response for us in setting interest rates, therefore, is to try to
stay in step and keep pace - not running ahead, but equally not lagging behind.
BIS Review 22/2001
3
The third and final area of uncertainty I want to focus on is the underlying strength of demand in the
UK economy. The US slowdown may, as I have said, have some dampening effect on other countries,
including the UK. The supply-side improvements I have described may enhance our growth capacity.
Both  these  factors  could  provide  grounds  for  the  monetary  stance  to  provide  more  stimulus  to  the
economy, depending on how events develop. But a third area of uncertainty - the underlying strength
of  demand  in  the  UK  -  could  point  to  less  need  for  stimulus.  Consumer  spending  may  be  slowing
somewhat, but it remains relatively buoyant. Retail sales continue to grow and housing market activity
may be picking up. Consumer and business confidence remains steady, with new orders holding up
well.  The  easing  in  sterling  has  improved  our  competitiveness  in  key  export  markets.  Business
investment  is  picking  up.  The  planned  increases  in  government  spending  are  beginning  to  come
through.  Employment  remains  high  and  earnings  are  showing  signs  of  some  upwards  creep  as
businesses  experience  skill  shortages.  All  of  this  is  welcome  evidence  of  a  healthy  and  thriving
economy,  and,  with  inflation  remaining  low,  it  is  a  performance  that  can  be  sustained  without
immediate risk of overheating. But it is also a situation in which cost and price pressures can begin to
build up. The task of the MPC is to ensure that this does not happen, by keeping inflation in line with
our target so that the economy can continue to grow at a sustainable rate.
The uncertainties I have described thus lie in both directions: the economy could grow more strongly
or  less  strongly  than  we  currently  project,  though  the  risks  lie  predominantly  on  the  downside.  The
uncertainties are probably rather greater than normal just at present, but we can take some confidence
from the underlying soundness of the economy. So we address the uncertainties from a position  of
strength. That does not mean that the ride may not be bumpy at times, but it does mean that we have
grounds for reasonable optimism that we will come through the present uncertainties in good shape.
4
BIS Review 22/2001
