Maurice O'Connell: The euro changeover in the Irish context
Statement  by  Mr  Maurice  O'Connell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Irish
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Finance and the Public Service, in Dublin on 18 July 2001.
  Chairman
We are now less than six months away from the launch of euro banknotes and coin, three years after
the introduction of the euro as a currency. The period of transition has  been  very  long but this has
been unavoidable because of the complex production and distribution  process that is required. The
euro will at last become a fully fledged currency on 1st January. For the first time the public in general
will be able to relate to it as their own currency. This should have a very positive impact in terms of
gaining acceptance of the new currency.
The changeover is a big undertaking for all countries of the euro area. The individual national central
banks have worked closely together through the European System of Central Banks. There has been
regular  monitoring  of  production  to  ensure  uniform  quality  of  banknotes  across  the  euro  area.  The
overall  production  requirement  for  launch  of  the  new  currency  is  15 billion  banknotes  and  50 billion
coins.  These  figures  are  so  large  as  to  be  almost  incomprehensible.  Each  national  central  bank  is
charged with the responsibility of meeting requirements in its own country. In our case this means that
we will provide more than 200 million banknotes and more than 1,000 million coins.
Members of this Committee will be familiar already with the banknote and coin denominations and the
conversion rate against the Irish pound. May I remind you that the smallest coin (one cent) will have a
value  of  less  than  a  penny  and  the  largest  banknote  (500 euro)  will  have  a  value  close  to  £400.
Traditionally the demand for high value banknotes in this country has been quite small.
The Central Bank of Ireland has three main functions in relation to the changeover:
 
it must provide sufficient quantities of the new currency to meet the launch requirement and
ongoing demand
it must provide sufficient quantities of Irish currency right up to the end of this year and meet
the peak Christmas demand
it must withdraw the old currency after 1st January in an orderly manner.
 
The Central Bank is on course in the production of new banknotes and coin. Frontloading of coin to
bank branches and major retailers will begin in September and frontloading of banknotes will begin in
November. Contracts for distribution are being negotiated. For security reasons I would not wish to go
into further detail on distribution arrangements at this time. In order to give the public the opportunity to
familiarise  themselves  with  the  new  coinage,  starter  packs  of  euro  coins  may  be  purchased  from
17th December from banks and post offices. These packs will cost £5 and they will contain a selection
of coins equal to 6.35 euro in value. It is understood that all member States in the euro area are taking
a  similar  initiative.  There  will  be  no  frontloading  of  banknotes  to  the  public  as  this  might  effectively
amount to bringing forward the launch date and it could generate undue confusion for both consumers
and retailers at the busiest shopping time of the year. While the banks will be closed on 1st January,
supplies of euro banknotes will be available from most ATM facilities.
The second leg of our responsibility is to maintain an adequate supply of Irish currency up to the end
of this year. From the point of view of the Central Bank the timing of the changeover is by no means
ideal  as it comes immediately  after  the  Christmas  peak  and  in  the  middle  of  the  Winter  sales.  The
traditional pattern here is that demand for currency rises by 15-20 per cent between mid-November
and  Christmas.  In  recent  times  the  Bank  has  tapered  off  production  of  Irish  banknotes  and  coin
because of the changeover. The Bank has, however, stocks of Irish banknotes and, particularly, Irish
coin to ensure that the supply of cash to the system is adequate. The Bank has appealed to the public
to release hoarded coin. In addition, a number of charities, with the full support of the Bank, will mount
appeals  for  Irish  coin  in  the  autumn.  It  is  hoped  that  these  initiatives  will  secure  a  very  positive
response. The Bank is satisfied that there will be adequate supplies of currency in circulation to meet
the requirements of the public over the Christmas period.
BIS Review 66/2001
1
The  euro  will  become  legal  tender  on  1st January.  The  Irish  currency  will  remain  legal  tender  until
9th February. So there will be a period of 5-6 weeks during which the two currencies may circulate as
legal tender. After that date the banks will accept Irish banknotes and coin for a period and, of course,
the Central Bank will honour Irish banknotes and coin  indefinitely. The intention  is to  withdraw Irish
currency as quickly as possible after 1st January and retailers  will be  encouraged  not  to  issue  Irish
currency in change. In this manner it is hoped that dual currency circulation will quickly be very limited
and this should help to minimise any confusion that may arise. Obviously, the Central Bank cannot put
precise figures on the quantities of Irish currency that must be withdrawn. I can tell you that there are
roughly  180 million  banknotes  and  2½ billion  coins  on  issue.  The  expectation  is  that  the  greater
proportion of banknotes outstanding will be returned. As regards coin, we would not expect more than
80 per cent in overall value and considerably less in lower denominations.
The Minister for Finance has already indicated that the banks will not impose a handling charge on
euro  cash  provided  to  retailers  prior  to  1st January.  Also,  there  will  be  no  charge  on  retailers  for
lodgement  of  Irish  banknotes  and  coin  during  the  dual  circulation  period  and  for  a  short  time
afterwards (up to 15th February). During this period the Central Bank will pay a lodgement fee to the
banks  in  part  compensation  for  the  fee  income  that  they  will  forgo.  The  cost  is  estimated  at
£5-£6 million.  The  total  cost  to  the  Central  Bank  of  the  changeover  is  likely  to  be  in  the  region  of
£70 million; production materials will account for two thirds of the total outlay.
I  have  outlined  the  changeover  programme  of  the  Central  Bank.  We  are  also  involved  through  a
publicity campaign run by the European System of Central Banks in promoting familiarity with the new
currency. We work in close co-ordination with other agencies such as the Euro Changeover Board of
Ireland and Forfás and the Office of the Director of Consumer Affairs and I would like to acknowledge
the contribution that these are making to preparations.
There  is  understandable  concern  that  the  changeover  may  boost  inflation  as  traders  may  take
advantage  of  the  situation  and  round  up  prices  or  seek  compensation  through  price  increases  for
changeover  costs  that  they  may  incur.  In  Ireland  it  is  part  of  the  folklore  that  decimalisation  in  the
1970s  had  inflationary  consequences  at  the  time.  May  I  say,  in  relation  to  decimalisation,  that  an
examination of the facts will demonstrate that it did not have any significant inflationary outcome. As
regards the euro changeover the expectation is that any inflationary fallout should be small. This is the
view of the European Central Bank which is monitoring developments on a euro area wide basis. It is
considered that market competition and price transparency can soon reverse any inflationary effects of
the changeover. At the same time there is need for vigilance as the opportunity for price increases is
heightened in the months ahead. Fees and charges administered by Governments across the  euro
area will be price neutral or revised in favour of the consumer. Here at home there is a national code
of practice whereby subscribers commit themselves to carrying out the changeover fairly and to seek
no advantage from the conversion.
The  European  Central  Bank  has  agreed  that  banknotes  may  be  frontloaded  outside  the  euro  area
from 1st December. It is likely that there will be significant demand for the currency outside the euro
area.  There  is  already  considerable  anecdotal  evidence  of  high  value  banknotes  being  returned  to
central banks.
Another factor  that  must  obviously  demand  attention  at  European  level  is  the  risk  of  counterfeiting.
The European  Central  Bank is acutely conscious of this threat  and it  has in place  arrangements to
respond effectively and in a co-ordinated manner to any such danger, should counterfeiters seek to
take  advantage  of  the  unique  situation.  As  a  precaution,  the  information  campaign  on  the  security
features of the euro banknotes has been delayed as long as possible. The security features will be
unveiled on 30th August.
There seems to be a perception that cross border retail money transfers of the new currency within the
euro area may be much cheaper and simpler than before. Regrettably, this is not the case in the short
term  at  least.  The  reality  is  that  the  national  payment  systems,  including  cheque  clearing  systems,
have  not  so  far  been  harmonised  and  there  are  no  short  term  plans  to  develop  a  standard  cross
border system. In any event there would seem to be particular difficulty associated with developing a
cross  border  paper  based  system.  Customers  may  of  course  use  their  credit  card  and  ATM  cards
cross  border  as  before.  The  use  of  cheques  in  the  euro  area  varies  hugely.  In  Ireland  and  France
cheques are still the most widely used payment instrument, accounting for almost one half of all non-
cash transactions. In Germany and Austria, on the other hand, they account for less than 5 per cent of
such transactions. I am aware that the European Commission is taking an interest in the cost of cross
2
BIS Review 66/2001
border  transfers  within  the  euro  area  with  the  aim  of  achieving  equalisation  of  banking  charges  as
soon as possible.
From  September  onwards  publicity  campaigns  for  the  euro  introduction  will  be  intensified  both  at
European and national levels. In such a large logistical operation, it is probably inevitable that there
will be some local difficulties. There is a strong confidence, however, that in general the changeover
will go well and it will help to establish the euro as a powerful symbol of European identity.
I  have  outlined  the  various  operational  issues  that  arise  in  relation  to  the  launch  of  the  euro.  It  is
appropriate to reflect at this point on why a single currency is being introduced. It is seen as essential
to full exploitation of the single marketplace and to the economic integration of Europe. It is necessary
for the evolution of a single monetary policy. With a multiplicity of currencies there are always extra
costs and additional barriers to cross border trading. There is also a lack of transparency in pricing. In
the new order it will be possible to compare prices directly from one country to another and this should
be of considerable  benefit to the consumer. A single currency  will also lead to  broader and deeper
financial  markets  in  Europe,  thus  increasing  the  choice  of  financial  products  for  businesses  and
consumers. Europe also needs a single currency if it is to be a leader on the international stage. The
US dollar will continue to be the dominant international currency for the foreseeable future but, in time,
the  euro  may  be  able  to  challenge  this  dominance.  Certainly,  there  was  never  any  prospect  that  a
fragmented Europe might be a serious challenger.
The euro has been weak against the dollar and other major currencies for an extended period since its
introduction.  The  essential  reason  for  this  has  been  the  net  flows  of  European  capital  into  the  US
economy in particular, as European investors have been attracted to higher returns in the US market.
These flows would have occurred in any event if no currency change were taking place. It may be also
that novelty and the absence of a track record have worked against the euro; it takes time to establish
credibility. A currency without cash tends to be artificial, perhaps, even in the financial markets. All of
this  is  about  the  change.  The  arrival,  at  last,  of  banknotes  and  coin  will  bring  a  new  sense  of
permanence to the new currency.
BIS Review 66/2001
3
