Alan Greenspan: Condition of the US banking system
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the  US Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 20 June 2001.
 Mr Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to  be  here this morning to discuss the
condition of the US banking system. In my presentation today, I would like to raise just a few issues. I
have attached an appendix in which the Federal Reserve Board staff provides far more detail relevant
to the purpose of these hearings.
There are, I believe, two salient points to be made about the current state of the banking system. First,
many  of  the  traditional  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  suggest  that  bank  asset  quality  is
deteriorating and that supervisors therefore need to be more sensitive to problems at individual banks,
both  currently  and  in  the  months  ahead.  Some  of  the  credits  that  were  made  in  earlier  periods  of
optimism  –  especially  syndicated  loans  –  are  now  under  pressure  and  scrutiny.  The  softening
economy and/or special circumstances have especially affected borrowers in the retail, manufacturing,
health care, and telecommunications industries. California utilities, as you know, have also been under
particular  pressure.  All  of  these,  and  no  doubt  other  problem  areas  that  are  not  now  foreseeable,
require that both bank management and supervisors remain particularly alert to developments.
Second, we are fortunate that our banking system entered this period of weak economic performance
in a strong position. After rebuilding capital and liquidity in the early 1990s, followed by several years
of post-World War II record profits and very strong loan growth, our banks now have prudent capital
and  reserve  positions.  In  addition,  asset  quality  was  quite  good  by  historical  standards  before  the
deterioration began. Moreover, in the last decade, as I will discuss more fully in a moment, banks have
improved their risk management and control systems, which we believe may have both strengthened
the  resultant  asset  quality  and  shortened  banks'  response  time  to  changing  economic  events.  This
potential for an improved reaction to cyclical weakness, and better risk management, is being tested
by the events of recent quarters and may well be tested further in coming quarters.
We  can  generalize  from  these  recent  events  to  understand  a  bit  better  some  relevant  patterns  in
banking,  patterns  that  appear  to  be  changing  for  the  better.  The  recent  weakening  in  loan  quality
bears  some  characteristics  typical  of  traditional  relationships  of  loans  to  the  business  cycle  –  the
pro-cyclicality  of  bank  lending  practices.  The  rapid  increase  in  loans,  though  typical  of  a  normal
expansion  of  the  economy,  was  unusual  in  that  it  was  associated  with  more  than  a  decade  of
uninterrupted economic growth.
As  our  economy  expanded,  business  and  household  financing  needs  increased  and  projections  of
future outcomes turned increasingly optimistic. In such a context, the loan officers whose experience
counsels that the vast majority of bad loans are made in the latter stages of a business expansion,
have had the choice of (1) restraining lending, and presumably losing market share or (2) hoping for
repayment  of  new  loans  before  conditions  turn  adverse.  Given  the  limited  ability  to  foresee  turning
points, the competitive pressures led, as has usually been the case, to a deterioration of underlying
loan quality as the peak in the economy approached.
Supervisors  have  had  comparable  problems.  In  a  rising  economy  buffeted  by  competitive  banking
markets, it is difficult to evaluate the embedded risks in new loans or to be sure that adequate capital
is being held. Even if correctly diagnosed, making that supervisory case to bank management can be
difficult  because,  regrettably,  incentives  for  loan  officers  and  managers  traditionally  have  rewarded
loan growth, market share, and the profits that derive from booking interest income with, in retrospect,
inadequate provisions for possible default. Moreover, credit-risk specialists at banks historically have
had difficulty making their case about risk because of their inability to measure and quantify it. At the
same time, with debt service current and market risk premiums cyclically low, coupled with the same
inability  to  quantify  and  measure  risk,  supervisory  criticisms  of  standards  traditionally  have  been
difficult to justify.
When  the  economy  begins  to  slow  and  the  quality  of  some  booked  loans  deteriorates,  as  in  the
current  cycle,  loan  standards  belatedly  tighten.  New  loan  applications  that  earlier  would  have  been
judged  creditworthy,  especially  since  the  applications  are  now  being  based  on  a  more  cautious
BIS Review 56/2001
1
economic outlook, are nonetheless rejected, when in retrospect it will doubtless be those loans that
would have been the most profitable to the bank.
Such policies are demonstrably not in the best interests of banks' shareholders or the economy. They
lead to an unnecessary degree of cyclical volatility in earnings and, as such, to a reduced long-term
capitalized  value  of  the  bank.  More  importantly,  such  policies  contribute  to  increased  economic
instability.
The  last  few  years  have  had  some  of  the  traditional  characteristics  I  have  just  described:  the
substantial  easing  of  terms  as  the  economy  improved,  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  loan  book,  the
deterioration of loan quality as the economy slowed, and the cumulative tightening of loan standards.
But this interval has had some interesting characteristics not observed in earlier expansions. First, in
the mid-1990s, examiners began to focus on banks' risk-management systems and processes; at the
same time, supervisors' observations about softening loan standards came both unusually early in the
expansion  and  were  taken  more  seriously  than  had  often  been  the  case.  The  turmoil  in  financial
markets  in  1998,  associated  with  both  the  East  Asian  crisis  and  the  Russian  default,  also  focused
bankers'  attention  on  loan  quality  during  the  continued  expansion  in  this  country.  And  there  was  a
further induced tightening of standards last year in response to early indications of deteriorating loan
quality, months before aggregate growth slowed.
All of this might have been the result of idiosyncratic events from which generalizations should not be
made. Perhaps. But at the same time another, more profound development of critical importance had
begun: the creation at the larger, more sophisticated banks of an operational loan process with a more
or less formal procedure for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk. In these emerging systems, loans
are classified by risk, internal profit centers are charged for equity allocations by risk category, and risk
adjustments are explicitly made.
In short, the formal measurement and quantification of risk has begun to occur and to be integrated
into the loan-making process. This is a sea change – or at least the beginning of one. Formal risk-
management systems are designed to reduce the potential for the unintended acceptance of risk and
hence should reduce the pro-cyclical behavior that has characterized banking history. But, again, the
process has just begun.
The federal banking agencies are trying to generalize and institutionalize this process in the current
efforts  to  reform  the  Basel  Capital  Accord.  When  operational,  near  the  middle  of  this  decade,  the
revised accord, Basel II, promises to promote not only better risk management over a wider group of
banks  but  also  less-intrusive  supervision  once  the  risk-management  system  is  validated.  It  also
promises less variability in loan policies over the cycle because of both bank and supervisory focus on
formal techniques for managing risk.
In  recent  years,  we  have  incorporated  innovative  ideas  and  accommodated  significant  change  in
banking  and  supervision.  Institutions  have  more  ways  than  ever  to  compete  in  providing  financial
services.  Financial  innovation  has  improved  the  measurement  and  management  of  risk  and  holds
substantial promise for much greater gains ahead.
Building on bank practice, we are in the process of improving both lending and supervisory policies
that we trust will foster better risk management; but these policies could also reduce the pro-cyclical
pattern of easing and tightening of bank lending  and  accordingly  increase  bank  shareholder  values
and economic stability. It is not an easy road, but it seems that we are well along it.
Appendix to testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan, prepared by staff, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
The  US  banking  industry  is  well  capitalized  and  highly  profitable  by  historical  standards  and  in
reasonably good shape, although there are signs of erosion as problem loans have risen, especially in
larger syndicated credits. Moreover, some further erosion  is likely as  borrowers  who have taken on
heavy  debt  burdens  experience  less  robust  increases  in  profits  and  income  than  might  have  been
anticipated not too long ago. In many cases, problem loans are a hangover from loans made in the
mid-1990s when lenders evidently failed to exercise sufficient discipline. After about 1998, banks took
a  number  of  steps  to  tighten  lending  standards  and  terms,  which  should  help  to  limit  further
deterioration. Nevertheless, with a weakening economy, problems could well worsen for some banks
and  some  market  segments,  requiring  vigilance  by  banks  and  their  regulators.  As  always,  the
2
BIS Review 56/2001
underlying issue is how to adopt and price realistic assessments of likely credit risks under alternative
scenarios, keeping credit flowing to worthy borrowers at reasonable prices.
Today,  banking  organizations  and  their  supervisors  are  taking  a  number  of  steps  that  will  be
necessary to ensure that our financial system continues to flourish and support long-term economic
growth well into the future. Key elements of such actions are referenced in the last two sections of this
appendix.
Earnings
Although  banking  profitability  has  risen  to  historically  high  levels  in  terms  of  return  on  assets  and
return  on  equity  over  the  past  decade,  in  recent  periods  higher  loan  loss  provision  expenses  and
narrowing net  interest margins have placed pressures on bank profitability. Despite those emerging
weaknesses,  downside  risks  likely  have  been  limited  by  the  increasing  diversity  of  noninterest  and
interest sources of revenues. The continued push by banks to diversify their revenues by expanding
business lines devoted to asset management, servicing, securitization, investment banking, and other
fee-based activities should help stabilize earnings streams. In addition, in the wake of consolidation
and  interstate  banking,  many  larger  firms  are  less  vulnerable  to  downturns  in  particular  regions  or
specialized business lines.
Nonetheless,  in  the  past  few  quarters,  emerging  earnings  weaknesses  have  been  pronounced  at
some  of  the  larger  banking  organizations,  which  have  experienced  sharp  increases  in  loan  loss
provision expenses, narrowing interest margins, and significant declines in venture capital revenues.
During the first quarter of this year, those negative developments at large firms were somewhat offset
by  record  trading  profits  and  better  overhead  cost  efficiency.  While  the  net  effect  was  a  decline  in
profits at many larger banking organizations, the underlying strength in the profitability of regional and
community banks, coupled with nonrecurring securities gains, helped the industry as a whole achieve
record first quarter earnings of nearly $20 billion.
Asset quality
The rise in nonperforming assets at banking organizations has been pronounced over the past year,
especially  at  larger  banking  organizations.  Despite  that  rise,  these  problems  generally  remain
moderate in historical terms relative to earnings, assets and capital. Assets classified as substandard,
doubtful or loss have also risen rapidly in recent periods, though again from a modest base. Much of
that increase is attributable to larger syndicated credits, though there are some indications of softening
in  the  credit  quality  of  middle-market  borrowers.  In  response  to  this  rise,  banks  have  written  down
assets  to  estimated  net  realizable  values  and  replenished  reserves  for  expected  problems  through
loan loss provision expenses.
A common theme for many of the problem credits has been significant leverage employed to expand
businesses  during  times  of  ebullient  economic  and  market  conditions.  Many  of  these  credits  were
originated  during  a  period  of  relaxed  lending  standards  that  did  not  adequately  account  for  the
susceptibility  of  the  borrower  to  weakening  sectoral  or  economic  conditions.  After  the  reminders  in
1998 from the Asian disruptions and the Russian default, lending standards were tightened. But, with
the advent of a softening economy, the embedded risks of weaker or more vulnerable borrowers are
becoming  well  recognized.  Particularly  hard  hit  have  been  certain  borrowers  in  the  retail,
manufacturing, health care and telecommunications industries. In addition, unexpected developments
in  asbestos  litigation  as  well  as  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  California  utilities  have  also  added
considerably to the stock of classifications.
The  rapid  deterioration  of  credit  quality  in  certain  segments  of  bank  loan  portfolios  reflects  the
significant share of the growth in bank lending in recent years to borrowers on the borderline between
investment and noninvestment grade creditworthiness. With the presence of active money and capital
markets  in  the  United  States,  and  their  ease  of  access  by  the  best  quality  borrowers,  these  credit
grades reflect the quality of those with which our banks now normally deal. They represent the types
of borrowers that tend to require the more customized analysis, underwriting and structuring offered by
banks that may not be as readily available or as cost-effective through the bond market. The higher
magnitude and volatility of default rates in these types of borrowers is well documented from decades
of  experience  in  the  below-investment  grade  segment  of  the  bond  market.  Consequently,  as
conditions have weakened and defaults have risen sharply in noninvestment grade bonds, a parallel
increase  has  occurred  in  troubled  and  nonperforming  loans  of  bank  portfolios.  Forecasts  for  a
BIS Review 56/2001
3
continued rise in defaults for lower rated bonds by Moody's suggest that bank corporate asset quality
is also likely to deteriorate further before it improves.
Although part of the deterioration may be a natural consequence of taking normal business risk in a
weaker economy, part also reflects a lack of discipline by some banks, particularly in the 1995-1997
interval. As banking organizations relaxed their standards and the rigor of their credit risk analysis in
this  period,  banking  supervisors  responded  by  issuing  cautionary  guidance  and  stepped  up  the
intensity of reviews of lending operations at many banking firms. In particular, supervisors pointed out
the need for lenders to avoid the use of overly optimistic assumptions that presumed strong conditions
would  prevail  indefinitely.  In  addition,  supervisors  also  noted  the  lack  of  downside  risk  analysis  or
stress testing as a weakness in risk management practices at many banks.
Recent credit losses have highlighted the importance of following those sound lending and evaluation
fundamentals and have clearly differentiated strong credit risk management systems from weak ones,
prompting  many  organizations  to  take  remedial  action.  For  the  past  several  years,  the  banking
agencies have shifted their supervisory approach to focus on risk management processes at banking
organizations  as  a  more  effective  means  for  promoting  sound  banking  practices.  While  bank  risk
management practices have improved, in part because of supervisory efforts, recent experience has
shown that more work needs to be done. More recently, to help facilitate improvements underway at
banks in response to current credit difficulties, the banking agencies issued guidance earlier this year
clarifying their expectations regarding sound practices for managing leveraged finance exposures.
Even before recent weaknesses, banks had begun to reevaluate their strategic direction and, with the
encouragement  of  supervisors,  had  become  more  deliberate  about  the  need  to  implement  formal
procedures for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk. Without these reforms, the recent deteriorating
trends would likely have been considerably worse. In these emerging systems, loans are classified by
risk, internal profit centers are charged for equity allocations by risk category, and risk adjustments are
explicitly made. In addition, more advanced systems provide the metrics that are necessary to support
active  portfolio  management,  including  decisions  on  whether  certain  loans  exhibiting  emerging
weaknesses should be sold and at what price. The active sale of troubled syndicated credits has been
an emerging trend among larger organizations. In particular, the increasing appetite for these loans by
nonbank  investors  has  helped  deepen  and  liquefy  the  market,  providing  an  outlet  for  banks  with
adequate capital and reserves to sell loans at a discount to par value and to rebalance their portfolios.
Today risk management systems have also helped rationalize the pricing of risk through stricter terms
and  conditions  for  more  vulnerable  borrowers.  Sophisticated  risk  management  systems  are  also
helping banks to reevaluate the profitability of bank lending by benchmarking loans against corporate
hurdle  rates.  In  many  circumstances,  banks  are  recognizing  that  without  the  ancillary  cash
management or other revenue opportunities attached to the lending relationship, it is difficult to find
stand-alone  lending  opportunities  that  meet  these  hurdle  rates.  By  using  these  sophisticated
quantitative  risk  management  tools  to  support  their  decision-making,  banks  are  better  able  to
distinguish profitable versus unprofitable relationships and determine whether a particular customer is
compatible with the bank's appetite for risk.
At present, the tightening of terms and standards at banks and the bond market has not inhibited the
flow  of  funding  to  sound  borrowers,  though  borrowers  appear  to  be  increasingly  tapping  the  bond
market, and lenders and the bond market also are requiring higher spreads for marginal credits. While
tightening  can  be  over  done,  so  far  banks  seem  to  be  making  balanced  decisions  on  the  tradeoff
between risk and returns. This is a favorable outcome, because it assists in directing capital flows to
their highest and best use in the economy.
Much  focus  has  been  placed  on  the  dynamics  within  the  corporate  loan  book,  which  is  currently
experiencing the majority of problems, but banks and supervisors should continue  to  be  vigilant  for
other potential risks. In  particular,  though  retail  credit  quality  has  been  fairly  stable  in  recent  years,
consumers,  like  corporations,  have  also  increased  leverage,  making  their  ability  to  perform  under
stressful  circumstances 
In  recent  years,  buoyant  economic  conditions  raised
expectations for continued growth in income and employment for consumers, which along with rising
levels  of  wealth,  has  led  to  growth  in  household  debt  that  has  outstripped  growth  in  disposable
personal income over the past five years. That expansion of debt has pushed consumer debt service
burdens to new highs.
With the recent slowdown in the economy, rising personal bankruptcies, an increasing unemployment
rate, and a modest deterioration in loan quality, lenders have tempered their outlook, tightening their
standards  somewhat  for  credit  cards  and  installment  loans.  At  the  same  time,  while  consumer
less  reliable. 
4
BIS Review 56/2001
spending  has  leveled  out  as  the  economy  has  weakened,  demand  for  credit  has  strengthened  in
recent periods.
Over  the  past  decade,  banking  organizations  have  taken  advantage  of  scoring  models  and  other
techniques for efficiently advancing credit to a broader spectrum of consumers and small businesses
than ever before. In doing so, they have made credit available to segments of borrowers that are more
highly leveraged and that have  less experience in managing their finances through difficult periods.
For the most part, banks appear to have tailored their  pricing and  underwriting  practices  to  various
segments  of  their  consumer  portfolios  to  account  for  the  unique  risks  related  to  each.  Some
institutions  have  also  tailored  lending  towards  segments  with  troubled  credit  histories,  the  so-called
subprime market. Such lending can be favorable both to borrowers and lenders. Subprime borrowers
benefit  by  gaining  access  to  credit  and  the  opportunity  to  build  a  sound  credit  history  that  may
eventually allow them to achieve prime status. For lenders, subprime lending affords the opportunity
for higher returns provided the necessary infrastructure is in place to closely track and monitor the risk
related to individual borrowers, which can be labor intensive and costly. Lenders must also recognize
the  additional  capital  and  reserve  needs  to  support  such  lending,  particularly  if  they  have
concentrations in subprime loans.
Banks that have not understood the subprime market have had significant difficulties. To ensure that
banks entering this business properly understand these risks, the agencies have encouraged banks to
adopt  strong  risk  management  systems  tailored  to  the  challenges  posed  by  these  loan  segments.
Beyond poor risk management, there have also been instances in which certain lenders have charged
fees  and  structured  loans  designed  not  to  protect  against  risk,  but  rather  to  deceptively  extract  a
borrower's  net  worth.  Such  predatory  lending  practices,  though  rare,  are  a  cause  for  concern  and
examiners are watchful for programs that would violate the law in this regard.
Another area of supervisory focus, of course, is commercial real estate. The exceptional demand for
office and other commercial real estate in recent years has led to a rebound in the volumes of loans
secured by these properties. This time, however, as demand has grown, larger banking organizations
have  managed  to  keep  their  holdings  modest  relative  to  their  asset  bases  either  through
securitizations,  sales  or  by  avoiding  originations  altogether.  In  contrast,  many  smaller  commercial
banks  have  raised  their  commercial  real  estate  concentrations  relative  to  assets  and  capital.  While
underwriting practices appear to be much healthier today than they were in the 1980s and standards
have  tightened  somewhat  recently,  supervisors  are  paying  particular  attention  to  community  banks
with concentrations that make them materially vulnerable to a downturn in this market.
While for the past several years there have been few real estate markets with material imbalances in
supply and demand, emerging signs of weakness make the need for vigilance more pressing. In the
first  quarter  of  this  year,  there  has  been  a  pronounced  increase  in  nationwide  vacancies  that  has
resulted in a negative net absorption of office space in the United States. That poor performance, the
worst in twenty  years,  has  been  attributed  by  some  market  observers  to  the  abrupt  return  of  office
space to the market by technology firms and to delays by prospective tenants hoping that softening
conditions will lower rents further. In this environment, noncurrent commercial real estate loans have
edged up somewhat in the first quarter. Whether the first quarter represents a temporary phenomenon
or the beginning of a longer term trend remains to be seen, but the need for institutions to continue a
realistic assessment of conditions and stress test their portfolios is paramount.
In addition to real estate, agricultural lending is also facing challenges. Commodity price weakness,
coupled  with changes in the federal price support programs, has  placed  pressures  on  the  ability  of
farmers  to  service  their  debt.  This  in  turn  has  led  to  a  rise  in  noncurrent  farm  loans.  Banks  are
continuing to identify ways to work with their borrowers to navigate through this difficult period.
Funding
For banks to remain in sound condition, they must not only pay attention to the quality of their assets,
but also to the nature and quality of their funding. In recent years, large and small banks alike have
come to rely increasingly on large wholesale deposits and nontraditional sources of funds. They have
done so in part as the demand for loans and their own growth objectives have outstripped the growth
in insured core deposits. It is true that retail core deposit growth has been quite meager over the past
decade with higher returns in mutual funds and the stock market luring customers away from banking
deposits.  On  the  other  hand,  banks  have  also  made  the  calculated  decision  to  pay  relatively  low
interest rates on some types of retail accounts and rely on higher-priced jumbo deposits or wholesale
borrowing to fund incremental asset growth.
BIS Review 56/2001
5
Despite  competition  for  household  funds,  community  banks  have  been  relatively  successful  at
maintaining their core deposit bases. For example, a decade ago banks with less than $50 million in
assets  funded  around  80  percent  of  their  assets  with  core  deposits.  Over  the  course  of  the  past
decade, that figure eroded by 7 percentage points, but remains a fairly strong 73 percent of assets.
That  compares  to  core  deposit  holdings  of  only  39  percent  for  banks  with  more  than  $10  billion  in
assets.
While  community  banks  have  experienced  moderate  erosion  in  the  share  of  core  deposits  funding
assets, when that trend is coupled with rapid loan growth, pressures on bank liquidity have intensified.
To replace core deposits, community banks have been fairly successful at attracting jumbo deposits
and have made use of Federal Home Loan Bank advances. Community banks have also funded the
gap  between  loan  and  deposit  growth  by  liquidating  securities  holdings  and  accordingly  raising  the
quantity  of  loans  relative  to  assets.  The  combined  deposit  and  loan  trends  have  pushed  liquidity
benchmark ratios such as loans-to-deposits to historic peaks. On the other hand, there are some signs
of relief for bank liquidity. For one, the demand for loans by businesses and consumers appears to be
moderating, and there are some early indications that consumers are returning to bank retail deposits
in the wake of disappointing stock and mutual fund results.
Still, many of these liquidity pressures are likely to remain in one form or another, and banks are likely
to continue to explore non-deposit alternatives for managing their balance sheets. While the  use of
non-deposit liabilities to fund growth is not new to banks, the growing volume, variety and complexity
of these funds creates new issues. To meet this challenge, banks must strive to fully understand the
implication  of  relying  on  these  types  of  funds  both  from  a  liquidity  and  earnings  perspective.  The
Federal  Reserve  recently  issued  guidance  on  the  use  of  complex  wholesale  borrowings  and  the
banking agencies recently issued guidance on rate sensitive deposits to highlight the  importance of
adequate management techniques for ensuring stable and consistent funding.
Capital and supervisory initiatives
The  most  stable  funding  source  for  bank  balance  sheets  is  shareholder  equity.  More  significantly,
shareholder  equity's  key  feature  is  its  ability  to  absorb  losses.  The  need  for  banks  to  hold  capital
commensurate with the risk they undertake is highlighted by recent weaknesses in bank asset quality
and  the  uncertain  economic  environment.  Today,  by  virtue  of  market  pressures  following  the
difficulties of the late 1980s, minimum regulatory capital requirements and the ability of many banking
organizations to measure and recognize their own needs for a cushion against more difficult times, the
industry  capital  base  appears  adequate  to  meet  emerging  challenges.  From  a  regulatory  capital
perspective, the vast majority of all banks meet the definition for well capitalized.
The original Basel Accord that was adopted in 1988 has served supervisors and the industry fairly well
over  the  past  decade  as  one  of  the  primary  tools  for  maintaining  a  sound  banking  system.  More
recently, the nature and complexity of risk undertaken by many larger organizations have made the
blunt  traditional  measures  of  capital  adequacy,  whether  equity-to-assets,  leverage,  or  current
risk-based capital ratios, less meaningful. In considering the likely continuation of innovations over the
next  decade,  supervisors  must  develop  ways  to  improve  their  tools  while  reinforcing  incentives  for
sound risk management.
The new Basel risk-based proposal seeks to achieve the twin objectives of a more meaningful capital
adequacy  measure  and  promoting  sound  risk  management  practices.  The  proposal  by  the  Basel
Committee that was announced in January of this year calls for an international capital accord that is
based  on  three  pillars:  a  minimum  capital  requirement  that  is  more  sensitive  to  risk,  a  supervisory
review  process,  and  market  discipline.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Basel  Committee  is  in  the
process of reviewing the public's comments on the proposal and there are still a myriad of important
issues and details to address and work out before it can be implemented.
The proposal offers a menu of alternative frameworks for establishing minimum capital requirements
so that institutions can be matched with the approach that fits their particular degree of sophistication,
risk profile and risk management capabilities. On one end of the spectrum, the proposed  advanced
approach, designed for the most sophisticated and complex entities, relies on  a bank's internal risk
rating and loss estimates in the establishment of the minimum requirements for credit exposures. At
the other end of the spectrum, the proposed standardized approach modifies the current framework to
be somewhat more risk sensitive but retains many of the simple features of the current accord.
6
BIS Review 56/2001
The second pillar, the supervisory review process, requires supervisors to ensure that each bank has
sound risk management processes in place. The emphasis in that review is both on the integrity of the
process  that  produces  the  metrics  used  in  calculating  the  supervisory  minimum,  as  well  as  the
adequacy of a bank's own analysis of its capital needs.
The second pillar fits very well with the Federal Reserve's efforts in recent years to encourage larger,
more complex banks to improve their internal risk rating systems while placing more emphasis on their
own internal analysis of capital adequacy. The new accord is much more than an effort to improve the
meaningfulness of minimum regulatory capital ratios, although that clearly is an important  aspect of
the proposal. Embodied in  the  proposal  are some important risk management principles and sound
practices  that  supervisors  would  expect  all  of  the  very  largest  and  most  complex  US  banks  to  be
following  or  aspiring  to,  even  those  not  electing  to  use  one  of  the  more  advanced  approaches.  As
proposed, the capital standards should provide banking organizations in the United States and abroad
with  strong  incentives  to  accelerate  their  development  and  implementation  of  improved  risk
management  systems  in  order  to  qualify  for  a  more  risk-sensitive  regulatory  capital  treatment.
Moreover, the review necessary to ensure that bank risk measures are sound maintains the focus of
supervisors on the key elements of control and risk management that govern safe and sound banking.
The third pillar complements the first two by bolstering market discipline through enhanced disclosures
by banks. By their very nature, many banking risks are opaque. However, innovations in recent years
that  have  helped  improve  the  management  of  risk  have  also  led  to  the  development  of  various
summary statistics to meaningfully describe risks that were qualitatively described in the past. While
challenges  remain  in  making  such  measures  comparable  or  differences  across  institutions  well
understood,  such  disclosures  are  a  necessary  complement  to  the  other  two  pillars  for  the  overall
approach  to  retain  the  necessary  level  of  rigor  and  integrity.  Disclosure  of  information  that  helps
stakeholders determine risk profiles is designed, of course, to increase, when necessary, the market
pressure and costs on bank lenders that they would otherwise receive as a matter of course if they
were  not  beneficiaries  of  the  safety  net.  Market  discipline  can  also  provide  useful  signals  to
supervisors.
Significantly,  the  opportunity  for  enhanced  market  discipline  through  disclosure  is  substantial  given
that  larger  organizations  fund  about  two  thirds  of  their  assets  with  uninsured  funds.  However,
supplemental information will be irrelevant unless uninsured creditors believe that they are, in fact, at
risk. Uninsured creditors have little reason to engage in risk analysis, let alone act on such analysis, if
they believe that they will always be made whole under a de facto too-big-to-fail policy. Recognizing
that  dilemma,  in  1991  the  Congress  placed  in  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation
Improvement  Act  a  requirement  for  a  least-cost  resolution  of  financial  institutions.  Although  an
exception clause exists, it does not require that all uninsured creditors be made whole. Conceptually,
there are rare situations where events may require that the FDIC and other governmental resources
be  used  temporarily  to  sustain  a  failing  institution  pending  its  managed  liquidation.  But  indefinitely
propping up insolvent intermediaries is the road to stagnation and substantial resource misallocation,
as recent history attests.
Indeed,  if  the  government  protects  all  creditors,  or  is  generally  believed  to  protect  all  creditors,  the
other efforts to reduce the costs of the safety net will be of little benefit. The implications are similar if
the  public  does  not,  or  cannot,  distinguish  a  bank  from  its  affiliates.  As  financial  consolidation
continues, and as banking organizations take advantage of a wider range of activities, the perception
that all creditors of large banks, let alone of their affiliates, are protected by the safety net is a recipe
for a vast misallocation of resources and increasingly intrusive supervision.
Financial holding companies and umbrella supervision
Mindful  of  the  potential  for  the  federal  safety  net  to  extend  beyond  what  Congress  intended  in  its
enactment  of  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  ("GLB  Act"),  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  careful  to
distinguish  between  insured  depositories  and  uninsured  holding  company  affiliates  and  parent
organizations in the supervision of financial holding companies ("FHCs"). Consequently, the Federal
Reserve's focus in FHC supervision has been to identify and evaluate, on a consolidated group-wide
basis, the significant risks that exist in a diversified holding company  with  a view to evaluating  how
such risks might affect the safety and soundness of insured depository institution subsidiaries. Such
supervision is not intended to impose bank-like supervision on FHCs, nor is it intended to duplicate or
replace supervision by the primary bank, thrift, or functional regulators of FHC subsidiaries. Rather, it
seeks, on the one hand, to balance the objective of protecting the depository institution subsidiaries of
BIS Review 56/2001
7
increasingly  complex  organizations  with  significant  inter-related  activities  and  risks,  against,  on  the
other, the objective of not imposing an unduly duplicative or onerous burden on the subsidiaries of the
organization.
To  accomplish  that  objective  we  have  relied  on  our  long-standing  relationships  with  primary  bank,
thrift, securities and foreign supervisors while forging new relationships with the functional regulators
that  oversee  activities  that  are  newly  permitted  under  the  Act.  These  relationships  respect  the
individual statutory authorities and responsibilities of the respective supervisors, but at the same time,
allow for enhanced information flows and coordination so that individual responsibilities can be carried
out  effectively  without  creating  duplication  or  excessive  burden.  The  Federal  Reserve  places
substantial  reliance  on  internal  management  information  maintained  by  FHCs  and  on  reports  filed
with, or prepared by, bank, thrift, and functional regulators, as well as on publicly available information
for both regulated and non-regulated subsidiaries.
Since enactment of the GLB Act, over 500 FHCs have been formed. The vast majority of those are
small  community  holding  companies  that  converted  largely  in  an  effort  to  take  advantage  of  the
insurance  agency  provisions  of  the  GLB  Act  or  to  be  well  positioned  should  opportunities  for
exercising new powers present themselves. Most of the larger holding companies have also converted
to  FHCs,  and  appear  to  be  taking  advantage  of  the  securities,  merchant  banking,  and  to  a  lesser
extent,  the  insurance  provisions  of  the  Act.  In  addition  to  the  conversion  of  existing  bank  holding
companies,  there  have  been  a  few  nonbank  financial  service  companies  that  have  applied  for  and
received FHC status in connection with their acquisition of banking organizations.
In  general,  banking  organizations  appear  to  be  taking  a  cautious  and  incremental  approach  to
exercising new powers under the GLB Act. In addition, the number of new, truly diversified financial
holding companies across securities, insurance and banking has been few enough to let organizations
and supervisors gradually gain experience and comfort in their operations.
8
BIS Review 56/2001
