Alberto Romero: At the beginning of a new century: the current economic and
financial situation in the Netherlands Antilles
Speech by Mr  Alberto Romero, Executive Director Bank van  de Nederlandse Antillen  at the  "Aruba
and Curaçao Tourism and Public Finances" seminar, 3 March 2001.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. I would like to thank the UNA for inviting me today to present to
you an overview of the economic and financial development of the Netherlands Antilles during the last
15 years.
Let me also express my appreciation for my friends of the Central Bank of Aruba that are here today
and that have accepted the invitation of the UNA to participate in this seminar. During the last decade
the cooperation between the Central Bank of Aruba and our Central Bank has grown to become one
of mutual respect for each other’s work and there also exists a great desire between staff members of
both institutions to cooperate with each other, to share information and work closely together on topics
of common interests.
As you all know, our economy has been suffering from a severe recession since 1996. During the year
2000 only, the Antillean economy shrank as measured by the gross domestic product (GDP)  by  an
estimated  4.4%.  This  decline  can  be  explained  by  a  weak  domestic  demand,  migration,  new  tax
measures,  lay-off,  all  of  which  resulted  in  reduced  private  consumption.  Private  investment  also
declined  due  to  a  lack  of  confidence  in  and  uncertainty  of  the  economic  future  of  our  country.  In
addition,  the  difficult  financial  situation  of  the  governments  constrained  further  domestic  public
expenditures.
All these factors contributed to a further lowering of the domestic spending and this is now reflected in
a depressed economy and a constantly shrinking GDP since 1996.
Going back to the last decade of the 20th century our real GDP recorded an average growth of only
0.7% as compared for instance to all developing economies which showed an average growth of 2.4
%. As an economist it is in a sense puzzling to see that, while the world economy has been expanding
during  these  past  few  years,  and  our  major  trading  partners,  the  USA  and  Holland,  are  showing
remarkable  positive  overall  economic  performance,  we  do  not  seem  to  benefit  from  these
developments and are even falling behind in the region.
One  would  wonder as to  what the main causes are for our  poor  performance,  particularly  if  placed
within the context of new emerging international trade relations and a positive business environment.
Let me give you my views on the various internal weaknesses that have, to a great extent, hampered
economic growth in the Netherlands Antilles during the past few decades.
• 
In the first place the mounting disequilibrium in the fiscal balances of the governments as a
result of the weakened tax base and rising expenditures on wages, salaries and interest is a
main reason for the poor economic development;
In  the  second  place,  and  closely  related  to  the  fiscal  imbalance,  is  the  weak  balance  of
payments outcome. Given the openness of our economy, the medium to long term effects of
fiscal imbalances will unequivocally be reflected in imbalances in the current account of the
balance of payments;
Thirdly the rigidity in the labor market and the related high general cost of doing business, to
a great extent have resulted in high unemployment. There is a simple law in economics that
has proven to be useful for policy-makers. Whenever the per unit labor cost rises above the
productivity level of labor, employment opportunities will shrink and unemployment will rise.
In addition the poor results in the educational field and inconsistent human resource training
programs  have  resulted  in  a  high  youth  unemployment  and  massive  migration  of  this
younger age-group of our community to Holland;
  BIS Review 18/2001
1
   The various attempts to modify, adapt and re-shape our tax structure has gradually raised
the tax burden on the islands of the Netherlands Antilles and this has resulted in additional
cost effects that is now spreading throughout the economy;
The policies to correct perceived market failures in the past has caused our product market
to  become  rigid  and,  associated  with  this  development,  the  price  mechanism  did  not
correctly reflect the demand and supply situation in the various market segments;
Finally  the  lengthy  discussion  between  the  two  layers  of  government  has  practically
paralyzed the urgently needed efficient functioning of the decision making process.
Some  of  the  above  mentioned  weaknesses,  particularly  those  associated  with  high  budget  deficits,
triggered an unsustainable high public debt and as a consequence of this a financial crisis that started
originally  in  the  public  sector,  but  is  now  spreading  throughout  our  society,  creating  a  social  and
economic crisis, accompanied by increasing poverty and a migrating population.
To  address  the  topic  of  this  seminar  I  have  chosen  to  single  out  two  main  areas  of  risk  that  have
intensified due to the crisis in the public sector. I will first start with the consequences  of the public
sector’s financial situation for APNA’s public pension scheme. In addition to the negative effects of the
imbalance in the public sector on the pension fund, we also see that the interest burden in the budgets
of the governments have magnified due to the uncontrollable debt situation.
 Rationalizing the APNA pension scheme
Another  important  side-effect  of  the  situation  in  government  finances  is  the  imbalance  in  the  public
pension fund system (APNA) that I would like to discuss with you next.
Since 1998 the governments have focused their efforts on rationalizing and reforming the public sector
pension  scheme.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  cost  savings  efforts  that  the  governments  have
introduced  into  the  pension  scheme  must  be  seen  as  important  positive  steps  to  bring  the  public
pension system more in line with private sector pension schemes. Despite the increasing criticism on
the foreseen reforms, one should have do bear in mind that the long term viability of the fund is  at
stake if no reforms are undertaken now.
Various cost saving measures were implemented with the objective to balance the contribution of the
participants in the scheme on the one hand and to safeguard their pension benefits in the long run.
Some of the most important rationalization measures were:
• 
• 
Raising the retirement age to 60 years;
full  pension  rights  will  be  obtained  after  35  years  of  service  for  new  participants  in  the
scheme instead of 30 years;
the early retirement option for new participants into the fund was eliminated while a gradual
phasing out of this option for those that acquired this right prior to 1998 is being worked out;
the inclusion of the AOV (old age pension) into the public pension scheme.
• 
Due  to  all  these  amendments  into  the  APNA  scheme  the  total  premium  paid  has  abruptly  been
reduced from 34% in the past to the current 16%. In addition this 16% premium scale has now been
changed  into  a  so-called  dynamic  premium  system,  which  was  proposed  by  the  management  and
board of the APNA.
This dynamic premium scheme is based on the crucial assumption on the level of the funding ratio,
being the ratio between the liquid assets and the pension liabilities.
If  the  funding  ratio  at  a  given  point  in  time  becomes  higher  than  115%  the  dynamic  contribution
scheme automatically adapts the total premium to be paid to the APNA by lowering it by 1% points
from 16%. If on the other hand the funding ratio falls below the 95% threshold, the total premium will
have to be raised by 2% points from the basis of 16%. With a funding ratio between 105% and 115%
the total premium can be maintained at its present level of 16%.
Based  upon  these  assumptions  made  by  APNA  the  present  16%  dynamic  premium  scale  is  in  the
short  term  at  the  safe  end.  Recently1  also  an  IMF  panel  of  experts  concluded  that  this  premium
                                                     
1  Special IMF mission that studied the pension scheme from January 29 to February 8, 2001
2
BIS Review 18/2001
scheme could be maintained in the short term on condition that the actuarial assumption used in the
calculation of this new premium scheme be re-evaluated by an independent actuarial study.
Other  important  considerations  however,  should  be  studied  in  more  detail  in  order  to  mitigate  the
longer term risk to the public pension system. One of these risks factors is the modus operandi of all
island governments that together contribute to the premium system. In the past decade without any
exception  all  of  the  island  governments  and  the  general  government  were  unable  to  meet  the  full
pension contribution and therefore forced the pensionfund management and board into renegotiating
and converting premium arrears into new interest bearing loans. It is also important and fair to state
that the governments were able to fully comply with the interest payments obligations to the fund.
One of the consequences of this payment attitude results in a forced annual or automatic ‘investment’
of  the  APNA  in  government  securities,  and  due  to  this  development  currently  45%  of  the  balance
sheet  assets  of  the  public  pension  fund  is  made  up  of  receivables  from  the  governments.  The
liquidation of these assets to comply with the short term pension obligations will become crucial at one
point  in  the  future  and  this  needs  closer  attention  and  monitoring  of  the  APNA  management  and
board.
As long as there is certainty that these government securities can be readily and easily liquidated into
a secondary security market, there is no risk at all for the pensionfund obligations. The story becomes
more worrisome if the liquidation of these securities cannot easily be converted into cash. This should
be, in my view, the focal point in the discussions among the participants of the APNA pension scheme
in the coming years.
In the past some  other  possible  solutions  were  brought  forward  for  consideration  to  APNA  and  the
governments in order to safeguard the long term viability of this public pension scheme. Some of the
options discussed were:
• 
the opening up of the scheme for other non-governmental participants to reduce the risks of
over investment into one type of security;
a further increase in the retirement age to e.g. 62 or 65 years to also better reflect the life-
expectancy on the islands;
reorientation  of  the  premium  system  from  a  "defined  benefit"  system  into  a  "defined
contribution" system.
  In my view these are important issues to be discussed in order to further rationalize the APNA pension
scheme in the future.
The relation public debt and interest payments.
The second important side effect of the consistently high budget deficits of the  past  is shown in an
increasing share of interest payments into the total public sector expenditures. This phenomenon is
also  related  to  the  aforementioned  conversion  of  arrears  to  creditors  (including  APNA)  into  interest
bearing loans.
In 1986 for instance the interest payments in the budgets of the governments amounted to NAf 25.4
million or 7.9% as a share of the total public expenditure. The most recent data on the public sector
interest  burden  shows  that  for  February  of  2001  the  total  interest  payment  amounts  to  NAf.226.4
million or 15.6% of the total expenditures of the general government. This means that in a 15 years’
time-span  the  share  of  the  interest  payments  in  the  total  expenditures  have  doubled.  This
development should be of great concern for policy makers on the islands for various reasons. Some of
these reasons are:
• 
If  for  instance  the  governments  had  been  able  to  theoretically  operate  the  public  sector
without debts in the past 15  years, this  would have generated savings of over 200 million
guilders in the year 2001 only;
Furthermore,  these  200  million  guilders  of  interest  savings  would  have  generated  in  the
private sector billions of guilders of investments because of the fewer crowding out effects of
public expenditures than we are currently experiencing;
  BIS Review 18/2001
3
  The deterioration in public assets as a consequence of maintenance backlogs would have
been reversed if only part of the savings mentioned in this context would have been invested
in these assets;
Finally we should imagine the positive effects that investment of these 200 million in savings
had generated in the educational field for the entire community.
I have given you just a few general remarks on the positive external effects that a more balanced and
responsible management of public funds would have generated in the past decades.
The focus on new economic areas of development for the future
Considering the fact that the real per capita income of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba2 is more
than US$ 10.000 this situation does not put us in the range of the ‘poor countries’. On the other hand
there  seems  to  be  a  concern,  particularly  on  the  islands  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  that  the
distribution of this income is not equitable among all members of our community. According to some
studies done last year on the poverty situation on the islands of the Netherlands Antilles, there seems
to be an increasing poverty among our fellow countrymen and some of them regrettably have taken
the easy way out of poverty through migration to the Netherlands.
In the past  20  years the  islands of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  have  been  hit  by  a  number  of  external
shocks which are still having an important negative effect on the GDP of our country. I do not have to
repeat here the reasons for these external shocks nor will I dwell in detail on the background of the
external shocks, but recent estimates put the income effect of these external shocks at approximately
20% of GDP or over 800 million guilders. Particularly for well developed economies this type of severe
economic  blows  of  this  magnitude  would  have  thrown  them  back  for  years  in  development  if  no
external assistance had been available. As an example the Latin-American debt crisis of the 80s is an
excellent  reference  point  in  time  to  illustrate  how  external  shocks  can  severely  hamper  economic
development in larger and less vulnerable economies. Still, many countries in Latin America are slowly
recovering from these shock even today.
How have we reacted to these external shocks here since 1986? There is a number of ways that can
be given on how we are managing ourselves out of this crisis:
Migration as a social safety net:
During the last 5 years and estimated number of some 40.0003 persons from our islands (mainly from
Curaçao) left to Holland to secure a better future for their families.
The migration has dramatically affected the workplace, so much that it is one of the explanations for
the tempered decline in the unemployment rate. This migration makes it also more difficult to quickly
recover from the recession on the islands. For the year 2000 we estimate that the unemployment rate
declined from 15.5% to approximately  14.9%,  in spite  of the economic downturn. This is to a  great
extent attributable to the migration effects.
Labor market flexibility:
Another important explanation for the structurally high unemployment rate is the rigidity problems the
labor market on the islands of the Netherlands Antilles. Under the program of economic recovery that
this  government  signed  with  the  IMF  on  September  15,  2000  significant  positive  steps  were
undertaken to increase flexibility in our markets. Most of the economic measures agreed upon with the
IMF are focused on enhancing labor market flexibility and improving the business climate.
For example, almost all measures related to the labor market are focussed on increasing the flexibility
for the employer to adjust capacity  to market demand. Furthermore, the  procedures  for  obtaining  a
permit for establishing a business are being streamlined, and it was agreed to introduce more flexibility
in regulations on shop opening hours. Moreover, legislation on e-commerce and on the establishment
of  economic  zones  (E-zones)  has  been  adopted  by  parliament  in  order  to  promote  business
                                                     
2 
3  Preliminary  information  of  the  Statistics  (CBS)  "Census  2001"  indicates  that  the  population  of  Curaçao  dropped  from
 For Aruba the real capita income as per the end of 1999 reached US$11.600
144.000 to 130.000 from 1992 2001
4
BIS Review 18/2001
development.  In  addition  to  these  local  efforts,  several  international  organizations  are  involved  in
assessing the business climate. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), a subsidiary of the
World Bank, is looking into the attractiveness of the Netherlands Antilles as a location to invest, while
the OECD has evaluated the legislation for the international financial and business services sector.
Furthermore, during a two-week mission in December 2000, the World Bank visited all the islands in
an effort to develop a long term economic growth strategy for the Netherlands Antilles.
Debt financing to pay for adjustments:
The third  way  we are trying to  get  out  of the crisis is through debt refinancing.  I have to clarify my
position on this by saying that this is not the correct way of resolving the crisis.
Since  19864  our  governments  have  adopted  the  policy  of  adjustments  through  additional  local
financing and accumulation of arrears. To a great extent this policy option explains the growing debt
and interest burden in the public sector budgets.
Coming back now to the more recent economic and financial situation, I can say the following. On the
fiscal  front,  a  budget  deficit  of  NAf.160  million  (3.6%  of  GDP)  is  estimated  for  the  year  2000.
Compared to 1999, government revenues have increased considerably due to more tax revenues.
This increase resulted from the rise of turnover tax rates and measures to improve the tax assessment
and collection. On the other hand, expenditures increased also, mainly because the government had
to pay part of the claims related to the Parker-guarantee to a foreign financial institution.
The NAf. 160 million budget deficit equals the target agreed upon with the IMF in the Memorandum of
Economic  Policies,  signed  on  September  15,  2000.  This  program,  which  has  to  be  implemented
before the end of March 2001, contains a number of measures in various areas, such as the reduction
of  the  budget  deficit,  the  flexibilisation  of  the  labor  and  product  markets,  and  trade  liberalization.
Furthermore, the program contains targets for the level of credit extension and the foreign exchange
reserves.  As  a  result  of  the  agreement  with  the  IMF,  the  Dutch  government  has  made  available  a
substantial  amount  of  liquidity  support  in  2000  (NAf.  110  million).  The  release  of  these  funds  is
conditional on the progress made in the implementation of the policy measures.
For 2001 no economic recovery  is  yet foreseen,  as economic activity  is expected to drop by  0.5%.
This decline is related to the drop in public expenditures in an effort to cut the budget deficit by 50%.
In addition to the decline in public expenditures, private consumption will drop further due to continued
migration, the reduction in the number of civil servants and the freeze on government salaries.
In contrast, private investment is expected to pick up in 2001. This increase is related to several large
investment projects in the tourism sector and at the Isla refinery. Contrary to domestic demand, foreign
demand is excepted to increase as a result of a recovery in stay-over tourism.
The  inflation  rate  accelerated  from  0.8%  in  1999  to  5.1%  in  2000,  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in
turnover  tax  rates.  In  addition  to  this  domestic  factor,  the  sharp  increase  in  the  oil  price  and  the
increase in inflation at our main trading partners contributed to the higher price level.
The  tourism  industry  is  currently  undergoing  a  difficult  period.  Stay-over  tourism  has  been  slow  for
some time, and the spectacular increase in cruise tourism has not been able to compensate for this.
The  decline  in  stay-over  tourism  particularly  for  Curaçao  and  Bonaire,  is  related  to  the  weak  Euro,
which makes our islands more expensive for European visitors. Fortunately, the average length of stay
and  the  average  amount  spent  on  the  islands  have  increased  slightly,  dampening  the  effect  of  the
drop in the number of visitors.
The  tourism  industry  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is  expected  to  improve,  as  room  capacity  will  be
restored  in  St.  Maarten.  The  projections  for  Curaçao  looks  quite  positive  also,  as  a  number  of
investment projects are under way, like Brionplein Hotel, Kura Hulanda, Cornelisbaai, and Jan Thiel
Baai.
                                                     
4
This was the last year that the general government had a positive balance in their budgets.
BIS Review 18/2001
5
Furthermore, there are plans for tourism related projects at Caracasbaai  and Blauw Baai,  while the
Curaçao  Ports  Authority  is  considering  a  second  mega-pier  to  accommodate  the  growth  in  cruise
tourism.
To  conclude,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  the  Antillean  economy  has  been  going  through  a  deep
recession during the past few years. The financial crisis with the government spread through the entire
economy, creating a social and economic crisis. The only way out of this negative spiral is to tackle the
financial  problems  of  the  government.  The  government  has  made  considerable  progress  in  the
implementation  of  the  policy  program  agreed  upon  with  the  IMF,  but  some  delays  have  surfaced
during the last two months. The reduction in the financial needs of the government, coupled with the
gradual restoration of confidence, will lay in my view a solid basis for sustainable economic growth.
Economic growth will create better prospects for jobs and an improvement of living standards.
6
BIS Review 18/2001
