Y V Reddy: Issues in choosing between single and multiple regulators of
financial system
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Public  Policy
Workshop, at ICRIER, New Delhi on 22 May 2001.
 Respected Chairman, Dr. Patel, Dr. Isher Ahluwalia and distinguished participants.
I  am  here  in  fulfillment  of  a  promise  made  to  Mrs  Isher  Ahluwalia  some  time  back  to  make  a
presentation at this prestigious institute. Needless to say it is a privilege to be here; and I am thankful
to  the  organizers  for  giving  me  freedom  to  choose  the  subject  of  the  day.  My  fascination  for  this
subject  is  only  about  four  yours  old.  Dr.  Rangarajan,  the  then  Governor  deputed  me  to  attend  the
fourth Central Bank Governors Symposium in London on my way to the annual meeting of Bank for
International  Settlements  at  Basle.  The  broader  issue  of  financial  regulation  and  the  contemporary
issue of single regulator had then just been decided upon in United Kingdom. In view of recent interest
in the subject in India, I thought that I should share my thoughts on the choice between single and
multiple regulators for our financial system. It is a great personal honour to me that Dr. I.G. Patel is
presiding  over  this  session  as  his  scholarship,  statesmanship,  sage  counsel,  and  outstanding
leadership are admired by all of us.
I have divided this presentation into five parts. First, the institutional structure for regulation needs to
be considered with an initial broad understanding of the rationale for regulation, regulatory coverage,
policy frame and the operational aspects. Second, the structural aspects of regulation are presented
encompassing the reasons for recent interest in the subject, pros and cons of single versus multiple
regulators, the international experience and the developing countries’ perspective. Third, the current
status of the regulatory structure. Fourth, the contours of the current debate on the subject. Fifth part,
the  issues  for  consideration.  It  is  argued  that  the  historical  context,  the  state  of  development  of
financial markets and the level of skills available should be considered in making a choice. It is also
argued that apart from single and multiple regulators, hybrid arrangements can be explored to suit the
requirements of our country. While change from the current status appears desirable, the issue is not
only  one  of  choosing  an  appropriate  model,  but  also  one  of  managing  the  process  of  change  and
sensitizing all participants to the changing circumstances. In any case, an ideal structure by itself does
not  guarantee  optimal  regulation,  and  in  any  structure,  coordination  among  all  wings  involved,
including the Government, is critical.
Financial regulation
There are several theories that attempt to explain regulation in general and financial sector regulation
in particular. These include theory of competition for regulation and theory of regulatory capture on the
one hand and public interest theory aimed at correcting market failures on the other. Since there are
virtually no takers for frontier capitalism, the rationale for regulation lies in the search for a public policy
that makes markets work better, while avoiding the dangers of excessive burden by treating regulation
as  a  free  good  and  the  scope  for  regulatory  capture  by  the  few  suppliers  compared  to  the  large
dispersed consumers. More generally, the objectives of regulation are to avoid monopoly power, foster
competition and protect the consumer’s interest.
In regard to  financial  regulation,  however,  there  is  a  slight  change  in  emphasis  in  the  objectives  of
regulation in the sense that the focus is on maintaining systemic stability and protecting the interest of
the customer. Maintaining systemic stability is important because social costs of financial distress are
high in the form of the contagion effect. A wholesale customer, such as a corporate or large net worth
individual, should be in a position to have the capacity and resources to make informed choices. But, a
retail customer, such as small saver or small borrower, cannot incur the cost of getting information,
acquire or employ skills to analyse, have large enough volumes to learn from experience, big enough
portfolio to spread risks, and as such will be unequal in relation to the financial intermediary. Above all,
economies of scale are  likely  in monitoring of information on a collective  basis. In brief,  the  why  of
financial  regulation  should  be  considered  essentially  in  the  light  of  the  primary  objectives,  namely,
BIS Review 44/2001
1
the 
maintaining systemic stability and giving an impression of protecting interests of the retail customer;
and implicitly other objectives will have to be secondary.
In India the regulation of financial sector has evolved  as  an  instrument  of  planned  development.  In
such  a  situation  the  objectives  are  mobilisation  of  savings,  and  allocation  of  investible  resources
mainly  through  public  sector  and  or  administered  prices  of  financial  products.  There  has  been  an
implicit sovereign guarantee of maintaining systemic stability and in the process giving an impression
of protecting interests of all participants. The management of the financial sector, therefore, contained
a variety of objectives and to this end many financial institutions were nationalised (banks) or created
(Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India  or  Unit  Trust  of  India)  to  subserve  ends  of  planned
development,  thus  relegating  the  role  of  competition  as  an  instrument  of  efficiency  to  a  secondary
position. Furthermore, co-ordination among the financial institutions took precedence over arms length
relationships or checks and balances, thus introducing what may be called a joint-family approach to
financial  transactions,  which  undermined  both  the  degree  of  transparency  and  the  extent  of
accountability.
The  next  question  is,  what  constitutes  regulation.  Regulation  in  its  broadest  sense  includes
establishing specific rules of behaviour, or regulatory aspect per se, monitoring or tracking observance
of  behaviour;  and  supervision  or  oversight  of  the  compliance  with  specific  rules  in  the  overall
behaviour  along  with  disincentives  and  penal  provisions  for  non-compliance.  There  are  some
arguments in favour  of  formally  separating  the  regulatory  aspects  from  supervisory  aspects  but  the
current international practice favours the two functions being viewed together. In this presentation, the
functions  are  not  viewed  differently,  and 
terms  regulation  and  supervision  are  used
interchangeably to cover all three functions, unless otherwise indicated. The Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) is generally looked at inter alia through three angles, viz., (i) monetary authority (ii) regulatory
authority  (iii)  supervisory  authority.  It  is  clearly  possible  to  separate  the  monetary  function  from  the
other  two  though  such  a  separation  between  regulation  and  supervision  could  pose  problems.  The
impression that the supervisory function needs to be segregated from the regulatory responsibility has
been reinforced by the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee (1998) to the effect that the
supervisory  function  be  removed  from  the  central  bank  and  be  made  autonomous.  In  operational
terms,  however,  supervision  is  an  integral  part  of  the  regulatory  framework.  In  India,  in  some
instances,  regulation,  monitoring  and  supervision  are  combined  with  business  or  commercial
relationship  as  in  the  case  of  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Development  (NABARD)  or  Small
Industries  Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI).  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  such  apex  supervisory
institutions competing or jointly financing with the institutions that they regulate and refinance some of
them as in the case of state-level industrial corporations. Thus developmental objectives are pursued
jointly by national and state-level public-sector financial intermediaries, some of which, like Industrial
Development Bank of India (IDBI) have private-shareholding also, and in the process, the distinction
between regulator and participant in the business gets blurred.
The  objective  of  regulation  may  be  institution  based  or  function  based  or  even  product  or  market
oriented.  In  other  words,  a  regulator  may  regulate  banks  though  banks  may  involve  themselves  in
other  activities  such  as  being  an  intermediary  in  capital  markets.  Alternatively,  the  capital  market
regulator  may  regulate  all  activities  relating  to  public  issue  or  trading  in  securities  whether  those
functions are performed by banks or non-banks. Similarly, all institutions  which take public  deposits
may be regulated by one regulator. Yet another approach is to consider regulation in terms of markets
say government securities, or money market or forex. In India, capital markets and insurance activities
were regulated by Ministry of Finance till the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Insurance
Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  (IRDA)  were  set  up  recently  while  Development  Financial
Institutions  (DFIs)  have  recently  begun  to  be  regulated  /  supervised  by  RBI. While  most  banks  are
regulated by the RBI, some are under dual control of government and RBI. Department of Company
Affairs  (DCA)  regulates  deposit  taking  activities  of  corporates  other  than  banks  and  non-banking
financial companies registered under companies Act, but not those which are under separate statutes.
Thus, the object of regulation itself is susceptible to some overlap, but the major issue in this regard
relates to the regulation of banks, namely whether banks should be necessarily treated as a separate
and special group of institution for regulatory purposes.
There has been significant debate on whether banks are special, and should be treated as such. The
rapid  development  of  capital  markets,  increasing  importance  of  non-bank  sources  of  financial
intermediation and the emergence of universal banking have led to the erosion of importance as well
as uniqueness of banks as financial institutions. There are, however, three major reasons adduced for
treating  them  as  special.  First,  they  are  participants  in  the  payments  system  and  hence  are  the
2
BIS Review 44/2001
backbone of the financial system. The systemic risks of any one bank being affected either on account
of  its  banking  operations  or  on  account  of  non-banking  operations  are  high.  Second,  the  banks
contract for liquid deposits to acquire illiquid assets and hence are vulnerable to liquidity crisis. This
would underline the need for a lender of last resort. Third, the banks are the major service providers
for  retail  customers  and  are,  therefore,  on  a  separate  footing  in  terms  of  consumer  protection,
especially  since  the  customers  of  a  bank  are  typically  risk-averse.  In  other  words,  while  retaining
incentive for banks to be always solvent, there is constructive ambiguity in extending liquidity by lender
of last resort. Thus, banks, particularly those with access to payments system are generally treated as
a separate class in a regulatory framework – particularly in developing countries. In India, all banks
are subject to RBI’s regulation but the framework is not uniform in the sense that public sector banks,
cooperative banks, and private banks are governed by significant differences and not all of them have
access to the payments system. The RBI is a regulator of banks but is also the dominant owner of the
largest  commercial  bank.  Such  close  links  were  considered  essential  for  effective  coordination  in
financial sector as part of the early endeavours of planned development and the channeling of credit.
Regulation policy should recognize and admit that the fact of regulation does not guarantee that there
will be no risk of failure or insolvency of a regulated unit. In fact, a zero failure system is likely to be
sub-optimal. There is always a danger that people perceive that mere act of an entity being regulated
provides a guarantee from the regulator that it is risk free to transact business with the unit. The risks
arise  due  to  several  problems,  mainly  related  to  lack  of  information.  First,  it  is  difficult  to  precisely
assess even for the regulator how good the internal controls in a regulated entity are on an on-going
basis. Frauds that occur in connivance with the management of the bank are even more difficult to
detect  if  they  occur  between  two  inspections  as  the  offsite  surveillance  may  not  throw  up  this
information.  Second,  there  is  no  way  of  perfect  and  continuous  assessment  of  adherence  to  the
external  rules  imposed  by  the  regulator.  Third,  even  under  most  prudent  circumstances,  there  is  a
residual risk.
Regulation is often perceived to be a free good, available at no cost, but it is not so. There are costs of
administering regulation; of compliance; and there are also structural costs. Excessive or inappropriate
regulation can stifle efficiency, and invite problems of what are known as moral hazard and adverse
selection. It may even provide incentives for the over regulated business overtly or covertly depending
on  the  nature  of  the  business  to  move  to  entities  which  are  not  so  regulated.  Moreover,  there  are
savers who are willing to have a portfolio with different degrees of risk and return and correspondingly
there are investment avenues. An efficient regulatory policy should provide avenues for a spectrum of
risks and rewards, make it clear that regulation by itself does not guarantee risk-free transaction and
ensure  that  overall  benefits  to  the  system  are  commensurate  with  the  overall  costs  incurred.  All
failures  of  a  regulated  unit  do  not  represent  failure  of  regulation  and  a  regulator  cannot  guarantee
compensation  for  those  affected  by  failures  other  than  those  covered  by  deposit  insurance.  But,  a
regulator  has  to  maintain  the  credibility  in  terms  of  assurance  of  systemic  stability  and  consumer
protection, especially in terms of information availability in a timely and transparent manner particularly
to retail customers. "Public policy arrangements should never eliminate the incentive for consumers of
financial services to exercise due care" (Charles Goodhart, 1998).
It is useful to refer to some operational aspects of financial regulation, which impinge on effectiveness
of regulation. First, how much of regulation through supervisory arm should be externally imposed by
regulator  and  how  much  should  be  left  to  market  discipline  so  as  to  make  the  behaviour  of  the
regulated unit consistent with regulators intent. Second, whether intensity of regulation is such that it is
considered to be the minimum with incentive for better behaviour by the regulated unit or is regulation
such as to ensure mere compliance and no more. Third, how much of regulation should be off-site and
how much on-site. Fourth, how much of regulation should  be  incentive  based,  which  would  include
disincentives.  Fifth,  how  far  do  consultations  with  market  participants  help  enhanced  efficiency  and
when  does  such  consultation  end  up  as  capture  of  regulator  by  the  regulated.  Sixth,  how  much  of
findings  of  supervisory  oversight  be  put  in  public  domain  and  how  much  kept  for  communication
between the regulator and the regulated. Seventh, how much of the supervisory oversight should be
strictly  rule  based  and  how  much  of  judgment  of  overall  compliance  acceptable.  Briefly  stated,  the
answer to all these questions lies in seeking and striking a right balance. These are several issues
which  need  to  be  addressed  irrespective  of  the  structure  of  regulation.  Of  particular  relevance  to
Indian conditions is the need to appreciate the difference between administering law or public welfare
and  regulation  of  financial  entities  and  also  not  mixing  up  issues  between  the  two  roles.  Similarly,
process of deregulation or rationalization of regulation should not imply dilution in supervision and, in
fact, should be complemented by close monitoring and effective supervision, especially adequate and
timely penal action as appropriate.
BIS Review 44/2001
3
Finally an optimal regulatory framework ensures both autonomy and accountability of the regulator. To
ensure these, regulatory objectives need to be spelt out clearly and full operational freedom granted to
achieve the objectives through exercise of powers granted to the regulator over the regulated entities.
At  the  same  time,  the  regulators  should  be  as  transparent  as  possible  and  fully  accountable.
Accountability should no doubt be with reference to overall objectives and effectiveness. If individual
actions  of  a  regulator  are  subjected  to  external  scrutiny,  there  may  be  a  preference  for  regulatory
inaction, just as, if individual case of inaction is subjected to such a scrutiny, there may be superfluous
or even obnoxious regulatory actions. In brief, the credibility of a regulatory framework is enhanced by
making it accountable for the overall performance in terms of well defined objectives. In India, many of
the  joint  family  approaches  are  not  consistent  with  some  of  these  principles.  For  example,  the
regulator  has  a  nominee  on  the  board  of  the  regulated.  The  Government  to  whom  a  regulator  is
accountable  has  dominant  presence  on  the  board  of  a  regulator,  who  has  to  exercise  operational
autonomy.  These  arrangements  may  give  some  advantages  of  coordination  but  have  also
disadvantages of role-conflict leading to inadequate regulatory focus and diffused accountability.
Structural aspects of financial regulation
Recently,  there  has  been  significant  attention  to  structural  aspects  of  regulation.  Thus,  a  unified
regulator was announced in UK in 1997; changes have been considered in Australia and reform has
been brought about in Japan. Further, legislative changes in the USA have to some extent diluted the
compartmentalization  of financial  activities  and  regulatory  framework,  which  had  been  described  as
"hotchpotch of different regulators for different bits of financial services industry, mainly for reasons of
history rather than deliberate strategy" (The Economist, May 5, 2001). Irrespective of the actual policy
preferences  or  reforms  across  the  globe,  the  structural  issue  of  financial  regulation  has  recently
gained attention for several reasons.
First,  the  growth  of  financial  sector  is  characterised  by  the  blurring  of  distinction  between  banking,
securities and insurance activities.
Secondly, even if these institutions and activities are treated with a compartmental approach and even
if risks are considered separable, the linkages are such that the contagion cannot be avoided.
Thirdly,  globalisation  has  resulted  in  multifunctional  global  conglomerates  warranting  appropriate
changes in structural aspects of domestic regulation.
Finally, it is argued that banks can still be treated separately for purposes of prudential requirements
without necessarily linking them with  the central bank, whose primary responsibility should  be  price
stability.
In considering the pros  and  cons  of  single  regulator  or  unified  regulation  and  multiple  regulators,  a
major issue that needs to be addressed is: should banks be supervised by central banks? A case for
keeping supervision with the central bank is generally made out on the following grounds.
First, in order to assess the creditworthiness of the participants in the payments systems, the central
bank needs to form a judgment on aspects of liquidity and solvency and prudent conduct of banks.
Secondly,  supervision  complements  the  central  bank’s  market  intelligence  system  with  a  detailed
knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of individual banks and, therefore, of the banking system
as a whole.
Thirdly, knowledge of developments in the banks’ balance sheets can be important in assessment of
macroeconomic conditions.
Fourthly, lender of last resort function has a potential for moral hazard in the system and may cause
banks to gamble for resurrection, requiring the central bank to ensure that banks are well supervised.
Fifthly,  there  are  substantial  economies  of  scale,  especially  when  there  is  scarcity  of  skilled
professionals in the area of finance.
Sixthly,  independence  of  bank  supervision  is  automatically  provided  if  the  central  bank  enjoys
autonomy,  thus  avoiding  politcisation  of  bank  regulation.  In  other  words,  central  banks  do  enjoy  a
tradition of independence and lesser politicisation.
There  are,  however,  strong  advocates  of  separation  of  monetary  policy  function  and  of  banking
supervision too. It is said that monetary policy independence would be compromised due to possible
conflict between monetary policy and banking regulation/supervision. For example, the central bank
4
BIS Review 44/2001
may  relax  monetary  policy  in  times  of  extreme  weaknesses  in  the  banking  system  rather  than  for
macroeconomic reasons. In fact, Dr.Rangarajan had stated "Therefore I feel that the responsibility of
banking supervision being carried on to the central bank might make it more difficult in my opinion to
gain the kind of independence that we are talking about". Further, bank failures or weaknesses may
undermine the credibility of the central bank.
Assuming that one  has an open mind  on the  issue mentioned above,  the  arguments in favour  of a
single regulator can be summarized as follows:
First, there are economies of scale for the regulator since unification may permit cost savings on the
basis of shared infrastructure, administration and support systems.
Secondly, the regulated units also benefit since unification mitigates the costs which supervised firms
with diverse activities (i.e. financial conglomerates) bear for dealing with multiple regulators.
Thirdly, accountability is enhanced since complexity of the multiple supervisory system could lead to
lack of clarity of roles and consequently lack of accountability.
Fourthly, regulatory arbitrage can be avoided in the case of a single regulator. In a multiple regulatory
regime, fragmentation of supervision could lead to competitive inequalities as different units, possibly
offering similar products or services, are supervised differently.
Fifthly,  reducing  the  number  of  regulators  could  allow  scarce  supervisory  resources  especially  in
specialist areas to be pooled.
Sixthly,  a  single  regulator  can  respond  more  effectively  to  market  innovation  and  development  as
there would be no regulatory gray areas.
Finally, unification aids in international cooperation as there is a single contact point for all regulatory
issues. In developing countries where banks dominate in banking insurance and securities business,
there may be a case for unified regulation.
Not surprisingly, the arguments against the idea of a single regulator are equally strong.
First, unification could lead to lack of clarity in functioning as multiple regulators tend to have different
objectives.  This  objective  may  be  depositor  protection  for  banks  vs  investor  protection  for  capital
markets vs consumer protection for other financial firms.
Second, concentration of power could vitiate democratic policies.
Third, there may actually be diseconomies of scale since monopolistic organizations can be more rigid
and bureaucratic than specialist agencies because they would typically be large and too broad based
structures for effective regulation of the entire system.
Fourth,  there  may  be  unintended  consequence  of  public  tending  to  assume  that  all  creditors  of
supervised institutions will receive equal protection.
Finally, the focus of banks, securities and insurance supervisors being different, pooling of skills and
objectives, pooling of resources may not produce the synergy that is expected.
One way of reconciling the idea of a single regulator with keeping bank supervision as a part of central
bank is to have the central bank itself as a super regulator. A clear example of this unified supervision
is the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
In USA, there are multiple regulators even for banks who are accountable to Federal Reserve, FDIC
and State authorities.
In  India,  there  is  a  separate  agency  for  each  main  sector  but  there  are  examples  of  a  variety  of
combinations such as combined securities and insurance regulators (Chile, South Africa); combined
banking and securities regulators (Germany, France); and combined banking and insurance regulators
(Australia, Canada). Currently, examples of unified regulator outside the central bank are UK. Japan,
Korea and Sweden.
It is also necessary to recognize that several arrangements are possible whereby the single or multiple
regulators  can  function  while  ensuring  appropriate  coordination,  sharing  of  facilities,  and  where
appropriate  establishing  clear  cut  division  of  responsibilities.  It  is  possible  to  readily  identify  four  of
them:  (1)  Unified  Oversight  Board  which  leaves  the  existing  structure  in  place  but  overlay  it  with  a
newly  established  oversight  board  comprising  heads  of  different  agencies  (South  Africa).  (2)
Unification of support services which keeps agencies as separate legal entities but provides shared
BIS Review 44/2001
5
infrastructure  and  support  services.  (3)  Shared  facilities  with  central  bank  which  establishes  unified
supervisory agencies as  a separate  agency,  but  have  it share the support services with the central
bank (Finland). (4) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which establishes framework of cooperation
between government, central bank and single regulator (Memorandum of Understanding of UK 2001).
The  guiding  principles  of  the  MoU  are  accountability,  transparency,  no  duplication  and  information
exchange.
The international status in regard to the regulatory structures has been reviewed by the International
Monetary  Fund  (IMF,  December  2000).  The  study  notes  that  in  approximately  half  of  the  countries
examined in a recent study, the revealed preference is for a regulatory structure based on specialised
agencies. The study shows that 35 countries have separate agencies for each main sector,  3 have
combined securities and insurance regulators, 9 have combined banking and securities regulators, 13
have central  banking  and  insurance regulators,  3  have  unified  supervision  (in  central  bank)  and  10
have unified supervision (outside central bank).
It will be interesting to explore further the countries that adopted the unified model. The ten countries
classified as having adopted this organizational form are Australia, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Japan,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. In at least two cases –
Australia  and  Canada  –  the  regulatory  structure  is  not  fully  unified,  as  securities  regulation  is
conducted separately from banking and insurance regulation.  As mentioned  already, in Singapore’s
case, regulation has been unified within the central bank. This leaves only seven countries that have
fully  unified  regulatory  agencies  separate  from  the  central  bank.  Over  half  these  are  in  Nordic
countries.  In  brief,  while  there  is  a  significant  global  interest  in  examining  the  desirability  of  unified
financial sector supervision – combining banking, insurance and securities regulation, the practitioners
continue to be very few so far.
While there are only a few practitioners of unified model, it is noteworthy that almost all of them are
developed economies. In examining this issue, it may be useful to consider the organizational status
of banking supervision since banking is more special in developing countries. The Financial Stability
Institute’s  publication  on  the  subject  (Occasional  Paper  1),  makes  interesting  observations:  "The
evidence  appears  to  be  that  the  weight  of  argument  is  moving  towards  the  adoption  of  a  separate
unified  supervisory  body  within  more  developed  economies.  But  does  that  same  balance  hold  for
emerging  and  transitional  countries?"  The  publication  notes  that  in  view  of  the  Asian  crisis,  "it  is
possible that international pressures, e.g. through the IMF, will interact with domestic forces to lead
towards  better  funded,  more  skilled  and  more  independent  supervisory  bodies  irrespective  of  how
these are structurally organized". The conclusion is instructive : "If so, then structure may come not to
be  an  important  issue  for  the  conduct  of  banking  supervision.  Perhaps,  but  for  the  time  being,  the
balance  of  argument  would  suggest  that  in  less  developed  and  transitional  economies  it  would  be
safer and better to integrate banking supervision into the ambit of the Central Bank".
Mr.Howard Davies, in the Tenth C.D.Deshmukh Memorial Lecture "International Financial Regulation:
The Quiet Revolution" makes a valid point of relevance to India: "in countries where the central bank is
well established as an independent institution, and where the interplay between the banking system
and  the  government’s  finances,  perhaps  because  of  state  ownership,  or  state  run  programmes  of
lending,  is  close,  then  one  can  see  a  stronger  argument  for  central  bank  involvement  in  banking
supervision".
The reasons for caution in advocating unified model for developing countries have been  articulated
very well by Professor Charles Goodhart in the Eleventh C.D.Deshmukh Memorial Lecture "Whither
Central  Banking?":  "I  doubt  whether  the  pressures  to  establish  a  unified,  specialist,  supervisory
agency are quite so strong in most developing countries. The financial system is less complex, and
dividing lines less blurred. Commercial banks remain the key players. Moreover, the Central Bank in
most developing countries is relatively well placed for funding, is a centre of technical excellence, and
can maintain greater independence from the lobbying of commercial and political interests on behalf of
certain favoured institutions. If the supervisory agency is placed under the aegis of the Central Bank, it
should  share  in  these  benefits  of  better  funding,  technical  skills  and  independence.  There  are  too
many cases of supervisory bodies, outside Central Banks, failing in such respects. For such reasons I
do not believe that the case for separation, which has become stronger in developed countries, should
be transposed also to developing countries". It is, however, necessary to recognize that there may be
a  variety  of  systems,  even  among  developing  countries.  However,  in  most  cases,  systems  are
underdeveloped in terms of coping mechanisms (such as good governance practices), which makes
them  fragile  and  more  vulnerable.  Besides,  in  developing  economies,  there  is  concentration  of
economic activity  with few economic players. To deal  with  situations  from  such  scenario,  therefore,
6
BIS Review 44/2001
function  specific  supervision  may  be  necessary  but  not  adequate  unless  there  is  an  institutional
framework for effective overall coordination.
Perhaps, one should also examine the possibility of unified supervision under central bank itself in the
case of developing countries. On this, Dr Chandavarkar, who made an outstanding analysis of Central
Banking in Developing Countries (1996) has this to state:  "Although the case for the central bank’s
supervisory  role  is,  on  balance,  stronger,  this  does  not  imply  that  there  is  necessarily  a  case  for
merger of existing autonomous supervisory agencies with central banks, which can continue, provided
there is effective coordination between the agency and the central bank".
Current status in India
In India, as in the case of many other countries, there are several agencies entrusted with the task of
regulation and supervision of different institutions and market participants in the financial sector. While
the specific objective may vary from depositor protection and investor protection to market regulation,
their common concern is maintaining financial stability. The RBI regulates and supervises the major
part of the financial system through its various departments. The supervisory role covers Commercial
Banks, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) and some All-
India  Financial  Institutions  (AIFIs).  Some  of  these  AIFIs  in  turn  regulate  and/or  supervise  other
institutions  in  the  financial  sector,  viz.,  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  and  Central  and  State
Cooperative  Banks  are  supervised  by  the  RBI  through  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural
Development  (NABARD);  State  Financial  Corporations  (SFCs)  by  Industrial  Development  Bank  of
India (IDBI) (to be transferred to SIDBI) and Housing Finance Companies by National Housing Bank
(NHB).
The Board for Financial Supervision, which operates as a Committee of the Central Board of Directors
of the RBI functions as an oversight supervisory body in respect of banks, NBFCs and AIFIs. It may be
noted  that  while  NBFCs  have  been  brought  under  a  firm  regulatory  framework  through  legal
enactments,  supervisory  role  in  respect  of  AIFIs  is  of  more  recent  origin.  The  AIFIs  continue  to  be
large in size but with significant direct links with the Ministry of Finance. The RBI-NABARD relationship
has  many  different  facets.  On  behalf  of  the  RBI,  NABARD  supervises  the  banks  in  the  rural
cooperative segment, viz., the State and Central Cooperative Banks. The banks in this sector are not
supervised by the BFS. It also supervises the RRBs which are in part regulated by the RBI. The RBI
currently licences and regulates Local Area Banks (LABs), which are treated as commercial banks, but
the  supervisory  responsibility  of  these  is  with  the  RBI.  Statutory  provisions  govern  the  supervisory
responsibilities of Housing Finance Companies by NHB and SFCs by IDBI /SIDBI.
The  Registrars  of  Cooperatives  (ROC)  of  different  states  are  a  joint  regulator  for  the  banks  in  the
cooperative  sector,  both  urban  and  rural.  (For  multi-state  institutions,  the  Central  ROC  under  the
Ministry  of  Agriculture  is  the  main  regulator).  While  RBI/NABARD  are  concerned  with  the  banking
function performed by them, the management control rests with the State/Central Governments. This
dual control impacts the supervision of both RBI and NABARD over institutions in this sector.
SEBI regulates the capital markets and supervises several institutions such as the Stock Exchanges,
Mutual  Funds  and  other  Asset  Management  Companies,  securities  dealers  and  brokers,  Merchant
Bankers  and  Credit  Rating  Agencies.  SEBI  regulates  venture  capital  funds  also.  Companies  in  the
insurance  sector  are  regulated  by  IRDA.  Banks  are  permitted  to  be  involved  in  insurance  activity
through joint ventures / equity participation/selling agency type arrangements.
The Department of Company Affairs (DCA) regulates the deposit taking activities of non-banking non-
financial companies and also some activities of NBFCs.
It  is  necessary  to  recognize  that  there  are  several  mechanisms  by  which  coordination  among  the
regulators in the financial system is ensured.
First, there is exchange of information on a routine basis and on occasions through special request.
Secondly, a nominee of RBI is on the Board of SEBI.
Thirdly,  there  is  a  High  Level  Committee  on  Capital  Markets  presided  over  the  Governor  RBI  with
which the Finance Secretary, Chairman SEBI and more recently, Chairman IRDA are associated as
members.  The  High  Level  Committee  has  constituted  a  Standing  Working  Group  to  enable
coordination  between  Ministry  of  Finance,  RBI  and  SEBI  at  the  operating  level  and  assist  the
Committee in its deliberations.
BIS Review 44/2001
7
Finally, while nominees of Ministry of Finance and Department of Company Affairs are on the Board of
SEBI along with a Deputy Governor of RBI, the Finance Secretary is a member (without voting rights)
of the Board of Directors of RBI.
It must, however, be recognized that a predominant role for regulatory and supervisory coordination
remains  with  Ministry  of  Finance  for  several  reasons  such  as  statutory  basis  of  many  financial
intermediaries performing commercial functions, powers of appointment and dismissal of board level
functionaries in public sector finance institutions, predominance of public sector ownership of financial
intermediaries themselves, and above all the accountability to Parliament through the Ministry.
Current debate in India
In  India,  the  Committee  on  the  Financial  System,  1991  (Chairman:  M.  Narasimham)  had  strongly
recommended that the "duality of control over the banking system between the Reserve Bank and the
Banking  Division  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  should  end  and  that  the  Reserve  Bank  should  be  the
primary agency for the regulation of the banking system". Thus, the supervisory function of banks (and
other financial  institutions) was hived  off to a separate authority as an autonomous body  under  the
aegis of the Reserve Bank. The BFS was constituted in 1994 with the Governor, RBI as Chairman.
The concept of a Super Regulator was raised in the Report of the Working Group for Harmonising the
Role and Operations of DFIs and Banks (Chairman: S.H.Khan). The Group recommended as one of
the options, the establishment of a Super Regulator to supervise and coordinate the activities of the
multiple regulators in order to ensure uniformity in regulatory treatment. The Discussion Paper on the
subject  released  by  the  RBI  in  January  1999  observed  that  the  question  whether  the  supervisory
responsibility should lie solely with the BFS or with a separate supervisory system to be devised for
the purpose would need to be considered in due course.
The Report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms, (April 1998) (Chairman: M. Narasimham)
recommended  restructuring  of  the  existing  BFS.  The  Committee  recommended  that  an  integrated
system of regulation  and  supervision  be  put  in  place  to  regulate  and  supervise  the  activities  of  the
banks, financial institutions and NBFCs. It also recommended that the RBI Act Section 58 should be
amended to enable the RBI Central Board to frame regulations to set up a separate and distinct Board
for Financial Regulation and Supervision (BFRS). The Board’s exclusive task would be to regulate and
supervise  banks,  financial  institutions  and  NBFCs  so  as  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  the  financial
system.
Subsequently, the Report of the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision, September 2000 (Chairman
M.S. Verma) made some elaborations on the subject. "Because of Reserve Bank of India/Government
Ownership of the banks (in the public sector), there is some overlap in the role of the Reserve Bank of
India  as  owner/owner’s  representative  and  as  the  regulator/supervisor.  This  overlap  needs  to  be
corrected  so  that  Reserve  Bank  of  India  can  perform  its  regulatory  /supervisory  role  without  any
hindrance.  Government  ownership  of  banks  is  not  conducive  to  any  serious  and  urgent  corrective
action by the regulator against any one of them. The limitations of the legal process have also come in
the way even where corrective action like removal of the incompetent management is contemplated".
The Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation, May 2001 (Chairman Mr.Deepak Parekh) also
referred to the diffusion of regulatory responsibilities when it stated "The regulatory responsibility of the
securities market is vested in the SEBI, the RBI and two government departments – Department of
Company  Affairs  and  Department  of  Economic  Affairs.  Investigative  agencies  such  as  Economic
Offences Wing of the government and consumer grievance redressal forums also  play  a  role".  It  is
interesting  to  note  the  suggestion  made  by  the  Deepak  Parekh  Group  for  greater  coordination  in
regulation  through  the  High  Level  Group  on  capital  Markets  (HLGCM):.  "There  may  be  merit  in
formalizing the HLGCM by giving it a legal status. Besides, the HLGCM needs to meet more frequently
and its functioning needs to be made more transparent. Also, a system needs to be devised to allow
designated functionaries (not necessarily only at the top level) to share specified market information
on  a  routine  and  automatic  basis".  This  recommendation  relating  to  giving  a  legal  status  to  the
HLGCM  is  in  consonance  to  what  came  to  be  described  as  the  Reddy  Formula  for  handling  the
regulatory gaps and overlaps.
There have been several suggestions for improvements in regulatory mechanisms through technical
papers and reports of working groups in RBI. For example, the Technical Paper on Regulation of Debt
Markets prepared by RBI and submitted to Ministry of Finance in 1999 considered issues of concern,
an overview of money and securities markets, existing regulatory framework, review  of international
8
BIS Review 44/2001
practices  and  made  several  recommendations.  As  a  follow  up  of  one  of  the  recommendations,  the
Government of India issued notification under Section 29 A of the Securities Contract Regulations Act
formally  demarcating  clearly  the  regulatory  jurisdiction  over  money,  and  government  securities
markets. The proposed Clearing Corporation is yet another follow up of these recommendations.
Recognising the criticality of formal coordination and information exchange mechanisms between RBI
and other agencies, an internal Study Group was set up in 1998 to suggest an institutional framework
for inter-agency coordination as part of the exercise of bridging gaps in compliance with Basle Core
Principles. The Group had recommended that formal arrangement for sharing of information to be put
in place between domestic regulators and as a first step, a Group drawn from RBI, SEBI, NHB, IRDA,
NABARD and DCA could identify areas of concerns. It also recommended that a shared data base to
serve  the  information  needs  between  regulators  and  enforcement  agencies  be  put  in  place,
administered through an agency set up on the lines of FINCEN of USA.
The Report of the Group had been considered by the BFS of RBI which had taken the view that the
Ministry of Finance should be asked to form a Technical Group to look into sharing of data between
regulators. Each agency should outline what data it collects and what data it can share, which data is
confidential and which is not, which data is collected on a routine basis and  which  by  request. The
BFS also indicated that this Technical Group could be a Standing Group and should be assigned all
residuary work including formation of an agency for data collection and sharing. The BFS expressed
that NABARD/NHB need not be part of the Group as they perform delegated supervision as agents of
RBI.  Regarding  the  information  sharing  between  investigative  agencies,  it  was  suggested  that  the
Technical Group could also look into this aspect after both  the Foreign  Exchange Management Act
(FEMA)  and  Money  Laundering  Bills  are  passed.  Accordingly,  RBI  took  up  the  subject  with
Government in March 1999. These issues have been considered in different discussions held in the
Government  on  topics  such  as  the  setting  up  of  a  Serious  Frauds  Office  (SFO),  introduction  of
Suspicious Activities Reporting (SAR) and the setting up of a Credit Information Bureau. It is hoped
that  the  information  sharing  between  investigative  agencies  and  SAR  would  be  revisited  after  the
agency to administer the proposed Money Laundering Legislation is identified.
In the context of the recommendations of Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation (Chairman:
Mr.  Deepak  Parekh),  a  reference  was  made  to  Reddy  Formula,  which  represents  the  approach
articulated in several speeches since 1997, and in greater detail in August 1999. The proposal was
made after elaborating on the need for considering five features of institutional structure for regulation
in India, and the need for a review. The proposal read as follows: "Since there is no point in creating
bureaucracies, there are practical difficulties in massive redeployment of personnel, and expertise for
regulation  cannot  be  created  overnight,  some  ways  for  filling  up  the  regulatory  gaps  and  overlaps
should  be  found  without  disrupting  the  existing  regulatory  structures.  I  would  propose  that  it  is
necessary  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  an  umbrella  regulatory  legislation  which  creates  an  apex
regulatory authority without disturbing the existing jurisdiction. The features of the idea are: The BFS
of  the  RBI  can  continue  to  supervise  banks  and  non-banks  but  with  the  Deputy  Governor  as
Chairman:  the  insurance  regulating  authority  will  supervise  insurance  companies  and  SEBI  will
continue with its regulatory jurisdiction. The apex financial regulatory authority may be constituted by
statute  with  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  as  Chairman  and  the  members  could  be
Chairmen of the three regulatory agencies. The apex body should also include some outside experts
on a  part time basis. Finance  Secretary could  be  a permanent special invitee or  a regular member
without voting rights as in the case of the RBI Board. The apex authority could have by law, jurisdiction
to  assign  regulatory  gaps  to  one  of  the  agencies;  arbitrate  on  regulatory  overlaps  and  ensure
regulatory coordination. The apex authority could be serviced by a part-time secretariat of the RBI. In
a way the proposal improves and formalizes the present informal arrangement into a legislative based
authority.  The  idea  could  be  debated  as  one  of  the  options  for  regulatory  reform"  (Corporate
Governance in Financial Sector, 1999). Dr. R.H.Patil, Chairman of the Advisory Group on Corporate
Governance too expressed his preference to what he also described as Reddy Formula. A legitimate
question in this regard is the justification for Governor RBI to be the Chairman, even assuming that
he/she  is  disassociated  from  supervision  of  banks.  It  will  be  appreciated  that  every  transaction
irrespective of the market in which it takes place, has one leg in the cash/interbank market in terms of
ultimate payment/settlement. Any problem in the market in which the transaction takes place has to
impact the cash market. The RBI as the ultimate provider of liquidity (though may not be as regulator)
has, therefore, to concern itself with the stability in the functioning of all financial markets. The case for
the Governor of the RBI to be the Chairman of  the  apex  financial  regulatory  authority  rests  on  this
overall responsibility on the part of RBI.
BIS Review 44/2001
9
The regulatory  and supervisory arrangements of institutions broadly  under the aegis of the RBI are
being reviewed to differentiate between financial intermediaries that are part of the payments system
(in view of the criticality for systemic stability); that are cooperative in character (emphasizing voluntary
participation and collective management and where appropriate retail depositors interests); and others
which are intermediaries with primarily commercial orientation (other DFIs, NBFCs, etc. some of which
have  systemic  implications  while  many,  though  not  all  mobilise  retail  deposits).  A  Technical  Paper
under  preparation  in  the  RBI  on  this  subject  will  be  finalised  soon  after  consultations  with  all
concerned.
Issues
The  elaborate  treatment  accorded  to  the  issues  relevant  to  choice  between  single  and  multiple
regulators brings out conclusions on somewhat expected lines. The subject needs to be viewed in the
context of a country and the circumstances, especially the institutional history. The choice should not
be  made  as  a  measure  of  "doing  something"  to  meet  pressing  demands.  The  choice  need  not  be
made  in  extremes  of  single  and  multiple  regulators  since  there  are  possibilities  of  hybrids  and
supplementing arrangements. Under any system, issues of information exchange and coordination are
inevitable.  In  the  final  analysis,  the  regulatory  objectives,  coverage,  skills,  operational  effectiveness
and credibility are important and structures remain one element of financial regulation. In the Indian
context, considering the current status and debate, a few issues could be raised.
First, should the subject be addressed now?
The answer is obviously yes. Dr. Bimal Jalan in his Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of April 19,
2001  stated  "The  recent  experience  in  equity  markets,  and  its  aftermath,  have  thrown  up  new
challenges  for  the  regulatory  system  as  well  as  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy".  Further,
Mr.S.Subramanyam  (The  Hindu  Business  Line,  April  5,  2001)  urged:  "The  earlier  the  government
thinks  about  this  far-reaching  issue  of  regulatory  reforms,  the  better  it  will  be  for  the  accelerated
growth of the financial services industry". Moreover, definitive suggestions have also been offered, as
for  example,  by  Mr.  Tamal  Bandyopadhyay  (Business  Standard,  April  7,  2001)  "Since  the  liquidity
support has to come from the RBI – the lender of the last resort – to ward off any crisis, ideally RBI
should be made the super regulator. However, before assuming this role, the central bank must put its
house in order".
Second, should the option of changing the regulatory structure be a priority now?
The answer is not easy but clearly there are many areas of the regulatory system that need attention.
Focusing  entirely  on  regulatory  structures  may  not  be  an  adequate  response  to  the  current
weaknesses,  the  changes  needed  in  the  objectives  and  coverage  of  regulation,  and  the  emerging
challenges for higher growth as well as greater openness in external sector. Perhaps, the debate has
to  go  beyond  the  single  or  multiple  regulators,  or  hybrid  arrangements,  while  recognizing  some
urgency for putting in place effective arrangements for regulatory coordination.
Third,  what  appears  to  be  the  major  areas  for  immediate  attention  in  regard  to  financial  regulatory
system?
While it is difficult to be precise or comprehensive, the presentation made today invites attention to the
need  for  clarity  on  regulation  policy.  The  rationale,  the  scope,  the  limits  the  objectives  and  the
instruments ought to be clarified to the extent possible since there is a paradigm shift in the role of the
financial sector in economic growth and social justice. Expectations of public from regulation need to
be  clearly  appreciated  and  if  necessary  moderated.  At  an  operational  level,  arrangement  for
information exchange and coordination must be put in place and reviewed on a continuous basis. At a
legislative  level,  changes  to  distinguish  owners,  regulators  and  market  participants  in  the  financial
system are essential. Above all, designing and managing all these changes require a combination of
political will and professional skill.
Thank you.
10
BIS Review 44/2001
