I J Macfarlane: The movement of interest rates
Giblin Lecture by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the University of
Tasmania/Economic Society of Australia (Tasmanian Branch), Hobart, 18 September 2001.
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  University  of  Tasmania  for  inviting  me  to  give  this  lecture,  which
commemorates  one  of  Australia’s  truly  remarkable  men.  My  choice  of  topic  tonight  was  made  long
before  the  tragic  events  in  the  United  States  last  week.  Before  moving  on  to  the  main  body  of  my
speech, a few comments are in order about recent events.
The  first  order  of  business  for  central  banks  at  times  such  as  this  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial
markets and the payments system can operate effectively. This has been accomplished. The Federal
Reserve was open and the US payments system operating on the day of the attack. Central banks
around the world operated to assure market participants that there would be ample liquidity. We here
in Australia did likewise, and have added substantial additional funds into the cash market, and are
continuing to ensure that additional liquidity is available as required.
Assessing the lasting economic impacts of the events will take longer. Much will hinge, obviously, on
the extent to which investors and consumers in the United States respond to the tragedy by scaling
back  their  activities  and  plans.  That  is  almost  impossible  to  predict.  In  the  United  States,  where
economic  conditions  were  deteriorating  and  confidence  waning  prior  to  the  attack,  the  Federal
Reserve  has  brought  forward  an  easing  of  monetary  policy.  Some  other  countries  already  directly
affected  by  the  US  weakness  (Canada),  or  seeing  unexpected  weakness  of  their  own  (continental
Europe)  have  likewise  eased  monetary  policy.  These  moves  themselves  will  help,  of  course,  to
address  the  risks  to  global  growth  which  already  existed  and  those  —  as  yet  almost  impossible  to
assess — which may result from the reaction to the attacks themselves.
I know there were some who speculated about whether Australia might join this action today, easing
further  the  already  expansionary  setting  of  monetary  policy  currently  in  place.  We  have,  as  usual,
closely monitored events abroad and at home on a continuous basis. We have had better economic
data  in  Australia  lately  than  observed  in  the  United  States  or  Europe.  The  weakness  of  global
conditions in the short term will affect Australia, as we said in our statement announcing an easing of
policy just two  weeks ago.  But  we  have  not  seen,  in  the  past  week,  anything  relating  to  Australian
monetary policy’s field of operation which was so urgent that it warranted the suspension of the normal
timetable of the deliberative processes of our Board.
With that said, let me now return to the main body of my speech.
Sometimes it requires an effort to find the complimentary remarks that usually preface a lecture such
as this. But not so in the case of Giblin. While he is remembered principally as an economist, he did
not take up this calling on a full-time basis until he was 47 years old, by which time he had already
done so much in other areas.1 After graduating from Cambridge, during which time he played rugby for
England,  he  spent  some  time  prospecting  for  gold  in  Canada,  became  a  merchant  seaman,  a
plantation manager in the Solomon Islands, an orchardist in Tasmania, a Member of the Tasmanian
Parliament, and was decorated for bravery in World War I. As an economist, he made contributions in
a number of areas and had a close association with central banking through his membership of the
Board  of  the  Commonwealth  Bank.  But  it  is  another  aspect  of  this  extraordinarily  gifted  man  that  I
would like to commemorate tonight – his willingness to communicate difficult economic ideas to the
broader public.
Giblin wrote a series of articles in 1930 called Letters to John Smith 2 in which he set out the economic
issues facing Australia at the start of the Depression. This series faced economic issues head on, but
did not talk down to its readers. I will try to follow his example this evening. What I intend to do is to
answer three questions that are sometimes put to me by members of the public, rather than by regular
participants  in  monetary  policy  debates.  Because  the  questions  are  from  “lay”  people,  they  may
appear naive to a professional audience, but I often find that blunt untutored questions are the hardest
to answer, and they can often force a re-examination of previously unquestioned assumptions. They
                                                     
1
See Copland (1960).
ibid.
2
BIS Review 77/2001
1
can also open up some interesting historical and academic issues. I should also add that my choice of
topic tonight is not prompted by any current economic events, but is the outcome of some reflections
going back a decade or two.
The three questions are the following:
1. 
Why  does  the  Reserve  Bank  have  to  change  interest  rates  at  all:  why  can’t  they  be  left
constant?
Why  does  the  Reserve  Bank  have  to  be  involved  in  the  first  place:  why  can’t  the
determination of interest rates be left to the market?
Why do we need to set our own interest rates in Australia: why can’t we just accept the rates
of another country, e.g. the United States?
2. 
3. 
Obviously these three questions come from quite different perspectives, and the people who ask them
are  making  very  different  assumptions  about  how  an  alternative  system  for  setting  interest  rates
should work. But there is, I think, a common thread that connects them. That is the view that it would
be desirable to take away the element of discretion from interest rate setting, whether by making them
constant, by "leaving it to the market" in some sense, or by ceding the discretion to another country. In
other words, the questions arise out of a certain scepticism as to whether interest rate setting really
requires an active decision making role for the central bank.
One preliminary point to be dealt with before going to the substance of these issues is what we mean
by  "the  interest  rate".  There  are,  in  fact,  many  interest  rates  –  short-term,  long-term,  private,
government, on loans or on securities, etc. – so which one do we mean? In this discussion, it makes
most  sense  to  focus  on  the  short-term  interbank  rate  that  is  typically  set  by  a  central  bank  –  in
Australia,  the  overnight  cash  rate  (usually  referred  to  as  just  the  cash  rate).  The  rest  of  the  rate
structure can be thought of as keying off current and expected cash rates, and it is the cash rate that is
the main driver of movements in the interest rates that borrowers actually pay. So questions about the
appropriate system of interest rate setting in this context really amount, in essence, to questions about
how the cash rate should be determined.
Let me turn now to the three questions I have just outlined.
Question 1: Why do interest rates have to vary?
A lot of people are unhappy about changes in interest rates. When rates rise, there are always a lot of
complaints in the media drawing attention to the plight of people with mortgages. When rates fall, the
media usually treat this as good news, but I get a lot of letters from retirees  who take the  opposite
view. One solution would be to instruct the open market desk at the Reserve Bank to operate in a way
which kept interest rates at their current level indefinitely. Why would we not wish to do this?
There are two answers to this question: one which is historical, the other more theoretical.
The historical approach is to ask whether there has ever been a monetary system that did not involve
variations in interest rates. The answer is no. Interest rates have always moved up and down under all
the monetary regimes that have existed, whether the regime was a gold standard, a currency board, a
normal fixed exchange rate, a monetary target, an inflation target, or a regime of pure discretion by the
central  bank.  If  someone  can  think  of  an  example  of  a  successful  monetary  system  where  interest
rates never had to change, I would be very interested to hear of it.
But while most people can instinctively appreciate this point, there are, no doubt, some who would like
to know what would be wrong with trying to hold interest rates permanently fixed, even if it has not
been  done  before.  This  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  the  answer,  based  on  economics:  a  fixed
interest rate policy would be unsustainable because it would inevitably lead to either an inflationary or
a deflationary spiral.
This  conclusion  is  well  established  in  the  theoretical  literature,3  but  it  does  not  require  any  great
familiarity with monetary theory to appreciate how it is arrived at. Suppose, for example, that a central
bank attempted to set the interest rate at a low level which imparted a strong stimulus to demand and
                                                     
3
The technical way of describing the  weakness  of  permanently  fixing  the  interest  rate  is  to  say  that  it  is  an  unstable  rule
because it leads to indeterminacy of the price level. This point has been appreciated at least as far back as Henry Thornton
(1802) who analysed the inflationary consequences of the fixed interest rate policy then favoured by the Bank of England.
2
BIS Review 77/2001
activity. Over time, if that were maintained, it would cause inflation to rise, and, with a fixed nominal
interest  rate,  the  real  interest  rate  would  decline,  thus  leading  to  further  increases  in  demand  and
inflation. This process would continue through successive rounds resulting in an inflationary spiral.
By a similar logic, if the initial level of the interest rate were set too high, a self-reinforcing process in
the opposite direction would ensue, culminating in a deflationary spiral and rising unemployment. Only
if the interest rate could be set at an exact equilibrium point would these two extremes be avoided,
and, even then, the equilibrium would be temporary. Any economic event that pushed the economy
slightly away from its equilibrium would set  off one of the two self-reinforcing processes I have just
described.  One  response  to  this  line  of  argument  might  be  to  suggest  that  the  central  bank  try  to
stabilise the real rather than the nominal interest rate, but this already concedes the main point: that
the nominal rate has to be adjusted in response to information about current and prospective inflation.
Having made this point, I have to concede that there are not many people who would advocate that
interest  rates  should  literally  be  kept  permanently  fixed.  But  there  is  a  more  subtle  version  of  this
viewpoint  which  is  much  more  widely  held:  that  is  the  view  that  policy  should  always  aim  to  keep
interest rates as stable as possible. Expressed in this way, the idea sounds more reasonable, and I
think it is fair to say that it pervades some of the commentary that follows interest rate adjustments –
the idea that changes in interest rates (and especially increases) should be avoided if possible. We
need to be clear that this is an incorrect view, for the same reasons I have just outlined. If policy were
to give too great a weight to stabilising interest rates, as an end in itself, it would risk destabilising the
economy, because it would fail to keep up with inflationary or deflationary pressures as they emerge.
Of  course,  it  would  also  be  a  fallacy  to  jump  to  the  opposite  conclusion,  that  more  interest  rate
variation  is  always  better.  Obviously,  a  policy  which  made  large  and  hastily-decided  changes  in
interest rates would also be a destabilising force, so it has to be recognised that interest rates can be
moved by too much as well as too little. How much variation, then, is the right amount?
This is not the sort of question that is open to a precise quantitative answer, but it is certainly possible
to give some general principles.
• 
First, it depends on the size of the shocks that the economy experiences. Bigger interest rate
adjustments  will  probably  be  needed  the  bigger  the  shocks  to  which  you  are  responding.
When the shocks and imbalances are small, interest rates do not need to move as much
Second, it depends on how responsive the economy is to a given change in interest rates.
Arguably in the 1970s and 1980s, when inflation was high and variable, the economy was
less responsive to a given change in interest rates than it has been subsequently. Hence,
larger  changes  in  interest  rates  were  needed  to  achieve  a  given  effect.  Since  the  early
1990s, interest rate changes have generally been much smaller than in the earlier period.
Third,  it  depends  on  how  much  uncertainty  there  is.  When  you  are  very  sure  about  your
reading of the economy and about the likely effects of a change in interest rates, it may be
possible  to  move  rates  very  quickly  in  response  to  an  important  piece  of  information.  But
when you are highly uncertain about how to interpret events, it pays to be more cautious and
gradual in your approach. To use an analogy with driving — you should slow down in a fog.
  It follows from this that the "right" amount of movement in interest rates depends very much on the
circumstances. Sometimes rates will  be highly  variable, as they  were in the  1980s,  and  sometimes
they  will  be  quite  stable,  as  they  have  been  in  the  most  recent  decade.  In  all  of  this,  interest  rate
stability  should  be  seen  not  as  a  goal  in  itself,  but  as  a  by-product  of  a  stable  macro-economic
environment.
Let me turn now to the second of my three questions.
Question 2: Why not leave interest rates to the market?
This question, again, is based on a plausible-sounding premise, but the proponents of this view are
often rather unclear about what "leaving it to the market" would really mean in an operational sense. It
might mean several things.4
                                                     
4 One  possible  meaning,  that  will  not  be  discussed  here,  is  that  open  market  operations  should  be  directed  actively  to
controlling growth of the money base and thereby letting interest rates be determined as a residual. Since this suggestion
involves active intervention by the central bank, it is hardly in keeping with a "leave it to the market" approach. For those
BIS Review 77/2001
3
In its simplest form, leaving interest rates to the market would mean simply telling the Reserve Bank to
cease all open market operations. It  is  worth exploring what  would  be the consequences of such a
policy.
In a world where the Reserve Bank was undertaking no open market operations, the amount of cash
that  underpins  the  money  market  (exchange  settlement  funds,  or  what  the  academics  call  "high-
powered money") would depend on the Government’s fiscal balance, and it is not hard to see that this
would be likely to result in monetary  instability.  Any  government  deficits  not  financed  by  an  exactly
coincident issue of debt to the public, for example, would mean a rise  in cash  and a fall in interest
rates. Similarly,  a  surplus  not  exactly  matched  by  debt  retirement  would  lead  to  a  shrinkage  of  the
amount of cash and an escalation of interest rates. In both cases, there would be much more short-run
volatility  in  interest  rates  than  exists  at  present.  This  is  because  the  day-to-day  fluctuations  in  the
Government’s position, which can be quite large, would no longer be smoothed out by Reserve Bank
open market operations.
A further point to add here is that even maintaining a balanced fiscal position on a daily basis would
not ensure these effects would be avoided. Even with the fiscal position in balance, the system could
be  destabilised  by  changes  in  the  public’s  demand  for  currency.  Because  the  public’s  demand  for
currency expands with the growth of the economy, it could only be accommodated in this regime by
some other source of cash such as provided by RBA open market operations. Failing this, there would
be continuing upward pressure on interest rates and economic contraction.
I have spelled this out in some detail because proponents of the "leave it to the market" view often do
not have a clear idea of what their position really means. But if they mean simply ceasing Reserve
Bank operations, and leaving  interest rates to the market in that sense,  then  it  is  clear  that  such  a
system would not be workable. It would be a recipe for more interest rate volatility, not less.5
To  be  fair  to  those  saying  rates  should  be  left  to  the  market,  there  are  some  who  have  a  more
sophisticated view. They would argue that I have made two assumptions that could easily be changed.
First, if the Government did  not  bank  with  the  central  bank,  then  its  fiscal  position  would  not  affect
high-powered money. And second, if the central bank did not issue bank notes, but bank notes were
instead issued by commercial banks, then it would not involve the central bank having to provide cash
to the system. These changes would eliminate the central bank from the picture entirely, and bring us
to the world of "free banking" so beloved of a small group of academics.
Among supporters of the free banking ideal, there are at least two schools of thought as to how such a
system should work. One view is that money should be ultimately linked to a commodity such as gold,
so that bank notes issued by commercial banks would essentially be "gold certificates" redeemable in
gold on demand. Therefore, the supply of gold would act as a discipline against over-issue of notes
and the system would ensure that interest rates were determined by the supply and demand for funds.
While examples that resemble this outline do exist in early banking systems such as Australia before
1910,  they  all  eventually  gave  way  to  what  are  now  conventional  systems  based  around  a  central
bank.6 The reason was that such "free" banking systems were found to be prone to instability without a
central bank to manage liquidity and provide last-resort funding in a crisis. Banking systems tied to a
commodity  standard  were  simply  not  flexible  enough  to  cope  with  periodic  bank  runs  and  liquidity
crises. No doubt, the true believers in free banking would argue that the theory  was never properly
tried, and that, if it were, the market would find a solution to the apparent problems. But that is to make
the theory unassailable by pure assumption.
The other school of thought on free banking is an even more radical one.7 It proposes a system of
competing private currencies that would not have  to  be linked to any standard of value. The banks
operating in such a system would compete with one another to offer sound currencies on terms that
                                                                                                                                                                     
who would like to introduce money base targeting, see Macfarlane (1984 and 1989) and Goodhart (1995) for the contrary
view.
Another interpretation of what "leaving it to the market" could mean is that the Reserve Bank should move the cash rate to
where the market expects it to be. This could mean, for example, moving the cash rate to where the 90-day rate currently is.
The problem with this approach is that the current level of the 90-day rate is mainly a reflection of where the market expects
the Reserve Bank to set the cash rate 90 days hence. The process then becomes completely circular.
See Pope (1989) for a discussion of "free banking" in Australia prior to 1910. The more commonly cited case of free banking
is in the 18th century Scottish banking system (see White, 1984). Note, however, that other writers such as Goodhart (1988)
express scepticism that this was a true case of "free banking".
The best known proponent of this view is Hayek (1976).
6
7
5
4
BIS Review 77/2001
were  attractive  to  the  public.  In  effect,  a  country  operating  such  a  system  would  depend  upon
competition between commercial banks to ensure stability in the financial system and low inflation.
To my mind, these free-banking proposals really belong in the world of technical curiosities. They can
be  argued  to  work  in  theory,  but  the  fact  is  that  there  is  no  working  example  of  such  a  system
anywhere in the modern world. So I have to conclude that those who say interest rates should be left
to the market are proposing something that is either not workable (if they mean simply shutting down
central bank operations) or something that is much more radical than most people would be prepared
to accept.
This brings me to my third question.
Question 3: Why not just accept US interest rates?
The premise behind this question is that we could do away with the discretionary role of the Reserve
Bank by having a rule that interest rates would always be equal to those set by the US Fed. My first
comment on this is that it is hard to see why anyone would see this as a particularly attractive goal. It
certainly would not do away with central bank discretion, but only replace the discretion of one central
bank with that of another. And it would be a discretion tailored to meet US conditions, not to policy
requirements in Australia.
But leaving aside the question of whether it would be desirable, the main question I want to focus on
is: is it feasible? The answer is, it depends on how it is done. If the mechanism for achieving equal
interest rates with the United States was that we adopt the US dollar, or establish a fixed exchange
rate, then it should be technically achievable. Interest rate convergence would then be a by-product of
fixing our currency to the US dollar, and, the more credible the exchange rate peg, the more closely
our interest rates would shadow those in the United States. That was how interest rate convergence
was achieved within Europe, though the same process is proving extremely difficult in Argentina. So if
the  people  asking  us  to  adopt  US  interest  rates  are  really  arguing  for  a  change  of  exchange  rate
regime, then there is no dispute that it could probably technically be done. But this is really a different
debate from the one about how to set interest rates.
If, on the other hand, someone is arguing for adopting US interest rates under the existing exchange
rate regime, I would have to say that such a strategy would not be workable. The reasons for this are
quite similar to those I outlined earlier under question 1.
Suppose we began such a regime in a position of equilibrium, in which Australia and the United States
had the same inflation rates and there were no imbalances tending to push the exchange rate in one
direction  or  the  other.  In  these  conditions,  we  could  expect  the  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  two
countries to be the same. But if we then established a rule that Australian interest rates would always
be equal to those in the United States, the system would be extremely vulnerable to any event that
affected  the  relative  performance  of  the  two  economies.  For  example,  if  there  were  contractionary
forces operating on Australia, but not the United States, the level of interest rates would not be able to
respond, and the result would be a downturn in the Australian economy, and in extremis, deflation. An
expansionary shock would likewise destabilise the economy in the other direction. The strategy could
only  be  maintained  if,  by  a  fluke,  economic  conditions  in  the  two  countries  remained  perfectly
synchronised.
Having made this point, it is interesting to note that interest rates in Australia and the United States
have at times moved quite closely together in recent years. There is nothing wrong with that. We just
need to be clear that when this occurs, it is a result of the two countries experiencing similar economic
conditions, not something that has been set up as an end in itself.
Conclusion
In the history of monetary economics there has been no shortage of proposals to make the system
automatic, and thereby to eliminate the need for central banks to be involved in setting interest rates. I
have looked at three simple proposals of this sort, and tried to show why they would not be viable or
would  have  very  different  consequences  from  those  imagined  by  their  proponents.  In  a  modern
monetary system, it is not possible to have interest rates on automatic pilot, and so a discretionary role
for the central bank in setting interest rates cannot sensibly be avoided.
BIS Review 77/2001
5
All of this is a long way from saying how the decision-making process should work: what should be the
objectives and how the process should be governed. I have given my views on these matters in public
on many occasions, as have a number of my colleagues, so I will not go over the same ground again
tonight. Here,  I  would just note that the  most  important  modern  advance  is  to  ensure  the  decision-
making  takes  place  within  a  framework  of  well-defined  objectives  and  clear  accountability.  This  is
indeed  one  of  the  strengths  of  the  inflation  targeting  regimes  that  have  been  adopted  in  so  many
countries during the past decade. They recognise the need for a decision-maker, so that interest rates
can be adjusted in response to unfolding events, but they also place the process within a framework of
clear objectives and accountability.
Bibliography
Copland, Douglas B. (ed) (1960), "Giblin: The Scholar and the Man: Papers in Memory of Lyndhurst
Falkiner Giblin, D.S.O., M.C.", edited by Douglas Copland, Melbourne, Cheshire.
Goodhart, C.A.E. (1995), "Money Supply Control: Base or Interest Rates" in Goodhart, The Central
Bank and the Financial System, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Goodhart, C.A.E. (1988), "The Evolution of Central Banks", 2nd ed, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Hayek, F.A. (1976), "Denationalisation of Money", Institute of Economic Affairs, London, Hobart Paper
No. 70.
Macfarlane,  I.J.  (1984),  "Methods  of  Monetary  Control  in  Australia",  New  Zealand  Association  of
Economists  Annual  Conference,  Massey  University,  August,  1984.  Reprinted  in  J.D.  Juttner  and  T.
Valentine (eds), The Economics and Management of Financial Institutions, Longmans Cheshire, 1987.
Macfarlane, I.J. (1989), "Policy Targets and Operating Procedures: The Australian Case", Monetary
Policy Issues in the 1990s, Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August.
Pope,  D.  (1989),  "Free  Banking  in  Australia  Before  World  War  I",  Australian  National  University,
Working Papers in Economic History, Working Paper No. 129.
Thornton, Henry (1802), "An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain",
F.A. von Hayek (ed), London, George Allen and Unwin, 1939.
White, L.H. (1984), "Free Banking in Britain: Theory, Experience and Debate: 1800-1845", Cambridge
University Press.
6
BIS Review 77/2001
