Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy, forecasts and market communication
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank,  at  the  Norwegian  School  of
Management’s Centre for Monetary Economics, Norsk Hydro, Lysaker, 7 June 2001.
 The long-term objective of monetary policy is to contribute to low and stable inflation. Price stability is
the best contribution monetary policy can make to economic growth and prosperity. A nominal anchor
is also a necessary precondition for stable financial markets and property markets. We cannot achieve
higher employment in the long run by accepting higher inflation. On the contrary, the experience of our
country and that of others in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s is that periods of high inflation are followed
by  downturns  with  high  unemployment.  High  and  variable  inflation  also  leads  to  an  arbitrary
redistribution of wealth and income.
This  spring,  the  Government  assigned  a  new  operational  mandate  for  monetary  policy  to  Norges
Bank.  Norges  Bank  shall  set  the  key  rate  with  a  view  to  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation.  The
inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. I will use this occasion to elaborate on our interpretation of the
mandate and to discuss how it will affect the conduct of monetary policy.
The inflation outlook is presented three times a year in Norges Bank’s Inflation Reports, and forms a
basis for the  Bank’s interest rate decisions. Further  assessments are presented  every  six  weeks  in
connection with the Executive Board's monetary policy meetings.
Mandate, interpretation and implementation
New  Zealand  was  the  first  country  to  introduce  an  inflation  target  in  1989.1  Chile  followed  in  1990,
Canada in 1991, the UK in 1992, Sweden, Finland and Australia in 1993 (Finland until 1998), Spain in
1994 (until 1998) and Iceland and Norway in 2001. A number of emerging market economies like the
Czech  Republic  and  Poland,  as  well  as  Israel,  South  Africa  and  Brazil,  have  introduced  inflation
targets  in  the  last  few  years.2  The  ECB  shall  direct  its  monetary  policy  instruments  towards  price
stability, which the bank has defined as inflation of less than 2 per cent. The target of the Swiss central
bank  has  a  similar  formulation.  In  the  US,  price  and  employment  stability  are  equally  important.
Experience with inflation targets has generally been good. Low and stable inflation has underpinned
economic  growth  and  employment.  The  fact  that  conditions  were  favourable  for  low  inflation  and
renewed growth in many countries following the downturn and high unemployment in the early 1990s
may also have contributed positively.
Norway  introduced  an  inflation  target  during  a  different  phase  of  the  economic  cycle.  We  have
experienced  a  prolonged  upturn.  The  labour  market  is  tight.  High  labour  force  participation  and
demographic conditions indicate that the possibility for further growth in the labour supply is limited. In
addition, reforms that reduce the supply of labour were implemented. At the same time, because of
our large petroleum revenues, the Norwegian authorities do not face the same budget constraints on
their fiscal policy as other countries faced when they introduced inflation targets. Several of the OECD
countries have substantial budget surpluses now, however. Finland expects a budget surplus of 5.3
per cent of GDP this year.3 New Zealand and Ireland have introduced fund schemes where they invest
their budget surpluses in anticipation of higher pension disbursements later in this century.
The new Regulation on Monetary Policy was adopted on 29 March 2001.
Section  1:  Monetary  policy  shall  be  aimed  at  stability  in  the  Norwegian  krone’s  national  and
international value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments.
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  shall  underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable
developments in output and employment. Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of
monetary policy. Norges Bank's implementation of monetary policy shall, in accordance with the
                                                     
1  From 1931-1933 Sweden had a regime defined as "and with all existing means to preserve the domestic purchasing power
of the Swedish krona" (my translation). This must be interpreted as an inflation target.
2  A. Schaechter, M. R. Stone og M. Zelmer: "Adopting Inflastion Targeting: Practical Issues for Emerging Market Countries".
IMF Occasional Paper 202. Washington 2000.
3  OECD Economic Outlook no. 69 - table "General government financial balances"
BIS Review51/2001
1
first paragraph, be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary
policy  shall  be  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  approximately  2½  per  cent  over  time.  In
general, the direct effects on consumer prices resulting from changes in interest rates, taxes,
excise duties and extraordinary temporary disturbances shall not be taken into account.
Storting Report no. 29 of 2001, "Guidelines for economic policy" states:
"Consumer  price  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  within  an  interval  of  +/-1  percentage  point
around the target."
The inflation target of 2½ per cent over time is slightly higher than the targets in Sweden, Canada and
the euro area, but corresponds to targets in the United Kingdom and Australia. In the US, consumer
price inflation has been somewhat higher the last ten years. The target is approximately in line with the
average inflation rate in Norway in the 1990s.
In  our  view,  with  its  change  in  monetary  policy,  the  Government  has  recognised  low  inflation  as  a
benefit  in  itself.  History  has  shown  that  high  inflation  does  not  result  in  either  sustained  economic
growth or lower unemployment rates. A track record of low inflation since 1990 has provided Norges
Bank with a good basis for implementing monetary policy even though, as I mentioned, the inflation
target was introduced during an upturn.
Higher interest rates curb demand for goods and services and reduce inflation. Lower interest rates
have  the  opposite  effect.  If  evidence  suggests  that  inflation  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent  with
unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that  inflation  will  be  lower
than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry
here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low, or deflation, as it is to avoid an
inflation rate that is too high. When the annual use of petroleum revenues is managed according to a
long-term action plan, a policy for which there is currently fairly general political consensus, we should
normally  be  able  to  use  the  interest  rate  as  a  policy  instrument  to  prevent  high  inflation.  Normally,
monetary  policy  should  also  be  a  fairly  effective  means  of  countering  a  deflationary  recession.
Stagflation,  ie  stagnating  output  and  rising  unemployment  combined  with  rapid  inflation,  which
characterised  economic  developments  in  many  countries  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  originates  in  the
supply and output side of the economy or in income determination. If the Norwegian economy should
ever be threatened by stagflation tendencies, monetary policy must be directed towards maintaining
low and stable inflation. At the same time, structural policy  and  incomes policy should contribute to
improving the functioning of the economy, allowing economic growth and employment to pick up.
A  change  in  interest  rates  is  not  expected  to  have  an  immediate  effect  on  inflation.  Our  analyses
indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two
years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. Therefore, the
inflation outlook in two years may be viewed as a derived objective in monetary policy.
In  some  situations,  where  unexpected  events  lead  to  an  inflation  rate  that  is  too  high,  it  may  be
appropriate to apply a longer time horizon than two years. For example, reducing inflation to 2½ per
cent within this time horizon may be associated with unnecessary real economic costs. A precondition
for applying a longer time horizon is that there is clear evidence of strong confidence in low and stable
inflation  over  time  on  the  part  of  economic  agents.  Gradually,  as  we  gain  experience  with  setting
interest rates according to an inflation target, the possibilities for placing emphasis on stability in the
real economy will probably increase.
Low and stable inflation is a necessary precondition for stability in the foreign exchange and financial
market  and  the  property  market.  However,  there  have  also  been  episodes  where  bubbles  have
accumulated in these markets, in the form of sharp increases in asset prices, while inflation has been
low.  Price  increases  in  property  and  financial  markets  may  have  a  considerable  impact  on  wage
growth  and  consumer  price  inflation  after  a  period.  When  the  bubbles  burst,  the  result  may  be  an
economic downturn. In this way, developments in financial and property markets may be a source of a
more unstable  inflation environment.  In  principle,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  use  the  interest  rate  to
counter this. In practice, however, it is difficult to assess whether price trends in property and financial
markets are sustainable.
When Norges Bank concludes that the key rate should be changed, the change will in most cases be
made  gradually.  This  is  because  there  is  normally  uncertainty  about  the  situation  in  the  economy,
potential disturbances to the economy and how fast an interest rate change will affect price inflation.
But we will not always take a gradualist approach. A rapid and pronounced change in the interest rate
is  appropriate  if,  for  example,  heightening  turbulence  in  financial  markets  or  a  cost-push  shock
2
BIS Review 51/2001
resulting  from  negotiations  indicates  that  confidence  in  monetary  policy  is  in  jeopardy.  And  should
there be prospects of a deflationary recession, it would be appropriate to apply our instruments more
firmly.
If  special  circumstances  prompt  Norges  Bank  to  apply  a  different  time  horizon  than  two  years,  the
Bank  will  provide  an  assessment  of  this.  The  same  applies  if  special  emphasis  is  placed  on
developments in financial markets or property markets.
In  the  long  run,  inflation  is  determined  by  developments  in  domestic  costs,  productivity  growth  and
imported inflation. A special feature of wage formation in Norway has been that conditions for exposed
industries have received considerable emphasis in the wage negotiations, including the negotiations
for industries that do not face international competition. During the last few years, the sheltered sector
has had greater influence on overall wage developments.
The  centralised  income  settlements  in  Norway  have  been  an  arena  of  coordination,  where
macroeconomic considerations have at times received considerable emphasis. This has contributed to
maintaining low unemployment. But we have also experienced that the income settlements may be a
source  of  economic  disturbances.  The  income  settlements  in  the  mid-1970s  and  1986  had  the
strongest negative impact. The settlements in 1998 and 2000 also fuelled high cost inflation.
Retrospective evaluation of monetary policy
Today's  inflation  rate  is  partly  the  result  of  the  interest  rate  that  was  set  one  to  two  years  ago.
Therefore,  today’s  consumer  price  index  figures  provide  a  basis  for  assessing  the  results  of  the
monetary policy conducted some years ago.
Monthly figures for the consumer price index are influenced by random or temporary factors that have
little  impact  on  developments  in  inflation  over  time.  Electricity  prices  are  affected  by  precipitation
levels. Changes in indirect taxes have an immediate impact on the consumer price index. The direct
effects  of  these  factors  on  inflation  will  be  non-existent  after  a  year.  Hence,  they  will  not  have  any
significance for the interest rate, which is normally set with a view to maintaining inflation at 2½ per
cent two years ahead.
However,  it  is  still  interesting  to  adjust  monthly  inflation  figures  for  temporary  effects  to  determine
whether developments are broadly in line with our projections. Norges Bank analyses and  presents
figures for consumer price inflation where the effects of some temporary factors are excluded. In April,
the year-on-year rise in the consumer price index was 3.8 per cent. Figures were affected by sharp
increases in both  electricity and petrol prices and  by  higher  indirect  taxes.  Excluding  electricity  and
petrol prices and adjusting for changes in indirect taxes, price inflation was approximately 2½ per cent,
which is in line with the current inflation target.
It should be pointed out, however, that our adjustment of the figures may overestimate these effects.
We  assume,  for  example,  that  increases  in  indirect  taxes  are  passed  on  in  their  entirety  to  the
consumer. In practice, changes in indirect taxes are often shared by manufacturers and consumers
based on the intensity of the supply-and-demand reaction to price increases. In addition, increases in
electricity prices are not only the result of last year’s low precipitation levels in Western Norway and
BIS Review51/2001
3
higher electricity taxes. Other, more permanent conditions may also have contributed. The increase in
petrol  prices  leads  to  higher  prices  on  other  goods  such  as  transport  services  and  we  have  not
adjusted for this. However, adjusting inflation figures for direct effects of one-off factors can also be
associated with pitfalls. Higher indirect taxes and an increase in petrol and electricity prices may be a
source of accelerating inflation, via spillover effects on other prices and wages.
Other  countries  with  inflation  targets  adjust  the  consumer  price  index  for  temporary  and  random
factors in a variety of ways. In the UK, changes in interest rates have a strong, direct impact on the
consumer price index. The Bank of England aims at an inflation target that is adjusted for such effects.
In  New  Zealand,  the  inflation  target  is  formulated  as  growth  in  the  consumer  price  index,  but  the
mandate specifies factors for which adjustments may be made. These factors include price changes
due to substantial changes in commodity prices, changes in indirect taxes, considerable changes in
economic policy which directly impact prices, as well as natural disasters. There are no continuous,
fixed indicators that make adjustments for these factors, but adjustments are made if the effects are
substantial.
In  Sweden  and  Canada,  the  inflation  target  is  formulated  as  growth  in  the  consumer  price  index
without  special  exclusions.  However,  in  practice,  indices  for  underlying  inflation  are  used  in  the
implementation and assessment of monetary policy. Sweden’s Riksbank often refers to an indicator
that adjusts for the direct effects of interest rates and net indirect taxes. The Bank of Canada has now
defined a new indicator as the operational target of monetary policy. This indicator is the consumer
price index excluding the eight most volatile components: fruit, vegetables, petrol, heating oil, natural
gas, domestic air travel, tobacco products and interest rate costs. Adjustments are also made for the
effect of indirect taxes.
The consumer price index is compiled to show developments in the cost of living. To some degree, the
consumer price index overestimates developments in the cost of living. This is partly related to the fact
that the measurement method does not adequately capture quality changes  in the service  industry.
The Boskin Report (1996) discovered that the US CPI overestimated the actual cost of living increase
by 0.8-1.6 percentage points annually. Statistics Norway has assessed the measurement error in the
Norwegian  consumer  price  index.4  The  conclusion  is  that  the  Norwegian  index  also  overestimates
developments in the cost of living but that the deviation is probably well below one percentage point
annually.
National consumer price indices are constructed in various ways. For example, there are differences in
the goods and services included, the relative weights assigned to the goods and services included and
the frequency with which the weights are adjusted. In addition, the method of weighting the various
sub-indices – ie whether the arithmetic or geometric average is used – may also affect the growth rate.
Eurostat’s  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  represents  a  standard  that  facilitates  the
comparison of countries.
                                                     
4  B. Koth and L. Sandberg: "Kilder til målefeil i konsumprisindeksen" (Sources of measurement errors in the consumer price
index) Økonomiske analyser 5/97. Statistics Norway Oslo 1997
4
BIS Review 51/2001
The national index in the UK is calculated by using arithmetic averages, whereas geometric averages
are  used  in  the  harmonised  index.  Several  items  in  the  national  index  are  not  included  in  the
harmonised index, for example costs related to housing (house depreciation, council tax and building
insurance).  In  contrast,  air  fares,  university  accommodation  fees,  foreign  students’  university  tuition
fees and payments by residents of nursing and retirement homes are excluded from the national index
but  included  in  the  harmonised  index.  Year-on-year  growth  figures  in  April  showed  a  difference  of
nearly one percentage point between the Bank of England’s index (RIPX) and the HICP. This index
tied to the inflation target showed 2 per cent growth in the last 12 months, whereas the harmonised
index showed an increase of 1.1 percentage point. Different treatment of housing costs pushed the
national  index up  by more than ½ percentage point compared  with the  harmonised  index.  Different
weighting  methods  accounted  for  a  similar  proportion  of  the  increase.  Different  weights  reduced
growth in the national index by nearly ¼ percentage point compared with the harmonised index.5
Predictability, transparency and communication
Central  banks  control  the  volume  of  central  bank  liquidity  or  the  interest  rate  on  this  liquidity.  Most
central banks use the interest rate on intra-day liquidity. In Norway, this is the interest rate on banks’
sight  deposits  with  Norges  Bank,  the  sight  deposit  rate.  Banks’  net  position  vis-a-vis  Norges  Bank
fluctuates around zero. By comparison, household and private sector domestic gross debt amounts to
roughly NOK 1500 billion, whereas the total money supply is approximately NOK 750 billion. Our key
rate  has  a  direct  influence  on  a  very  small  portion  of  the  total  money  and  credit  market.  Monetary
policy would not affect price inflation if our key rate  only  influenced the interest rate on the amount
outstanding  between  the  central  bank  and  the  banks.  We  are  dependent  on  a  spillover  effect  on
interest rates on debt in the household and enterprise sectors.
The  link  between  these  variables  and  the  key  rate  runs  through  market  expectations  and  the  yield
curve. Long-term interest rates that are determined by the market reflect expected future short-term
rates, uncertainty and risk premiums. Interest rates on money market investments with maturities of
more than one day will be influenced by expectations about changes  in Norges  Bank’s rates in the
future.  Interest  on  investments  that  mature  in  one  week  will  be  a  weighted  average  of  expected
interest on one-day investments in the days up to maturity. Similarly, three-month rates reflect both
prevailing  and  expected  future  overnight  rates.  If  economic  agents  believe  that  Norges  Bank  will
reduce interest rates in the next few weeks, three-month-rates  will  be  lower than interest  on krone-
denominated assets with shorter maturities. Similarly, if economic agents believe that Norges Bank will
raise  interest  rates  in  the  next  few  weeks,  three-month-rates  will  be  higher  than  rates  on  krone-
denominated assets with shorter maturities.
If there is confidence in monetary policy, changes in Norges Bank’s rates will have little effect on long-
term interest  rates.  These  rates  will  then  primarily  be  determined  by  the  demand  for  real  return  on
capital that originates in the international capital market. If confidence in economic policy deteriorates,
for  example  because  Norges  Bank  sets  interest  rates  so  low  that  inflation  and  unstable  exchange
rates  are  expected,  long-term  interest  rates  will  rise.  The  cost  of  low  confidence  is  thus  high  risk
                                                     
5 
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/cpi0501.pdf
BIS Review51/2001
5
premiums and unnecessarily high long-term interest rates.
Transparency in our  intentions, strategies  and  implementation  of monetary  policy  may  contribute  to
reducing uncertainty among economic agents. If monetary policy is predictable, an important source of
risk is diminished. Thus, all else being equal, the interest rate that is necessary to achieve the inflation
target will be lower. There will then be a better chance of achieving the inflation target without frequent
and  abrupt  changes  in  the  key  rate.  Predictability  may  contribute  to  ensuring  more  stable
developments in demand and output.
Thus, a predictable monetary policy may contribute to improving the efficiency and impact of monetary
policy. Predictability and transparency are often equated. However, increased transparency does not
necessarily  imply  a  higher  degree  of  predictability.  Many  cite  the  Bank  of  England  as  a  very
transparent central bank, because it presents its assessments of the economic outlook in its inflation
reports and publishes the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meetings. A report6 prepared by
Dr. Sushil Wadhwani, a member of the MPC, indicates, however, that the Bank of England’s interest
rate changes in the period 3 June 1997 –18 April 2001 have come as more of a surprise to market
participants than interest rate changes in continental Europe and the US during the same period. The
same study indicates that the element of surprise has waned over time.
In  Norway,  it  appears  that  transparency  in  Norges  Bank’s  interpretation  of  the  mandate  and  in  the
implementation  of  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  making  monetary  policy  somewhat  more
predictable. The chart shows that Norges Bank’s changes in the key rate have less impact on money
market rates now than earlier.
The academic literature on transparency and monetary  policy is  voluminous and growing.  "How Do
Central  Banks  Talk?"7,  a  report  prepared  by  a  number  of  well-known  academics  and  presented
recently  at  the  Center  for  Economic  Policy  Research,  specifies  the  objectives  that  central  banks
should bear in mind when developing their strategy on transparency. The report says the following:
"Transparency  should  allow  the  public  to  understand,  and  possibly  anticipate,  the  central  bank’s
decisions, to see each of them as the logical conclusion of a chain of past and future decisions aimed
at a clear set of targets,…")
This view of transparency and predictability contrasts sharply with the earlier practice of playing on the
element of surprise. In monetary policy, this was associated especially with control of the exchange
rate. Gradually, the  economic  policy  met  distrust  and  high  premiums for  uncertainty.  The  effects  of
changes  in  monetary  policy  instruments  became  increasingly  uncertain.  Nevertheless,  a  desire  for
predictability must not precede the demand for an interest rate setting that the central bank deems to
be correct. The expectations of other economic agents must not control the setting of interest rates.
There are a number of examples from countries with "transparent" monetary policies where interest
rate changes have come as a surprise. This may be partly due to the fact that the central bank had a
                                                     
6  Wadhwani, S.B: "Some Reflections on the MPC". Speech to the National Association for Business Economics.Washington
21 May 2001
7  Blinder, A., C. Goodhart, P. Hildebrand, D. Lipton, C. Wyplosz: "How Do Central Banks Talk?" Report to be presented at the
Third Geneva Conference on the World Economy on May 4, 2001
6
BIS Review 51/2001
objective function
reaction function
analyses
views on how interest rates affect price inflation
assessment of the inflation outlook and the balance of risks
different view of the outlook for economic developments. The inflation outlook may also change rapidly
and prompt rapid and possibly pronounced interest-rate adjustments.
Transparency may be discussed in relation to
 
 
 
 
 
Norges Bank has sought to contribute to transparency by presenting its interpretation of the mandate
and by explaining the implementation of monetary policy. In the Inflation Report 4/2000, we presented
our view of how interest rates affect price inflation in Norway.
In principle, the more discretion and flexibility the monetary policy objective implies, the more complex
and  subtle  communication  must  be.  Monetary  policy  requires  the  continuous  exercise  of  discretion.
The exercise of this discretion is limited, however, by Norges Bank's mandate and our interpretation of
it. Furthermore, we have contributed to restricting the exercise of discretion by being transparent in our
response pattern, our analyses of economic developments and our assessment of the results of the
monetary policy that has been conducted.
Central bank communication varies from one country to another. The various solutions reflect different
objectives  and  institutional  parameters  as  well  as  different  histories  and  cultures.  Therefore,  in  my
view,  we  should  be  cautious  about  recommending  a  specific  country’s  choices  and  solutions  as  a
norm.
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is required by law to submit a Monetary Policy Statement at least
twice  a  year,  and  these  reports  are  published  quarterly  in  the  form  of  inflation  reports.  The  reports
include an account of an interest rate path that will contribute to keeping inflation consistent with the
target. The official Cash Rate, New Zealand’s key interest rate, is reviewed once between reports, at a
pre-announced time. Decisions regarding the Cash Rate are published immediately, accompanied by
a commentary. The Reserve Bank Governor is responsible for achieving the target, and for making
decisions.
BIS Review51/2001
7
In the Bank of England, interest rate decisions are made by the Monetary  Policy Committee,  which
has nine members. Four of the members are external economists appointed by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer.  In  practice,  they  work  full  time  for  the  central  bank,  but  they  are  not  part  of  line
management.  The  Bank  of  England  presents  an  inflation  report  four  times  a  year.  The  report  is
prepared by the Bank’s administration, but the work is directed by the Committee. The report provides
projections  of  economic  growth  and  inflation.  The  Bank  of  England  has  developed  a  method  that
illustrates the Committee’s subjective view of the uncertainty associated with forecasts for GDP growth
and inflation. Uncertainty increases with the time horizon, so that the illustration of uncertainty takes
the form of a fan. This fan has gradually acquired a central role. The introduction to the report states:
"Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are based, the
fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths for inflation and
output and the uncertainties surrounding those central projections." The Bank’s view of the outlook for
the interest rate is not stated directly, but is implicit in the discussion of the fan around the inflation
projection and an associated table. Twelve monetary policy meetings are held each year. Decisions
taken  are  made  public  immediately,  but  without  an  explanation,  and  meetings  are  not  followed  by
press conferences. Two weeks after each meeting, the Bank publishes minutes, which make it clear
whether there was a lack of consensus in the Committee. Publication  of the minutes is required  by
law.  An  account  of  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  is  provided  in  the  Annual  Report.  All
committee members are free to express their personal views on economic issues and monetary policy.
In Sweden, too, interest rate decisions are made by a board of experts – the Executive Board. The
members work full time, and participate in the daily operations of the central bank. An inflation report
expressing the Executive Board’s collective view of the inflation outlook is published four times a year.
As  in  the  UK,  special  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  individual  responsibility  of  the  Executive  Board
members.  The  individual  members’  voting  and  assessments  are  disclosed.  Any  lack  of  consensus
regarding  the  inflation  outlook  and  setting  of  interest  rates  emerges  from  the  minutes  that  are
published from two to four weeks after each monetary policy meeting. Grounds are given for decisions
on interest rates, but no press  conference  is  held  immediately  after  monetary  policy  meetings.  The
Executive Board does not directly announce its stance regarding interest rate movements in the period
ahead,  but  this  is  implicit  from  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  projection,  which  Sweden’s
Riksbank also illustrates by means of a fan surrounding the inflation projection. The Executive Board
reports twice a year to the Swedish parliament, the Riksdagen. Sweden’s Riksbank has chosen to use
two of its four quarterly inflation reports for this purpose. Members of the Executive Board give lectures
and express their personal views on economic questions and monetary policy.
In its December 2000  Bulletin, the  ECB  presented for the first time price inflation projections  in  the
form  of  a  broad  range.  Bank  staff  prepare  the  projections.  In  the  ECB’s  two-pillar  system,
developments in the first pillar, the money supply (M3), and the second pillar, which comprises other
factors that may influence price inflation, are equally important. According to the Maastricht Treaty, the
Governing Council shall meet at least ten times a year. Since the implementation of a single monetary
8
BIS Review 51/2001
policy in January 1999, monetary policy meetings have been held fortnightly. Press conferences are
held after every second meeting, but no explicit expression  is given of the Bank’s stance regarding
interest rate movements in the future and the minutes of monetary policy meetings are not published.
Members of the Governing Council make individual statements about monetary policy, but the actual
interest rate decision is presented as a collective one.
In the US, the Federal Open Market Committee determines the interest  rate.  The  Committee  holds
eight pre-announced meetings a  year, but has also occasionally changed the interest rate  between
meetings. Decisions are announced after interest rate meetings. The future policy bias is expressed
implicitly  through  the  discussion  of  the  balance  of  risks  with  respect  to  the  economic  outlook.  In  a
separate press release, the committee explains how the formulations may be interpreted. The Federal
Reserve does not publish a traditional inflation report like the  Bank of England’s  with  projections of
future developments. However, in connection with the Chairman’s semi-annual testimony to Congress,
estimates are given of probable ranges for GDP growth, consumer price inflation and unemployment.
The minutes of Committee meetings are  published  after six weeks, and disclose the  way  individual
members  have  voted.  A  complete  transcript  of  proceedings  is  released  after  five  years.  Members
express individual views on monetary policy.
Norges  Bank  analyses  the  inflation  outlook  in  separate  inflation  reports  which  are  published  three
times a year. Further assessments regarding the inflation outlook are presented  every six  weeks in
connection with the monetary policy meetings at which the Executive Board sets interest rates. Central
aspects of the modelling tools and our view of the functioning of the economy are examined in detail in
the  Inflation  Report  and  in  articles  in  the  journal  Penger  og  Kreditt  and  its  English  counterpart
Economic Bulletin. The minutes of monetary policy meetings are not published. The Executive Board
functions as a unified group in relation to the public.
In Canada and New Zealand, responsibility lies with the central bank governor, and therefore only one
view is expressed. In the ECB, Australia, Switzerland and Norway, the decision-making body speaks
to the public with one voice. Like Norway, Australia includes external members in the body that makes
decisions regarding the interest rate.
Forecasts as communication
Section  2  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Regulation  states:  "Norges  Bank  shall  regularly  publish  the
assessments  that  form  the  basis  for  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy."  The  projections  and
analyses in the Inflation Report, together with continuous assessment of the outlook for price and cost
inflation  and  conditions  in  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  provide  a  basis  for  interest  rate
decisions.
The Inflation Report contains analyses and projections for a number of macroeconomic variables. This
has been the practice since the first report was published in December 1994. Most other central banks
restrict themselves to forecasting price inflation and the output trend. Some also provide estimates of
the main components of demand and of the labour market. Different practices reflect different histories
and cultures. Some central banks place emphasis on the uncertainty of economic estimates, pointing
out that this may make them more misleading than instructive. Institutional framework conditions also
influence  the  forecasts  at  a  detailed  level.  In  countries  where  a  decision-making  body  presents
forecasts, each member may have his/her own individual forecast for both developments in the real
economy  and  inflation.  At  the  same  time,  the  body  must  present  a  single  estimate  for  price
inflation - and developments in the real economy - based on the members’ best collective evaluation.
Such  is  the  case  with  the  Bank  of  England.  If  the  members  have  very  different  views  regarding
economic  developments,  projections  for  economic  variables  will  lose  much  of  their  informational
content.  Under  framework  conditions  of  this  nature,  it  will  not  be  very  fruitful  to  provide  detailed
estimates of the various demand components in the economy. In some cases, the inflation projection
itself  may  lose  some  of  its  informational  value.  In  the  UK,  there  is  at  times  greater  interest  for  the
uncertainty surrounding the projection, illustrated by the fan charts, and in the minutes of the monetary
policy meetings, than in the inflation report and the actual inflation projection.
Detailed projections may increase the possibility of checking the consistency of projections over time.
They  also  provide  a  basis  for  evaluating  whether  short-term  indicators  are  in  line  with  the
developments expected by the central bank. On the other hand, very detailed projections may suggest
that the central bank is more certain about developments than there is actually reason to be. Norway
BIS Review51/2001
9
has a long tradition of making detailed forecasts. Economic agents know from experience that point
forecasts are very uncertain and presumably regard them with a healthy scepticism.
The analysis and projections in the Inflation Report are conditional on a number of economic variables
such as fiscal policy, exchange rates and the interest rate. A different trend in these variables could
also  result  in  a  different  course  for  both  the  real  economy  and  nominal  developments.  The
assumptions  on  which  the  inflation  forecast  is  based  must  be  reasonable  and  fairly  realistic  if  the
forecasts are to function as a basis for decision-making.
The  central  bank  directly  influences  the  sight  deposit  rate,  and  thus  faces  an  important  question
already  at the stage  of making projections:  what  interest rate  scenario  should  provide  the  basis  for
inflation projections? Practice varies. Generally, more than one interest rate scenario may result in the
same inflation projection. The Central Bank of New Zealand is the only central bank that presents its
assessment of the optimal interest rate path and uses this as the basis for its inflation projections. The
central banks of other countries base their projections on a stylised assumption about the interest rate.
Thus,  these  interest  rate  scenarios  are  not  necessarily  consistent  with  the  interest  rate  trend
envisaged by the central bank. The Bank of England and Sweden’s Riksbank base their estimates in
the baseline scenario on the assumption that interest rates remain unchanged. Alternative projections
based on market expectations regarding future interest rates are also shown.
A  number  of  academics8  have  argued  for  making  the  optimal  interest  rate  scenario  the  basis  for
inflation  projections.  Their  argument  is  as  follows:  If  the  central  bank  itself  does  not  regard  an
unchanged interest rate during the forecast period as the most probable scenario, the price inflation
projection will not be the most probable one either. Thus, the projection does not provide guidance as
to what inflation the central bank actually expects.
                                                     
8  See e.g. Alesina, A., O. Blanchard, J. Garli, F. Giavazzi and H. Uhlig: "Defining a macroeconomic Framework for the Euro
Area. Monitoring the European Central Bank 3 ". CEPR London 2001 and Lars E. O. Svensson: Independent Review of the
Operation of Monetary Policy in New Zealand: Report to the Minister of Finance. February 2001.
10
BIS Review 51/2001
In Norges Bank, we have used both an unchanged interest rate and an interest rate scenario based
on  market  expectations  in  our  inflation  reports.  If  Norges  Bank  projects  price  inflation  as  higher  or
lower than 2½ per cent, it is an indication that the Bank envisages an interest rate path that is higher
or lower than the path on which the projection is based.
There  is  uncertainty  associated  with  all  forecasts.  This  very  uncertainty  and  the  central  bank’s
assessment of the various risk factors constitute important supplementary information. In our Inflation
Reports, the uncertainty associated with the projections is discussed explicitly. An account is given of
which variables Norges Bank regards as particularly uncertain, which way this uncertainty points, and
how  a  different  scenario  could  influence  price  projections.  In  addition,  a  fan  chart  illustrating  the
uncertainty of the projections is presented.
Calculations  based  on  alternative  assumptions  are  presented  regularly.  This  illustrates  the  isolated
effect on price inflation of changes in assumptions. It provides insight into the effect on price inflation
of potential disturbances to the economy.
We base our analyses and assessments of the inflation outlook and balance of risks on models. The
RIMINI  macroeconomic  model,  developed  in  Norges  Bank’s  Research  Department,  has  been  an
important tool for the Bank’s analyses since 1994. The model seeks to take account of many of the
important  relationships  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  The  model  combines  and  takes  account  of
empirical and theoretical knowledge of these relationships as they have functioned in the  past,  and
contributes to a more consistent analysis of the interaction between them. It takes time for structural
changes to be captured in the model. It may therefore be useful to analyse the effects of any structural
changes in previously existing relationships. For example, it may be useful to ask whether the effects
on  consumer  prices  of  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  are  different  now  that  the  exchange  rate
fluctuates more than it did in the past.
In  our  experience  it  is  not  possible  to  make  forecasts  that  prove  to  be  accurate  in  all  respects.  By
revealing  errors,  we  provide  a  basis  for  improving  the  analysis.  Our  projections  are  therefore
evaluated  regularly.  Analyses  of  forecast  errors  have  been  presented  four  times  in  the  journal
Economic Bulletin. Excerpts from these evaluation articles are also presented in the Inflation Report
once a year.
Concluding remarks
In  all  countries  with  which  it  is  natural  to  compare  Norway,  the  setting  of  interest  rates,  the  most
important monetary policy  instrument, is delegated to the central  bank. A number of factors help to
explain why the exercise of this authority is delegated.
BIS Review51/2001
11
First, monetary policy can well be delegated, because over time there is no real conflict between the
objectives of price stability, on the one hand, and economic growth and equitable distribution, on the
other. The formulation of objectives and subsequent evaluation of practice make adequate provision
for the more short-term considerations.
Second, it is possible to formulate fairly precise objectives for monetary policy and establish reporting
routines that ensure that those who delegate authority can subsequently evaluate the implementation.
Norges Bank provides an account of its actions in the Bank’s Annual Report, and the evaluation of the
Ministry of Finance, the Government and the Storting appears in and is based on annual reports to the
Storting.
Finally,  the  need  for  transparency  and  communication  argue  in  favour  of  delegation.  As  previously
mentioned, each monetary policy decision must be consistent with previous and future decisions, and
be directed towards a clearly defined target.
Thank you for your attention.
12
BIS Review 51/2001
