Sakuya Fujiwara: Policies and Internal Management of the Bank of Japan
English translation of a speech by Mr Sakuya Fujiwara, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, given
at the Japan National Press Club on 31 January 2001.
This translation covers the full text of his Japanese speech as far as economic outlook and monetary
policy are concerned. With respect to the other parts, only summary has been translated.
 in  Japan, 
Economic Outlook
Today, I would like to discuss the current conditions of the Japanese economy and its prospect. At the
end of October 2000, the Bank published a five-page document titled "Outlook and Risk Assessment
of the Economy  and  Prices,"  which I  call  the  "Outlook  Report"  to  make  the  title  short.  The  Outlook
Report  describes  our  baseline  scenario  of  the  economy  and  assessment  of  risks.  The  report  is
published twice a year and, in the case of the October 2000 issue, it covers the most likely scenario
for fiscal years 2000 and 2001. At the Monetary Policy Meetings of the Bank's Policy Board, a number
of board members have used the Outlook Report as a yardstick on which they base their arguments
about questions such as a) whether the economy is following the baseline scenario or b) whether its
risk  profile  has  changed.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  Minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  of
December 2000, which were released last week.
The  baseline  scenario  in  the  Outlook  Report  of  October  2000  can  be  summarized  by  the  following
three points. First, moderate economic recovery led by private demand is likely to continue in Japan.
Second, strong economic expansion is,  however,  unlikely  to  happen  because a  variety of structural
adjustment  pressures  persist 
including  balance-sheet  adjustment  and  continuing
restructuring  in  both  the  financial  and  non-financial  business  sectors.  Third,  economic  recovery  will
continue to be led by the corporate sector, while the household sector lags behind.
The report points out five downside risks and one upside risk. On the downside: a) IT demand in the
global market, b) impact of oil price rises, c) international financial market developments, d) impact of
the  balance-sheet  adjustment  and  restructuring  in  both  the  financial  and  non-financial  business
sectors,  and  e)  increase  in  consumers'  anxiety  for  the  future,  whereas  on  the  upside,  a  possible
revision of the expected rate of growth medium term in the corporate sector. Since the report raised a
greater number of downside risks and described them on a lot more pages, economists and journalists
seem to have understood that the Bank's views on risks to the baseline scenario was biased towards
the downside. Although you cannot measure our assessment by simply counting the number of risk
factors mentioned or the number of pages that are consumed for their description, it is perhaps fair to
say that the Bank of Japan was more strongly conscious of downside risks than upside. You may also
be  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  elements  that  are  being  discussed  now  were  already  considered
seriously at the time when the Outlook Report was released.
Allow  me  to  turn  to  economic  developments  after  the  release  of  the  report.  While  a  moderate
economic recovery continues, its pace  is slowing  down as is reflected  in deceleration  of production
growth caused by export slowdown and pause in improvement in the business sentiment. As you may
be aware, the Bank of Japan's assessment in its Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial
Developments became more cautious in December 2000, and again in January 2001. Setting these
economic developments against the aforementioned Outlook Report, the majority of the Policy Board
is of the  view that the economy  has developed in line  with the baseline  scenario,  but,  at  the  same
time,  some  of  the  downside  risks  have  become  greater,  especially  those  related  to  the  global
economy.
I would like to explain, first, why we maintain our baseline scenario, i.e., moderate economic recovery
led by private demand mainly in the corporate sector. According to the Tankan survey of December
2000, the corporate sector continues  to  expect  a  substantial  increase  in  profits  and  stepping  up  its
business  investment  plan  for  this  fiscal  year.  Machinery  orders  and  other  leading  indicators  also
suggest that the growth trend in investment is likely to continue, being stimulated by IT businesses. At
the same time, we  need to monitor carefully the  impact that a  slowdown  in  production  and  exports
might have on the business decision-making with respect to investment for the next fiscal year, for the
slowdown is a negative element in the corporate sector, which has led the entire economy to date.
BIS Review 6/2001
1
Weak  as  they  are,  incomes  of  the  household  sector  have  stopped  worsening  as  the  supply  and
demand conditions in the labor market have begun to improve and wages are increasing year on year,
albeit to a small extent. Under these circumstances, some positive signs have been  witnessed  with
respect to auto sales, electronic sales and tourism, although personal consumption as whole still lacks
buoyancy. All this suggests that despite negative factors like stock price declines, the improvement in
corporate  profits  has  gradually  been  exerting  positive  influences  on  the  household  sector  after  a
certain time lag.
In  sum,  the  momentum  for  recovery  continues  in  the  corporate  sector  as  is  shown  by  profits  and
business investment, and the trend in the household sector are also showing firm movements amidst
a quite modest growth. Therefore, we consider the main thrust of the baseline scenario, or moderate
recovery led by private demand, to be maintained.
It  is  true,  however,  that  risks  to  this  baseline  scenario  are  becoming  greater.  We  are  now  paying
particular attention to two risks: global economic slowdown especially in the United States; instability
in stock markets both at home and abroad. Let me elaborate on each of these risks.
First, US economic slowdown is becoming increasingly evident. US economic growth has significantly
slowed down after it registered rates over 5 percent, well above its potential growth rate until the first
half of 2000. Some slowdown is not surprising at all in view of very fast growth in the preceding period.
The slowdown may be desirable for sustainable growth as long as it is what is believed to be a "soft
landing."
However, the pace of slowdown in recent months has been more rapid than anticipated. At least in the
first half of this year, the US growth rate is likely to stay modest. Although the majority view among
economists is the one for recovery towards the second half of the year, it is difficult to envisage the
depth and duration of economic adjustment following the very fast growth in recent years. One good
news is that there remains significant room for US macroeconomic policy. In this regard, the Federal
Reserve  cut  its  federal  fund  rate  target  by  0.5  percent  in  its  FOMC  meeting  of  January  3,  2001.  I
understand that this reflects Federal Reserve's determination to keep the economy on a sustainable
growth path in the long and medium run.
These US economic developments could have a significant impact on the global economy, especially
the Asian economies, which have close trade relations with the United States. In fact, a slowdown in
export growth has been observed in Asia. Under the present circumstances, we have to watch very
carefully the impact of the US slowdown on our economy, examining both direct and indirect channels
of influence, including Asian economies, stock markets, and global capital flows.
The second risk we are paying particular attention to is unstable developments in stock markets both
at  home  and  abroad.  The  most  fundamental  determinant  of  stock  prices  is  prospect  for  corporate
profits, and in this respect, the recent Tankan survey and market analysts' views support a continued
increase  in  profits.  In  spite  of  this,  stock  prices  dropped  in  recent  months  in  Japan.  This  can  be
attributed in large part to adjustment of IT stock prices in the global market, which has bearings on the
first risk I mentioned a minute ago.
In  addition,  there  is  of  course  a  domestic  element  for  consideration.  In  domestic  financial  markets,
bond  yields  have  declined,  and  so  have  stock  prices  together  with  the  yen's  depreciation  on  the
exchange  market,  the  combination  of  which  can  be  interpreted  as  a  reflection  of  bearish  market
sentiment  about  the  Japanese  economy.  This  market  sentiment  is  much  more  bearish  than  the
economic prospect indicated by corporate profits and other real economic activities. We will therefore
have to examine both economic and financial developments attentively and without preoccupation, in
order  to  find  out  whether  the  market  is  excessively  pessimistic  or  simply  preceding  economic
fundamentals to come about.
It  is  true  that  the  market'  s  concerns  about  structural  problems  are  strong  and  deep-rooted.  The
market  has  been  reminded  of  delays  in  structural  reforms  in  Japan  whenever  it  hears  bad  news
regarding  exogenous  events  such  as  US  economy  or  stock  markets.  This  has  been  repeated  a
number of times. Once a decline in stock prices sets in, it might have a negative impact, irrespective of
its proximate cause, on the economy through deterioration in creditworthiness of borrowers as well as
risk-taking  capability  of  financial  institutions  as  a  result  of  declines  in  unrealized  profits  from  their
equity holdings and/or deterioration in the confidence of both the business and household sectors. In
this respect, however, no changes have actually been observed in lending attitude of banks or credit
availability  for  borrowers  covered  by  the  Tankan  and  other  business  surveys.  Neither  have  been
observed  any  deterioration  in  consumer  confidence  nor  business  appetite  for  fixed  investments.
2
BIS Review 6/2001
Nonetheless,  because  these  changes  may  not  necessarily  become  readily  observable,  we  have  to
remain vigilant.
Monetary policy
To  sum  up,  while  the  baseline  scenario  of  moderate  economic  recovery  still  holds,  risk  elements
involving US economic developments and stock markets are becoming more pronounced. Therefore,
on the monetary policy front, we consider it to be appropriate to maintain the accommodative stance to
support the ongoing recovery. Under these circumstances, we intend to examine closely how such risk
elements will influence the Japanese economy.
At the Monetary Policy Meeting of January 19, 2001, Chairman of the Policy Board, Governor Hayami
issued instructions to the Bank's staff: the staff will examine possible rooms for further improvements
in  the  way  of  liquidity  provision  to  the  market,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  smooth  functioning  and
stability of the financial market, and report the results to the Policy Board by the next Monetary Policy
Meeting. This is aimed at maximizing the effect of our accommodative monetary policy. Since we have
yet to explore, I should refrain from making comments on specific measures. Instead, I would like to
discuss here my approach to this question.
First of all, we are exploring whether there is no further room for improving the way in which the Bank
of Japan provides the market with liquidity under the current directive of money market operations, i.e.,
encouraging  the  overnight  call  rate  to  move  around  0.25  percent.  As  long  as  the  market  functions
properly,  this  directive can be achieved  without problems by  using existing  operational  instruments,
and monetary ease will be channeled through financial markets and the financial system to permeate
into other markets and corporate finance.
However,  this  mechanism  seizes  up  at  a  time  of  market  disruptions  or  dysfunctioning  of  financial
intermediation. For instance, there was a temporary deficiency in corporate financing in autumn 1998,
when low interest rates prevailed in the interbank money market. With a view to supporting corporate
fund  raising,  the  Bank  of  Japan  adopted  several  measures,  e.g.,  increase  in  CP  operations  and
creation of a temporary lending program.
Take  a  Y2K  episode  for  another  example.  This  happened  at  the  end  of  1999,  when  possible  Y2K
computer  problems  overshadowed  financial  markets.  At  that  time,  mounting  demand  for  New  Year
liquidity  put  an  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  of  the  contracts  maturing  beyond  the  year-end,
although there was a widespread perception that the overnight call rate would likely be near-zero for
some  time  under  the  zero  interest  rate  policy.  The  Bank  of  Japan  tried  to  stabilize  the  market  by
announcing its intention to provide ample fund maturing beyond the year-end in a flexible manner, and
in  addition,  by  enhancing  its  operational  capacity  through  an  introduction  of  new  instruments,  e.g.,
outright purchases and sales of short-term government securities.
These episodes clearly demonstrate that decisions of the overnight call rate guidance level is at times
insufficient for monetary ease to permeate the economy, because the effectiveness of monetary policy
varies, depending on the conditions of financial markets and financial institutions.
In order to avoid any misunderstanding, I should hasten to add that we, at present, see no seizing up
in corporate finance or any other particular area, or anomalies in interest rates on contracts maturing
beyond the fiscal year-end. Yet, in view of the greater downside risks that I noted earlier, we cannot
rule  out  the  possibility  that  some  negative  news  might  trigger  instability  in  financial  markets  or
uneasiness on the part of market participants about fiscal year-end funding. This consideration led to
the  Chairman's  instructions  to  improve  the  Bank's  capacity  to  provide  liquidity  so  that  the  current
monetary ease be maintained even in case of contingencies. I believe that enhanced preparedness on
our side  will help strengthen confidence  among market participants, thereby  stabilizing  the  financial
market and thus the Japanese economy.
Financial System Issues (summary)
Let me now turn to financial system issues. Although we still cannot afford to be complacent about the
situation, the amount of non-performing loan charge off by the Japanese banking industry has shown
a  significant  decline.  In  addition,  its  capital  adequacy  ratio  has  improved  by  raising  capital  in  the
market as well as injection of public funds. At present, we think it unlikely that stability of the Japanese
financial system will be put at risk. In light of the speed in which circumstances may change both at
BIS Review 6/2001
3
home  and  abroad,  we  should  continue  to  be  vigilant  with  respect  to  developments  in  the  financial
system.
Organization and Operations of the Bank of Japan (summary)
The Bank's operations must be conducted in an efficient manner since its costs are ultimately borne
by  the  public.  With  the  independence  in  monetary  policy  established  and  the  autonomy  of  its
management respected, it has become all the more important for the Bank to make efforts to promote
the  efficiency  of  its  business  operations  and  organization.  Moreover,  because  the  central  bank  is
unique in the nation, it must always be mindful of self-examination so that "the Bank's commonsense"
matches the "commonsense of the society."
Article  5  of  the  new  Bank  of  Japan  Law  stipulates  that  the  Bank  "shall  endeavor  to  conduct  its
business in a proper and efficient manner." I would like to emphasize at this juncture that, even two to
three years before the discussion of the revision of the law, reforms had been initiated within the Bank
in  a  variety  of  ways.  Three  years  have  passed  since  the  new  law  became  effective,  during  which
period, the Bank has implemented the most significant restructuring in its own history, which covers
the  organizational  structure,  remunerations  for  the  staff  and  executives,  the  number  of  staff,  real-
estate holdings, and facilities for staff welfare. All of these are intended to bring the Bank's business
structure  in  line  with  the  commonsense  of  the  society.  Aiming  at  further  efficiency  of  business
operations, we have reviewed our branch and office network and reached a conclusion that we should
close  branches  in  Otaru  and  Kita-Kyushuu.  We  are  currently  trying  to  obtain  understanding  of  the
public, particularly in the regions concerned.
The  Bank  of  Japan  will  enhance  for  efficiency  uninterruptedly  rather  than  by  a  one-time  reform.  In
order to become a more efficient central bank in the 21st century, we would like to make initiative in
reviewing and re-examining the Bank's organization.
4
BIS Review 6/2001
