Pridiyathorn  Devakula:  Monetary  policy  in  Thailand:  current  challenges  and
prospects
Speech  by  M.R.  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  to  the  APFA  2001
Conference held in Bangkok, 24 July 2001.
 President of APFA, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  an  honour  to  address  the  8th  Asia  Pacific  Financial  Association  Annual  Conference,  and  to
welcome  the  distinguished  members  of  the  Asia  Pacific  financial  community.  Judging  by  the
attendance I trust that this three-day event will prove most fruitful and rewarding for all participants.
I would like to discuss today the current challenges facing monetary policy in Thailand and what we, at
the Bank of Thailand, have set out to do to meet those challenges.
In  so  doing,  I  will  briefly  review  the  progress  of  the  past  few  years,  and  look  forward  to  some  key
emphases of our current policies.
The current situation
On July 2nd this year newspapers in Thailand ran headline stories to remind us of the four-year ordeal
since the floating of the baht and the ensuing economic and financial crisis. These have been difficult
years as the economy fought hard to regain macroeconomic and financial stability, and the confidence
of financial markets.
Economic growth shrank by more than 10 percent in 1998. Underlying this was a sharp correction in
the  current  account  in  response  to  the  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate.  The  correction  was
substantial. The investment-saving gap moved to surpluses averaging 10 percent of GDP in the first
three years after the crisis, from the pre-crisis deficits average of 7 percent of GDP before 1997.
Such magnitude of change is indicative of the depth of the adjustment Thailand  had to  go through.
Although the initial imbalance in the lead up to the crisis was not small, the adjustment was amplified
partly by the wave of contagion effect in the early years of the crisis which brought pressure on the
capital account, the exchange rate, and growth.
Now, while we can look back to the last two years of growth of around 4 percent, signs of fragility still
abound,  with  important  issues  remaining  to  be  resolved.  This  includes  the  continued  reform  of  the
banking sector and the resolution of the costs of financial sector restructuring. The main fragility in the
recovery process at this time is the weakness in domestic demand. The problem is compounded by
the  slow  growth  in  bank  credit  and  the  weak  corporate  balance  sheets,  particularly  the  non-export
sector.
Unfortunately, the current external  environment does not  bode  well for the recovery,  going  forward.
The  global  slowdown  is  posing  strains  on  Thailand’s  export,  and  is  adding  pressure  to  the  current
account  and  external  stability.  Official  GDP  forecast  this  year  is  around  2.0-2.5  percent.  Given  the
change in external environment, this year will be more a time for consolidation than for expansion. A
key  challenge  confronting  macroeconomic  policy  in  Thailand  is  to  safeguard  the  pace  of  recovery
while  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  discipline,  and  at  the  same  time  continuing
with the essential reforms.
Past records
Before moving on to discuss the challenges facing Thai monetary policy, I would like to review some
of the notable progress of the last few years. There have been gains that should further be expanded.
Macroeconomic and financial stability has been restored. Inflation remains low and stable. Thailand’s
international reserve position is healthy.
Surpluses in the external current account of these few years have been matched almost entirely by
falls  in  external  debt,  especially  short-term  debt.  Such  reversed  flows  have  been  instrumental  in
avoiding a real currency appreciation and loss of competitiveness.
BIS Review 70/2001
1
The surplus on the external current account is expected to continue this year, although at a somewhat
lower level. This would allow the debt stock to fall further as scheduled repayments are made. About
50  percent  of  the  existing  non-bank  private  debt  stock  represents  debt  contracted  after  the  crisis,
including  some  rollovers  which  were  done  under  new  contract.  This  means  that  private  sector  in
Thailand currently has no difficulties in gaining access to the international financial markets. Reflecting
this, the spreads of Thai Government bond yields over US Treasuries have narrowed while Thailand’s
sovereignty credit ratings remain stable.
The financial system has now stabilized, but much work still lies ahead.
To restore stability to the financial system, the most immediate step taken was to ensure that financial
institutions have adequate capital to withstand future risks. The sources of capital were to come from
the private sector including the original shareholders and new partners, both Thai and foreign.
As  it  turns  out,  in  some  cases,  the  authorities  did  eventually  provide  a  recapitalisation  scheme.
Nevertheless, this scheme was not much utilized by banks. In fact, only 74 billion baht of the scheme
was actually used.
Another  important  step  taken  to  stabilize  the  financial  system  was  to  raise  the  prudential  and
supervision  standards  such  as  the  rules  on  loan  classification,  provisioning,  asset  valuation,  just  to
name a few examples, to be in line with international standards.
As a result, commercial banks in Thailand have gradually recovered from the crisis. Here are some
facts and numbers.
 
 
The banking sector now has a capital adequacy ratio of 11.9%.
The Thai banks recorded a better result in the first quarter of this year. They turned in a profit
of  1.9  billion  compared  to  a  loss  of  39  billion  baht  in  the  same  period  last  year,  as  loan
provision expenses declined significantly. This is partly due to the large provisioning and loss
recognition,  which  were  already  taken  last  year.  In  addition,  there  has  been  substantial
progress in debt restructuring the Thai banks recorded.
Debt restructuring as well as some positive environment in the economy, especially buoyant
export growth in 1998 until the first half of 1999, together with the transfer of NPL to AMC
and write-off alter full provisioning, helped NPL to decline from the peak of 48% of credit in
mid 1999 to around 18% presently.
 The current challenges
Against this background of achievements, I would now like to turn to the current challenges.
The first is the challenge facing monetary policy.
Key concern of macroeconomic policy in Thailand at this time is the  weak domestic economy. This
concern has been met by an accommodative stance of fiscal and monetary policies. But the external
environment in which the Thai economic policy operates has changed considerably since the end of
last  year.  The  global  economy  is  now  slowing  with  possible  substantial  impact  on  the  growth
performance of the regional economies and on financial markets.
Because of the strong dependency on exports, Asia will be one region most affected by the slowdown.
Many countries have revised downward their export and growth estimates. Some have seen increased
pressure on the external current account and the exchange rate. A key risk to the current environment
is the global slowdown coinciding with a period of increased market volatility. This increase in market
volatility could come about following possible further repricing of financial assets in the key markets
abroad.
Because excessive market volatility is not supportive of businesses, monetary policy will have to be
watchful  of  financial  developments  abroad  and  to  take  account  of  the  impacts  that  the  global
slowdown might have on external stability.
Under  the  managed  float,  Thailand’s  monetary  policy  is  operating  under  an  inflation-targeting
framework. As the economy slows, the current domestic inflation rates remain low. Going forward, our
analysis shows that inflation will not pose a policy concern in the immediate future.
2
BIS Review 70/2001
But  with  considerable  uncertainty  in  the  economic  situations  abroad,  I  believe  monetary  policy  will
need  to  take  heed  of  both  internal  and  external  stability.  This  balance  of  emphasis  will  provide
Thailand with some flexibility in dealing with the pressure that could stem from the external front. In
essence, I see the need for monetary policy in the period ahead to be vigilant and give due safeguards
to both internal and external stability.
One question often asked is, “Does the continued emphasis on stability mean that monetary policy is
abandoning growth?”
The current policy preference for now is clear – stability ahead of growth. And to qualify this, I would
like to make three points.
First,  an  important  pre-condition  for  growth  on  a  sustained  basis  is  a  stable  macroeconomic
environment. To this end, the best contribution that monetary policy can make to promote growth is to
ensure continuity of macroeconomic and financial stability. I remarked earlier that macroeconomic and
financial stability are the gains we have made in the last few years. They are the gains that we must
continue to preserve.
Second, the increased emphasis of monetary policy towards external stability so far has not put undue
pressure on key domestic interest rates. They remain broadly accommodating. This is because of the
large  liquidity  overhang  in  the  banking  system.  I  believe  interest  rates  at  the  current  levels  are
appropriate  and  consistent  with  the  need  to  support  the  recovery  of  domestic  demand,  provide
incentives for corporate debt restructuring, and maintain the economy’s cost competitiveness.
And third, in addressing the issues of growth with stability, we must look for a proper coordination of
fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  At  this  time,  fiscal  policies  will  have  a  dominant  role  in  reviving  the
weaknesses  in  domestic  demand.  The  Government  has  been  cautious  to  balance  fiscal  stimulus
measures  within  the  context  of  longer-term  fiscal  sustainability.  The  role  of  monetary  policy  is  to
ensure the continuity of macroeconomic and financial stability.
Ladies and gentlemen,
One of the key concerns over Thailand’s long-term fiscal sustainability has been the issue of how the
Government will find solutions to the remaining cost of financial restructuring. The cost, which includes
the  remaining  uncovered  losses  up  to  now  plus  the  contingent  losses  for  the  next  three  years,  is
currently estimated at 774 billion baht or about 17.2 billion US Dollar.
On  this  issue,  yesterday,  the  Thai  authorities  announced  a  plan  which  would  constitute  a
comprehensive  solution  to  this  problem.  The  solution  centres  on  a  programme  of  Government
guaranteed bond issue that would provide for the full financing of the estimated cost. This programme
of bond issuance will run for a maximum period of twenty years, and the financings will be provided for
in the Government budget. This incorporation is projected to keep the share of the debt-service ratio to
an average of 13.6% of the Government budget in the first decade and 11.5% in the second decade.
This means that there will be little crowding-out effects on the Government’s investment expenditure in
the period ahead, while the public debt stock-to-GDP is projected to trend down in the long term.
With this programme, Thailand’s long-term fiscal sustainability is now assured.
With  monetary  stability  in  place  and  fiscal  stability  enshrined  in  the  Government’s  long-term  fiscal
sustainability framework, I believe the operating environment in Thailand in the period ahead will be
more assured and remain conducive to growth. But to really put the growth engine back on its feet,
notably the recovery of the domestic demand, more works will have to be done at the micro level to
remove the bottlenecks that inhibits the real economy.
This leads to our second challenge: to put the banking system back to normal lending.
Our banking system is returning to health and profitability with strengthened capital base, and a much
lower  level  of  non-performing  loans.  Yet,  the  growth  in  credit  has  been  very  minimal  with  deposit
growth rising and liquidity remaining ample. Finding solutions to this problem is not going to be easy.
But this is where efforts to revive the domestic economy will need to focus on.
New lending is perceived as risky given the current negative factors on the macro fronts and external
factors, while NPL overhang preoccupied bankers’ attention and kept them from renewing their client
relationship.
To address this problem, the authorities have chosen to approach the problem in three ways:
BIS Review 70/2001
3
   First,  to  further  accelerate  corporate  debt  restructuring  by  improving  the  legal  frameworks
and  by  setting  up  a  national  asset  management  corporation  to  deal  with  the  remaining
unresolved problem loans. Progress on  this  front  is  most  visible.  The  law  establishing  the
Thai  Asset  Management  Corporation,  or  TAMC,  was  passed  and  operations  set  to  begin
soon  with  all asset transfer to be completed by  September. A key benefit  of  TAMC  is  the
advantage of being a single creditor of the transferred asset. This would allow TAMC to deal
effectively and speedily with the  unresolved debts that  involve multiple creditors.  Also,  the
vast  executive  powers  given  to  TAMC  by  law  would  make  it  easier  for  TAMC  to  take  a
comprehensive approach to debt restructuring, and have the ability to deal with cases that
might warrant corporate restructuring and change of management.
Second, to introduce a scheme of credit guarantees which  would provide  a facility of risk-
sharing  between  corporate  borrowers,  the  Government,  and  banks  based  on  market
mechanism.
Third, to work with the management of the state banks and commercial banks to facilitate
their resumption of lending without compromising the banks’ own risk management and the
Bank of Thailand’s own supervisory standards.
On our part, the Bank of Thailand has improved the credit information system through fostering the
establishment of credit bureaus, which provide the much-needed infrastructure for the resumption of
new credit. Meanwhile, we will continue to adhere to the best practices in prudential standards, and
look to further improving the standards.
Let me now turn to the third challenge: Rebuilding our financial architecture.
This  is  an  area  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  takes  leadership  role  to  strengthen  the  soundness  and
efficiency  of  the  financial  institutions.  Our  leadership  must  lead  to  outcome  which  makes  practical
sense,  measures  up  to  international  best  practices,  and  must  be  market-oriented  and  suitable  to
Thailand.
So  far,  we  have  laid  down  necessary  groundwork  to  tackle  short-term  difficulties,  such  as  the
persisting non-performing loan problems, the lack of credit growth, or the restoration of financial sector
soundness. Long-term prosperity however requires more. It requires a new financial architecture and
corresponding  market  infrastructures  to  foster  competition  and  efficiency  while  ensuring  a  non-
recurrence of past problems.
Specifically,  in  the  world  where  financial  innovations,  economic  integration,  and  technological
advancements  bring  nations  and  markets  closer  and  define  a  new  paradigm  for  competition  for
financial service industries, the rebuilding of our financial architecture becomes vital for our long-term
successes, if not survival.
Given such a challenge, which direction are we heading?
 
Going  forward,  we  must  improve  our  financial  architecture  to  raise  efficiency  and  ensure
nationwide access to financial services.
In term of market competition,  the opening  up  of  our  banking  system  has  accelerated  the
transfer  of  technical  knowledge  and  ensured  competition  for  our  domestic  financial
institutions.
In term of market structure, the new Financial Institutions Bill – currently at the Senate and is
expected to be passed in the course of this year – will provide a legal and formal framework
that accommodates the establishment of financial conglomerates. Financial  institutions  will
be allowed to offer varieties of financial services such as insurance or securities through their
subsidiaries. Though this is still a step away from universal banking model where all financial
services will be offered under one entity but the draft law is flexible enough to make room for
such eventuality, and in the meantime boost competition.
Among  the  major  milestone 
financial
conglomerates, unified legal framework for both banks and finance companies, and prompt
corrective actions for weak financial institutions.
As for the availability of our financial services and product qualities, our recent survey
of financial product availability within Thailand indicated that market participants are keen to
expand product range, thus structural impediments obstructing them need to be dealt with.
law  are:  consolidated  supervision  of 
the 
in 
    4
BIS Review 70/2001
       The Bank of Thailand has announced new rules for the Internet banking – simply what can
be  done  over  the  counter,  will  be  allowed  over  the  Internet.  This  should  facilitate
development of financial products in this area.
And for the alternate forms of financial intermediaries, capital market, bond market, and
equity market will play a greater role in the future. They will help increase the efficiency of
our banks’ operations by providing new instruments to help manage, mitigate and repackage
risks.
The second agenda of the financial sector reform is enhancing our risk management
capacity, particularly of the Thai regulatory bodies and financial institutions. On this  front,
our  Supervision  Group  have  moved  from  regulation  and  transaction-testing  toward  risk-
based supervision early this year.
From  our  preliminary  assessment,  these  changes  have  fostered  corresponding  and
encouraging changes in the Thai financial institutions. Several have hired foreign consultants
to transfer the know-how and adopted the best international practices on risk management,
while  many  have  imported  several  standard  off-the-shelves  risk  management  software  to
help improve their current practices. Of course, there remain several impediments to change;
these  include scarce and expensive human resource in  this  particular  field,  and  it  is  even
more  difficult  to  re-engineer  the  business  process  to  ensure  that  such  resources  are
employed productively.
The New Accord is a major challenge and milestone in this area. The Bank of Thailand has
been working closely with the banking communities in Thailand, on how to implement it in
practices.
Though we applaud the Basel Committee in their efforts to create a framework that is more
sensitive  to  risk  and  incentive  compatible,  I  believe  there  are  many  areas  which  would
benefit from closer consultation with the academia.
First, to apply the Internal Rating-Based approach or the IRB approach of the New Accord
requires  a  substantial  build-up  of  capacity:  Human  resource,  Database,  Business  model
re-engineering, to name but few.
As far as the data on the default probability on credit risk is concerned, most countries that
just embarked on developing the required database will be at a disadvantage with a shorter
and probably less representative series. Moreover, for those just recovering from crisis such
as Thailand, the implied risk from such series collected during the crisis period will be higher
than  average  over  a  complete  business  cycle.  Thus,  developing  countries  will  find  a  high
cost before emerging from crisis.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
   This  pro-cyclical  aspect  of  the  default  statistics  may  be  an  important  issue  for  the  global
economic recovery.
Secondly, some technical aspects remain unclear. In many cases, capital is being calculated
to support both expected and unexpected losses, and overly costly.
Thirdly,  the  proposed  capital  charge  for  operational  risk  needs  to  be  made  more  refined,
incentive  compatible  to  risk  management,  and  more  practical  and  less  cumbersome  in  its
application.
The third aspect of our financial reform is market discipline.
 
We  recognise  that  sound  corporate  governance,  both  in  banks  and  their  borrowers,  will
provide discipline from within, while public disclosure will allow market force to discipline the
financial institutions from the outside.
We  will  launch  a  new  Directors’  Handbook  for  the  financial  community,  which  will  further
encourage  understanding  and  motivation  behind  good  governance,  and  we  will  also
endeavour to improve the transparency of appointment and compensation.
Ladies and gentlemen,
BIS Review 70/2001
5
The last challenge I want to share with you is the strengthening of the Bank of Thailand to meet
future challenges.
The  crisis  of  1997  brought  to  light  weakness  in  Thailand’s  financial  management.  The  Bank  of
Thailand like most central banks in the region, have had to go through sea of changes in the wake of
the crisis, and undergo intensive reform of its operation and organization.  Three areas of change in
particular  that  stands  out  as  our  major  achievements  are  internal  reorganization,  strengthening  the
framework  for  monetary  policy  under  inflation  targeting,  and  enhancing  communication  and
transparency of operation.
At  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  underwent  major  restructuring  in  the  organization
structure, data management and work process. These were aimed to ensure the good foundation in
our decision-making process particularly with monetary policy implementation and financial institution
supervision.  A  risk  management  unit  has  been  established  to  manage  operational  risks  more
effectively, by reviewing and monitoring areas of risks in central bank operations with a view to taking
forward looking risk mitigation actions.
Another important area that has been strengthened is in the process of monetary policy operation. The
inflation  targeting  framework  adopted  by  Thailand  provides  sufficient  flexibility  to  take  care  of  the
challenges  facing  the  economy.  Through  regular  communication  with  the  market  and  through  open
discussions on public policy issues, the central bank has fostered and enhanced the participation of
academic and market interests.
The  Bank  of  Thailand’s  monetary  policy-making  process  was  reformed  to  ensure  a  balance  of
transparency, independence and accountability. This is with the belief that transparency of operation
limits discretion and leads to accountability. The Bank quickly moved towards greater openness in the
provision  of  data  and  timely  economic  information.  It  is  our  belief  that  public  acceptance  and
understanding  of  monetary  policy  is  most  important.  And  this  will  come  about  only  with  greater
transparency and predictability.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
In conclusion, I hope that I have given you some updates and direction of where we are heading in
this  current  environment.  The  experiences  of  Thailand  are  not  significantly  different  from  other
countries emerging from a crisis and I therefore welcome any comments and suggestions which you
may have.
Before leaving  you  today, may I thank  you once again for the  honour  to  address  this  distinguished
forum. I would also like to congratulate the organizers, specially the Sasin Graduate School and the
Faculty of Commerce and Accounting of Chulalongkorn University for successfully organizing a high
profile international conference. Our thanks also go to Professor Carl Chiarella, the current President
of APFA for his untiring efforts in guiding the APFA activities and a warm welcome the newly elected
APFA President, Dean Professor K.C. Chan.
I wish you a successful and enjoyable term.
Thank you for your attention.
6
BIS Review 70/2001
