Mervyn King: No country is an island
Speech by Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Institute of Petroleum Annual
Dinner, London, 21 February 2001.
 No country is an island - in terms of economics, if not geography. Trade and capital flows link all the
economies  of  the  world.  Since  1970  the  volume  of  world  trade  has  increased  more  than  five-fold.
Globalisation is not a slogan; it is a fact.
The economic winds can rapidly alter direction bringing significant changes in the economic weather.
What  happens  in  the  world  economy  is  of  great  importance  to  your  industry.  But  no  business  in  a
country, such as the United Kingdom, which exports and imports almost a third of its national output
each year, can ignore global economic developments.
Recent events have reminded us of just how volatile that economic weather can be. Only a few short
months ago, the United States was experiencing rapid economic growth at a rate which surprised us
all. The new frontier had become the new economy, and some had forgotten that economic downturns
are  a  regular  feature  of  a  market  economy.  Share  prices  had  reached  levels  four  times  that  of  a
decade  earlier,  and  the  price  earnings  ratio  of  America's  top  500  companies  was  over  forty,  an
unprecedented  level.  Now,  after  a  swift  and  sharp  fall  of  business  and  consumer  confidence,  the
business cycle appears to be alive and well, and living in the United States. Share prices have fallen
by around 20% since their peak in March 2000; and technology stock prices have fallen even more, by
50%. Forecasts for economic growth in the United States for the coming year are still being revised
down and are only one half of their levels of a few months ago.
Equally,  only  a  few  months  ago,  some  currency  traders  were  openly  deriding  the  euro.  The  euro
reached a low of 0.82 to the dollar - the lowest level for the euro or its antecedents for over 15 years.
Since then, however,  the  euro  has recovered, and the euro economy  itself appears to  be  relatively
stable. In the other major industrialised part of the world economy, Japan, output has barely risen in
recent  years.  Real  GDP  in  Japan  has  grown  by  only  just  over  1%  a  year  over  the  past  decade,
compared with over 4% a year over the previous ten years.
Unexpected changes in the economic weather have also had a significant impact on the oil market. Oil
prices rose from below $10 a barrel (for Brent crude) in December 1998 to a recent peak of over $37
last September, falling back to around $22 in December only to rise again to around $30 a barrel. The
standard deviation of daily changes in oil prices rose by a factor of three from the first half of 1999 to
the second half of last year: an indication of just how much volatility has risen.
Moreover, volatility has not been confined to the industrialised world. The past five years have seen a
number of damaging financial crises that have afflicted emerging market economies. Sudden reversals
of  short-term  capital  flows  to  some  of  those  economies  resulted  in  crises  that  led  not  only  to  deep
recessions  and  sometimes  political  crises,  but  also  a  renewed  debate  about  the  role  of  the  IMF  in
providing bailouts to some of these countries.
Despite  this  volatility  in  international  economic  conditions  the  British  economy,  to  date,  has
experienced greater stability. At first sight, this is encouraging. The UK  has  weathered some of the
recent  international  economic  storms,  and  achieved  a  post-war  record  of  uninterrupted  economic
growth, falling unemployment, and inflation lower and more stable than for a generation. But no two
storms are ever the same. Do the clouds on the international economic horizon threaten our economic
stability at home? We cannot know. Rest assured that the Monetary Policy Committee will always act
to maintain stability by keeping inflation on track to meet the target of 2½%. But the recent stability of
inflation owes a good deal to the fact that economic shocks from overseas have tended to offset rather
than reinforce each other. It would be rash to assume that it will be at all easy to keep inflation over the
next five  years  within the 2%-3% range  within  which  it  has  largely  moved  over  the  past  five  years.
What matters most, however, is that any such deviations from target are short-lived, and that inflation
expectations generally are firmly anchored on the target. If we cannot ensure that the waters are calm,
we can at least steer a steady course.
BIS Review 16/2001
1
I want tonight to look more closely at two clouds on the international economic horizon. First, the US
slowdown and its consequences for the rest of us; and second, the risk of further financial crises in
emerging market economies.
Central bankers are good at finding clouds. We know that one is attached to every silver lining. And
even  on  passing  through  the  gates  of  heaven,  a  central  banker  would  probably  argue  for  greater
structural  reform  while  declaring  the  situation  "not  wholly  unsatisfactory".  But  the  two  clouds  are
moving towards us. So let us examine them.
The  outlook  for  the  world  economy  has  deteriorated  markedly  in  recent  months  as  a  result  of  the
sudden slowdown in the United States and signs of renewed stagnation in Japan. The speed of the
deterioration was a surprise, but not the fact of a slowdown. Last year saw the fastest growth rate of
the world economy for twelve years. Growth in the US reached an annual rate of 6% in the second
quarter of last year, well above even optimistic estimates of sustainable growth rates. A slowdown was
not only inevitable; it was desirable.
The  main  surprise  in  the  US  was  the  sharp  and  sudden  break  in  both  business  and  consumer
confidence. US manufacturers' optimism is now almost as low as it was in 1991 - the last time the US
economy  experienced  a  recession.  Consumer  confidence  also  fell  sharply  in  January,  driven  by
marked pessimism over the short-term future. Quite why this break in confidence should have been so
rapid is not easy to understand. And its origins will largely determine the nature of the US downturn.
On the one hand, greater use of information technology to economise on inventories may have led to
shorter lags between changes in final demand and changes in output. If so, then it is possible that the
speed of the downturn will be matched by the speed of the recovery, leading to a short-lived episode
of  output  growth  close  to  zero  as  the  result  of  an  inventory  correction.  On  the  other  hand,  the
slowdown could be much more protracted if the imbalances in the US economy which have built up in
recent years start to unwind, leading to a reduction in spending as both households and businesses
seek to reduce the amount of outstanding debt on their balance sheets.
The key to the nature of the US downturn is what will happen to productivity growth. Over the past five
years there has been accumulating evidence that the application of information technology has raised
productivity  growth  in  the  US  economy  -  the  "new  economy".  Expectations  of  higher  productivity
growth increased demand by more than it raised supply initially, as firms invested in new technology
and  households  anticipated  higher  future  incomes.  As  a  result,  spending  grew  rapidly,  outstripping
supply and large imbalances emerged. The current account deficit in the US is now close to 5%  of
GDP, a post-war record. It is sustainable as long as foreigners are prepared to finance it. So far, the
profitability of new investment opportunities in the US has attracted capital inflows to finance higher
investment, which in turn has led to a strong dollar. If expectations about higher productivity growth
prove  well-founded,  then  US  businesses  and  families  will  gradually  repay  the  debts  they  have
incurred,  and  the  current  account  deficit  will  subside,  with  an  adjustment  of  the  dollar  accordingly.
Although the imbalances will unwind, they will do so slowly, allowing the US economy to recover from
its present slowdown. But if there were to be a reappraisal of the extent to which productivity growth
had  increased,  then  a  more  sudden  downward  adjustment  to  spending  could  result.  In  such
circumstances,  the  imbalances  would  unwind  more  rapidly,  leading  to  adjustments  in  asset  prices,
both in stock markets and exchange rates. That would imply a much bumpier ride for both the United
States and the world economy in the months ahead.
Clearly, there have been some downward adjustments to stock prices in the US over the past year.
But their scale has been limited, and there does, at least so far, appear to be no significant reappraisal
of the impact of new technology  on US productivity growth.  Although  it  is not  easy to reconcile the
recent  sharp  falls  in  confidence  in  the  US  and  the  relative  stability  of  stock  market  prices,  it  would
appear that investors generally have taken comfort from the Federal Reserve's ability and willingness
to react to the latest data, and take appropriate action.
The second cloud on the horizon is the risk to emerging market economies posed by the US slowdown
and  the  unwinding  of  imbalances  in  the  industrialised  world.  In  some  emerging  markets,  especially
those in East Asia exporting high technology products to the United States, the immediate outlook is
for weaker economic growth. But for other countries, especially in Latin America, the fall in US interest
rates and in the dollar against the euro will mitigate the direct loss of export demand.
But the major concern is to avoid another financial crisis, of which there have been too many in the
past five years. From Mexico in 1995, through the Asian crisis in 1997 and Brazil in 1999, and, more
recently in Argentina and Turkey, sudden reversals of short-term capital flows have created financial
crises. In many cases, these crises have proved devastating to the citizens of the countries affected.
2
BIS Review 16/2001
The  existence  of  deep  and  liquid  international  capital  markets  offers  opportunities  for  greater  risk
diversification  by  both  borrowers  and  lenders.  But  it  also  increases  the  risk  of  contagion  from  one
country to another affected by an outflow of short-term debt finance.
There  remains  an  urgent  need  for  the  international  financial  community  to  raise  its  game  in  both
preventing  and  resolving  such  crises.  On  prevention,  much  has  been  achieved,  built  around  the
overriding principle of transparency. In itself, transparency will not prevent financial crises. But it can
help reduce the frequency of crises - by alerting both markets and policy makers to problems on the
horizon - and their severity - by minimising the surprises about the scale of any liquidity problems. On
the resolution of crises, the past year has seen a significant change in practice with more weight given
to  the  involvement  of  private  sector  creditors.  The  key  to  progress  is  the  recognition  that  official
finance from the IMF is strictly limited. Large bailouts from the IMF are undesirable - partly because
they  reduce  the  incentive  for  private  sector  investors  to  appraise  carefully  the  risks  they  take,  and
partly  because  the  funds  available  to  the  IMF  are  wholly  inadequate  for  it  to  play  the  role  of  an
international lender of last resort. Once it is recognised that official finance is limited, then it is clear
that countries need to work closely with their own private sector creditors. Debt obligations must be
honoured, although in some circumstances it may be necessary to restructure those obligations. The
relationship between debtor countries and their private sector creditors is one that must be nurtured at
all  stages.  And  many  emerging  market  economies  have  provided  excellent  examples  of  good
relationships with their creditors, thus enabling them to raise new money or lengthen debt maturities at
times  of  stress.  The  choice  is  not  between  large  bailouts  and  no  official  finance.  It  is  between  an
orderly  framework,  which  recognises  the  complementary  roles  of  private  and  official  finance,  and  a
disorderly process of default.
The combination of transparency to prevent crises and private sector involvement to resolve crises,
follows naturally from the view that markets require  information to  work efficiently but that investors
should  take  responsibility  for  the  risks  they  choose  to  bear.  This  sentiment  is  remarkably  close  to
views expressed recently by the new US Treasury Secretary. Now is the time to put in place a more
systematic  framework  for  the  prevention  and  resolution  of  financial  crises  so  that  emerging  market
economies can take their rightful place in the international economy.
What do these clouds mean for the UK economy? Fortunately, our own imbalances are on a much
smaller scale than those in the US. But here too, final domestic demand growth, which has averaged
4% a year for four years, has exceeded supply and the trade deficit has risen. Indeed, net trade is now
likely  to have made a negative contribution to output growth for five consecutive  years,  the  longest
such period since the nineteenth century. Final domestic demand growth, and especially that of private
consumption, needs to slow. Nevertheless, the differences between recent  developments in the  UK
and the US are more significant than the similarities. Perhaps the most striking difference between the
US and UK economies has been the remarkable resilience of business and consumer confidence in
the UK in recent months. Of course, further weakness of the world economy, emanating perhaps in
emerging markets, could change the outlook.
Nevertheless,  Mr  President,  I  am  confident  that  the  British  economy  can  withstand  the  storms  and
vicissitudes  of  the  international  economic  weather.  But  it  is  in  the  interests  of  all  of  us  to  work  to
ensure a prosperous international economy. No country is an island. As John Donne expressed the
thought  so  vividly  in  his  aptly-named  Devotions  upon  Emergent  Occasions  "all  mankind  is  of  one
author, and is one volume."
BIS Review 16/2001
3
