Lars Heikensten: Challenges for the Swedish fixed income market
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the RäntEvent,
Modern Museum, Stockholm, 8 May 2001.
 The  Swedish  fixed  income  market  has  undergone  a  fantastic  development  over  the  past  20  years.
This refers to both the volumes traded and the level of sophistication. However, the journey here has
by no means been a simple one. At times, both profitability and activity have been quite low. Today
the market is facing new challenges. Profitability appears to have fallen and with it both the number of
players  and  the  volumes  traded.  The  risks  are  now  also  covered  to  a  greater  extent  by  Swedish
players trading in, for instance, the German market. The Swedish fixed income market has thus lost
ground, relative to other countries. It also appears to have lagged behind in the sense of technology. A
year or so ago there was an attempt to introduce a new instrument, a Swedish fixed income future,
with  the  aim  of  increasing  the  market's  powers  of  attraction.  This  attempt  did  not  live  up  to
expectations, however. Today we are gathered here partly because of a new initiative, a platform for
electronic fixed income trading.
Let me start by saying a few words about the way I see the role of the Riksbank in this context. Our
fundamental  objectives  are  to  safeguard  price  stability  and  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment
system. There are connections to the fixed income market in both of these considerations. However,
this does not mean that we have an opinion on which system solutions the market chooses as long as
they  fulfil  reasonable  requirements  for  security  and  efficiency.  This  area  lies  outside  of  our  core
objectives.  This  is  why  we  also  remained  outside  of  the  discussion  on  a  fixed  income  future  a  few
years ago.
Given  this,  I  would  like  to  share  a  few,  brief  reflections  with  you.  Firstly,  I  shall  go  through  the
advantages of electronic trading. My views on this are mainly a matter of principle. After that I intend to
make some brief comments on a few aspects of the Swedish fixed income market today and in this
context say a few words on the consequences that electronic trading may entail. Finally, I intend to
take up a more specific question, settlement on the fixed income market. We do not consider that this
functions sufficiently well from a financial stability perspective.
Electronic trading, an opportunity
Let me begin by pointing out that electronic trading systems are being used to an increasing extent
around  the  world.  It  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  this  means  they  have  clear  advantages,
otherwise private players would not invest in them. However, a public authority naturally also wonders
whether they involve some kind of risk. With this in mind, there has been a study on electronic trading
systems made within the framework of the G10 central bank co-operation.1
The report emphasises a number of advantages:
• 
Electronic  trading  systems  make  it  possible  to  manage  large  amounts  of  trading-related
information.  This  enables  all  trading-related  processes  in  the  financial  companies  to  be
integrated,  which  in  turn  provides  opportunities  for  linking  together  the  entire  transaction
chain (business contracts, confirmation, clearing and settlement). This is known as straight-
through-processing (STP).
Electronic  trading  also  enables  a  greater  insight  into  the  market.  This  can  in  turn  make  it
possible to reduce any information symmetries between different players. That is, of course,
a  disadvantage  for  those  who  have  previously  profited  from  the  imbalances,  but  normally
benefits the system as a whole.
                                                      
1 Bank for International Settlements:, [2001], "The implications of electronic trading in financial markets". Report by a working
group established by the Committee on the Global Financial System of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries.
BIS Review 37/2001
1
   Another  important  aspect  is  that  electronic  trading  enables  anonymity  during  trading.  This
often has a positive effect on the markets' method of functioning and thus their efficiency.
For instance, it can facilitate settlements of large positions.
The  opportunities  for  access  to  the  market  can  also  be  improved,  if  desired.  This  applies
both  from  a  geographical  perspective  and  for  different  types  of  players.  An  opportunity  is
thereby  given  to  influence  the  structure  of  the  market  in  that  more  players  with  different
needs  can  be  active  in  many  different  markets.  This  can  lead  to  improved  liquidity  and
greater  competition.  According  to  the  report,  it  could  in  the  long  term  lead  to  a  change
becoming  necessary  in  the  traditional  role  of  the  intermediaries.  For  example,  they  may
choose to concentrate on the segments they consider most profitable.
A  further  important  effect  is  that  price  formation  can  be  improved  when  all  trading  is
centralised to one platform. This could make it easier for market players to find a balanced
price. New information will have a rapid impact on prices with the aid of the new technology.
This can in turn lead to a reduction in interest-rate differentials or spreads between purchase
prices and selling prices.
At the same time, the report points out the risks ensuing from electronic trading systems. One evident
risk,  which  may  seem  trivial  in  a  way,  but  in  reality  may  have  great  significance,  concerns  the
technology itself. It quite simply has to work, and do so even in situations where there is unrest on the
market. Knowledge of the traditional methods of trading, such as telephone trading, will of course also
decline over time. This means it will probably become increasingly difficult to trade using alternative
methods in the event of system disturbances. Allow me therefore to emphasise the importance of the
systems being reliable and of having functional emergency routines.
Electronic trading systems will not necessarily lead to all of the benefits I recently mentioned. On the
contrary, they could be used by the owners, who in many cases are part or all of the market collective
to begin with, in order to gather exclusive and valuable information on, for instance, market behaviour.
Given this, it is hardly surprising that ownership issues are often the most important in this context.
A further problem - and I shall return to this in a little more detail later - is that the increased anonymity
in trading - which entails certain advantages - can also have the disadvantage that it becomes more
difficult for the players involved to check their counterparty risks.
The Swedish market today
I mentioned at the beginning some of the problems today on the Swedish fixed income market. These
are  partly  connected  with  the  radical  fall  in  the  national  debt.  During  the  1990s,  the  national  debt
increased by an average of SEK 80 billion on an annual basis. Only a few years ago, namely in 1997,
this debt amounted to SEK 1,420 billion, or almost 80 per cent of GDP. This should be compared with
today's level of SEK 1,280 billion, or approximately 60 per cent of GDP. According to the Ministry of
Finance, the national debt will have been reduced by a further SEK 140 billion in 2004. The successful
budget consolidation process has thus cut down on business opportunities in that the volumes have
been reduced. However, the main thing is that the market has become more stable with fewer interest
rate fluctuations.
The Riksbank has also contributed to the stability by being involved in establishing a credible regime
with a low inflation rate. We have also endeavoured to make our monetary policy open and provide
clear signals, with the aim of reducing unnecessary fluctuations on the market.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  increasingly  improved  central  government
finances are essentially a very good development from a national economy point of view. Not even
this  market,  which  has  made  a  good  living  from  central  government  financial  problems,  should  be
concerned  over  this.  The  falling  volumes  of  treasury  papers  entail  new  opportunities  for  other
borrowers.  "Crowding  out"  will  now  be  replaced  by  "crowding  in".  This  should  open  the  way  for
increased corporate financing with bonds, an area where we have a good tradition. Furthermore, an
increase in construction should create a greater financing need. It should also be possible to expand
the part of the fixed income market that is aimed at households. The fact that the share market does
not merely rain blessings has been made quite clear from developments over the past year. A clear
and  practical  system  for  bonds  aimed  at  households  could  be  one  good  alternative  to  both
shareholding and interest funds.
2
BIS Review 37/2001
It is scarcely surprising that the Swedish market is markedly different from, for instance, the Treasury
market in the USA or the Bund market in Europe. The number of players is much smaller, while the
depth of the market is less. This reasonably entails the costs of doing business of the same size being
higher and the relationships between players being closer. This carries a risk, particularly in times of
uncertainty, of affecting the functioning of the market. The inclination to take on risks then declines
and with few players and problems with trading situations, the market has occasionally almost come to
a standstill.
As  you  know,  there  are  differing  opinions  as  to  whether  this  type  of  problem  can  be  solved  or
alleviated with the aid of electronic trading. I do not intend to become involved in that discussion. Part
of  the  positive  effects  of  electronic  trading  that  I  mentioned  earlier  on  a  more  general  level  will
probably  be  smaller  in  a  market  like  the  Swedish  one  than  on  a  larger  market.  Of  course,  even  in
terms of direct operating costs, the savings will be less when calculated in kronor.
At the same time, it is clear that electronic trading will involve new opportunities. Above all, we hope
that it will bring about an increased interest from both Swedish and foreign players in being active and
doing business on the Swedish market. How this turns out will undoubtedly depend on the actions of
those in the system from the start. If they choose to limit entry or make it more difficult for new players,
there is a risk that the socioeconomic gains with the new platform will not be very great.
Settlement is important
Allow me to conclude with a few words on business settlement. This is a question that in itself does
not concern the choice of  whether or  not  we should have electronic  trading. All  business is settles,
whether this is done through a traditional market-maker system or by electronic trading. Those buying
fixed income instruments want to be sure of receiving what they have bought an those selling want to
receive the money they have been promised, regardless of the trading form. On the other hand, it is
clear that it would be desirable to take the opportunity to design a new system that would provide a
good means of handling settlements. This is particularly important as the  increased  volumes hoped
for, which are the whole point of the new system, will create increased risks in terms of settlement.
Today settlement on the fixed income market is done by means of net settlement in VPC. This works
well in many ways and the routines are perceived as manageable by the market players, as far as I
understand it. However, the system is nevertheless obsolete and involves risks. If one of the parties
involved failed to meet its payments during the daily settlement, for instance, if one party was forced to
make  a  suspension  of  payments  or  simply  lacked  sufficient  liquidity,  the  situation  could  become
troublesome.  The  existing  routines  can  be  called  into  question.  One  can  imagine  situations  where
settlement is not achieved, which could  have consequences for the  liquidity  of the  banking system.
From the point of view of financial stability, this is an unsatisfactory situation.
The requirement normally made of a settlement system is that settlement can be achieved even if the
largest  party  should  fail.  This  requirement  is  not  met  in  Sweden  and  the  security  in  the  Swedish
payment system would not be regarded as satisfactory in an international evaluation.
VPC's owners, i.e. the banks, undertook to remedy this problem when they purchased VPC from the
government. That was in spring 1999, and as far as I know nothing has yet been done.
Common to all methods, unfortunately, is that they cost a lot of money to implement and this money
has to come from the market players in some way. However, it should be in the interests of the market
players that something is done. In the long run, it is unlikely that the banks' international counterparties
will accept that settlement in Sweden is done through systems that are inferior to those in the rest of
Europe,  and  with  questionable  security.  It  is  reasonable  that  we  should  live  up  to  the  international
standards now being established. It would be a defeat for the market if the government had to enforce
solutions in this field through legislation.
Starting point for a renaissance
These brief comments show that there are challenges awaiting those who work on the Swedish fixed
income market. Although the electronic platform being launched today will not be able to meet all of
these,  I  still  hope  that  it  will  prove  to  be  the  starting  point  for  something  new  and  contribute  to  an
eagerly-awaited renaissance for Swedish fixed income trading.
Good luck!
BIS Review 37/2001
3
