T T Mboweni: Recent economic and financial developments
Address by Professor T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the University of
South Africa, Pretoria, 23 August 2001.
 Introduction
1.
Ladies and gentlemen, honoured guests. I wish to thank you for the honour you have bestowed on me
by choosing me as the recipient of your award for Excellence in Managing the South African Financial
Environment. In accepting this award and thanking you for extending it to me, I would like to make a
few comments about the recent economic and financial developments in South Africa. I will touch on
the recent price developments, the exchange rate, and developments in other emerging markets.
Recent economic developments
2.
Towards the end of 2000 the  South  African economy had not  been  seriously  affected  by  the  world
economic downturn. But by the first quarter of this year, it became clearer that we would probably be
adversely affected by the slowing activity in the major world economies.
As  we  mentioned  in  our  latest  Quarterly  Bulletin,  published  in  June,  the  recorded  decline  in  export
volumes contributed to a slowing down in domestic growth from 3 per cent in the fourth quarter of last
year to 2 per cent in the first quarter of this year. Although growth had already slowed from 4 per cent
in the third quarter of 2000, the slowdown had largely been confined to the agricultural sector. But in
the first quarter of this year, the weakness spread to other sectors of the economy. Of some worry is
that the sector that bore the brunt of the slowdown was the manufacturing sector. The growth rate in
this sector slowed from an annualised 4.5 per cent in the fourth quarter to a mere 1 per cent in the first
quarter.  This  is  somewhat  puzzling  because  there  appears  to  be  strong  demand  for  manufactured
goods.
Domestic demand remained strong in the first quarter with household and government consumption
expenditure  rising  and  growth  in  real  fixed  capital  formation  and  inventory  investment  accelerating.
The welcome acceleration in inventory levels followed a steep drop in net inventory investment from
the  third  to  fourth  quarters  of  2000.  This  suggests  that  producers  are  positive  about  South  Africa’s
future growth prospects and anticipate a sizeable increase in domestic demand.
Price developments
3.
Inflation in the prices of consumer goods and services moderated meaningfully in the first half of 2001.
The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index for metropolitan and other urban areas
excluding  mortgage  cost  (CPIX)  -  the  benchmark  indicator  for  inflation-targeting  purposes  -  has
declined from 8.2 per cent in August 2000 to 6.4 per cent in July 2001. This rate of increase is only
0.4 percentage points above the upper limit of the inflation target range of between 3 and 6 per cent
set for 2002. When measured from quarter to quarter and expressed at an annualised rate, the short-
term pace of CPIX inflation has almost halved from 7.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2001 to 4.5 per
cent in the second quarter.
“Headline” CPI inflation or  the  year-on-year rate of increase in the overall consumer price index for
metropolitan areas slowed down from 7.8 per cent in February 2001 to 5.3 per cent in July.
Increases in the prices of consumer services decelerated quite significantly. In the case of housing-
related services, price increases moderated from a year-on-year rate of 8.1 per cent in February 2001
to  2.8  per  cent  in  July.  Housing-related  services  include  mortgage  rates,  house  rent  and  domestic
workers' wages. Expressed at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate, the rate of increase in the
prices of all consumer services fell from 13.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2001 to only 4.2 per cent in
the  second  quarter.  Smaller  increases  in  the  prices  of  other  services,  apart  from  housing-related
services, also contributed to the decline in the inflation in the prices of all consumer services.
The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  prices  of  consumer  goods  fell  back  from  8.7  per  cent  in
August 2000 to 5.2 per cent  in July  2001. Declines in the price of food,  which  had  risen  steeply  in
2000, helped to bring down the inflation rate.
BIS Review 72/2001
1
In contrast to the moderation in consumer price inflation, production price inflation has advanced at a
firmer pace  in  recent  months.  Measured  over  periods  of  twelve  months,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the
all-goods production price index rose from 8.1 per cent in April 2001 to 8.6 per cent in May, June and
July.
The  year-on-year rate of increase in the prices of domestically produced goods  which had receded
from 8.0 per cent in November 2000 to 6.9 per cent in April 2001, accelerated to 8.2 per cent in July.
Rising food price inflation, though still at a modest level, contributed most to the pick-up in inflation in
the prices of domestically produced goods.
The  higher  inflation  in  the  prices  of  domestically  produced  goods  has  been  partly  offset  by  a
deceleration  in  the  rates  of  increase  in  the  prices  of  imported  goods  in  recent  months.  Imported
inflation,  when  measured  over  periods  of  twelve  months,  declined  from  15.0  per  cent  in  December
2000 to 9.2 per cent in July 2001. The decline in imported inflation over this period was primarily due
to  lower  international  oil  prices  and  the  increase  in  the  value  of  the  rand  in  May  and  June  2001.
Coupled  with  declining  inflation  in  trading-partner  countries,  this  contributed  meaningfully  to  the
slowdown in imported inflation.
Exchange rate developments
4.
The  performance  of  the  rand/dollar  exchange  rate  has  been  disappointing  in  recent  times.  It  has
traded  between  R8.01  on  4  July  2001  and  R8.45  on  22  August.  Whilst  I  have  often  said  that
commentators should focus on the trade-weighted value of the rand, as a deterioration in the value of
the rand against the US dollar might merely reflect the strength of the US dollar on the international
exchanges,  the  traded-weighted  value  of  the  rand  has  also  succumbed  to  negative  sentiment.  It  is
currently around 8 per cent weaker than at the end of last year.
Why is the exchange rate of the rand currently under pressure? The reasons cited in the market are
the following: in the first instance, currencies perceived to belong in the emerging markets asset class
have  been  adversely  affected  by,  in  particular,  developments  in  Argentina  and  Turkey.  There  are
concerns  in  the  market  that,  notwithstanding  the  official  aid  packages,  with  their  accompanying
conditionalities, Argentina’s economic problems could prove difficult to resolve. Sentiment towards the
rand has been clearly affected by fears of contagion.
Secondly, developments in Zimbabwe, in particular with respect to their land-reform programme, have
also been cited as explanatory factors. The impact of these developments was compounded this week
following  a  report  on  Bloomberg.  Mr  Thami  KaPlaatjie,  Secretary-General  of  the  Pan-Africanist
Congress  of  South  Africa,  reportedly  supported  Zimbabwe’s  approach  to  land  reform  and  criticised
those  who  oppose  it  as  negating  the  interests  of  Africans.  Furthermore,  he  reportedly  also  told
journalists that the problem of land in South Africa will, when it explodes, be of enormous proportions
- “too ghastly to contemplate” were his words. (I believe Mr KaPlaatjie was not speaking in his official
capacity but, I must stress, the damage was done.)
I  would  like  to  repeat  what  I  said  yesterday  at  the  Annual  African  Investment  Conference  held  in
Stellenbosch. I am concerned that developments in Zimbabwe have tended to have an adverse effect
on our markets, in particular our currency and bond markets. I would like to reiterate that firstly, the
land question in Zimbabwe needs to be resolved in accordance with the law and in an orderly fashion
which finds a solution that is beneficial to the political and economic imperatives of Zimbabwe and the
region.
Secondly, the current state of restlessness in Zimbabwe should really be brought to an end to allow
the  economies  of  Southern  Africa  to  stabilise.  Thirdly,  our  markets  need  to  learn  to  differentiate
between developments in one Southern African country and another. Here in South Africa the political
leadership has consistently stated that land reform will take place according to the law as guided by
the Constitution and the need for historical redress and food production. I hope the market players are
listening to what is being said.
Fourthly,  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  point  of  view  we  are  highly  appreciative  of  the  efforts  of  the
Southern  African  Development  Community  in  trying  to  assist  in  a  resolution  of  the  Zimbabwean
question.  And  finally,  we  should  always  be  aware  that  the  financial  markets  are  affected  by  a
multiplicity of factors, not just one factor. Since developments in one emerging market will from time to
time  affect  another,  it  is  therefore  important  that  emerging  markets  design  their  policies  and
2
BIS Review 72/2001
programmes to receive the maximum benefit from globalisation. An “injury to one tends to be an injury
to all”.
The final factor which has been mentioned  in the market has been the perceived increase in strike
action and threatened labour unrest. Of course, the rand sometimes is pressurised by the perception
that it is a “commodity currency”, or concerns may emerge regarding the privatisation process in South
Africa, or regarding the so-called NOFP, the net open foreign currency position of the Reserve Bank.
Movements in the value of the rand can also, of course, be exacerbated by pure speculative trading
activity  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Undoubtedly,  however,  the  first  three  factors  I  mentioned
earlier have dominated market sentiment and commentary in recent days.
I believe that the pressures on the rand are really, truly and honestly overdone. Cognisance has to be
taken  of  South  Africa’s  sound  economic  fundamentals  to  allay  these  contagion  fears  which  might
emerge if economic conditions in Argentina, Zimbabwe and Turkey deteriorate. Secondly, the South
African Government has given a clear and unequivocal commitment to the rule of law and has recently
been  seen  implementing  court  decisions  without  delay  in  respect  of  a  land-occupation  problem  at
Bredell. Fears regarding any land-reform programme in South Africa are unfounded. The best defence
of a currency lies in the economic management of the country. South Africa pursues and will continue
to pursue prudent macro-economic policies. I have no doubt that a carefully considered analysis of
South Africa will lead to a retracement in the value of the rand’s trade-weighted index.
Developments in other emerging markets
5.
The increase of international financial transactions and international capital flows has brought with it
an increase in the potential risks of a reversal. This sudden and large reversal of short-term capital
flows has caused international financial crises in Mexico (1994-1995), Asia (1997-1998), Brazil (1998-
1999) and more recently in Argentina and Turkey.
Argentina’s  economic  performance  deteriorated  significantly  from  mid-1998  in  the  aftermath  of  the
Asia, Brazil and Russia crises. After a short-lived pickup in the last quarter of 1999, the economy again
stagnated in 2000. This reflected the fiscal tightening on domestic demand, a drop  in  business and
consumer confidence, and the progressive hardening of financing conditions in international markets.
The  government  responded  with  a  strengthened  growth-oriented  economic  strategy  aimed  at
promoting  and  ensuring  medium-term  sustainability  of  the  fiscal  and  external  financial  situations.  It
centred on a strong commitment by the government to reduce fiscal deficits.
The IMF supported this strengthened economic programme and increased Argentina’s access to IMF
financing  in  January  this  year.  Argentina  also  received  new  loan  commitments  from  other  sources.
Favourable developments that followed the agreement on the programme and financing package were
interrupted  in  early  March  2001  by  a  new  crisis.  The  principle  catalyst  was  evidence  of  a  major
deterioration in the fiscal performance, but internal political disagreements and increased uncertainty
in international markets were contributing factors.
In  June  2001,  the  government  completed  a  nearly  US$  30  billion  debt  exchange  with  its  major
domestic  and  international  creditors.  Argentina’s  financial  conditions  improved  somewhat  but  this
proved  to  be  temporary  and  Argentina’s  financial  asset  prices  started  falling  in  mid-July  2001  as
analysts  questioned  Argentina’s  ability  to  meet  payments  on  almost  US$  130  billion  public  debt.
President  Fernando  De  la  Rua  tried  to  reassure  investors  in  July  by  announcing  a  series  of  strict
measures to cut government spending and limit tax evasion. Argentina’s stocks, however, fell sharply
thereafter as investors questioned President De la Rua’s proposed spending cuts and other economic
measures designed to reduce Argentina’s ballooning deficit. This package of measures, designed to
achieve  a  zero fiscal  deficit,  was finally  approved  by  Argentina’s  Congress  at  the  end  of  July  2001
after much debate.
Fears of a regional crisis in Latin America, however, eased when Horst Kohler, the IMF’s managing
director, this week informed the Executive Board of the Fund that he was prepared to recommend an
augmentation  of  Argentina’s  current  stand-by  credit  facility  by  approximately  US$  8  billion  to  about
US$ 22 billion.
Similarly,  Turkey’s  economy  experienced  considerable  growth  since  1994  but  had  entered  a
recession by 1999 as a result of tight fiscal policies and the earlier Russian crisis. With high  public
deficits and a public sector making net payments of external debt after 1994, the pressure grew on
Turkey’s financial markets. The lack of depth of these financial markets and the volatile inflation rate
BIS Review 72/2001
3
paved the way for sustained high real interest rates. The high real interest rate paid on domestic debt
therefore increased the borrowing requirements of the public sector. All this created a vicious circle of
debt and interest payments, pushing Turkey into an ever more difficult financial position.
The deterioration of the public financial balance, the rise in domestic debt due to continued high real
interest  rates,  the  acceleration  of  inflation  rates  and  the  continuing  economic  contraction  made  it
necessary  to  embark  on  a  medium-term  economic  austerity  programme.  This  programme  was
designed  to  free  Turkey  from  high  inflation,  restore  macro-economic  fundamentals  and  address
structural weaknesses in the economy.
For  most  of  2000,  the  government’s  economic  programme  made  good  progress.  Consumer  price
inflation declined rapidly from 68.8 per cent in January 2000 to 33.4 per cent in February 2001, the
lowest level since 1986. GNP growth also accelerated sharply from a contraction  of 6.1 per cent  in
1999 to an expansion of 6 per cent in 2000.
However,  a  severe  banking  crisis  in  late  November  2000  was  accompanied  by  a  massive  capital
outflow.  The  crisis  was  triggered  by  liquidity  problems  in  some  medium-sized  banks,  which  had
positioned themselves aggressively for continued declines in interest rates. The underlying cause of
the crisis, however, appears to be the significant deterioration in the current account and the delays in
the  privatisation  programme  which  were  causing  interest  rates  to  rise  from  September,  and  more
markedly from around mid-November 2000.
The severe liquidity squeeze and growing bank distress was accompanied by pressure on overnight
interest rates and government bond yields. The capital outflow was only halted, and devaluation fears
allayed  when  the  IMF  announced  in  December  2000  an  additional  US$  7  billion  to  alleviate  the
balance of payment difficulties stemming from the recent crisis. Interest rates declined and there was a
modest rise in capital flows in January 2001.
In February 2001, a second financial crisis was triggered by a political dispute between Prime Minister
Bulent Ecevit and President Ahmet Necdet Sezer. The dispute raised concern that the country’s three-
party  coalition  government  might  collapse  and  raised  doubts  about  the  authorities’  commitment  to
reform. Market confidence in the system was shattered and the Turkish lira faced a fresh major attack
in February 2001. The central bank spent US$ 4.5 billion, one sixth of its reserves, to defend the lira.
These  attempts,  however,  failed  to  restore  confidence  and  the  Turkish  authorities  decided  on
22 February 2001 to allow the lira to float freely.
Turkey’s economic programme was again strengthened following the crisis that led to the floating of
the  lira.  The  new  economic  framework  included  increased  transparency,  accountability  and  good
governance in both the private and public sectors. The improved programme aimed to strengthen the
primary fiscal position of the public sector, reduce the government’s immediate borrowing requirement
and address major bank restructuring. Market sentiment, however, again started to deteriorate in early
July 2001 when the IMF postponed a portion of the Turkish loan. The differences between the IMF and
the Turkish authorities were fortunately resolved and the IMF approved the eighth review of Turkey’s
economic programme supported by the three-year Stand-By Arrangement on 12 July 2001.
The  IMF’s  Executive  Board  also  completed  the  ninth  review  of  Turkey’s  economic  programme  on
3 August 2001. This decision will enable Turkey to draw an additional US$ 1.5 billion from the IMF.
The  IMF  is  convinced  that  there  are  encouraging  signs  that  the  economic  downturn  in  Turkey  is
bottoming out, and that the targeted lowering of inflation is materialising, which could permit declines
in  interest  rates.  The  IMF  is  also  encouraged  by  the  considerable  progress  in  the  structural  reform
agenda, especially in restructuring the banking system. However, the Turkish lira has again started to
depreciate  rapidly  since  the  beginning  of  August  as  confidence  in  Turkey’s  ability  to  repay
US$ 26 billion of debt (before the end of this  year) has been shaken by repeated disputes between
members of the governing coalition. The Turkish authorities have also decided to formally make an
inflation target the nominal anchor of Turkey’s monetary policy beginning in the fourth quarter of this
year.
The effects of the Mexican, Asian and Russian crises spread from one country to another in a process
commonly  known  as  contagion.  But  in  this  case,  the  available  evidence  indicates  no  broad-based
contagion  from  Argentina  and  Turkey  to  emerging  markets  in  general  at  this  stage.  However,
according  to  the  IMF,  the  potential  for  broader-based  contagion  still  remains.  Concerns  about
Argentina  did  spill  over  into  the  region,  notably  to  Brazil,  which  is  also  suffering  from  domestic
difficulties.
4
BIS Review 72/2001
I once again appeal to our markets to judge South Africa on its performance and not on the basis of
emerging market perception.
And once again, my heartfelt thanks to you.
BIS Review 72/2001
5
