Mervyn King: A tale of two cities
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  Cardiff  Business  School,
Cardiff University, 18 June 2001.
 Vice-chancellor, ladies and gentlemen,
It was once said that economic forecasters are the unfathomable in pursuit of the unpredictable. As a
student I found this odd. Whenever England played Wales at rugby the result was wholly predictable.
The reason was simple. My fellow-student, Gerald Davies, ran faster than Englishmen, even when he
carried the ball and they didn't. Economics is, unfortunately, less straightforward. Yet any decision that
involves an elapse of time between its implementation and its effects requires a forecast. Time lags
are  the  essence  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  And  that  is  why  the  Monetary
Policy Committee spends much time thinking about the likely future path of the economy.
The severe limits on our ability to anticipate future events means that forecasts can be no more than a
description of the relative likelihood of a range of possible outcomes. Anyone who presents you with a
point forecast for the future path of the economy is either concealing the most interesting part of their
analysis,  or  suffering  from  self-deception.  So  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  presents  forecasts  in
terms of probabilities. And it is the balance of risks to the economy which determines monetary policy.
So what are the balance of risks to the British economy at present? Overall, the past five years have
been a period of remarkable stability for the UK. Annual GDP growth has averaged 2.8%, and there
have been 35 consecutive quarters of positive economic growth. Since the MPC was set up in May
1997,  inflation  has  averaged  2.4%,  very  close  to  our  target  of  2½%,  and  been  in  the  remarkably
narrow range of 2%-3% in 43 out of the past 49 months. This degree of stability reflects well on the
new framework for monetary policy  in  this country. But  if I focus today  on  the risks ahead, it is not
simply because as a central banker I know that to every silver lining is attached a cloud, but because
the small deviations of inflation from the target over the past four years give a misleading impression
of the greater volatility of inflation that we might reasonably expect to see in future.
There  are  two  sources  of  uncertainty  facing  the  UK  at  present,  one  domestic  and  the  other
international. Both are related to imbalances. The correction of these imbalances will pose challenges
for policy over the next few years.
To  see  the  domestic  imbalance  look  beneath  the  relative  tranquillity  of  the  aggregate  data  to  the
significant turbulence among different sectors of the economy. It is obvious that there is an imbalance
between those sectors of the economy most exposed to international competition and those sectors
facing predominantly domestic competition. To describe this as a difference between manufacturing
and services is too simple, but the point is clear. For that part of the economy producing internationally
tradable, not just traded, goods and services, output is falling while consumer spending is buoyant. As
a result, there is a "tale of two cities" in which some industries are experiencing the worst of times, with
declining  manufacturing  output,  and  others  the  best  of  times,  with  the  latest  retail  sales  figures
showing an increase in the volume of sales over the past twelve months of 6.4%.
Such imbalances are not uncommon. Indeed, I first used the phrase "tale of two cities" in early 1995 to
describe  the  contrast  between  strong  demand  for  manufacturing  output  and  weak  retail  sales,  the
opposite  of  the  position  today.  Since  then  the  economic  see-saw  has  lurched  from  external  to
domestic demand, partly as a result of the continuing weakness of the euro which has led to a large
and persistent rise in the sterling effective exchange rate.
The  scale  of  the  imbalances  at  home  can  be  seen  in  figures  for  domestic  and  external  demand.
Whereas aggregate demand and output have risen at a fairly steady rate of around 2¾% over the past
five  years,  domestic  demand,  supported  by  rapid  money  and  credit  growth,  has  risen  much  more
rapidly than net external demand. Indeed, private final domestic demand grew at an average rate of
nearly 5% over this period, and its growth was in excess of 4% a year in four of the last five years.
This  imbalance  between  domestic  demand  and  output  has  resulted  in  a  rising  trade  deficit.  Net
external demand, exports less imports, actually made a negative contribution to total economic growth
in each of the past five years. This is the first time that the external contribution to growth has been
negative for a period of five consecutive years since the 1870s. And that negative contribution is likely
to continue for the foreseeable future.
BIS Review 58/2001
1
Imbalances  on  this  scale  are  unsustainable,  although  it  is  far  from  obvious  for  how  long  they  can
continue.  At  some  point,  the  weakening  balance  sheet  positions  of  the  private  sector  will  lead  to  a
slowing  of  consumption  and  investment  as  households  and  firms,  respectively,  reduce  spending  to
lower the ratio of debt to prospective income. Household debt to income and corporate debt to profit
ratios are at historically high levels. Moreover, within the corporate sector the debt levels of the most
highly indebted companies – those in the top decile of the distribution of debt to profits ratios – are
even higher than in the early 1980s and early 1990s. That holds true even when the telecoms sector is
excluded. Spending might, therefore, be expected to decelerate in response to these balance sheet
positions.  But,  for  the  time  being,  final  domestic  demand  continues  to  grow  at  above  trend  rates,
exacerbating the imbalances within the economy and adding to the risk of a large adjustment at some
point  in  the  future.  The  continuing  shift  of  resources  to  meet  the  demand  for  better  public  services
means that private demand must grow much more slowly over the next few years. In turn, that would
enable the trade deficit to stabilise and eventually fall back.
The second uncertainty facing the UK is the slowdown in the world economy, and, in particular, the
downturn in the United States. In 2000, the world economy grew by 4.7%, the highest rate for twelve
years. And, stimulated by an increase in productivity growth, the US growth rate had reached almost
6% a year in the first half of 2000. Such a rate was unlikely to have proved sustainable.
Over  the  past  five  years  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States  has  risen  markedly.  Labour
productivity growth rose by more than 1 percentage point a year to an average of 2½%-3% between
1995 and 2000. Some of this rise was the impact of new technology on efficiency, and some was the
result  of  greater  investment  in  IT  –  capital  deepening  –  which  added  significantly  to  the  amount  of
capital with which each employee was working. But demand rose even more rapidly than the supply of
output, leading to a large current account deficit. The external imbalance was the mirror image of the
internal imbalance.
So a slowdown in the US was not only unsurprising, it was desirable. But the speed of the turn-round
in the  US  has  taken  most  commentators  by  surprise.  Investment  in  IT,  which  had  been  growing  at
around  20%  a  year,  actually  fell  in  the  first  quarter.  As  a  result,  and  as  in  the  UK,  the  US  has
experienced a fall in manufacturing output while consumption and the housing market appear more
resilient.  Prompt  action  by  the  Federal  Reserve  has  so  far  limited  the  slowdown  to  a  downturn  in
inventories  and  fixed  investment.  Whether  the  slowdown  in  the  US  will  be  more  prolonged  than  is
embodied  in  the  current  consensus  view  will  depend  critically  upon  personal  consumption.  And,  in
turn, that will depend upon expectations of future productivity and hence income growth in the US.
If there were to be a reappraisal of the extent of the increase in productivity growth in the US, then
there  might  be  a  further  downward  revision  of  asset  prices  and  a  lower  path  for  consumption
spending.  So  far,  the  evidence,  both  from  consumption  directly,  and  financial  markets  indirectly,
suggests  that  no  major  reappraisal  has  occurred.  Share  prices  have  fallen  from  their  peaks  of  last
year. But price to earnings ratios remain well above historical levels. The average P/E ratio in the US
since 1900 was around 14. The ratio peaked at over 30, falling back to current levels of well over 20.
Interestingly,  the  divergence  of  valuation  between  hi-tech  and  other  companies  has  virtually
disappeared in recent months. There has also been a reduction in the perception of downside risks to
equity returns. Returns on shares are usually negatively skewed; that is, there is a greater chance of a
return  below  rather  than  above  its  expected  value.  During  the  course  of  this  year,  the  degree  of
negative skew has fallen in the US, suggesting that market expectations of further sharp falls is share
prices have diminished.
Of  course  a  reappraisal  of  the  future  growth  of  productivity  could  yet  occur.  The  recent  fall  in  IT
spending  will,  at  least  in  the  short  run,  reduce  the  contribution  to  higher  productivity  growth  from
capital deepening. It is never easy to detect changes in underlying productivity growth because a large
quantity of data is needed to distinguish clearly between changes in trend and cyclical movements.
Nevertheless, there is no evidence to suggest that the rate at which computing processing power is
increasing  –  doubling  every  eighteen  months  according  to  Moore's  Law  –  has  diminished.  Indeed,
there have been suggestions that the pace of doubling of processing power is now closer to twelve
months.
But there is one reason for caution about estimates of higher future productivity growth, and that is the
conventions used to measure output and hence productivity. It might seem obvious that a higher level
of  gross  domestic  product,  produced  by  the  same  number  of  person-hours,  is  an  improvement  in
productivity. But gross domestic product, GDP, is not value added. It is the latter which is the correct
measure of output and it differs from the former by an appropriate allowance for depreciation of capital
2
BIS Review 58/2001
goods.  The  proper  measure  of  output  is  net  domestic  product,  NDP.  In  normal  circumstances,  the
growth rates of GDP and NDP are identical. But the two can differ when the average depreciation rate
of the capital stock is changing, and that is exactly what has been happening recently. There has been
a shift toward greater investment in short-lived assets, such as IT and computer software, and as a
result the average depreciation rate has risen. Part of the additional gross output is simply replacing
the  higher  proportion  of  capital  that  wears  out  each  year.  It  makes  no  sense  to  include  the  higher
depreciation as part of increased output and hence higher productivity. A change in technology that
raises output today at the expense of output tomorrow is not an  improvement in  productivity. Using
estimates of growth rates of GDP will lead to an overestimate of the rise in productivity growth during
the  transition  to  higher  depreciation  rates.  The  rise  in  average  depreciation  rates  in  recent  years
suggests that the magnitude of this overestimation could be non-negligible, although more research is
needed. Moreover, as John Kay has pointed out, the measurement problem, and the overestimation of
output growth,  is  even  more  acute  when  the  price  of  capital  goods  is  falling  relative  to  that  of  final
consumption goods.
What this argument suggests is that economists should be cautious about drawing strong conclusions
about the future path of productivity growth. The changes in technology are real and evident in many
aspects of our home and business lives. But their implications for aggregate productivity growth are
much more uncertain.
The two uncertainties facing the UK economy at present, namely the imbalances both at home and
overseas, suggest that the Monetary Policy Committee may be in for a slightly bumpier ride over the
next  four  years  than  during  its  first  four.  So  far,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  managed  to
achieve  an  overall  balance  in  the  economy  despite  the  contrasting  fortunes  of  the  internationally
exposed  and more sheltered  sectors  of  the  economy.  But  if  these  large  imbalances  are  to  unwind,
then the Committee is likely to face a difficult challenge in trying to maintain a balance between total
demand  and  supply.  Controlling  inflation  in  future  may  prove  more  difficult  than  over  the  past  four
years, and the longer the imbalances persist the greater the risk that the subsequent adjustments to
demand, output and inflation are larger than those experienced recently.
Any rebalancing of the economy is likely to be associated with a fall in the real exchange rate. But the
magnitude and timing of that are not only uncertain, but also difficult for the MPC to influence. As Sir
Samuel Brittan wrote recently about expected changes in exchange rates: "These developments are
most  likely  to  happen  when  they  are  least  expected  and  least  welcome".  Although  a  sharp  fall  in
sterling has been the fervent wish of many manufacturers over the past four years, I recall the words
of the person who told me: "think very carefully before you make a wish – it might come true". The only
problems  worse  than  those  of  an  excessively  strong  currency  are  those  of  an  excessively  weak
currency.
The existing imbalances pose risks also to the inflation outlook. Prices of services have tended to rise
faster than those of goods – about 2% a year faster since 1990. But over the last twelve months the
gap between the two inflation rates has exceeded three percentage points. Services inflation has been
in the 3-4% range for some time, but goods inflation declined steadily from over 3% in late 1995 to
close  to  zero  in  the  spring.  The  strength  of  sterling  was  the  main  factor  that  lay  behind  this  fall  in
goods  inflation.  But  there  are  now  tentative  signs  of  a  pick  up  in  goods  prices  and  the  retail  sales
deflator. RPIY inflation has also risen during the course of this year from 1.5% to 2.8%. The MPC will
monitor the price data extremely carefully. But there is likely to be significant short-run volatility in the
inflation  figures  over  the  coming  months,  and  it  would  be  unwise  to  read  too  much  into  the  latest
inflation figure because the rise from 2.0% to 2.4%, although the lar gest one-month increase since
October 1996, was largely accounted for by jumps in the prices of seasonal food and petrol.
There is, I believe, broad-based support for the objective of setting interest rates to meet the inflation
target.  Quarterly  opinion  polls  since  November  1999,  commissioned  by  the  Bank  of  England  and
published in our Quarterly Bulletin, provide support for this proposition. But it is clear that the MPC still
has much work to do to explain how interest rates affect the economy. Building a constituency for low
inflation is a primary objective of the Bank, and one to which we attach great importance. Support for
low  inflation,  and  stability  more  generally,  cannot  be  taken  for  granted,  nor  based  solely  on  fading
recollections of boom and bust. There is a new generation with little memory of the high and unstable
inflation rates of the past. The Bank has, therefore, started an annual competition for schools in which
students play the role of the Monetary Policy Committee. The first year's competition attracted over
200  entries,  and  culminated  in  the  national  final  at  the  Bank  of  England  in  March.  Next  year's
competition has just been announced, and I would encourage as many schools as possible to enter
the  competition  and  pit  their  wits  against  the  MPC.  I  am  delighted  to  report  that  Bassaleg
BIS Review 58/2001
3
Comprehensive  School  in  Newport,  who  won  last  year's  South  Wales  regional  heat,  were  the  first
team in the UK to enter this year's competition.
Success in explaining the objectives of monetary policy, building the constituency for low inflation, and
setting policy in order to meet the inflation target, are all key parts of the role of the Monetary Policy
Committee. But the MPC cannot fine-tune the economy quarter by quarter. Its contribution to stability
is to meet the symmetric inflation target of 2½%, looking beyond the immediate short-term fluctuations
in monthly inflation rates. The Committee will have to watch carefully developments in the economy as
they unfold, and be ready to act promptly in either direction. There will always be unpredictable events
to  which  the  MPC  will  need  to  respond.  What  is  essential  for  monetary  policy  is  the  transparent
framework  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium  term,  and,  in  so  doing,  helping  to  anchor
inflation expectations as close as possible to the 2½% target. At the beginning of next month the MPC
will meet for the 50th time. Reaching our half-century has not been without incident. No doubt there
will be more surprises on the way to our century. But the symmetric and transparent inflation target
provides the best defence against unexpected events.
4
BIS Review 58/2001
