Willem Duisenberg: “the EURO. OUR money”
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Euro  2002
Information Campaign Conference, Brussels, 6 March 2001.
 Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  Euro  2002  Information  Campaign
conference.  It  is  the  first  of  a  series  of  conferences  in  the  course  of  2001  on  the  euro  cash
changeover. These conferences are being organised and hosted by the national central banks of the
12  euro  area  Members  States  and  will  take  place  in  the  context  of  the  Eurosystem's  Euro  2002
Information Campaign. Brussels is the right venue for launching these conferences, not only  as the
capital of Belgium, but also as a city which is very closely associated with and linked to the process of
integration in Europe. The other national central banks of the euro area will also organise conferences
in  the  course  of  2001.  The  next  conference  is  to  take  place  on  4  April  2001  in  Madrid  and  will  be
hosted by the Banco de España. Subsequent ones will take place on 15 May 2001 in Lisbon and on
16 May in Frankfurt, hosted by the Banco de Portugal and the Deutsche Bundesbank respectively.
The  objective  of  these  conferences  is  to  raise  citizens'  awareness  of  the  cash  changeover  at  the
beginning of 2002 and to prepare them for it. They will bring together the key parties involved in the
euro cash changeover process, both at the national and at the European level, with a view to focusing
on the cash changeover preparations.
Frontloading and sub-frontloading of euro banknotes and coins
1.
The  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  means  an  unprecedented  logistical  challenge  for  all
parties involved; 14.25 billion banknotes and 50.1 billion coins have to be produced. Banknotes and
coins  have  to  be  distributed.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  aims  to  contribute  to  making  this
exercise as smooth as possible. The ECB has decided that the frontloading and sub-frontloading of
euro banknotes and coins can start as of 1 September 2001. Frontloading is the advance distribution
of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  to  those  credit  institutions  that  are  counterparties  for  monetary  policy
operations within the Eurosystem. Credit  institutions can sub-frontload euro  banknotes and coins to
professional  groups  (retailers,  cash-in-transit  companies,  cash-operated  machine  industry)  provided
that certain conditions are fulfilled.
Each  national  central  bank  is  free  to  decide  the  specific  date  on  which  frontloading  and  sub-
frontloading can start at the national level in order adequately to meet their respective national needs,
provided,  of  course,  that  it  does  not  happen  before  1  September  2001.  The  time  available  for
frontloading  and  sub-frontloading  may  differ  from  target  group  to  target  group.  The  lead-time  for
frontloading  will  largely  depend  on  the  chosen  national  changeover  scenario,  as  well  as  on  the
national logistical infrastructure. These, the scenarios and the infrastructure, differ considerably from
country to country.
When  speaking  about  the  euro  changeover  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  subsidiary  and
decentralisation  principles  apply.  Although  the  ECB  has  endorsed  some  general  principles  and
practices  in  order  to  ensure  a  common  level  playing  field  from  a  competition  perspective,  it  is
necessary to check the specific national changeover scenarios in order to have complete and detailed
information. All countries have acknowledged the need to frontload banks with both euro banknotes
and  coins  prior  to  1  January  2002,  so-called  E-day.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  smooth  and  fast
changeover.
The ECOFIN Council has agreed that the general public could be frontloaded with euro coins, starting
in the second half of December 2001. Most participating countries have already decided to do so or
are in the process of doing so. In  Belgium, the so-called  "starter kits" of euro coins with a  value of
approximately BEF 500 will be available to the general public as of 15 December 2001.
The  ECB  has  ruled  out  the  frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  to  the  general  public.  We  are  certainly
aware of the fact that retailers are concerned about having to hold large amounts of cash during the
first few days of 2002. These concerns have, of course, been taken into account and will continue to
BIS Review 18/2001
1
receive  due  consideration.  However,  the  frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  to  the  general  public  has
more risks than advantages and is not the appropriate means of addressing this concern. What means
then are appropriate? Let me mention some examples:
• 
Dispensing lower denominations of euro banknotes via automated teller machines (ATMs) at
the start of 2002. This measure would be very useful in view of the fact that, on average,
around 70% of the euro banknotes will be put in circulation via ATMs.
Establishing exchange points.
Replacing larger national denominations in ATMs  with smaller  ones  at  the  end  of  2001  in
order  to  ensure  that  small  amounts  can  be  paid  using  low-denomination  banknotes.  This
would reduce the need for retailers to have large cash holdings for returning change.
Using lower banknote denominations in countries where welfare payments are largely paid in
cash.
  The ECB is open to discussing possible additional measures aimed at smoothing the changeover with
all  relevant  parties  involved  in  the  euro  cash  changeover.  Some  of  these  parties  have  expressed
concerns about the related costs. In this regard, the ECB has made its position clear from the outset.
We have emphasised that, as a general rule, the  ECB will  not cover  the  operational  costs  of  other
parties. Thus, the same criterion is being applied that was applied when the changeover to the euro
took  place  on  1  January  1999.  Each  of  the  parties  involved  in  the  cash  changeover  -  and  this
obviously includes the ECB - will be responsible for covering its own costs. The ECB is only prepared
to  cover  costs  stemming  from  extra  cash  holdings  by  credit  institutions.  An  appropriate  method  to
ensure this has been developed.
The ECB is also addressing the issue of the euro cash changeover outside the euro area. We know
that  a  significant  number  of  banknotes  issued  by  national  central  banks  of  euro  area  countries  are
circulating outside the euro area, especially in the accession countries. The citizens of these countries
should be aware that several measures are currently under consideration to facilitate the exchange of
these banknotes for euro banknotes. On the occasion of a seminar organised for the central banks of
the accession countries at the ECB on 8 February 2001, the first steps to co-ordinate such measures
were  taken  and  agreed.  Further  steps  are  planned  to  facilitate  the  exchange  process  in  countries
outside the euro area. Central banks are our natural counterparts to that end.
The Euro 2002 information campaign
2.
It is sometimes forgotten that the euro has already been in existence as a currency since 1 January
1999. Therefore, whenever we pay in cash with current banknotes, we are actually already paying in
euro.  However,  owing  to  the  lengthy  preparations  needed  to  produce  the  new  high-quality  euro
banknotes,  we  are  still  obliged  to  use  the  current  national  banknotes.  This,  mainly  psychological,
drawback  will  disappear  on  1  January  2002.  The  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  be  easy  to  use
throughout the euro area, will make our lives easier and will be visible proof that we have a common
currency.
It is crucial that we do our best to make sure that the euro banknotes and coins are well received by
euro area citizens. The quick acceptance by the general public will very much depend on our ability to
communicate  with  "our"  population  on  "our"  money.  If  we  succeed,  we  will  make  an  important
contribution to convincing Europeans that Europe is not an abstract and remote idea, but something
real  and  dynamic.  The  success  of  the  euro  cash  changeover  will  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  the
information the European citizens receive on their new money. This will help them to cope  with the
cash  changeover.  It  will  also  help  some  of  them  get  accustomed  to  denominations  that  differ  from
those they are familiar with.
In this respect, the two following points are important:
• 
the co-operation  of all the professional  parties  directly  involved  -  such  as  banks,  retailers,
cash in transit companies and vending machines operators – and
the quick acceptance of the new banknotes by the public.
BIS Review 18/2001
 2
the detailed visual appearance of the banknotes and coins,
their main security features,
the denominations of euro banknotes and coins; and
the changeover modalities.
Therefore, the ECB has embarked on the preparation of an information campaign. It has a budget of
EUR 80 million. We have the support of Publicis, the communication agency we have selected to work
with  us  on  this  crucial  project.  The  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  will  implement  the
information campaign on a decentralised basis.
Our campaign addresses all users of the euro banknotes and coins. It includes users from outside the
euro  area,  such  as  tourists,  travellers  and  nationals  from  countries  where  the  euro  banknotes  and
coins will circulate widely as a parallel currency. In order to reach such a broad public, the information
campaign  uses  relevant  groups  or  institutions  as  partners  or  "multipliers".  In  that  context,  banks,
retailers, educational institutions or the media can be mentioned. We also dedicate particular attention
to  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  the  elderly,  the  handicapped,  the  deaf  and  the  blind  and  partially
sighted, who need and will receive tailor-made information and training.
Our information campaign is being co-ordinated with other campaigns prepared by national authorities
and the European Commission. It can thus be considered a "specialised" campaign. The message of
our campaign concentrates on four main issues:
• 
• 
• 
• 
I  should  like  to  emphasise  how  particularly  well  the  co-ordination  of  the  campaigns  in  Belgium  has
been. The national campaign here is really complementary to our campaign. This is ensured since the
National Bank of Belgium is chairing the national changeover board.
Although our information campaign, and particularly our communication towards the media and our co-
operation with partners, was already started months ago, an advertising campaign focusing mainly on
the details of the euro banknotes and coins cannot start too early. It would be very difficult and costly
to try to keep the public's attention over a long period of time. Moreover, the euro banknotes and coins
contain  highly  sophisticated  security  features.  They  will  be  new  for  the  citizens  in  many  euro  area
countries. In order to limit the risks of counterfeiting, the security features and other details of the euro
banknotes should not be unveiled too early, in other words, not before 1 September 2001, the earliest
delivery date for frontloading. On that particular occasion, the ECB will present the visual appearance
of the euro banknotes and coins to the media and to the general public.
Last week, at the ECB's regular monthly press conference on 1 March, I informed the media about the
slogan  of  our  campaign.  It  is  "the  EURO.  OUR  money".  The  research  undertaken  has  indeed
revealed an encouraging degree of affinity between Europeans throughout the 12 euro area countries
and their own currency. The resulting slogan has been chosen for all deliverables of the campaign,
especially for the advertisements to be  developed for the autumn of this  year  and  the  beginning  of
2002.
In line with the timely communication policy I have just outlined, the bulk of the information campaign,
in particular the mass media part, will be visible during the last months of this year. The dissemination
of the information will continue in the first weeks of 2002, when the changeover will be taking place
and the public will have the euro banknotes and coins in their hands and in their pockets. The public
will then be in the best position to understand and assimilate the information received.
I am fully aware of the fact that, among the general public in the euro area, there is sometimes still a
feeling of a lack of information concerning the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. Raymond
van  Buuren,  the  World-Wide-Account  Director  of  Publicis  in  charge  of  the  Euro  2002  Information
Campaign, will shortly provide you with the details of the main objectives and tools of the Euro 2002
Information  Campaign.  However,  let  me  emphasise  that  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area  should  be
confident that they will receive detailed information at the appropriate moment.
I am repeating myself, but it is important to be aware that we are not introducing the euro in 2002. The
euro has already been our currency since 1 January 1999. What we are going to do is to introduce
the  physical  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  However,  I  have  to  admit  that,  in  spite  of  the  efforts
undertaken by the European Commission and the national authorities, as well as by other players, the
use of  the  euro  is  currently  still  limited.  If  the  use  of  the  euro  as  a  unit  of  account  or  for  non-cash
payments were more wide-spread among the public, the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins
on 1 January 2002 would be seen as far less inconvenient.
BIS Review 18/2001
3
The  public  sometimes  tends  to  reduce  the  complex  activity  of  any  one  institution  to  a  very  simple
concept. The ECB's tasks are really complex, involving monetary policy decisions, statistics, monetary
policy operations, payment systems, legal issues, etc. All these activities are often relatively unknown
to the man in the street. He or she will, in one  year's time, tend to identify the ECB with the single
image of the euro banknotes. The euro banknotes will be seen as the face of the ECB. The euro, our
currency,  and  the  ECB,  our  central  bank,  will  be  identified  by  the  public  with  these  banknotes.
Therefore,  next  year  is  also  of  paramount  importance  for  the  public  image  of  the  ECB  as  an
organisation. I am fully aware of the fact that representatives of professional parties involved in the
euro cash changeover are attending this conference. Allow me to conclude by thanking you all for your
great efforts, your understanding and your co-operation in making this remarkable historical moment
happen. Let me now give the floor to Raymond van Buuren.
4
BIS Review 18/2001
