Bank of Japan’s May report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, May 21, 2001.
 The Bank’s view2
Adjustments in economic activities have been under way, as production is declining reflecting a fall in
exports.
With regard to final demand, the recovery in private consumption continues to be weak as a whole, but
there are somewhat positive signs in some indicators. Housing investment is declining slightly. Public
investment is increasing. On the other hand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to
decrease  reflecting  a  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  such  as  those  of  the  U.S.  and  East  Asia.
Business  fixed  investment  seems  to  be  leveling  off  while  the  exporting  conditions  continue  to
deteriorate.
Industrial  production  is  declining  sharply,  reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  as
excessive  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  some  materials  are  building  up.  The  environment
surrounding  corporate  profits  is  becoming  more  severe  in  line  with  the  decline  in  exports  and
production,  and  business  sentiment  of  firms  is  worsening  particularly  in  manufacturing.  Income
conditions of households have not yet deteriorated, but the decline in production is starting to affect
the household sector mainly through the decrease in hours worked.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  expected  to  continue  increasing  for  the  time  being.  Net
exports, however, are likely to continue decreasing for a while, reflecting the ongoing adjustments in
overseas economies. Business fixed investment is projected to peak out and then to start a downturn,
as  the  effects  from  the  implementation  of  a  backlog  of  orders  sustaining  investment  dissipates.  In
addition, inventory adjustments in goods such as electronic parts and materials will continue for the
time  being.  Industrial  production,  therefore,  is  expected  to  follow  a  declining  trend.  In  these
circumstances, corporate profits are likely to start decreasing and thus household income is expected
to weaken gradually.
Overall, the  adjustments are likely to continue for some time, mainly in production.  Meanwhile,  it  is
generally thought that overseas economies, particularly the U.S., will follow a gradual recovery trend
from  the  latter  half  of  2001.  In  this  case,  exports,  helped  also  by  the  depreciation  of  the  yen,  are
expected to underpin the economy once again. However, attention should still be paid to the possibility
of a prolonged deceleration of overseas economies and the risk of a negative impact on the economy
induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and  domestic  capital  markets  via  corporate  and  household
confidence.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the yen. Domestic
wholesale prices are declining mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery. Consumer
prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to the decline in prices  of imported products and their
substitutes. The rate of decrease in corporate service prices is accelerating somewhat owing to the
reduction in communications charges.
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the prior yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressure on prices. However, with the ongoing adjustments, the balance between supply and demand
in the domestic market is likely to exert downward pressure on prices. In addition, the declining trend
of machinery prices caused by technological innovations, the decrease in prices of consumer goods
arising from the streamlining of distribution channels, and the reduction  in  communications  charges
aided by deregulation will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are expected to be
weak for the time being. Moreover,  given the high  degree of uncertainty  regarding  future  economic
                                                     
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
May 17 and 18, 2001.
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on May 17 and 18 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 41/2001
1
developments, the possibility that weak demand will intensify downward pressure on prices warrants
careful monitoring.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is currently moving at about 0.01 percent, reflecting the
guideline for money market operations to maintain the current-account balance at the Bank of Japan
at around 5 trillion yen.
Interest rates on term instruments are declining further. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds recently decreased to around 1.3 percent. The yield spreads
between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are  mostly
unchanged or contracting somewhat.
Stock  prices  rose  until  early  May  reflecting  the  recovery  in  U.S.  stocks,  but  are  decreasing  slightly
thereafter.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen has appreciated slightly and is currently being traded in the
range of 122-124 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  There  seem  to  be  no
significant changes in firms’ perception on the lending attitude of financial institutions. The fund-raising
conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such  instruments  as  corporate  bonds  and  CP  are  improving
further owing to the decline in market interest rates and the more active stance of investors to take
credit risks.
On  the  other  hand,  credit  demand  of  private  firms  continues  to  lack  momentum  as  the  level  of
corporate expenditures such as business fixed investment remains below firms’ cash flow. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. The amount outstanding
of  corporate  bonds  issued  continues  to  be  above  the  previous  year’s  level  but  the  growth  rate  is
slowing.  Meanwhile,  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  issued  is  well  above  that  of  the  previous  year
marking the highest level to date.
The year-to-year growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) is around 2.5 percent.
Funding costs for firms are declining reflecting developments in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy. For the time being, attention should be paid to the effects of the additional
monetary easing measures taken by the Bank, while careful monitoring is required for the effects of
stock price developments and corporate profit conditions on the behavior of financial institutions and
the fund-raising conditions of firms.
2
BIS Review 41/2001
