Tony Latter: Banking and development
Address by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 2001
APEC Economic Outlook Symposium held in Hong Kong, 28 June 2001.
 I  should  like  this  morning  to  address  three  particular  aspects  of  the  broad  topic  of  banking  and
development.  One  is  the  contribution  of  banking  –  or  the  financial  sector  more  generally  –  to  the
economy in terms of activity. The second is the role of banks as providers of cross-border finance for
development. The third is the implications  of  the  internet  revolution  for  the  development  of  banking
itself.
Contribution of banking to the economy
Our very distant  ancestors survived  without  money,  let  alone  banks. With  the  passage  of  centuries
and the growing complexity of barter, physical money emerged as a useful unit of account, a medium
of exchange and a store of value. Still later, banks emerged as intermediators between, on the one
hand,  those  with  holdings  of  money  surplus  to  immediate  need  and  attracted  by  the  prospect  of
earning interest, and, on the other, those willing to pay interest in order to be able to accelerate their
spending. With the further passage of time various other means of intermediation, such as marketable
securities, also developed.
A key point here is that banks only emerged because of the evident utility in the service they provided.
Throughout the world we can now see examples of how banks and other financial institutions have
facilitated the funding of the development of the rest of the economy, and how at the same time they
have enabled savers to obtain returns on their savings and to allocate desired expenditure efficiently
between the present and the future. Of course, there have been shortcomings, mistakes and disasters
along the way, where market failures have impaired efficiency or where banks have collapsed as a
result of poor judgement or of circumstances beyond their reasonable anticipation or control; but such
experiences are found in all areas of economic activity.
Despite, however, the evident benefit from having an active and efficient financial sector, there have
remained people at different times in history who have been sceptical of the intrinsic worth of banking
as  an  economic  activity  contributing  to  aggregate  welfare.  This  attitude  has  often  reflected  a
presumption  that  activity  only  has  merit  if  it  delivers  tangible  output  –  food,  clothing,  cars,  clearly
consumable  services  such  as  television  programmes,  and  so  on.  But  this  belief  contradicts  the
evidence  of  the  contribution  which  efficient  finance  makes  to  the  economy,  and  the  necessary  role
which it plays. Even the strictest communist regimes of the twentieth century found it  impossible to
dispense entirely with banks, even if, as a result of fantastic accounting and rotten economic policies
in general, the banks mostly ended up bankrupt and depositors penniless.
The  essential  raison  d'être  of  banking  is  that  an  economically  advancing  society  needs  effective
intermediation between savers and borrowers, and mechanisms for making payments efficiently. As
already  noted,  the  initial  basic  intermediary  function  of  providing  deposits  and  loans  expanded
subsequently  into  the  organisation  of  alternative  channels  of  intermediation  such  as  bonds  and
equities (these activities may be conducted in some jurisdictions outside the narrowly defined banking
sector, but the distinction is not material in the present context). Although it is human nature for savers
to complain that the returns are inadequate, and borrowers that costs are extortionate, in the market-
oriented economies competition in financial intermediation has mostly been quite intense, and most of
us would probably agree that this has worked to the increasing benefit of customers on both sides of
the balance sheet.
Meanwhile,  the  provision  of  payment  services  has  developed  markedly  at  both  the  wholesale  and
retail levels. Banks are at the centre of this activity, typically supported by the central bank as ultimate
provider  of  liquidity.  In  fact,  whereas  many  other  types  of  institution  may  nowadays  be  involved  in
lending money or providing avenues for savings, banks themselves remain firmly at the core of the
payments system. A sound and efficient payments system is acknowledged to be a prerequisite if an
economy is to realise fully its potential.
BIS Review 59/2001
1
Banking facilities have become so much an accepted and necessary part of life that access to them is
sometimes  regarded  as  an  absolute  and  unconditional  right,  in  the  same  way  as  is  argued  for
universal education or health services. This has been a topic of debate in Hong Kong recently, in the
context of likely changes to savings rates and to fees and charges in the light of the final deregulation
of interest rates next week. As a general rule, however, businesses such as banks should be allowed
to determine their own strategies in the light of market forces, although the authorities may claim a
legitimate  interest  in  ensuring  that  those  market forces  do  indeed  function  competitively.  One  bank
may decide that the provision and encouragement of the widest possible access to its services fits well
into its business plan; another may decide otherwise. In the rather unlikely event that insufficient basic
banking  services  are  available  to  some  section  of  society,  the  case  may  be  argued  for  official
intervention.  But  one  must  distinguish  between  different  aspects  of  the  situation  –  commercial,
competitive and social. If, other things being equal, banks are to be  pressed  into assisting  with  the
delivery of social policies, then the precise terms of that obligation, including responsibility for funding
it, should be made clear – whether by law or in suitable agreements or codes.
In Hong Kong, banking, in a rather narrow definition, is estimated to contribute about 7.5% to gross
domestic product and about 3.5% to  employment. Despite  the  withdrawal  of a number of individual
banks, particularly Japanese, from Hong Kong in the late 1990s, the share of banking in GDP appears
to have remained roughly stable for a number of years now. However, the share in employment has
declined somewhat of late – as has also been evident in, for example, the USA and UK over a slightly
longer period. This implies that there have been significant productivity gains, including no doubt those
arising  from  the  process  of  consolidation,  which  has  been  evident  among  international  banks  with
presences in Hong Kong for some time and has now been spreading to the local banks.
Permit me one further historical reflection, related partly to my earlier comment about attitudes towards
banking. When I first studied economics, there was a respected body of literature which argued that
productivity  growth 
in  other  sectors  because
manufacturing was more amenable to the application of new technologies and economies of scale. In
services, output was regarded as too firmly dependent on the specific input of labour for there to be
much scope for productivity gains. This reasoning even led some governments to adopt policies with a
bias to promote manufacturing in the belief that this would be the route to more rapid overall growth,
although this seemed to ignore the demand side – that the public would become saturated with goods
and  increasingly  desire  to  consume  services.  I  don't  know  whether  any  of  the  protagonists  of  that
school of thought are still alive today. If they are, and even if they could still identify some services
where productivity has not advanced very much (hairdressers and taxis are among the usually quoted
examples), they would be astonished at the productivity growth which has been apparent in banking
and  certain  other  service  sectors  around  the  world  in  recent  years,  as  a  result  of  the  forces  of
globalised competition and the opportunities presented by technological advances.
It is clear, therefore,  that  banking  and  other  financial  services  not  only  provide  essential  support  to
development but also make their own contribution to national income. I am often asked questions such
as  what  is  the  long-term  growth  prospect  for  this  sector  or  how  will  the  mix  of  activities  within  the
sector evolve. The simple and honest answer is that I don't know. Plainly, there are limits to the likely
domestic demand for these services. But that demand may be supplemented if overseas customers
are attracted to use our local services, or, of course, diminished if local customers choose to satisfy
some of their needs from overseas. At the end of the day the pattern will depend on efficiency and the
laws of comparative advantage. From the official side, we  in Hong  Kong  are anxious to provide  an
infrastructure  and  business  environment  on  a  level  playing  field  within  which  such  activities  can
flourish, but we are not capable of determining the outcome.
in  manufacturing  would  always  outstrip 
that 
The role of cross-border bank finance in economic development
In the absence of an adequately developed financial sector, sound enough to enjoy the trust of the
local community and offering sufficiently attractive products, it may prove difficult to channel domestic
savings  into  domestic  investment.  This  is  a  problem  which  confronts  many  less  developed  and
emerging economies. The result is often that, despite a quite strong disposition of households to save,
the  preference  is  to  exploit  all  means,  legal  or  otherwise,  to  hold  those  savings  offshore.  In
consequence, domestic enterprises and government may become more dependent than otherwise on
attracting  funds  from  abroad  to  fulfil  their  funding  needs.  This  may  have  the  salutary  advantage  of
exposing the borrowers to the discipline of the international market place, but it may also saddle them
2
BIS Review 59/2001
with  higher  costs  and  currency  risk.  Moreover,  historically,  the  lending  institutions  have  not  always
possessed sufficient local knowledge to enable them to make sound credit judgements.
This role of banks as providers of cross-border funding for development is the second topic on my list
today.
The subject is perhaps topical for not the happiest of reasons. For the past couple of years the banks,
along  with  international  bodies  and  fast-food  chains,  have  become  the  main  target  for  anti-
globalisation and anti-capitalist protests. I leave others to muse on the motivation and justification for
such  actions,  but  I  do  note  that  bank  finance  for  developing  countries,  and  more  particularly  the
question  of  debt  forgiveness,  are  prominent  items  on  the  protest  agenda.  I  also  note  that  this  is  a
subject which has for several years been keenly debated, more soberly, by governments, international
organisations such as the IMF and World Bank, and banks themselves.
It  is  a  complex  issue.  One  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  bank  lending  involves  a  contract
between the bank and the borrower, and the parties should be expected to honour that contract. If it is
treated otherwise, then the basis for all future relationships crumbles. But in practice the situation is
hugely  complicated  if  there  is  a  syndicate  of  lenders,  giving  rise  to  problems  of  co-ordination  and
potential free riding, or if the World Bank or IMF are involved, which typically expect to be at the front
of the queue for repayments. At the end of the day, commercial banks may decide that a degree of
debt forgiveness (possibly disguised as a generous rescheduling) is advisable as the best means of
minimising overall losses and, perhaps, preserving longer-term business opportunities with the country
or customer in question. But this should be a commercial decision. If governments wish, for political or
humanitarian reasons, to ease further the contractual debt burden of an indebted country, this should
be carried forward as a conscious and transparent policy decision, which would surely involve usage
of taxpayers' money unless it was reliant on coercion of banks.
In practice, there are many developing countries which are effectively cut off from commercial bank
finance because of a track record of default, political instability, economic mismanagement, corruption
and  so  on.  Banks  generally  need  certain  minimum  assurances,  relating  to  the  political  climate,  the
legal system, transparency, corporate governance, etc, over and above the narrower assessment of
the servicing capacity of the borrower. Fortunately, most economies in the APEC fold can be classified
as open for bank finance. But there are many other countries in the world which are passed over by
the international banking community because of the lack of the basic essential attributes, or because
they are simply too poor to afford credit on commercial terms, in which case they become dependent
on concessional finance from the international institutions as the only reasonably accessible source of
external funding.
Banks  have  to  abide  by  prudent  standards.  Regulators,  depositors  and  shareholders  all  expect  as
much. Most banks would leap at the chance to lend more to assist development, if such lending was
assessed to be commercially viable. But as a general rule banks should not be prevailed upon against
their  better  judgement  to  be  providers  of  economic  aid  or  social  services,  whether  domestically  or
internationally, unless there is the political consensus that taxpayers are willing to fund them in that
role.
The internet
Turning  now  to  the  internet,  I  believe  that  this  has  some  relevance  to  the  overall  theme  of  this
symposium, not so much because of questions about the availability of banking services to those who
need  them,  but  rather  because  of  possible  implications  for  the  location  and  structure  of  banking
activity.
Let  me  begin  by  observing  that,  ever  since  the  telecommunications  and  IT  revolutions  began
substantially to impact on banking – and that, depending on how exactly one defines the terms, was at
least two or three decades ago – some commentators have been forecasting the imminent demise of
financial centres as such. The argument is that all the humdrum work will be carried out in computer
centres  and  call  centres  in  low  wage  countries,  while  the  high  value  adding  executives  can  locate
where  they  wish  –  depending  on  their  preferences  for  recreation,  culture,  climate  and  so  on  –  and
tele-conference one another when necessary. The former – the migration of routine operations to low-
cost places – has happened to a degree, but the latter has not. Even if colleagues within a bank can
sometimes substitute a conference call for a meeting, their customers have been less eager. Although
for basic banking services little personal contact may be necessary, deals in such fields as corporate
finance  and  investment  banking  appear  to  require  interaction  between  a  number  of  parties
BIS Review 59/2001
3
face-to-face. Indeed, in recent years the world's major financial centres may, if anything, have become
more  rather  than  less  dominant  as  a  result  of  the  demonstrable  benefits  of  co-location  and  critical
mass particularly in the context of the higher value-added activities.
How  does  the  internet  fit  into  this  picture.  The  new  dimension  which  the  internet  brings  is  to
revolutionise the access of customers to banks – and banks to their customers. Already we know that
huge numbers of customers have moved  over to  using the internet to carry out their basic banking
business. This may in turn have enabled banks to realise cost savings, although it is as yet not easy to
find hard evidence to this effect.
The implications for the structure of banking are unclear. One may envisage two extreme outcomes.
One would be where banks, both established ones and new ones created as internet-only providers,
compete fiercely in all areas of banking where human contact is not required. Consumers flit around
from  one  to  another  in  response  to  the  best  deals,  splitting  their  banking  relationships  across  a
number  of  banks  if  that  appears  cost-effective.  The  prices  of  these  services  are  driven  down  to
"commodity" levels. None of the banks makes much of a profit from it. Some of the "old" ones suffer
loss of their bread-and-butter business. The outcome in the longer term is unclear. It is conceivable
that  banks  cease  to  exist  as  integrated  multi-product  businesses.  They  become  instead  product
specialists  in  a  rather  fragmented  landscape,  finding  it  tough  to  earn  more  than  commodity  profits
even  in  areas  where,  in  the  case  of  the  longer  established  banks,  they  used  to  enjoy  niche
advantages.
The other scenario emanates from the same starting point of intense competition. But in this case the
new entrants do not have the resources to continue with their generous initial terms for long enough to
secure  a  firm  business  foundation.  The  established  banks  reluctantly  but  necessarily  take  on  the
newcomers  aggressively,  utilising  their  financial  strength  and  making  extra  efforts  to  build  robust
relationships across a broad range of services and to exploit the underlying inertia that customers may
exhibit.  In  other  words,  they  use  the  internet  to  consolidate  their  relationships  and  to  see  off  the
competition. Customers are persuaded that it's not worth sacrificing the relationship for the sake of a
few basis points. Some customers may be lost, but some of these may  anyway be ones  which the
banks can afford to say goodbye to. As a variant to this model, the banks may adopt different brands
for their internet services, exploiting any opportunities available from product differentiation and market
segmentation, but retaining  the capacity from their standpoint to manage  multiple  relationships  with
any individual customer as one.
One can envisage many other outcomes besides these examples. I know of no sure way of predicting
what will happen, but my personal view is that the internet is likely to emerge more as a channel to
build on existing relationships and to increase the efficiency of basic services than as something which
changes the landscape of the banking industry. But perhaps I am guilty of thinking that everyone else
possesses the same inertia as I do when it comes to changing one's habits.
Concluding remarks
I  have  skimmed  over  a  few  issues  which  can  rather  loosely  be  said  to  fall  under  the  heading  of
banking and development. There are many experts attending this symposium who will, I am sure, offer
much deeper and more provocative insights into the economic outlook in general, and the relationship
between financial development and growth in particular. I wish you all a fruitful and enjoyable couple
of days.
4
BIS Review 59/2001
