Andrew  Crockett:  Speech  upon  receiving  the  European  Banker  of  the  Year
2001 award
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  upon  receiving  the  European  Banker  of  the  Year  2001
award, Frankfurt, 25 April 2001.
 Lord Mayor, President Duisenberg, distinguished guests.
Let me begin by saying  how  honoured I feel  to be chosen to receive this  prestigious award. It  is a
particular  honour  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  such  a  distinguished  group  of  predecessors,  and  to
receive the award from such an eminent central banker as Wim Duisenberg, whom I have been proud
to count as a friend and mentor for many years.
And it is a pleasure to be here in Frankfurt for the ceremony, and to have present so many friends and
colleagues from the German banking community.
I realise that awards such as this one are all, to some extent, proxy awards. That is particularly true in
my case. My presence here symbolises the growing importance of the role played by central banks in
our economies, and the position of the BIS as the instrument of international central bank cooperation.
For that, many people deserve credit, not least Wim Duisenberg, past President of the BIS, and both
his predecessor and mine in our respective functions, Alexandre Lamfalussy.
The  BIS  has  become  widely  associated  in  the  public  mind  with  banking  supervision.  If  I  say  a  few
words  on  this  topic  today,  it  should  not  detract  from  the  crucial  part  the  BIS  has  played  in  central
banks’ efforts to restore price stability, to say nothing of its role over many years as a patient promoter
of European monetary cooperation.
When I began my career, some 35 years ago, banks operated in a much less complex environment
than  they  do  today.  In  the  mid-1960s,  banks  were  the  predominant  financial  institutions  in  largely
domestic markets. They had a common business model in which traditional core services were jointly
provided.  Competition  was  limited  by  custom  and  regulation.  Branches  were  the  key  vehicle  for
attracting and servicing clients. Cross-border banking was in its infancy.
By now, much of this has changed. Business models have become more diverse: some banks offer a
full range of services to wholesale and retail clients, others specialise in niche products. The products
that  used  to  be  offered  jointly  by  banks  can  now  be  unbundled  and  provided  separately  by
independent service providers who may not themselves be banks.
This has gone hand in hand with an enormous increase in competition, of various kinds: competition
between banks in the same national market; competition across geographic boundaries; competition
between  banks  and  non-bank  financial  intermediaries,  and  competition  between  banks  and
non-financial  firms.  Intensified  competition  has  been  both  the  cause  and  consequence  of  the
liberalisation  and  globalisation  of  financial  activity.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  a  notable
increase in the volatility of the financial environment.
All this has profound implications for banking  practitioners: for those  who manage  banks and those
who  have  to  regulate  them.  Bank  managements  have  to  maximise  shareholder  value  in  an
increasingly  difficult  and  uncertain  environment.  Bank  regulators  have  to  juggle  the  objectives  of
efficiency, competitive equity and a safe and sound financial system.
The challenge to banks can be put quite simply: it is to find a business model that provides competitive
returns to shareholders, while retaining the confidence of depositors and counterparties.
How to meet this challenge in practice is of course much more complex. And it is made all the more so
by the dynamic evolution of the competitive environment. Who can tell with confidence which financial
products will be in demand five years from now? Who can predict the technology by which they will be
produced  and  delivered?  Yet  decisions  made  today  have  to  embody  assumptions  in  all  these
domains, if not with precision, at least with regard to the direction of change.
Different institutions will choose different futures for themselves. Some are choosing to focus on the
profitable,  if  unexciting,  business  of  servicing  domestic  retail  clients.  Others  see  a  more  promising
future in shedding retail activities and focussing more heavily on corporate finance.
BIS Review 33/2001
1
Some  banks  believe  that  the  integration  of  banking  and  insurance  activities  offers  important
opportunities to exploit synergies and diversify risks. At the retail  level, the rationale is that  delivery
channels developed for banking services can be cheaply exploited to deliver other financial products.
At the wholesale level, banks following the integrated strategy believe that the provision of an assured
credit source will help them with mandates for other forms of corporate finance, possibly  with fatter
profit margins.
Next, there is the question of the appropriate geographic scope of activities. Most banks of any size
believe they have to follow their domestic corporate customers when they develop significant activities
abroad.  This  is  a  different  thing,  however,  from  providing  a  comprehensive  range  of  services  in  all
major  financial  centres.  The  number  of  institutions  that  can  do  this  is  relatively  small,  probably  not
more than a dozen, in my judgement. The problem is, there are probably twice that number that aspire
to be in such a select group. This implies that the competition and consolidation that has characterised
the industry in the past decade still has some way to go.
Last, but certainly not least, a question hanging over the financial sector is the speed and scope of
changes  to  be  brought  about  by  the  internet  revolution.  Certain  financial  activities  are  being
transformed  by  the  new  technology  quite  quickly.  This  includes  securities  broking  and  foreign
exchange. In  other  areas,  (traditional  banking  is  one),  change  is  occurring  more  gradually.  But  this
does not mean that its scope could not be significant.
In  adapting  to  the  changes  in  the  financial  landscape,  the  objective  of  central  banks  and  other
regulatory authorities has been to allow the financial system to be responsive to the needs of the real
economy,  while  preserving  a  level  playing  field  among  financial  institutions,  and  making  sure  that
intermediaries operate in a prudent way.
This  has  required  a  change  in  the  focus  of  regulation  –  away  from  prohibitions  and  administrative
restraints on balance sheets, and towards prudential requirements that focus on the management of
risk. Away, that is from regulation, and towards supervision.
This journey has been a lengthy one, and it is not yet complete. An early step was the original Basel
capital accord of 1988, with its focus on the concept of risk-based capital requirements. The latest is
the revised accord, with its greater reliance on  internal risk measurement, and  its emphasis on two
additional “pillars” for capital adequacy – supervisory review and market discipline. In between these
landmark documents, there has been a vast array of official guidance on risk management practices.
This is not the place to comment in detail on the latest proposals from the Basel Committee. But I think
it is worthwhile to make two points of a more general nature. One concerns the “style” according to
which  individual  institutions  are  supervised.  And  the  other  concerns  the  balance  between  the
regulation of individual institutions and the goal of systemic stability.
Concerning the “style” of supervision, public authorities have become increasingly aware of the need
to  make  regulation  conform  to market  realities,  rather  than  the  other  way  round.  Going  against  the
grain  of market forces will create or entrench  inefficiencies that reduce the capacity  of  the  financial
system to serve the needs of its users. It will also be ultimately fruitless, since the ingenuity of financial
engineers to avoid burdensome restrictions will always run ahead of the capacity of regulators to close
loopholes.
The  objective  of  modern  prudential  regulation  is  not  to  control  arbitrarily  the  activities  of  financial
intermediaries, but rather to  ensure  that  risks  that  are  inherent  in  all  economic  activity  are  sensibly
managed  and  that  an  adequate  cushion  of  capital  is  maintained  to  cover  unexpected  losses.
Supervisors  therefore  have  to  understand  the  business  of  the  institutions  they  supervise,  and  the
opportunities and risks to which they are exposed.
This change  in focus is placing a  premium  on  new  skills  within  supervisory  authorities:  the  tools  of
economists, consultants and business managers are taking their place alongside the more traditional
disciplines of law and accounting. This has important implications for the recruitment policies of official
bodies,  to  say  nothing  of  compensation  practices.  Good  supervision  means  the  need  for  top-class
supervisors. And this is ultimately in the interests of the industry too.
My second point has to do with the focus of the oversight activities of the prudential authorities. The
job of a regulator should not be to prevent any and all business failures. To attempt to do so would
mean that banks would have to conform to excessively costly prudential standards. Business would
then tend to slip away to unregulated channels of intermediation. The end result would be a distorted
competitive  structure  and  a  riskier,  not  a  safer,  financial  system.  The  task  of  supervisors,  and  in
2
BIS Review 33/2001
particular of central banks, is to ensure the stability of the financial system at large. By that, I mean the
capacity of the system to continue to provide intermediary functions to the wider economy.
If supervisory oversight were exclusively conducted institution by institution, it would miss some of the
most  common  sources  of  systemic  risk. Widespread  instability  usually  arises  not  from  idiosyncratic
problems but from shared exposure to common risk factors. The financial cycle is the most common.
Typically,  the  upswing  of  a  financial  cycle  results  in  an  acceleration  of  credit  expansion  and  rising
asset  prices.  The  two  feed  on  each  other,  since  credit  expansion  causes  asset  prices  to  rise,  and
rising  asset  prices  justify  increased  lending.  Eventually,  however,  something  happens  to  prick  the
bubble and the process goes into reverse. As asset prices fall, bad loans are revealed. If adequate
capital cushions have not been built up, failures occur, and can be system-wide in their incidence.
Stopping this cycle is not easy. But it is an essential part of the task public authorities now face to build
a  more  robust  financial  architecture. We  will  certainly  have  to  encourage  financial  firms  to  improve
their risk management at an  institution  level.  Beyond this, however, thought  is  called  for  on  how  to
moderate the credit cycle that  lies behind the fluctuations in asset prices. Incentives are  needed  to
encourage banks and other financial institutions to build up capital cushions in good times, in order
better to protect themselves, and the wider economy, when the bad times arrive. We certainly cannot
be satisfied with the volatile financial cycles that seem to characterise liberalised financial systems.
Let me end by saying something about the international dimension. It has become a commonplace to
say that we live in a globalised economy. Nowhere is this more true than in the financial system. An
integrated global financial system has brought  many  advantages:  capital  is  mobilised  and  allocated
more efficiently; the spread of technological advance is more rapid; and disciplines over unsustainable
policies are more effective.
Yet globalisation has also brought deeper and more widespread financial crises. Contagion has meant
that disturbances that were previously localised now have wider repercussions. This places a greater
premium on effective international mechanisms of crisis prevention and response. Recognition of this
fact lies behind the ongoing debate on strengthening the international financial architecture.
Today’s financial architecture is based on the operation of liberalised markets. It is market forces that
determine such key features of the international financial system as exchange rates, the availability of
liquidity, capital flows and the balance of payments adjustment process. When instability occurs, it can
usually be traced to market imperfections and failures.
To address these issues, the international community has embarked on an ambitious effort to develop
standards and codes of best practice in financial markets. These codes cover the prudential behaviour
of  financial  intermediaries,  such  as  banks;  the  transparency  requirements  for  efficient  market
functioning; and the need for an effective financial infrastructure in contract law, accounting, payments
systems, and so on.
Success  in  this  endeavour  will  require  ongoing  cooperation  across  regulatory  jurisdictions,  and
between 
following
recommendations by Hans Tietmeyer, has the capacity to make such cooperation a reality. If it does
so,  I  believe  it  can  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  building  a  more  robust  international  financial
system.
All this is a substantial agenda for the future. It is an agenda that requires the common efforts of the
private  sector,  which  provide  the  innovative  spark  for  the  development  of  new  techniques,  and  the
public sector, which needs to make sure that the right incentives are in place to allow efficiency and
stability to be mutually consistent.
the  public  and  private  sectors.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum,  set  up 
BIS Review 33/2001
3
