Donald T Brash: Should the Reserve Bank of New Zealand have eased as fast
as the Federal Reserve?
Speech by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Rotary Club of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 21 May 2001.
 Introduction
Over  recent  days,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  has  puzzled  a  lot  of  people  –  indeed  even
angered a few! – because we have been slower to ease monetary policy than they have expected or
wanted, and slower than central banks in some other countries.
Surely,  it  is  argued,  the  Reserve  Bank  must  be  able  to  see  that  the  world  economy  has  slowed
sharply, and monetary policy should be eased.
Surely,  it  is  argued,  the  Reserve  Bank  must  be  able  to  see  that  the  domestic  economy  has  been
sluggish, business and consumer confidence are down, and monetary policy should be eased.
Surely, it is argued, the Reserve Bank must be able to see that the drought has been serious and will
have a potentially big impact on production next season, and monetary policy should be eased.
Surely,  it  is  argued,  the  Reserve  Bank  must  be  able  to  see  that  the  US  central  bank,  the  Federal
Reserve, has eased policy by much more than has been the case in New Zealand. Given the record of
growth  with  low  inflation  which  the  US  economy  has  achieved  over  the  last  decade,  surely  this
suggests that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand should be following the Fed's example, and easing
monetary policy more aggressively.
Certainly,  the  American  central  bank  has  cut  its  official  interest  rate  by  250  basis  points  since  the
beginning of the year. The Australian central bank has cut its official interest rate by 125 basis points
since the beginning of the year. And to date the New Zealand central bank has cut its official interest
rate by a rather more modest 75 basis points since the beginning of the year.
And  forecasts  of  the  parts  of  the  global  economy  of  most  relevance  to  New  Zealand,  compiled  in
London  by  an  organisation  called  Consensus  Forecasts,  continue  to  be  revised  down.  Back  in
November, as we prepared our December Monetary Policy Statement, the Consensus forecast for the
14 countries of most relevance to us had growth in those countries this year at 3.5 per cent. Three
months later, that forecast had been revised down to 2.9 per cent. Now, the forecast is only 2.3 per
cent. Surely, it must be obvious to the Reserve Bank that the world economy is going to continue to
get weaker, and monetary policy must be eased urgently.
The most important point I want to make to those who run these arguments is that, just because other
central  banks  have  eased  monetary  policy  substantially,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  is  not
necessarily  remiss  in  taking  a  somewhat  different  course.  Why?  Simply  because  every  national
economy is unique. Monetary policy is not a race, with every central bank trying to get to the finishing
line first. It is about adjusting interest rates to influence demand within a specific economy to ensure
price stability in that economy. What is right for one country might well be entirely wrong for another.
So while of course it is important that we in New Zealand are aware of what other central banks are
doing – because their actions may say something about their economies which could be relevant to
inflationary pressures within New Zealand – matching  the decisions of other central  banks point for
point will often make no sense at all.
Should we in New Zealand have been easing monetary policy more quickly than we have been doing?
Or  in  other  words,  will  the  slow-down  in  the  world  economy  reduce  inflationary  pressures  in  New
Zealand so  much  that  some  time  in  the  next  year  or  so  inflation  will  fall  towards  the  bottom  of  the
agreed 0 to 3 per cent target band?
BIS Review 44/2001
1
Still plenty of risks in the world economy
It is certainly possible to imagine some very pessimistic scenarios which would warrant a major further
easing of interest rates in New Zealand, or indeed make us wish that we had eased more quickly over
the last few months. In June 1999, I was one of three central bank governors who gave speeches in
answer to the question "Is deflation a risk?" at a seminar held in conjunction with the annual meeting
of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland. My task was to sketch out a situation in
which the world economy found itself in a situation of generalised deflation. I found it disturbingly easy
to do.
Two years later, there are still considerable risks. While the high-tech parts of the US equity market
have  fallen  from  stratospheric  levels  to  more  moderate  levels  over  the  last  year,  the  market
capitalisation of the stocks in the S & P 500 index, which reached a peak of 132 per cent of US GDP
in March 2000, remains at around 110 per cent of US GDP, compared with an average for that ratio of
just  50  per  cent  over  the  last  75  years.  Or  to  put  the  matter  differently,  the  US  share-market
appreciated  between  1982  and  the  year  2000  at  a  rate  five  times  faster  than  underlying  corporate
earnings growth. There is plenty of scope, in other words, for US equity markets to fall much further
yet, and US business confidence and consumer spending to fall with them.
Indeed,  after  by  far  the  longest  uninterrupted  economic  expansion  in  US  history,  a  fairly  marked
slowdown in the US economy might not even need the trigger of a further fall in US equity markets.
The Japanese economy continues to experience serious difficulties, its banking and insurance sectors
fragile, its public debt very large and increasing, and its immediate prospects clouded.
And inevitably, with the outlook for the American and Japanese economies uncertain, the prospects
for the economies of non-Japan Asia are also unclear – with banking sectors still showing the open
wounds of the crisis of three years ago and their biggest markets slowing sharply.
The  Australian  economy,  of  great  importance  to  our  own  economy  as  our  largest  single  trading
partner, saw a fall in GDP in the December quarter of last year, while in recent months unemployment
has been rising and business confidence falling.
So let me make it quite clear: because of the impact of a slowing world economy on inflation in New
Zealand, it may well be necessary to ease monetary policy in New Zealand substantially further than
we have done so far. We are as keen to avoid having inflation go below the bottom of our 0 to 3 per
cent target as we are to avoid its going above.
But  in  a  situation  where  the  New  Zealand  economy  has  recently  been  operating  near  to  full
capacity – with unemployment near a 13 year low, and some measures of capacity utilisation back to
levels last seen in the period of strong growth in the mid-nineties – three things have led us to ease
policy  more  slowly  than  some  other  central  banks  have  done,  and  more  slowly  than  some  New
Zealanders would like.
So far, the world economy continues to grow
First, and despite the slowing which has occurred, the world economy continues to grow. In the United
States, growth in GDP in the March quarter was stronger than most observers had expected, and only
a  few  commentators  are  expecting  the  US  to  experience  a  recession  this  year.  Indeed,  many
commentators are predicting that the US economy will "bounce back" in the second half of this year, or
at  least  by  the  fourth  quarter.  Interestingly,  US  equity  markets,  which  must  be  assumed  to  reflect
sentiment about the future of corporate earnings, have recently advanced, and the S & P 500 index is
less than 20 per cent below the all-time high it reached in March last year. The narrower Dow index is
less than 5 per cent below its all-time high.
In Japan, the prospect of a new political determination to deal with the problems which have beset that
economy for more than a decade has improved sentiment, and the Nikkei stock index is well up from
the low point reached in the middle of March this year.
In Australia, it has been pointed out that the modest fall in GDP in the fourth quarter was mainly the
result of a very sharp fall-off in the construction sector following the introduction of GST in mid-year,
with most of the rest of the Australian economy continuing to grow at an annual rate of around 4 per
cent.
2
BIS Review 44/2001
Although not too much should be made of it at this relatively early stage, Consensus forecasts for our
14  major  export  markets  suggest  growth  next  year  of  3.6  per  cent,  well  up  from  the  2.3  per  cent
expected for the same markets this year.
If we eased policy too much now, and that easing had its biggest effect next year, as we expect, we
might find that policy would be stimulating the economy at the very time that the world economy was
picking up.
New Zealand's export prices continue to hold up
Secondly,  and  contrary  to  much  past  experience,  the  slowdown  in  the  world  economy  which  has
occurred  to  date  has  not  had  an  obviously  negative  effect  on  the  world  prices  of  many  of  New
Zealand's exports.
Of course, the prices of some exports have been seriously affected. The world price of our seafood
exports is well down over the last year for example. But many other prices have held up well, and that
has been particularly true of major exports such as meat and dairy products (both up by more than 22
per cent in world price terms in the 12 months to April).
In aggregate, the world price of New Zealand's commodity exports rose almost 14 per cent in the year
to April 2001, and almost 23 per cent over the two years to April 2001.1 This means that an important
channel through which weakness in the world economy typically affects New Zealand has so far, on
this occasion, been blocked.
The New Zealand dollar is sheltering the economy from foreign chills
Thirdly,  as  we  assess  the  impact  of  the  relatively  subdued  world  economy  on  the  New  Zealand
economy, and therefore on New Zealand inflation, we have to assess also the impact which the New
Zealand exchange rate is having on the situation. If, as is possible, the world economy slows further,
and if, as also seems possible, this has a negative effect on the world price of New Zealand's export
commodities, will our export industries, and those industries competing against imports, be protected
from those cold winds by a low exchange rate?
Make no mistake. As many of you are aware, the New Zealand dollar is not far above its lowest level
ever against the United States dollar, and remains at a very low level also against the Japanese yen
and  sterling.  It  is  not  so  low,  to  be  sure,  against  the  Australian  dollar  and  the  euro,  two  other
currencies which have been weak in recent times, but weakness against the US dollar, the yen, and
sterling is certainly  providing strong benefits to many  of the companies  and  individuals operating  in
export and import-competing industries.
As a consequence, while the world prices of New Zealand's commodity exports have gone up by an
already large increase in the 12 months to April (almost 14 per cent), the New Zealand dollar prices of
those exports have risen by a very strong 36 per cent over the last year, and by almost 60 per cent
over the two years to April.
Initially, the volume of New Zealand's exports of good and services grew rather strongly in response to
this stimulus (helped no doubt in part by the return to more normal climatic conditions down on the
farm). More recently, export growth has slowed down quite sharply. We don't fully understand why this
is so. Perhaps it just takes longer than we might have thought for businesses to gear up to increase
exports. Perhaps  businesses have been frightened by media stories about the slowing  in the  world
economy. Perhaps businesses were so traumatised by the experience of a strong exchange rate in
the  mid-nineties  that  they  will  respond  only  cautiously  to  the  apparent  enticements  offered  by  the
now-low exchange rate. Perhaps other countries with which New Zealand exporters compete in, say,
the US market have experienced similar levels of exchange rate depreciation against the US dollar,
thus  eroding  much  of  the  benefit  to  our  exporters  of  the  depreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar.
Perhaps for many of our exporters the Australian market is still the major market, and here there has
been little depreciation over the last few years.
One of the difficult judgements we have had to make in deciding how to run monetary policy in recent
months  concerns  what  the  low  exchange  rate  means  for  future  inflation  pressures.  If  the  economy
                                                     
1 
ANZ New Zealand Commodity Price Index, 2 May 2001.
BIS Review 44/2001
3
responds to the low exchange rate as it has in the past, we would expect to see strong growth in net
exports  over  the  next  year  or  two,  with  export  and  import-competing  industries  investing  in  new
capacity, hiring more staff, and expanding production. The risk is that such a strong expansion in the
export and import-competing industries would put pressure on available resources. That in turn would
lead to increased inflation unless monetary policy were kept appropriately tight.
If, on the other hand, the economy does not respond to the low exchange rate as it has in the past, as
seems possible on the basis of very recent experience, it may be that export and import-competing
industries will expand only moderately. In that situation, monetary policy would not need to be as tight
in order to keep inflation under control.
Like it or not, no central bank operating in an open economy can afford to ignore the exchange rate in
setting monetary policy. The fact that we have not only not increased the Official Cash Rate despite
our currently low exchange rate but have actually felt able to reduce it in recent months largely reflects
our assessment of the global economy, and our assessment that, for reasons not yet fully understood,
the  exchange  rate  is  not  providing  the  stimulus  to  export  and  import-competing  industries  that  has
been true in the past.
But,  as  will  be  obvious,  if  the  economy  does  start  responding  to  the  low  exchange  rate  as  it  has
historically, there will be a need for interest rates to be quite a bit higher than currently, if resources
are going to be able to move from domestic parts of the economy to the export and import-competing
industries  without  causing  inflation.  This  is  true  because,  in  aggregate,  the  economy  is  already
operating at close to capacity, with some measures of capacity utilisation back at levels last seen in
the boom of the mid-nineties and unemployment at a near 13 year low.
As  an  aside,  the  data  on  employment  and  job  advertisements  released  10  days  ago  on  balance
support this assessment that there is little spare capacity in the labour market. While it is true that total
employment  did  not  increase  over  the  March  quarter,  wage  rates  have  begun  to  climb  –  by  a  little
more than we and the market had been expecting; hours worked rose strongly during the quarter, and
are now some 6 per cent above the level in the first quarter of last year; unemployment is at its lowest
level since June 1988; and job advertisements, while down slightly for the month of April, remain well
ahead of their level at this time last year.
There are  clearly  strongly  conflicting  influences  on  the  future  path  of  inflation  in  New  Zealand.  It  is
entirely possible that we will need to ease monetary policy more than we have done to date. It is also
entirely  possible  that  we  will  need  to  increase  interest  rates  from  their  present  level.  In  such  an
environment,  it  is  prudent  to  adjust  policy  cautiously  as  we  watch  the  evolving  balance  of  those
influences.
At this stage, we see inflation settling back near the middle of our target range with something close to
current interest rate settings. But it is not difficult to imagine outcomes that are rather less benign – in
either direction. At the end of the day, monetary policy depends on the outlook for inflation one to two
years  ahead.  At  the  moment,  that  in  turn  depends  primarily  on  how  the  economies  of  our  trading
partners evolve, on the extent to which any global slowdown affects demand for our exports, on how
the New Zealand  exchange rate behaves, and  on how  the  New  Zealand  economy  responds  to  the
exchange rate.
My plea to observers and commentators is to keep in mind that New Zealand's economy is not the
Australian, or the American, or indeed any other economy. In the March Monetary Policy Statement, I
mentioned  that  the  New  Zealand  economy  was  "favourably  out  of  sync"  with  the  rest  of  the  world.
Actually, we are often out of sync with the rest of the world, either favourably or unfavourably. New
Zealand's economic fortunes depend to a significant extent on a relatively narrow range of exported
goods and services, and so we often face relatively sharp slow-downs and, on the flip-side, relatively
fast accelerations. That is the nature of our economy. For the Reserve Bank, that  inevitably means
trying to steer a course through these short-term vicissitudes, a course appropriate to the inflationary
pressures in the New Zealand economy, whatever the Federal Reserve and other central banks are
doing.
4
BIS Review 44/2001
