Urban Bäckström: What shall guide monetary policy?
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Swedish  Economics
Association, Stockholm, 17 April 2001.
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  once  again  to  the  Swedish  Economics  Association  to  discuss  various
aspects of the Riksbank and monetary policy. I greatly appreciate the opportunity of addressing what
can be called a historical and academic forum and conducting a dialogue about economic policy both
with the two opponents and with other scholars and students.
The  inflation  target  has  been  monetary  policy’s  rudder  ever  since  1993  and  I  believe  most  people
would agree that on the whole in this period it has functioned fairly well. After a couple of decades of
high  inflation,  we  have  managed  to  re-establish  price  stability.  Market  players  as  well  as  people  in
general  are now more confident  in  and  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  regime  and  the  general
formation of monetary policy. It also looks as though the importance of fiscal discipline as a means of
supporting the monetary policy regime is anchored in the political system and in Swedish society.
Sweden is not the only country where a regime with an explicit inflation target seems to be working
well. I am sure that much the same view is held by my colleagues in the small group of countries —
consisting of New Zealand, Canada and the United Kingdom — that formally introduced the regime at
much the same time as Sweden in the early 1990s. Since then, more and more countries, including
some  of  the  emerging  industrialised  countries,  have  changed  to  a  regime  with  an  explicit  inflation
target. The other week it was announced that two of our Nordic neighbours, Norway and Iceland, are
also to focus monetary policy on an inflation target.
But  we cannot settle down to a  quiet  life. Our thoughts about both the implementation of  monetary
policy  and  its  analytical  framework  must  be  developed  continuously.  That  is,  indeed,  an  ongoing
process  at  the  Riksbank.  Early  in  1999,  for  instance,  the  Executive  Board  made  some  formal
clarifications. It was noted  that monetary policy should aim to fulfil the inflation target,  expressed  in
terms  of  the  consumer  price  index,  one  to  two  years  ahead  but  that  under  certain  specific
circumstances  there  can  be  grounds  for  deviating  from  that  aim.  In  some  respects  the  clarification
amounted to a codification of what had been practised for a number of years1.
Today  I  shall  be  discussing  how  the  Riksbank  ought  to  react  when  the  economy  is  exposed  to
structural  changes  of  various  types.  Firstly,  how  should  monetary  policy  handle  price  effects  of
deregulations. In that deregulations can lower the general price level, they may occasion a temporary
dip in the rate of inflation. Secondly, how should monetary policy be formulated in connection with a
rising rate of productivity growth? Such a development can be taken to indicate that the economy is
being exposed to positive supply shocks. While the rate of productivity growth in Sweden has not yet
moved up to the same extent as in the United States, it is conceivable that, as so often in the past, we
will follow the pattern there. However, the  probability  of this happening  is not something I  intend  to
consider today.
The rule of action in monetary policy
1.
First let me recall the Riksbank’s rule of action by which monetary policy is usually guided. It states
that if the forecast rate of inflation, measured with the consumer price index, 1–2 years ahead is above
2 per cent, then normally the repo rate should be raised and vice versa. The reason why we chose this
target  horizon  is  that  an  adjustment  of  the  monetary  stance  takes  time  to  exert  its  full  impact  on
inflation  and  the  macro  economy  in  general.  Although  we  are  also  able  to  influence  inflation  in  the
shorter  run,  doing  so  is  normally  inappropriate  because  it  is  liable  to  result  in  large  fluctuations  in
production and employment.
                                                     
1  Minutes of the Executive Board meeting on 4 February 1999. The clarification is also presented in Heikensten, L. (1999),
The Riksbank’s inflation target — clarifications and evaluation, Quarterly Review 1, Sveriges Riksbank.
BIS Review 30/2001
1
Of course the rule is not applied mechanically. The basic intention is to stabilise inflation around the
target  and  at  the  same  time  avoid  unduly  large  fluctuations  in  production  and  employment.
Consequently the Riksbank chooses to disregard economic shocks with effects on inflation that can be
assumed to be only transitory. Moreover, there may be grounds for heeding the expected course of
events beyond the regular target horizon. There may be a case for adjusting the repo rate immediately
if there are already strong reasons for expecting a marked increase or decrease in inflation  directly
after the two-year horizon. Another point to remember is the Riksbank’s function of promoting a safe
and  efficient  payment  system;  problems  in  this  context  may  call  for  interest  rate  adjustments  even
though  the  inflation  target  is  not  threatened.  Such  adjustments  may  be  needed  both  to  prevent
potential risks from building up in the payment system and to moderate effects of problems that have
already arisen.
Departures  of  this  type  from  the  rule  of  action  should,  however,  be  made  restrictively.  When  the
clarification was presented at the beginning of 1999, the Executive Board made a point of the fact that
deviations from the normal rule are to be stated clearly and justified.
The Riksbank’s rule of action and some of the aspects I have mentioned have direct counterparts in
current  laws  and  their  prefatory  documents.  The  Riksbank  Act  states  that  "The  objective  of  the
Riksbank’s  operations  shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability.  In  addition,  the  Riksbank  shall  promote  a
safe  and  efficient  payment  system."  Moreover,  the  Government  Bill  (1997/98:40)  lays  down  that  in
order  to  increase  the  possibility  of  democratic  control,  the  statutory  objective  should  be  given  its
specific  content  by  the  Riksbank.  Furthermore,  in  the  prefatory  documents  it  is  said  that  as  an
authority under  parliament,  the  Riksbank  shall  self-evidently  support  the  general  goals  of  economic
policy, for example sustainable growth and full employment, in so far as they do not conflict with the
objective of price stability. It was not considered necessary to legislate these obligations.
The inflation target and price effects of deregulations
2.
Market  deregulation  can  have  considerable  effects  on  price  formation.  The  immediate  effect  of  a
deregulation  is  often  that  the  price  falls,  sometimes  almost  at  once,  so  that  the  rate  of  inflation  is
lowered for the time being. All else equal, the rate of inflation then returns to the initial level as the
months on which the statistical comparison is based move forward. Normally, however, deregulations
also affect the conditions for competition and price formation in the longer run. I should add here that
rising competitive pressure can also affect productivity but the economic effect of productivity growth is
something I shall be considering later.
A  particular,  limited  deregulation  need  not  call  for  measures  of  monetary  policy.  If  a  deregulation
stems from political decisions that could not be predicted, or its effects on inflation are calculated to
disappear in less than one to two years, it will not elicit a reaction from the Riksbank as long as the
rule of action is adhered to.
The situation is different, however, if the economy goes through a series of deregulations or the price
effects of a single deregulation continue for several years. This may lead to inflation being below the
target more permanently, which in turn ought to lead, according to the rule of action, to a downward
adjustment  of  the  instrumental  rate.  The  stimulus  from  monetary  policy  acts  through  the  usual
channels.  So  all  else  equal,  one  can  expect  a  fall  in  market  interest  rates,  rising  share  prices,  a
stronger expansion of credit and so on. General demand rises, employment moves up, unemployment
falls and the inflation target is fulfilled.
When the price effects have waned, there is a risk, if nothing else intervenes, of inflation rising above
the  target.  To  counter  this,  monetary  policy  responds  by  gradually  increasing  the  instrumental  rate
again.  Market  interest  rates  move  up,  share  prices  fall  and  the  growth  of  credit  slackens.  In  other
words, the customary transmission mechanism now works in the opposite direction, leading to some
fall in production and employment as well as in resource utilisation. Another component of the process
is the higher inflation’s limiting effect on household real income, just as the lower inflation benefited
household income. Inflation then falls back to the targeted rate.
For clarity’s sake I should perhaps add that this reasoning presupposes that inflation expectations are
not affected.
The exchange rate’s reactions to monetary policy measures are not entirely given. Text books say that
the exchange rate weakens in a scenario with monetary stimuli and appreciates when the instrumental
rate  is  increased.  That  should  normally  be  the  case  as  long  as  nothing  else  happens.  But  the  fact
2
BIS Review 30/2001
remains that there have been many instances all over the world of exchange rates appreciating even
though instrumental rates have been cut and vice versa. In such situations market players have often
attached greater weight to the prospects of faster or slower economic growth — provided the rate of
inflation is expected to remain low. So it is not entirely clear how the exchange rate will ultimately be
affected when the intrumental rate is raised or lowered.
Were it the case that regulatory changes always refer to a particular group of goods or services, one
might  consider  excluding  this  group  from  the  price  index  that  monetary  policy  aims  to  stabilise.  A
disadvantage of this might be that monetary policy would be guided by an indicator of inflation that is
not the most relevant one for consumers. On the other hand, it could confer the advantage of making
monetary policy simpler and more predictable.
In practice, however, adjusting the consumer price index for shocks of this type is virtually impossible.
The effects can come from a series of deregulations that affect different stages of price formation for a
variety of goods and services. So even if it were feasible, I believe that working with a narrow price
index  would  have  more  drawbacks  than  advantages.  We  must  accept  instead  that  all  economic
activities  pose  difficulties  that  stem  from  the  impossibility  of  predicting  the  future  exactly.  When  it
comes to evaluating monetary  policy,  it  is  better  to  accept  certain  deviations  from  a  relevant  target
than to have a target than can only be fulfilled because it has been defined so narrowly as to be hardly
relevant.
This particular aspect is also highly important and valid in other situations to do with the evaluation of
monetary policy. There needs to be a widespread awareness both of what monetary policy is actually
capable of achieving and of the choices that continually have to be made. Otherwise it will be difficult
to achieve a comprehensive evaluation.  All this  is, of course, a matter of learning. But  sometimes
there is too great temptation to score a cheap point in the public discussion by accusing the central
bank of acting too late or ‘missing’ the target.
The point I want to make on this topic is that an inflation targeting monetary policy normally functions
satisfactorily  even in situations that are characterised by  price effects  from  deregulations.  Monetary
policy may not be capable of fully countering every change in the general price level, including more or
less transitory effects on the rate of inflation. But that has more to do with the difficulties in producing
exact forecasts of deregulations and their price effects than with the effects of deregulations differing
in  some  more  principled  sense  that  warrants  treating  them  differently  from  other  shifts  in  relative
prices.
The inflation target and rising productivity growth
Effect on demand and direct downward effect on inflation
3.
3.1
Another  type  of  structural  change  occurs  when  productivity  growth  rises2.  Higher  trend  productivity
implies  a  permanently  faster  growth  of  total  output.  At  the  same  time,  as  the  productivity  growth
subdues unit labour costs, in a process of this kind inflation tends to be pushed down, at least initially.
The return on capital rises and stimulates an expansion of the capital stock. In addition, the equilibrium
real interest rate tends to move up in order to maintain the balance between saving and investment.
The background to this is that demand for capital is assumed to rise when investment is perceived as
more profitable in the light of higher productivity.
In  recent  years  some  observers  have  concluded  that  rising  productivity  growth  contributes  to  a
decreased risk of inflation, a smoothing of cyclical fluctuations and a virtually endless continuation of
the upswing. That is not so, as we shall shortly see. A path of this kind is, of course, highly desirable,
leading as it does to higher real incomes and prosperity. But it faces monetary policy with troublesome
problems and it is in the actual process of adjustment that the difficulties arise.
A structural change with rising productivity growth may be due to, for instance, a shift in technology.
An interesting example is provided by the United States, where the relative price fall in connection with
developments in computers and telecommunications in recent decades can serve as an illustration.
During the process of adjusting to the new, higher growth path there are at least two, contrary effects
that  are  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  One  effect  is  an  increase  in  demand.  The  impact  of  this  on
                                                     
2  For an interesting review of aspects of the adjustment process, see Meyer, L.H. (2000), "The Economic Outlook and the
Challenges Facing Monetary Policy," Remarks at Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri. The Federal Reserve Board,
October 19.
BIS Review 30/2001
3
inflation will depend on how the increment to demand relates to the higher potential supply of goods
and services. The other effect is a direct damper on inflation. It is often only the latter effect that is
highlighted in the public debate. I should like to consider the two effects in turn.
Demand rises in the form of higher investment and increased private consumption. The upswing for
investment stems from expectations of a higher return on capital. Share prices rise, which facilitates
capital procurement. The capital stock is adjusted towards a new level that is expected to match the
new and higher rate of potential growth. Private consumption is stimulated via  the wealth  effects of
higher share prices and expectations of higher future household income. Experience suggests that the
increase in demand, initially at least, often exceeds the upward shift in potential growth. As a result,
unutilised capacity is brought into production, unemployment falls and resource utilisation rises. So all
in all, the demand effect tends to drive inflation up.
The direct damper on inflation is a consequence of higher productivity growth leading to lower unit
labour  costs  and  thereby  lower  costs  for  production.  Profits  therefore  rise  initially  but  competitive
pressure on prices leads in time to lower inflation. This effect presupposes that it takes time for wages
to adjust to the higher productivity growth, which is not uncommon.
These two effects on the rate of inflation accordingly work in opposite directions. An upward effect on
inflation  from  the  rising  demand  is  countered  by  the  dampening  effect.  For  an  inflation  targeting
monetary  policy,  the  problem  in  principle  should  amount  to  striking  a  balance  between  these  two
effects. As I shall soon be discussing, however, things are not quite as simple as that. But first I want
to point out that in the longer run  —  when  both  the  demand  effect  and  the  dampening  effect  have
dropped  out  —  the  interest  rate  will  unquestionably  rise  because  a  higher  level  of  potential  growth
pulls the equilibrium real interest rate up to maintain the balance between saving and investment.
Two alternatives for monetary policy
3.2
Behind this seemingly straightforward  and fairly simple discussion there are, as  we  shall  soon  see,
major challenges for monetary policy and pitfalls for economic development in general. They basically
have to do  with the principles that monetary policy decision-makers have  to  choose  between  when
productivity growth accelerates.
One possibility, given that the economy is in equilibrium, is to let output growth exceed the potential
rate for a time. This leads to a temporary fall in unemployment but the direct dampening effect is so
strong that inflation can be held in the vicinity of the target. This alternative presumably requires an
instrumental rate that is kept at a comparatively low level.
The other possibility, given that the economy is benefiting from the rising productivity growth, is to let
output growth match the new, higher potential rate. Unemployment is then unchanged and the direct
dampening effect is left to work through so that inflation falls below the target without this having any
consequences for monetary policy.
The  two  alternatives  thus  amount  to  choosing  a  temporarily  lower  level  of  either  unemployment  or
inflation,  or  a  combination  of  the  two,  during  the  actual  process  of  adjustment.  Taken  literally,  the
Riksbank’s rule of action tells us that a temporarily lower level of unemployment is not the "correct"
choice. Monetary policy should instead be sufficiently stimulatory to keep inflation close to the target.
In other words, the central bank should let the economy grow faster than the potential rate and pave
the way for a temporary fall in unemployment.
In this context, however, an unduly rigid interpretation of monetary policy’s rule of action can be risky.
Let me explain why.
The process of adjusting to a new, higher rate of productivity growth leads initially to a good circle.
Rising  productivity  tends  to  drive  share  prices  up  and  that  in  turn  makes  new  investment  easier  to
finance.  New  investment  and  a  growing  capital  stock  imply  a  larger  proportion  of  capital  and
accordingly give productivity growth a further upward shift. This in turn drives share prices upwards
again and so on. A continuation of this process can lead to risks for economic development:
• 
One  source  of  problems  can  lie  in  the  financial  markets’  reaction  to  rising  productivity.
Expectations  of  the  future  unfortunately  become  unduly  optimistic  at  times.  Under  such
circumstances,  expectations  of  rising  profits  lead  to  an  increased  supply  of  credit,  rising
prices for shares and real estate that result in a further expansion of credit, and so on. When
such a bubble ultimately bursts, the negative economic effects can be serious and lead to a
crisis in the banking system.
4
BIS Review 30/2001
 Excessive  euphoria  can  also  lead  to  an  undue  expansion  of  the  capital  stock.  This
perspective  is  derived  from  the  Austrian  school.  Extensive  investment  is  undertaken  in
sectors  that  will  never  yield  the  return  that  was  expected  initially.  The  speculative  fever
simply results in misplaced investment. The subsequent process of adjustment accordingly
involves markedly subdued investment activity and an attendant economic trend that is weak
for a fairly long period.
The empirical picture
4.
The different types of problem I have just described have to a varying extent probably characterised
Japan in the 1990s, several countries in Southeast Asia recently and, it seems, Sweden  in the late
1980s and early 1990s. There are also plenty of examples earlier on of similar periods of economic
setbacks in various countries. Experience shows that the subsequent process of adjustment can be
very troublesome and sometimes protracted. Inflation is markedly subdued and there is even a risk of
a period of deflation.
The structural changes that affected the Swedish economy in the second half of the 1990s seem to
have been confined to a series of price effects in connection with the deregulation of electricity and
telecom  markets  in  particular.  Inflation  has  therefore  been  lower  than  would  otherwise  have  been
expected from resource utilisation in  general. In keeping  with the rule of action,  in recent  years the
Riksbank has implemented a stimulatory monetary policy and systematically aimed at the target one to
two  years  ahead.  Partly,  but  not  solely,  for  this  reason,  the  instrumental  rate  has  accordingly  been
lower than in many other countries.
On the other hand, productivity growth has not accelerated as it has in the United States. The rate in
the  corporate  sector  has  admittedly  been  somewhat  higher  than  in  the  1980s  but  it  had  already
increased in the early 1990s when the economic crisis eliminated less competitive and low-productive
firms. In the second half of the 1990s there was no further improvement in productivity growth.
In the United States, however, the upward shift in productivity growth has led to a development along
the  lines  I  discussed  earlier,  with  growing  expectations  of  future  profits  and  incomes,  steeply  rising
share prices, extensive new issues and credit growth. Massive investment in the corporate sector has
been accompanied by rapidly rising purchases of durable goods. The private sector’s financial balance
has  deteriorate  rapidly  and  become  increasingly  negative.  That  in  turn  has  enlarged  the  deficit  on
current account.
In Sweden, the Stockholm Exchange has been driven by the stock-market boom in the United States,
not  least  in  the  IT  and  telecom  sectors,  but  credit  growth  has  been  more  moderate.  Neither  has
investment  risen  as  rapidly  as  in  the  United  States.  The  private  sector  financial  balance  has  not
undergone  such  a  marked  negative  swing  and  for  several  years  the  current  account  has  shown
relatively large surpluses. So in crucial respects the course of events in Sweden in the second half of
the 1990s differs from that in the United States.
Against  this  background,  in  this  period  the  Riksbank  has  not  found  any  grounds  for  sizeable
departures from the rule of action.
Conclusions
5.
So what conclusions can be drawn about how monetary policy ought to react when the economy is
exposed  to  different  types  of  shock?  I  have  discussed  two  types  of  shock:  price  effects  from
deregulations and an upward shift in productivity growth.
The  review  shows  that  the  Riksbank’s  rule  of  action  works  well  as  long  as  the  structural  changes
concern price effects in connection with deregulations. In a period of accelerating productivity growth,
on the other hand, the choices for monetary policy can be more complicated. While higher productivity
growth  is  positive  as  such  because  it  implies  higher  real  incomes  and  a  long-term  improvement  in
living standards, during the adjustment process it can entail a number of risks. What looks like a good
circle initially can lead later on to unduly strong and self-generating euphoria.
It is, of course, difficult to tell under which circumstances the good circle will turn into a less favourable
development.  In  practice  it  is  presumably  a  matter  of  very  difficult  assessments.  But  the  risk  is
probably greater if monetary policy aims too strongly and for too long at stimulating demand in order to
BIS Review 30/2001
5
keep inflation close to the target, instead of accepting a temporarily lower rate and doing its best to
bring the development of demand into line with potential growth.
In a way it could be said that such a reaction pattern implies that the central bank pays more attention
to asset prices than in the normal case. It is important to note, however, that this is done in a situation
where  unduly  rising  asset  prices  are  one  of  several  signs  that  imbalances  are  building  up  in  the
economy3. There is cause to be observant when notable increases in asset prices are accompanied
by  strong  credit  growth,  rapidly  rising  investment,  a  market  deterioration  of  the  private  sector’s
financial balance and growing deficits on the current account. As mentioned earlier, such a situation
does not necessarily mean that the rate of inflation rises immediately. If the central bank does not act
to  limit  imbalances  and  excesses  of  this  type,  the  result  may  accordingly  be  serious  adjustment
problems in both the financial system and the real economy,  with  a risk  of  subsequent  deflationary
tendencies.
This means that an unduly  rigid  interpretation of the Riksbank’s rule of action in monetary  policy  is
associated with risks. I do not find it difficult to envisage a situation where the rule of action and the
inflation target must defer to a tighter monetary stance. My view of how monetary policy ought to react
to asset prices is connected with my experiences as under-secretary at the Finance Ministry during the
banking  crisis  in  the  early  1990s.  If  rising  asset  prices  are  a  symptom  of  a  wider  build-up  of
imbalances in the economy, then monetary policy must aim to limit the risks of bubbles blowing up in
the financial sector and the real economy. That is not meant to imply that determining when such a
situation is on the way is particularly easy.
The "flexible inflation targeting policy" the Riksbank has defined also allows temporary departures from
the simple rule of action. In my opinion there is support for this in the law and its prefatory documents.
However, if a situation were to arise that might justify a departure from the current rule of action, it is
important  to  be  particularly  explicit  about  what  monetary  policy  is  guided  by.  Besides  enabling  the
general  public  and  market  investors  to  know  how  and  why  the  Riksbank  acts  as  it  does  in  such  a
situation,  this  makes  it  possible  to  exercise  democratic  control  even  when  the  target  of  2  per  cent
inflation has to take second place.
                                                     
3  An influential paper that summarises the traditional view of how monetary policy ought to address asset prices is Bernanke,
B. & Gertler, M. (1999), "Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility", in New Challanges for Monetary Policy, Proceedings
of  the  Symposium  Sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  pp.  77-128.  An
alternative opinion is presented in Cecchetti, S.G. et al. (2000), "Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy", Geneva Reports on
the World Economy No. 2, CEPR, Switzerland. See also Kent, C. & Lowe, P. (1997), "Asset-Price Bubbles and Monetary
Policy", Research Discussion Paper 9709, Economic Research Department, Reserve Bank of Australia.
6
BIS Review 30/2001
