Alan Greenspan: Monetary policy and economic outlook
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the  US Federal Reserve
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, 17 October 2001.
 I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Committee to discuss recent developments in the
United States economy. Despite the tragic events of September 11, the foundations of our free society
remain sound, and I am confident that we will recover and prosper as we have in the past.
But  before  the  recovery  process  gets  under  way,  stability  will  need  to  be  restored  to  the  American
economy and to others around the world. Arguably, that stability was only barely becoming evident in
the United States in the period immediately preceding the act of terrorism.
Aggregate  measures  of  production,  employment,  and  business  spending  continued  to  be  weak  in
August. Consumer spending, however, moved higher that month and appeared to be reasonably well
maintained  in  the  first  part  of  September.  Industry  analysts  suggest  that  motor  vehicle  sales  were
running  close  to  August  levels,  and  chain  store  sales  were  only  modestly  lower.  New  orders  for
nondefense capital goods stabilized in August. Moreover, the dramatic rate of decline in profits was
slowing. To be sure, these signs were tentative but, on the whole, encouraging.
In the days following the attack, the level of activity declined significantly. The shock was most evident
in consumer markets, as many potential purchasers stayed riveted to their televisions and away from
shopping malls. Both motor vehicle sales and sales at major chain stores fell off noticeably. The airline
and travel industries also suffered severe cutbacks.
The  unprecedented  shutdown  of  American  air  travel  and  tightened  border  restrictions  induced
dramatic  curtailments  of  production  at  some  establishments  with  tight  just-in-time  supply  chain
practices, most notably in the motor vehicle industry.
As  the  initial  shock  began  to  wear  off,  economic  activity  recovered  somewhat  from  the  depressed
levels  that  immediately  followed  the  attacks,  though  the  recovery  has  been  uneven.  Markedly
increased incentives induced a sharp rebound in motor vehicle sales by the end of the month that has
carried  apparently  undiminished  into  the  first  half  of  October.  However,  many  retailers  of  other
consumer goods report that sales have only partially retraced the steep drops that occurred in mid-
September.  Fortunately,  air  freight  is  largely  back  to  normal.  Overall  airline  passenger  traffic,  while
above  its  mid-September  lows,  was  still  off  considerably  in  early  October  from  pre-attack  levels.
Similarly, the hospitality and entertainment industries have overcome some of their earlier difficulties
but continue to struggle.
The effect on financial markets of the devastating attack on the World Trade Center was pronounced,
as  telecommunications  and  trading  capacities  were  severely  impaired.  But  the  markets  are  mostly
functioning normally now, and as in the past, the infrastructure will be rapidly restored.
For a brief time, the terrorist attacks markedly disrupted payment transfers, leaving those counting on
receiving  payments  caught  short.  Those  needs  ultimately  were  met  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  both
through record lending at the discount window and through an extraordinary infusion of funds through
open-market operations. To facilitate the channeling of dollar liquidity to foreign financial  institutions
operating in the United States, thirty-day currency swap lines were arranged with major central banks,
again in record volumes. It was essential in such an environment to meet all appropriate demands for
dollar liquidity. As repair of the financial markets and payment infrastructure proceeded apace, loans
were repaid, open-market operations could be scaled back, the unusual swap lines were allowed to
expire, and the temporarily bloated balance sheet of the Federal Reserve largely returned to normal.
But  even  as  market  functioning  and  liquidity  flows  were  restored,  the  potential  for  heightened
uncertainty to damp household and business spending for a time persisted. To cushion these effects,
we have eased the stance of monetary policy appreciably since September 11.
 BIS Review 87/2001
1
We in the United States have assumed ourselves to be fairly well-insulated from terrorism or, at most,
subject  to  limited  and  sporadic  episodes  similar  to  those  previously  observed  on  a  number  of
occasions in Europe.
We have been aware of the possibility for losses on a much greater scale. But I suspect that those
possibilities  were  deemed  so  remote  that  they  were  never  seriously  incorporated  into  most
conventional assessments of economic risk.
The  shock  of  the  tragedies  at  the  World  Trade  Center  and  the  Pentagon  has  reshaped  those
assessments  of  risk  and  required  an  abrupt  realignment  of  prices  in  many  markets  to  reflect  the
expected costs of operating in what we now recognize as a more hostile world. These circumstances
pose a difficult challenge for business decisionmaking, not so much because the costs are inordinately
large,  but  because  the  events,  which  have  potentially  substantial  consequences,  are  so  uncertain.
Insurance deals with this problem by spreading the risk and converting potential large unknown costs
into a steady stream of known insurance premiums that facilitates the forward planning so essential to
an effective business operation.
Obviously,  sharp  increases  in  insurance  premiums  for  all  forms  of  businesses  are  to  be  expected.
Some higher insurance costs, in effect, will be borne implicitly rather than explicitly, as firms choose to
self-insure, at least in part, rather than lay off all of this risk in the marketplace.
These higher insurance costs, both explicit and implicit, endeavor to anticipate future losses. But in
addition, they cover the physical capital and labor resources businesses will be required to devote to
enhanced  security,  and  to  increased  redundancies  as  protection  against  interruption  of  supplies  or
production. For example, the degree of comfort businesses have in allowing inventories to shrink to
minimal levels in a just-in-time supply chain is lessened. In this regard, increased security threats, not
pooled through insurance, have exactly the opposite effect on productivity than that which is gained by
an  improvement  in  information  technology.  In  addition  to  the  loss  of  human  life  and  capital  assets,
these are important collateral costs associated with the new threats that we now face.
The  pronounced  rise  in  uncertainty  also  has  damped  consumer  spending  and  capital  investment;
households  and  businesses,  confronted  with  heightened  uncertainty,  have  pulled  back  from  the
marketplace,  though  that  withdrawal  has  been  partial  and  presumably  temporary.  The  very  great
economic  uncertainties  that  have  arisen  in  the  current  environment  have  also,  at  least  temporarily,
resulted in a widening of bond spreads on high-yield instruments.
Markets across our economy will adjust to the altered perceptions of risk that we now confront. Critical
to that adjustment process is the behavior of consumers and business people. Behavior is difficult to
predict in circumstances such as those we have experienced in the past five weeks. But judging from
history, human beings have demonstrated a remarkable capacity to adapt to extraordinarily adverse
circumstances. And, I expect the same adaptability to become evident in the present situation.
Although it is difficult to determine with any precision, it seems quite likely that a significant repricing of
risk  has  already  found  its  way  into  our  markets,  as  many  economic  decisions  are  responding  to
shifting market signals. But these adjustments in prices and in the associated allocation of resources,
when complete, represent one-time level adjustments, without necessary implications for our longer-
term growth prospects.
Indeed, the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially
completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. High-tech equipment investment at
elevated rates of return will, most likely, resume once very high uncertainty premiums recede to more
normal levels.
The level of productivity will presumably undergo a one-time downward adjustment as our economy
responds to higher levels of perceived risk. But once the adjustment is completed, productivity growth
should resume at rates in excess of those that prevailed in the quarter-century preceding 1995.
It is worth noting that increased production to enhance security  will be counted  in measured output
without contributing to our standards of living, as was the case during our military buildup of the Cold
War. Our productivity measures have always endeavored to capture increased productive efficiency,
not increased well-being. We are, in effect, currently using part of our increase in efficiency to supply
increased security. Of course, given the heightened risks we face, these investments in security are,
doubtless, quite sound. In any  event, such costs are  likely  to fall short  of the costs we  incurred  for
security during the height of the Cold War.
2
BIS Review 87/2001
Nobody has the capacity to fathom fully how the effects of the tragedy of September 11 will play out in
our economy. But in the weeks ahead, as the initial shock continues to wear off, we should be able to
better gauge how the ongoing dynamics of these events are shaping the immediate economic outlook.
For  the  longer  term,  prospects  for  ongoing  rapid  technological  advance  and  associated  faster
productivity growth are scarcely diminished. Those prospects, born of the ingenuity of our people and
the strength of our system, fortify a promising future for our free nation.
BIS Review 87/2001
3
