 Jürgen Stark: The euro - the new European money 
Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a conference hosted by 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in  association  with  the  Generalkonsulat  and  the  German  Information 
Center, New York, 19 November 2001. 
 I am greatly honored to speak today before such a distinguished audience. It is good to be here in 
New  York  tonight  –  for  I  see  this  event  also  as  a  sign  of  solidarity  and  sympathy  with  a  wonderful 
people and a great city. To us Germans, with the United States having stood by us for many decades 
following  the  Second  World  War,  from  the  Berlin  Airlift  1948/49  to  reunification  in  1990,  solidarity 
should  not  and  will  not  be  – as  Chancellor  Gerhard  Schröder  put  it  a  few  days  ago –  a  “one-way 
street”. With our unconditional solidarity, we can now give back to you some of the support you have 
been  giving us for so many  years. I  wish to express my heartfelt sympathy to all of those  who lost 
relatives and loved ones in the horrible terror attacks of September 11. My sympathy also goes out to 
the families and friends of the victims of last week’s plane crash in Queens. Even after these terrible 
few weeks, to me New York always has been and always will be a symbol of the peaceful coexistence 
of people from all backgrounds, one which is a shining example for the entire world. 
I am therefore especially pleased to be here with you today. I am, of course, also glad that you have 
shown such great interest in this event and that it was possible to organize this event despite all the 
difficulties involved. My thanks go out to all those who made this happen. I hope that this event helps 
bring us a little closer to a state of normality.  
I would like to talk to you this evening about “The euro – the new European money”. When I spoke 
before  the  Council  of  Foreign  Relations  here  4½  years  ago  on  the  subject  of  European  monetary 
union  (EMU),  I  still  needed  to  provide  a  lot  of  background.  At  that  time,  even  a  fairly  sophisticated 
American dictionary offered only two definitions of EMU. The first said: “EMU = electromagnetic unit.” 
The second said: “EMU: large Australian bird that runs well but cannot fly.” Today there is hardly likely 
to be anyone who, upon hearing EMU, does not immediately think of European monetary union.  
If  you’re  thinking  about  coming  to  Europe  next  year,  you  will  meet  the  euro  wherever  you  go 
– because in just a few weeks it will exist in physical form. Paris, Rome, Brussels or Berlin: in most of 
Europe,  you  will  be  able  to  pay  with  a  single  currency  – euro  bills  and  coins –  starting  on 
January 1, 2002. For you here in the United States, it is natural that the dollar is legal tender in all fifty 
states of the Union. For us in Europe, though, monetary union is a quantum leap, both politically and 
economically. 
In my speech I would like to address the following issues:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
The historical background of the euro. 
The essential features of the new system and its ramifications. 
The future outlook for the euro – the political agenda.  
The historical background of the euro 
The euro is not quite as new as the title of my speech would lead you to believe. In fact, the euro is 
already a reality. The new European currency was born nearly three years ago when Europe entered 
Stage  Three  of  economic  and  monetary  union.  However,  compared  with  the  dollar  and  its  long 
tradition, the euro is a “rookie” in the monetary policy league. However, this “rookie” took the field after 
going through a tough “training camp” on the field of stability.  
Nearly  five  decades  ago,  far-sighted  European  politicians  kicked  off  the  drive  toward  European 
unification. Sure, this drive has repeatedly been hampered by setbacks. However, the thrust towards 
greater integration has ultimately been unmistakable. European economic integration has been firmly 
established according to the principle of an “open market economy with free competition.” This was 
not as obvious back then, as it seems today. Here in the United States, in particular, people might say 
“what else?” In Europe, though, it would behoove us to keep reminding ourselves of what it takes for a 
market economy such as ours to function properly. Only by paying attention to fundamental principles 
- personal responsibility, individual initiative, entrepreneurial spirit, and competition – can social equity 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 1
 be achieved; and this is  what is needed to overcome the severe structural problems that still beset 
Europe. We Europeans can learn much in this sphere from the United States.  
The  latest  and  greatest  step  towards  integration  in  Europe  has  been  entry  into  Stage  Three  of 
economic and monetary union. The euro-area countries have entered into a community of solidarity 
without any “exit.” There is no precedent for this unique project. In fact, it can rightly be called the most 
significant innovation in monetary history since the creation of the Bretton Woods system in 1944. 
This project is also unparalleled because clear preconditions needed to be met before EMU could be 
launched. The countries participating  in monetary union  needed to  pass a stability  test beforehand. 
Only  then  could  their  currencies  merge  to  form  the  euro.  By  contrast,  in  the  past  currencies  only 
ceased to exist after having failed to function as a store of value.  
The historical, political and economic dimensions of this project are extraordinary. I sometimes get the 
impression that this  is not  being given  its due on either side  of the Atlantic  – Europe  or the  United 
States. There still seem to be US investors who think that “EMU is crazy – in particular for Germany.” 
A  single  currency  for  Europe  means  waiving  political  sovereignty  at  the  national  level.  This  was  a 
particularly difficult step to take for many people in Germany. That should come as no surprise: the 
D-Mark  transcended  its  economic  importance  to  symbolize  the  postwar  reconstruction  of  Germany. 
The  D-Mark  stood  for  growing  prosperity  and  Germany’s  reintegration  into  the  international 
community. This success story also played a substantial role in the negotiations on EMU. Yet it was 
ultimately the courageous political will and the success in convergence achieved in the run-up which 
made  it  possible  to  turn  the  vision  of  “one  market  –  one  currency”  into  a  reality.  Through  this 
well-prepared  yet  courageous  step,  Europe  has  received  positive  stimuli.  The  elimination  of 
exchange-rate risk among the countries involved and the greater integration of financial markets are 
advantages  that  are  immediately  obvious.  However,  the  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  and 
fiscal  policy  represents  an  even  greater  success.  A  European  stability  culture  has  emerged!  This 
signifies a paradigm shift in European economic policy.  
The essential features of the new system and its ramifications 
The new European reality, with a new economic policy regime, is a rather ambitious one. The path 
chosen was not the usual “one political entity - one currency” route but instead one in which a single 
monetary  policy  has  to  contend  with  budgetary  and  economic  policies  which  are  still  largely  in  the 
hands of individual nations. This is a difficult concept to explain outside of Europe, even to those who 
have been keeping up with developments in Europe. 
In the United States, there are some people who sometimes wonder how Europe really functions. By 
the way, we in Europe also wonder sometimes what makes the United States tick. We must learn to 
understand  and  accept  existing  institutional  structures  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  A  chosen 
economic policy regime must be judged against the background of historical developments, traditions 
and its specific regional environment. 
Naturally,  the  asymmetry  between  centralized  monetary  policymaking  and  decentralized  economic 
and fiscal policy generates a certain tension. The way to overcome this state of tension is to closely 
coordinate decentralized economic and fiscal policy at the European level. Fiscal policy in the member 
states is additionally required by the Stability and Growth Pact to achieve the medium-term goal of a 
budget that is close to balance or even in surplus. One rationale for the Stability Pact was that it would 
be asking too much of a single monetary policy to be the sole defender of stability. The other was to 
keep government budgets sustainable. Public debt and the interest burden should not be allowed to 
go up after every economic slump as happened in the seventies and the early eighties. An additional 
factor  is  the  unfavorable  demographic  trend  in  Europe.  The  aim  is  to  regain  fiscal  policy  room  for 
maneuver and to avoid placing an undue burden on posterity. 
This fiscal policy self-commitment in Europe is “revolutionary”. Fiscal rules of this type are probably 
unprecedented worldwide. Yet these rules are not a straitjacket. In monetary union, the government 
sector  has  an  important  role  in  stabilizing  demand.  Through  automatic  stabilizers,  the  government 
budget has a steadying effect on economic development. In Europe, these automatic stabilizers are 
twice as effective as in the United States. One reason lies in the higher European general government 
ratio; another is the difference in the levels of social transfer payments. Given a 2 % decline in growth, 
these stabilizers restore ½ percentage point of GDP in the United States, whereas in Europe it would 
provide a fiscal stimulus of 1 % of GDP. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 As you can see, it is expressly not the objective of the Stability and Growth Pact to stifle the ability of 
the budget to breathe in sync with the economic cycle. The Stability and Growth Pact is seen as a 
burden  only  by  those  member  states  which  passed  up  the  opportunity  to  consolidate  their  budgets 
over the past few years and which have so far failed to achieve a sustainable medium-term position. 
However,  this  sustainable  medium-term  budgetary  position  is  a  basic  precondition  for  fiscal  policy 
stimuli  to  be  able  to  generate  additional  demand  in  the  first  place.  Given  unsound  financing,  in  the 
private  sector  only  the  saving  ratio  would  increase – to  make  up  for  impending  tax  increases  or 
cutbacks in transfer payments. This is an aspect which I am afraid is all too often overlooked in the 
debate on European economic programs. 
In  addition,  there  are  indeed  serious  reasons  for  objecting  to  an  anti-cyclical  fiscal  policy.  The  time 
lags in the political decision-making process and in implementation are generally too great to preclude 
pro-cyclical effects. The fact that it will tend to have an adverse impact on interest rates should not be 
underestimated, either.  
The situation from which fiscal policy starts out is a completely different argument. Here, the United 
States is in an entirely different position than Europe. In the euro area, the general government ratio is 
just under 49 % of GDP, and thus 1½ times that of the United States.  
I intentionally placed fiscal rules in Europe at the top of my agenda for this talk. One reason is that this 
necessary implication of monetary union is often overlooked or not properly understood. The other is 
that  fiscal  rules  are  occasionally  perceived  as  a  barrier  to  greater  economic  growth  in  Europe.  It  is 
easier  to  get  across  the  message  that  monetary  union  requires  institutional  changes  in  monetary 
policy.  
Monetary union led to the creation of a new institution in Europe, the European Central Bank. It is an 
independent institution with the priority task of maintaining medium-term price stability. This approach 
is based on a broad consensus among central banks – not just in Europe but worldwide – that the best 
macroeconomic contribution monetary policy can make towards improving the economic outlook and 
raising standards of living is to credibly maintain price stability over the medium and long term. Within 
this  consensus  there  are  various  concepts  and  different  strategies  that  can  also  have  a  variety  of 
ramifications. 
At any rate, monetary policy cannot work wonders. Chairman Greenspan a week ago put it that way: 
Interest rate cuts are not an instant fix to every problem. However, it can contribute to low and stable 
inflation  expectations.  And  stable  money  is  a  core  element  of  the  functional  viability  of  a  market 
economy.  Transparency  in  price  formation  is  improved  by  giving  an  undistorted  view  of  supply  and 
demand in the real economy. Keeping inflation as low as possible holds down long-term interest rates 
and minimizes the distorting effects of the tax and social welfare systems. 
Decades  of  practical  experience  and  a  wealth  of  empirical  studies  have  led  in  Europe  to  the 
mandating  of  price  stability  as  a  priority  objective  and  have  led  to  the  transfer  of  this  task  to  an 
Eurosystem,  which  is  free  of  political  influences.  This  mandate  has  been  used  to  develop  a 
stability-oriented monetary policy strategy tailored to the specific needs of the Eurosystem.  
The changeover to a single monetary policy involved a pronounced regime shift. The structural and 
institutional changes and the resulting insecurity regarding the future transmission process needed to 
be taken into account when formulating the monetary policy strategy. For it to be able to perform its 
task,  monetary  policy  needs  to  earn  market  participants’  confidence.  The  monetary  policy  strategy 
must therefore be credible – while at the same time taking due account of the particular environment in 
which  monetary  union  operates.  Such  a  strategy  must  be  clear,  comprehensible,  transparent, 
reviewable and compatible with the institutional independence of the Eurosystem.  
The ECB’s two-pillar strategy meets these criteria. The first pillar, which assigns an outstanding role to 
the  monetary  aggregate,  is  designed  to  be  the  “nominal  anchor”  and  recognizes  that  inflation  is 
essentially a monetary phenomenon. The second pillar undertakes a well-founded assessment of the 
outlook for price developments, incorporating the entire range of relevant cyclical indicators. 
Many critics claim that this strategy is inconsistent. For that reason, some recommend strict monetary 
targeting, while others say inflation targeting is the way to go. I think the strategy chosen is sufficiently 
clear and reflects the specific situation the European monetary union now finds itself in. 
In an insecure world, it is not possible to assign each of the two pillars a fixed and unchanging weight. 
Therefore, the information relevant to the price outlook is recompiled every time using the framework 
provided by the two pillars and subjected to a fundamental analysis. Yes, this concept is new and, for 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 3
 that reason, takes some time getting used to. However, the euro was launched in a completely new 
environment, too. And this is why an independent approach was chosen. The assertion that the ECB’s 
Governing Council bases its decisions arbitrarily on whichever pillar is most convenient at the time is 
completely unfounded. Today I would like to call on all of you to see this strategy as an independent 
approach alongside others and to accept it as such. Critics cannot use their own – wishful – thinking 
as a benchmark. And it should not be assumed that there is a global “one-size-fits-all” monetary policy. 
Of course, this strategy being pursued by the Eurosystem requires a communication policy that meets 
high standards. Monetary policy cannot be successful in the long run if the public does not accept it. 
This  is  particularly  the  case  with  a  young  and  independent  central  bank.  It  must  constantly  seek  a 
dialogue  with  the  public.  What  is  often  overlooked  is  that  the  ECB  is  one  of  the  most  transparent 
central  banks  in  the  world,  with  a  communication  policy  that  goes  above  and  beyond  its  statutory 
obligations. Among the most important central banks, only the ECB holds monthly press conferences 
immediately after it has taken monetary policy decisions.  
However, a “track record” says more than words can. Credibility is gained by actions, not words. For 
the  Eurosystem,  this  means  adhering  to  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  “in  a 
time-consistent” manner. The decisions of the past two months have clearly demonstrated the ability 
of the ECB to respond quickly to exceptional events without giving up its medium-term orientation. The 
ECB has taken due account of global developments and has assumed its share of responsibility for 
the stability of the international financial system. In my view, the ECB Governing Council’s monetary 
policy decisions do not need to shy away from the critical attention of the public.  
However, we should not make the mistake of attempting to transfer the macroeconomic framework as 
it  exists  in  the  United  States  to  Europe  or  vice  versa.  On  the  one  hand,  long-term  interest  rates  in 
Europe play a more important role in investment decisions. On the other hand, Europe is more heavily 
regulated and has less flexible labor markets. The European automatic stabilizers are more powerful. 
In the United States,  wealth effects from the valuation of stock prices have  a stronger  influence on 
consumer behavior than in Europe. 
In the seventies our attempts to implement short-term anti-cyclical economic policies taught us a tough 
lesson. The necessary adjustments came with a painfully high macroeconomic price tag. Even today 
many countries are suffering from the major debts run up in that period, which, in some cases, are 
over  100  %  of  GDP.  The  medium-term  orientation  of  macroeconomic  policies  was  hard-won.  It  is 
precisely in troubled times that this orientation should be adhered to. 
The future outlook for the euro – the political agenda 
Well  now,  what  specific  changes  have  taken  place  in  Europe  and  what  still  has  to  be  changed? 
Today’s  Europe  does  not  resemble  the  sclerotic  Europe  of  the  eighties.  Prior  to  monetary  union, 
considerable adjustments were undertaken in the real economy,  which are going to start having an 
impact over the medium term. 
1. 
The  economies  of  Europe  have  converged  to  form a  single  internal  market.  There  are  no 
more barriers to free trade in goods, services and capital. In the nineties, many countries’ 
state-owned  enterprises  were  privatized,  and  markets  were  liberalized  and  deregulated  –
 particularly  in  the  telecommunications,  media  and  energy  sectors.  Monetary  union  is  the 
final  stage  in  achieving  the  single  market.  The  money  market  is  fully  integrated,  and  the 
European capital market is also making great strides toward integration. 
Monetary union means that exchange-rate adjustments are no longer possible  in the euro 
area.  The  exchange-rate  distortions  that  have  occurred  time  and  again  due  to  external 
shocks,  and  the  attendant  expansion  of  interest-rate  spreads,  are  now  things  of  the  past. 
These  advantages  were  already  evident  in  1998  following  the  Russian  and  LTCM  crises. 
These advantages have been equally evident in the past couple of months. 
The euro-area fundamentals are quite strong. The results of the more medium-term policies, 
which have been implemented so far, have to be rated as positive. Since its inception, the 
ECB  has  largely  guaranteed  price  stability.  Interest  rates  are  low  and  conditions  for 
borrowing  are  favorable.  Wage  developments  are  moderate,  and  government  budgetary 
consolidation is making progress. 
2. 
3. 
However, there is no cause for complacency. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 the degree of job security 
the type, amount and duration of unemployment benefits 
the wage formation process and wage differentiation 
the amount of non-wage labor costs and, by extension, social security reform. 
Economic growth in the euro area will be around 1½ % this year; for Germany this figure will be ¾ % 
at  the  most.  At  the  same  time  unemployment,  already  high  to  begin  with,  will  continue  to  rise  - 
especially in the large economies. Europe’s problem is that its potential growth rate is only a sluggish 
2 to 2½ %. In the event of a global downturn, Europe will therefore quickly be pushed to the brink of 
economic stagnation. 
The priority must therefore be to increase potential growth. This cannot be done over the long term by 
deficit spending, nor  is an even  easier monetary  policy the answer. Economic reforms are the only 
road that will lead to success. 
Despite the creditable steps toward reform that were taken in the nineties, European economies are 
still struggling under a raft of burdens from the past: high structural unemployment, a welfare state that 
is  overstretching  the  capacity  of  many  countries,  and  future  strains  caused  by  demographic 
developments. The euro and the current economic slump have made structural problems even more 
apparent.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro  will  prove  to  be  the  most  ambitious  reform  program  of  the 
European Union. Any economy refusing to become more flexible will be left behind. Just a few days 
ago the IMF once again called on European governments to tackle structural problems on the labor 
market through, in its words, “a consistent and coherent set of labor market reforms.” These problems 
“head the list of remaining structural priorities.” 
Especially in Germany, the issues involved are - among others - 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These are all tasks that each country has to tackle and accomplish by itself. Monetary union requires 
flexibility  at  the  national  level  –  since  exchange  rates  are  no  longer  available  as  an  adjustment 
parameter.  Prior  to  EMU’s  inception,  many  critics  pointed  out  that  only  an  optimum  currency  area 
could  afford  to  forgo  flexible  exchange  rates  as  an  adjustment  tool  in  the  event  of  asymmetrical 
shocks. 
The mobility of labor as a factor of production in Europe, so the argument, is too restricted by cultural, 
linguistic and legal barriers to effect the necessary adjustment in a single currency area. 
However,  one  of  the  most  striking  effects  of  the  history  of  European  integration  has  been  that  real 
shocks are becoming increasingly symmetrical. In addition, European economies are less regionally 
specialized  in  certain  sectors  of  industry  than,  say,  the  United  States.  Therefore,  the  need  for 
geographical mobility  is likely to be a less important factor. Divergences exist in all currency  areas, 
even in one as long established as the United States. In the euro area, inflation rates range at present 
from 1.6 % in France to 5.4 % in the Netherlands. By comparison, in the United States the inflation 
rate was 2.4 % in Chicago and 5.0 % in San Francisco. Divergences in real growth rates in the United 
States are no less pronounced than they are in the euro area, either. Forecasts for 2001 range from 
6.3  %  in  Ireland  to  0.7  %  in  Germany.  In  the  United  States,  the  average  growth  gap  between  the 
individual states in the nineties was as high as 7 % of gross state product (GSP). 
Of  course,  much  remains  to  be  done.  There  is  a  clear  correlation  between  the  politically  urgent 
structural  reforms  and  the  international  standing  of  a  currency.  The  development  of  the  euro's 
exchange rate since 1999 has not been satisfactory, yet it is not a measure of the success or failure of 
EMU. The euro and globalization are exerting pressure on policies and markets in Europe to become 
more flexible. At the same time, however, the reforms will - in the medium to long term - accelerate the 
pace  of  economic  growth  and  enhance  the  attractiveness  of  the  euro  area  as  well  as  the  single 
currency. What will be a crucial factor, therefore, is that policymakers commit themselves in a credible 
manner to tackling the necessary changes and, at the same time, to safeguarding the stability of the 
euro. As monetary history has repeatedly shown, a stable internal value is the precondition for gaining 
that sustained confidence of international investors, which also gives a currency its external stability.  
One of the main tasks of the national central banks of the Eurosystem at present is preparing for the 
cash changeover on January 1, 2002. This is a tremendous logistical task. It is a great challenge to all 
of us. But I am confident. We will have a smooth transition from national currencies to the euro. I am 
also convinced that the issuing of the euro in physical form will help to improve acceptance of the new 
currency  in  Europe  and  in  particular  in  Germany.  The  results  of  the  latest  Eurobarometer  opinion 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 5
 survey show already a growth in support for the euro. In the euro area, 66 % of the people support the 
single  currency.  Germany  is  still  lagging  behind,  with  53 %  in  favor  of  the  euro;  however,  this  is  a 
significant improvement compared with the previous opinion survey.  
From  an  economic  point  of  view  the  changeover  is  a  non-event;  but  it  is  not  a  merely  technical 
process. It is the final and historical step towards further political integration in Europe. At least, I hope 
that the euro will also function as a catalyst in that direction. After all, history tells us that normally the 
territory  of a political entity and  the monetary area is identical. This is  not - or  nor  yet - the case  in 
Europe. As a consequence, monetary union cannot stand alone. In the medium term, EMU will need 
to be underpinned by political union. In particular, the stage of intergovernmental cooperation must be 
overcome  in  foreign  and  defense  policies,  and  in  domestic  and  legal  policies.  That  means  national 
interests  have  to  become  manageable  and  ultimately  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  move  on  to  truly 
common European policies. 
The  deepening  of  European  integration  and  the  enlargement  of  EU  offer  a  unique  opportunity  to 
integrate Europe peacefully and to create a region of stability and prosperity. Slowly but surely Europe 
is beginning to liberate itself from political standstill. Political processes take time since they need to be 
supported by a public majority. The deepening of integration and the enlargement of the EU both need 
the support of suitable political and macroeconomic framework conditions. This includes in particular, 
favorable growth and employment trends, which, in turn, can only be brought about in an environment 
of price stability. 
For the first time in history, Europeans from Lapland to Portugal and from Ireland to Greece will use 
the same currency. And what is also of importance: for the first time since the empire of Charlemagne 
1,200 years ago, French and Germans will be united by a single currency. 
I am convinced that the  euro  will become a symbol  of identification  with  Europe and  of the idea of 
deeper  European  integration – if  the  euro  stays  a  stable  currency.  This  symbol  reflects  a  strong 
political will and a long-lasting process of economic and political integration:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
towards an open market economy, 
towards free competition, 
towards tolerance and democracy, 
towards freedom and peace. 
6 
 BIS Review 93/2001
