 Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy: end-of-year media news 
conference 
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Vice-President  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the 
End-of-year Media News Conference, Zurich, 7 December 2001 
 The  Swiss  National  Bank  has  decided  to  lower  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  rate  by 
0.5 percentage points to 1.25%-2.25%. For the time being, the three-month Libor is to be kept in the 
middle of the target range. Recently, the National Bank has adjusted its monetary policy twice already. 
On  17  and  24  September  2001,  we  lowered  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  rate  by 
0.5 percentage  points  each.  At  the  time,  we  acted  in  response  to  the  decrease  in  inflationary 
pressures and the undesirable development of the Swiss franc exchange rate. The economic outlook 
has  since  continued  to  deteriorate  around  the  globe.  In  Switzerland,  there  are  no  signs  that  price 
stability might be jeopardised in the medium term. Due to this development, we are now in a position 
to reduce rates again. Accordingly, since the beginning of 2001, we have lowered the target band for 
the three-month Libor by a total of 1.75 percentage points, thus easing monetary policy considerably. 
Assuming that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.75%, inflation is expected to hover 
between  0.9%  and  1.5%  in  the  next  three  years.  The  National  Bank  projects  real  gross  domestic 
product to increase by 1.5% in 2001. For 2002 we anticipate a growth rate of around 1%. 
In the following, I would like to describe the development of inflation over the  past few months and 
explain our latest inflation forecast in more detail. The dotted curve in the graph shows our inflation 
forecast of June 2001. At the time, we expected inflation to climb slightly to 1.6% by mid-2002 and, 
subsequently, to recede gradually towards 1.2% by the beginning of 2004. This forecast was based on 
the assumption of a robust development of the world economy and a stable three-month Libor rate of 
3.25%. We assumed at the time that the economic slowdown experienced in the United States and 
Europe would be overcome as early as in the second half of 2001 and that the Swiss economy would 
be able to perform according to its potential. The price of oil was expected to stand at approximately 
USD 25 per barrel. 
Our forecast of June overestimated the inflationary development of the last few months. Year-on-year 
inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index, dropped to 1.0% in the third quarter 2001 
from 1.5% in the second quarter. In October inflation amounted to 0.6%, and to 0.3% in November. 
This sharp decrease can be mainly attributed to the marked fall in oil prices and prices of other foreign 
goods. Moreover, upward price pressure on domestic goods also eased markedly in November after 
still having been substantial until October. 
The  dashed  curve  in  the  graph  shows  our  latest  inflation  forecast.  The  table  contains  the  average 
annual  inflation  rate  according  to  the  new  forecast.  Since  our  forecast  of  June  2001,  the  world 
economy  has  moved 
inflationary  pressures  have  subsided 
considerably. On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.75% during the 
next three years, inflation should amount to 0.9% in 2002, move up to 1.3% in 2003 and reach 1.5% in 
2004. The fluctuations in the anticipated 2002 inflation rate are due to basis effects that do not reflect 
the inflationary trend. Inflation is expected to remain within the range of price stability throughout the 
forecasting period. From mid-2002 on, however, it will follow a slight upward trend through the rest of 
the forecasting horizon. This slight rise in anticipated inflation is attributable to two factors. First, the 
world economy will recover in due course. Second, Swiss monetary policy at a constantly low interest 
rate - which is currently 1.5 percentage points lower than in the June 2001 forecast - will tend to have 
an increasingly expansive effect as time passes. These two factors combined will cause inflation to 
rise somewhat over time. 
Our forecast is based on the assumption that the US economy will remain in recession until mid-2002 
and  will  subsequently  gradually  return  to  its  potential  growth  path.  In  Europe,  the  economy  will 
presumably stagnate until mid-2002 and pick up momentum afterwards. We expect the US dollar to 
remain roughly at its current level vis-à-vis the euro. The forecast assumes that today's relatively low 
oil prices will eventually climb back slightly. 
At this point, I would like to briefly comment on the interpretation of our forecast. It is based on the 
above-mentioned  assumptions  regarding  the  development  of  the  world  economy,  and  on  the 
three-month  Libor  remaining  stable  throughout  the  forecasting  horizon.  In  other  words,  the  forecast 
recession.  Short-term 
towards 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 1
 shows the development of inflation on the condition that monetary policy is left unchanged. However, 
monetary  policy  will  certainly  need  to  be  adjusted  during  the  forecasting  period.  The  economic 
environment changes continuously as new disruptions occur, and the National Bank responds to these 
changes in order to meet its objective of maintaining price stability. Therefore, it is important to bear in 
mind that the forecast is made for a three-year period but is valid for only six months at most, i.e. until 
the  publication  of  the  next  forecast.  The  relatively  long  forecasting  period  reflects  the  time  lag  with 
which monetary policy measures impact on the price level. We publish our forecast in order to inform 
the public of our assessment of the inflation outlook, at the time of the forecast, on the basis of an 
unchanged monetary policy. The publication is a means of making our monetary policy decisions more 
transparent and easier to understand. 
I will now make a few remarks about the development of the Swiss economy in the year now ending 
and the coming year. The recessionary trends witnessed across the globe will not leave Switzerland 
unscathed. Both this year and next, growth will be considerably slower than we predicted only a short 
time ago. We expect the economy to go into virtual stagnation in the second half of 2001. Overall, the 
economy  will  presumably  grow  by  about  1.5%  in  2001.  In  line  with  the  development  in  the  major 
economic blocs, notably exports and capital spending have shrunk drastically, putting a major break 
on economic growth. Although consumer confidence has been dented, consumption has so far turned 
out  to  be  a  cornerstone  of  growth.  The  decline  in  construction  investment  is  also  clearly  more 
moderate than the fall in capital spending. We expect the economy to follow a path of muted growth 
and to perform below its potential until the middle of next year. Only the second half of 2002 should 
see  the  economy  expanding  in  line  with  the  development  abroad.  We  project  average  growth  of 
approximately 1.0% for 2002. Unemployment is likely to climb in the months ahead. 
We  consider  the  current  interest  rate  level  and  the  existing  monetary  conditions  to  be  adequate  to 
enable  the  economy  to  return  to  sustainable,  non-inflationary  growth.  Our  forecasts,  however,  are 
fraught  with  uncertainties.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  terror  attacks  in  the  United  States,  these 
uncertainties are now particularly substantial. Investment and consumption depend on whether market 
participants  have  confidence  in  the  quality  and  stability  of  the  basic  conditions.  Depending  on  the 
development of the political situation, the global economy may thus recover at a faster or slower pace 
than we anticipated, and the exchange rates might be subject to major fluctuations. In this case, the 
National Bank would have to review its monetary policy. In the short run, the price of oil will also have 
a considerable influence on inflation. If it continues to erode, measured inflation might fall below zero 
for a few months. Should this situation arise, it is important to bear in mind that it cannot be equated 
with sustained - and thus  economically  dangerous -  deflation. On the contrary, a  low oil price level 
would create a positive supply shock and, under the current circumstances, would impact favourably 
on  production.  Inflation  would  be  dampened  temporarily.  We  also  keep  a  close  watch  on  the 
development of the money supply M3 in order to assess the medium-term inflationary risks. Following 
a phase of low, or even negative, growth rates, M3 is now expanding at a somewhat faster pace. So 
far, however, there has been no excess supply of liquidity in the economy, and the money stock M3, 
therefore, does not point towards inflationary risks at present. 
Finally, I would like to make some closing remarks about the imminent introduction of euro notes and 
coins. For about three years now, the euro has existed as deposit money. It has led to fixed exchange 
rates and a uniform interest rate level in the euro area countries. The introduction of euro notes and 
coins will have additional positive effects on the economic development in Europe, as it will be easier 
to compare prices and confidence in the new currency will be strengthened. Moreover, the euro is to 
be regarded positively not only with regard to the Swiss economy but also Swiss monetary policy. The 
Swiss export sector will profit from lower transaction costs, and currency devaluations - as previously 
implemented by some European countries in order to improve their competitiveness - will be a thing of 
the  past.  Swiss  monetary  policy  will  benefit  from  the  fact  that  a  large  economic  bloc  now  exists  in 
Europe which pursues similar goals in terms of monetary policy. All in all, exchange rate fluctuations 
between  Switzerland  and  the  EMU  countries  should  thus  remain  below  the  levels  seen  before  the 
launch of the euro. Furthermore, the markets will realise in due course that there is no reason why the 
Swiss franc, with regard to the role as a safe haven currency, should be assessed differently than the 
euro. This realisation should reduce the risk of sharp appreciations. 
As a result of the introduction of euro notes and coins, the euro will increasingly be used as a means 
of payment in the tourism sector and the hotel and restaurant industry as well as in foreign trade, to 
some degree simply as a substitute for the D-mark. Apart from very few viable exceptions, however, 
employment and loan contracts will continue to be concluded in Swiss currency, and the large majority 
of domestic payments, too, will be effected in Swiss francs in future. The euro will thus not emerge as 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2001
 a parallel currency in Switzerland. The purview of Swiss monetary policy will remain unaffected by the 
arrival of the euro. By retaining the Swiss franc, we are able to pursue an independent monetary policy 
that is oriented to the needs of the Swiss economy, and to keep interest rates at a low level. In this 
respect,  the  exchange  rate  is  a  key  element  for  producing  our  inflation  forecast  and,  therefore,  for 
determining our policy. 
 
Inflation Forecast December 2001 with Libor at 1.75%  
Annual average inflation in %  
    2001   
1.0 
 
2002   
 0.9  
 
 2003   
1.3 
 
2004 
 1.5 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 3
