Eva Srejber: The euro in the euro area and in Sweden
Speech by Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank,  to  the  EU  Club  of
Sweden, Gothenburg, 16 October 2001.
 I should like to begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity to come here and speak about the
euro and its usage. The euro is evidently hot news right now, which is probably not surprising when
one considers that in just two and a half months' time the 300 million inhabitants in the euro area will
be replacing the banknotes and coins in their wallets. On 1 January the euro, which so far has existed
asmerely an electronic currency it will also finally exist in the form of banknotes and coins.
A gigantic logistics project
The  newspapers  have  been  full  of  stories  about  the  introduction  of  the  euro  for  some  time  now,
including  fears  that  the  transition  to  the  euro  will  be  a  field  day  for  counterfeiters.  However,  most
articles concern the pure logistics behind the transition from the old national banknotes and coins to
the new euro ones. It is not surprising that this should be given so much attention. The transition to the
euro is a project of gigantic proportions. Someone, probably a Frenchman, has tried  to  indicate the
size of the operation by comparing the weight of the coins to be distributed with the weight of the Eiffel
Tower. The coins are supposed to weigh the equivalent of 24 Eiffel Towers! I don't know whether or
not this is a good comparison, but it is certainly a huge project. Starting on 1 January next year, almost
15  billion  banknotes  and  50  billion  coins  will  be  put  into  circulation.  Up  until  28  February  the  euro
banknotes and coins and the old national ones can be used parallel to one another, but with effect
from  1  March  the  euro,  and  only  the  euro,  will  be  legal  tender  throughout  the  euro  area.  The
changeover is not merely a question of replacing old banknotes and coins with new ones in euro; it
also  involves  all  manner  of  changes  from  parking  meters  and  new  values  on  stamps  to  converting
prices and wages.
The fact that the euro will soon make the transition from the electronic world to the more tangible world
of  physical  notes  and  coins  has  a  strong  symbolic  value  for  the  political  endeavour  to  bring  the
countries of Europe closer together. It will also make it easier to compare prices of goods and services
across the entire spectrum throughout the euro area. It will be interesting to see how this contributes to
reduced price differentials. Firms will need to consider their price-setting strategies and costs in the
production and distribution chain. At the same time, it is important to emphasise that the major step in
the  economic  integration  process  was  taken  back  on  1  January  1999,  when  eleven  countries
irrevocably fixed their exchange rates and the euro began to be their currency. Despite the fact that
anyone  travelling  between  the  euro  countries  and  wishing  to  use  banknotes  and  coins  has  had  to
exchange  them,  the  national  currencies  have  merely  served  as  different  expressions  of  the  same
thing, namely the euro, after 1 January 1999. Since that date there have been major changes in the
economies  of  the  euro  countries,  not  least  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  and  the  markets  for
securities, which, among other things, I will discuss today. In the following I shall begin by discussing
the development trends we have seen on the markets for securities over the past few years and then
take up various impediments to continued integration in the securities field. After this I intend to speak
about the significance of the single market and the single currency for Sweden.
Capital adequacy rules steer the euro money market
Let us begin by examining the money market, where short-term securities are traded, normally loans
to be repaid within a year.
The interbank market for  unsecured transactions became almost fully integrated right from the start of
the monetary union in 1999. The joint monetary policy and harmonisation of market practices were the
main reasons for this rapid process. However, the relatively immediate success of the joint reference
interest rate EONIA and the well-functioning settlement of cross-border payments via TARGET also
played a large role. Since then we have seen a particularly strong increase in activity among various
derivatives. According to ECB studies, this development is partly because the banks need to allocate
BIS Review 85/2001
1
less  capital  to  meet  the  capital  adequacy  requirement  for  derivatives  than  for  other  money  market
instruments.
Both the repo market and the market for securities with a short duration, such as treasury bills and
commercial  papers,  have  developed  relatively  well,  but  there  still  remains  a  clear  national
segmentation. In the repo market this segmentation seems to primarily reflect difficulties in assessing
the underlying securities, while integration on the market for short-term securities is mainly hampered
by the lack of a harmonised trade environment and separate systems for settlement. The fact that the
euro  countries  also  have  different  tax  systems  is  evidently  another  important  barrier  to  continued
market integration.
Evident success for euro corporate bonds
The bond market takes over where the money market stops. It is on this market that interest-bearing
securities  with  a    maturity  of  at  least  one  year  are  issued  and  traded.  Recent  developments  have
clearly illustrated that the euro has established itself on the international bond market. Although the
total stock is still significantly lower than the corresponding stock of international dollar bonds, the euro
has passed the dollar in terms of new issues. This boom is due to several factors. One of these is that
the euro has eliminated the exchange rate risk between the Euro countries and thereby given rise to a
broad and deep source of financing. The development also reflects a dawning maturity in the euro-
dominated  bond market and  shows  that  the  market  can  function  as  a  savings  alternative  when  the
stock market bubble has burst.
The positive development has been most obvious in the trade in euro-denominated corporate bonds.
The upturn  here  began  in 1999 and has continued ever since. It has  largely concerned a  relatively
limited  number  of  very  large  new  issues  within  a  small  number  of  sectors.  Behind  a  number  of
expensive  structural  deals  lies  the  single  market  and  general  trends  such  as  deregulation  and
technological  developments,  but  the  genesis  of  a  large  bond  market  in  the  domestic  currency  has
contributed  to  easier  financing  in  these  forms.  During  the  past  year  the  large  European  telecom
companies' need to finance their tenders for UMTS licenses has also made a contribution. Instead of
using  the  stock  markets,  these  companies  have  turned  to  the  rapidly  growing  euro  bonds  market.
However, although there is reason to be pleased with the positive development in corporate bonds, I
personally believe it is too early to draw any far-reaching conclusions on the continuing strength of this
market. The successes over the past year have been achieved in a situation that was very favourable
for  bonds,  with  severe  falls  on  stock  markets  around  the  world  and  a  large  demand  for  other
investment forms.
The  expansion  in  the  euro-denominated  corporate  bonds  market  has  coincided  with,  and  to  some
extent  benefited  from,  the  other  major  trend  on  the  bond  market,  namely  the  declining  supply  of
treasury bonds. This development in turn is a consequence of the consolidation of central government
finances  in  the  euro  countries.  However,  at  the  same  time,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  led  to
increased competition for treasury-bond investors' money. Previously, the governments were alone in
their  respective  domestic  markets.  Today,  they  are  doing  battle  for  loans  from  the  same  source  of
financing.  This  competition  has  led  to  a  number  of  changes  to  increase  liquidity  on  the  secondary
market for treasury bonds. For instance, the average size of the issues has increased. The editions
have also become increasingly standardised. Other means used to maintain liquidity are repurchases
and  bond  swaps.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cross-border  diversification  in  investors'  portfolios  has
increased at a much slower rate than anticipated.
Rapid expansion in the euro stock market
With  regard  to  the  stock markets,  stock  exchange  trading  in  the  euro  countries  was  converted  into
euro right from the start of the EMU in 1999. This means that approximately three-quarters of share
trading  throughout  Europe  and  one-quarter  of  international  share  trading  is  now  in  euro.  If  one
examines  this  development  a  little  more  closely,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  increased  degree  of
financing outside of the banking sector that can now be perceived on the interest rate markets is also
visible in the stock market. It is possible to measure this development in slightly different ways, but all
measures show the same picture. If we look at the development over the past ten years, we can see
for instance that market capitalisation in relation to GDP has grown from approximately 20 per cent in
1990 to almost 90 per cent in 2000. This means that according to this measure, the euro countries
have passed Japan, while the USA is still ahead of them. It is interesting to note that the EU countries
2
BIS Review 85/2001
outside of the euro area are at approximately the same level as the USA, or at just over 150 per cent.
However, the stock markets in the euro countries are  growing rapidly.  Between 1995 and  2000 the
value of the listed companies in the euro area grew by 276 per cent. The corresponding figure in the
USA was 206 per cent. Looking at the number of new issues and number of listed companies also
gives a picture of a strong development in Europe. All in all, there is a clear picture that companies in
the euro zone use risk capital to a lesser degree than those in the USA, but that the differences are
rapidly declining.
The rapid developments have also put greater pressure on structural changes in the infrastructure of
the stock markets. Since the introduction of the euro, we have seen several examples of co-operation
and mergers between stock exchanges in Europe. Euronext, the merger between the stock exchanges
in Paris, Amsterdam and Brussels, is one example. But, as with the interest rate markets, there are
still important barriers to a complete integration in the stock market.
Barriers to further development of the euro market
Despite  the  positive  development  in  trade  in  securities  in  the  euro  area,  developments  in  these
markets  in  Europe  are  still  in  general  behind  developments  in  the  USA.  The  difference  between
Europe  and  the  USA  is  mainly  because  the  USA  is  one  country,  while  Europe  consists  of  many.
However,  another  explanation  for  the  difference  usually  given  is  that  Europe's  credit  markets  are
dominated by banks, unlike those in the USA. This is mainly because the US legislation, in the form of
the Glass-Steagall Act from 1933 and various anti trust laws, has effectively prevented the banks from
taking  on  an  overly  dominant  role.  Instead,  the  securities  markets  in  the  USA  have  played  a  more
important role, and it is apparent that Europe is heading towards an Americanisation in this respect.
But as I said, there still remain a number of barriers of varying degrees of difficulty. I will give a few
brief examples, using the treasuries market.
There are 12 issuers of treasury papers in the euro area, and thereby 12 primary markets with slightly
varying credit risk. The countries differ with regard to everything from legal traditions, issue procedures
and  counterpart  systems  to  market  infrastructure  and  conventions.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  these
differences mean that the secondary market for euro-denominated treasuries is not uniform. Another
problem is which country's papers should form the benchmark. This is important, as the country with
the benchmark issue will by  definition be able to  borrow at the cheapest rate . The lack of a given
benchmark curve which ensues from this has led to both higher financing costs and a less efficient use
of  treasuries  as  collateral.  Today  it  seems  as  though  French  treasuries  function  de  facto  as  a
benchmark for shorter-term securities , while German treasuries have  the same function for longer-
term securities.
Breaking down barriers is a high priority task
The market usually finds solutions to most problems. But sometimes it can be good to give it a little
help. A lot has been done in the markets for euro-denominated treasury papers, but a lot still remains
to  be  done.  One  example  is  the  discussions  on  joint  procedures  and  dates  for  issuing  the  euro
countries'  treasury  papers.  An  increased  degree  of  standardisation  and  a  review  of  the  counterpart
system  in  the  central  government  loan  market  are  also  welcome  steps.  It  is  perhaps  even  more
important to establish common regulations for managing collateral and to introduce joint systems for
clearing and settlement.
It  is  clear  that  there  is  also  much  to  do  to  strengthen  developments  on  the  securities  markets  in
general. There is a lot of work underway to achieve this at the moment. The action plan for financial
services adopted by the EU countries is aimed at solving many of the legal problems, in order to give
the securities markets common ground. The 40 or so legislative proposals taken up in the plan should
come  into  force  by  2005.  In  an  attempt  to  hasten  this  process,  the  Lamfalussy  Committee  has
illustrated  how  legislation  in  the  financial  field  within  the  EU  could  be  adapted  more  simply.  The
Committee also identified a number of areas in the action plan that ought to be given special priority.
The Committee's proposals were approved at the EU summit meeting in Stockholm in the spring, and
the first proposals for directives are now being discussed.
I would like to emphasise the importance of this work. Well-formulated, flexible legislation is necessary
to  enable  the  financial  sector  to  provide  a  positive  contribution  to  economic  growth.  This  is  made
through enabling payments to be made more cheaply, risks to be distributed better and savings to be
BIS Review 85/2001
3
more easily channelled into profitable investments. The comparison with the USA also indicates that
there is great potential to be realised in this respect in Europe. The securities market has particular
importance  in  this  context.  Firstly,  as  we  have  seen,  the  securities  markets  have  gained  greater
importance  as  sources  of  financing  for  companies,  both  with  regard  to  risk  capital  and  borrowed
capital. Their significance for savers is growing correspondingly, which is clearly illustrated by the rapid
development in households' mutual fund savings. As the markets develop they, and more specifically
pricing on them, also take on greater significance with regard to resource allocation in society. In other
words, improved measures are extremely important.
The role of the euro in Sweden
After this glance at what is happening on the euro markets, allow me to turn to the role of the euro in
Sweden. I intend to begin with the effect on the securities markets and move on to euroisation and
competition.
What has the euro meant to the Swedish securities markets so far? My view is that it has so far had
relatively  little  effect.  We  should  remember  that  developments  on  these  markets  are  primarily
influenced by globalisation and technological developments. And as elsewhere, this has led to frantic
activity in consolidation and improving efficiency. Within EMU the introduction of the euro has clearly
hastened  this  process,  but  in  Sweden  the  euro's  influence  is  of  a  more  indirect  nature.  The  euro
market exists as an important alternative, and can thus be said to sharpen competition on the Swedish
securities markets through its mere presence. It first and foremost fulfils a need that the krona market
cannot completely satisfy. The euro market is perceived as deeper and more liquid, and thus provides
an  opportunity  to  borrow  large  volumes.  I  am  thinking  here  of,  for  instance,  the  large  Swedish
corporations' need of capital to finance the major structural deals made in recent  years. In order to
borrow really large volumes, companies like Volvo, Vattenfall and Ericsson have largely turned to the
euro market to issue bonds. From this perspective the euro has proved to be an interesting financing
alternative to the other large currencies - the dollar and the yen - for large Swedish corporations. Small
and medium-sized companies, on the other hand, still turn mainly to the krona market.
Development on the money market are largely the same. It is quite clearly the larger corporations that
are  active  in  euro,  for  instance  through  certificate  programmes,  while  the  smaller  companies  issue
their certificates on the krona market. At the same time, it should be said that the total Swedish activity
on the euro money market is very limited.
Swedish firms' euro activity on the stock markets is not particularly widespread, either. According to
the  Stockholm Stock Exchange statistics, only six Swedish companies have chosen  to  be  listed  on
exchanges in the euro area. Swedish companies' interest in becoming listed abroad is mainly aimed
towards London and New York. Nor have many companies taken up the Stockholm Stock Exchange's
offer  to  list  shares  in  euro,  either  exclusively  or  parallel,  on  the  OM  Stockholm  Exchange.  Three
companies  took  up  this  offer  in  1999;  Electrolux,  Nordea  and  Stora  Enso.  Since  then  no  other
companies have shown an interest. There has also been very limited trading in these shares.
It can be concluded that the role played by the euro in Sweden is a small one, even in other contexts.
This is not really surprising, as the krona is the only legal means of payment that everyone is obliged
to accept  in  Sweden. According  to  the  price  information  act,  goods  sold  to  individual  consumers  in
Sweden  must  be  priced  in  the  currency  relevant  to  the  customer.  The  act  does  not  state  which
currency prices should be stated in, but as long as most wages are paid in krona, the retail trade is
obliged to price goods in krona. The role of the krona as a means of payment and unit of account is
thus protected.
Although there is great freedom to choose other currencies, the krona thus has a special position in
the  Swedish  economy.  There  are  also  strong  economic  reasons  for  Swedish  companies  and
households  wanting  predictability  in  their  real  income  to  use  the  krona  as  contract  currency;  this
applies as long as the value of the krona is upheld, i.e. that there is a low inflation rate, as the real
value of the income is determined by price developments on the goods and services consumed by the
household/company.  In  the  long  term,  the  development  in  real  purchasing  power  of  the  income  is
determined  by  productivity  developments.  Then  real  purchasing  power  parity  also  prevails,  i.e.  the
price of an article is the same in the long term, regardless of the country in which it is sold and the
currency in  which it is priced. This means that  a country  with goods and services  that  cost  a  lot  in
foreign currency will sooner or later have to depreciate its currency and/or lower its domestic prices.
4
BIS Review 85/2001
However, in the short-term and medium-term, real incomes may vary  depending on  the currency  in
which wages and prices are contracted, as wages, prices and nominal exchange rates are adapted at
different rates to changes in productivity.  As  we know,  in  the short-term and medium-term, nominal
exchange rates can vary considerably, and to a greater extent than is motivated by the differences in
inflation  rates  between  different  countries.  This  means  that  an  article  can  have  different  prices  in
different  countries  during  a  fairly  long  period  of  time.  This  can  be  noticed  for  instance,  in  Sweden,
where  price  levels  are  still  higher  than  in  other  countries  in  most  fields,  without  this  being  fully
explained by differences in VAT. While Sweden's membership of the single market has certainly led to
stiffer competition and greater price pressure in some areas, competition still appears to be weak in
several branches and sectors. Increased competition contributes in principle to a convergence in price
levels, as the rate of price increase declines, or as prices perhaps even fall on a market exposed to
greater competition. All else being equal, inflation in Sweden would then be lower than the  inflation
target of 2%, and this would not normally be counteracted by the Riksbank's monetary policy, as it is a
temporary  effect.  Naturally,  it  is  difficult  for  the  Riksbank  to  decide  in  practice  whether  such  price
trends are  a result of increased competition  unless they are, for instance, connected to  changes  in
regulations. It should also be pointed out that in practice, not all goods and services will be objects for
cross-border trading and that competition will not therefore be completely all-inclusive, even when the
single market has been implemented.
The actual introduction of euro banknotes and coins will not noticeably increase competitive pressure
in Sweden, as prices here will continue to be expressed in krona and prices in the euro countries will
be expressed in euro. This will probably continue to give some scope in the future for specific pricing
adapted to Swedish conditions.
I  stated  earlier  that  the  role  of  the  krona  as  unit  of  account  and  means  of  payment  in  Sweden  is
unlikely  to  be  affected  by  euro  banknotes  and  coins  becoming  legal  tender  in  the  euro  area  as  of
1 January 2002. The krona is also likely to continue to play an important role as  store of value for
Swedes, as least uncertainty over real growth in net wealth, i.e. future real purchasing power, will be
achieved if households save and borrow in assets and liabilities in their domestic currency, as long as
price stability is maintained. Hence, a large part of Swedish households' assets and liabilities are held
in krona today. Those Swedes who now choose to build up their future purchasing power by buying
euro bonds are probably intending to pay for their future consumption in euro, either by moving to a
euro  country  or  because  they  assume  Sweden  will  adopt  the  single  currency  at  some  point  in  the
future. This applies at any rate to interest-bearing assets, while for equities uncertainty over the future
real value is only very slightly connected to the currency in which the share is issued. Basically, the
earnings are determined by where the company has its production and sales and by the competitive
situation. It is the profits that increase equity and thus shareholders' net wealth and real purchasing
power.
The choice of basic currency is not self-evident for multinational companies with owners, production
and sales spread throughout the world. Essentially, it should be the shareholders' country of domicile
that determines the currency. When this question was discussed prior to the introduction of the euro in
1999,  the  focus  was  on  the  size  of  the  portfolio  effects  if  several  large  multinational  companies
domiciled  in  Sweden  were  to  convert  to  regarding  the  euro  or  another  currency  as  their  domestic
currency.  The  connection  was  then  made  to  the  possibility  of  denominating  and  accounting  in  a
currency other than the krona. There were considerable difficulties in assessing the possible size in
portfolio shifts, but the illustrative examples then produced showed large shifts in portfolios. It was also
assumed that demand for the krona on the futures market would decline significantly, as companies
would not try to counteract uncertainty in profit forecasts by hedging expected net income in foreign
currency against  krona.  Investments  of  liquid  funds  and  profits  accumulated  over  the  year  in  krona
would also decline for the same reason. However, it was difficult to make any well-founded forecasts
of the effect on the krona exchange rate, inter alia because the companies' strategy  with  regard  to
hedging of export income and equity are not strictly applied. So what has happened? It doesn't seem
as though very much has happened. Companies can keep their accounts in euro now, if they wish.
Some  companies,  mostly  smaller  ones,  have  chosen  to  do  so.  The  changes  with  regard  to
investments of liquid funds that some believe they have observed are thus not based on a change in
accounting currency. The fact that perceptions of the existence and degree of changes in behaviour
differ may indicate that strategies differ between companies and over time.
To summarise, there are many reasons why the euro will still only have a minor effect on the role of
the krona in the Swedish economy after 1 January 2002.
BIS Review 85/2001
5
