 Kristina Persson: Sweden, EMU and the krona 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar at Svensk 
Handel, Stockholm, 16 November 2001.  
 Thank you for the invitation to come here. The theme is an important one, even if we do not yet know 
when a referendum will be held and whether a decision on EMU membership will be taken in Sweden. 
There  is  now  just  over  one  month  left  until  1  January  2002,  when  307  million  inhabitants  of 
12 European  countries  will  have  the  same  new  banknotes  and  coins.  15  billion  banknotes  and 
50 billion coins will come into circulation. In the course of a couple of months the national banknotes 
and coins in the eurozone will cease to be legal tender. 
The distribution and exchange will involve enormous challenges in terms of practical implementation, 
logistics and security. Yet I should imagine that many people will soon see it as a positive experience 
to be able to use the same means of payment throughout almost the whole of western Europe. Seeing 
the  banknotes  and  shopping  in  euro  prices  across  the  continent  brings  home  the  existence  of  the 
monetary union in a more tangible way for the citizens of Europe. 
For us Swedes the euro will enforce our sense of being outside the euro. In addition, we have behind 
us a period during which the krona has weakened without this being apparent entirely motivated by 
fundamental factors. In my opinion, these are problems that are worth a closer examination. It is on 
these issues that I intend to speak today. 
The role of the Riksbank 
The role  of the Riksbank in this context is to  implement the  decision  taken by  the  government and 
parliament. The Sveriges  Riksbank Act, which has governed  our operations since 1999, states that 
“the Riksbank shall decide on the application of the foreign exchange rate system decided upon by the 
government.” The General Council  of the  Riksbank last expressed  an  opinion  on the  issue in 1997 
when asked to respond to the government's investigative report. In its response to the submission the 
General  Council  emphasised  that  the  economic  advantages  of  a  membership  probably  outweighed 
the  disadvantages  and  that  Sweden  therefore  should  join  the  EMU  from  the  start.  The  current 
Executive Board has not had reason to take a stance on the issue. Over the past few years we have 
regularly made technical preparations to enable a possible future membership to be implemented at 
no great cost and in a problem-free manner if and when a decision is finally taken. 
Economic consequences of a Swedish EMU membership 
The most obvious advantage with the disappearance of the currency borders is that which is normally 
known  as  transaction  gains.  This  is  the  removal  of  the  cost  and  inconvenience  involved  in 
exchanging currency when one visits or trades with different countries in the eurozone. Of course the 
foreign exchange costs in the eurozone were limited right from the start of the EMU in 1999, but they 
will  now  disappear  completely.  For  the  economy  as  a  whole,  however,  this  exchange  of  cash  has 
involved a relatively small cost, which is nevertheless symbolically important. 
A somewhat larger cost has arisen from the handling charges the companies have been forced to bear 
to hedge against undesirable fluctuations in exchange rates. This cost disappeared as early as 1999 
within the eurozone, but it is not particularly large in relation to our GDP – perhaps a few tenths of a 
percentage point. 
A  single  currency  will  promote  competition  within  the  EU  and  benefit  the  consumers,  who  will 
experience  lower  prices  and  thereby  have  more  money  in  their  pockets.  When  everyone  uses  the 
same unit of currency, it is easier to compare prices between countries. It will also be an advantage for 
the  national  economy  as  a  whole,  since  competition  facilitates  the  work  on  holding  down  inflation. 
Some differences in prices are unavoidable and arise from transport and information costs, but not all 
of  the  differences  can  be  attributed  to  these  costs.  Despite  the  fact  that  we  now  have  a  common 
market with free trade for goods and services throughout the entire EU, there are still large differences 
in  prices  between  different  countries  within  the  union.  The  average  price  difference  is  16  per  cent, 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 1
 which means that the difference is approximately 40 per cent larger than is the case between various 
states and regions in the USA. The price of a normal Volvo, for instance, can differ by 15 per cent or 
more from one country to another in Europe. 
Some of this difference is created by difference in cultures and languages, but new studies indicate 
that the actual psychological barrier involved in differing units of currency may bear a large part of the 
responsibility. The US economist Charles Engel, for instance, has calculated in extensive studies of 
price  differences  between  the  USA  and  Canada  that  a  currency  border  creates  price  differences 
corresponding to a geographical distance of almost 8,000 km, even if the countries on either side of 
the currency  border (as in the case of Canada and the USA) are entirely open to one  another and 
share the same language and culture. 
The largest negative effects of having different currencies probably have to do with trade and resource 
allocation.  In  the  same  way  that  we  believe  inflation  results  in  large  national  economical  costs  by 
creating  uncertainty  about  future  expenses  and  income,  a  fluctuating  exchange  rate  does  too.  In 
addition,  the  allocation  of  resources  in  society  is  distorted  by  an  exchange  rate  that  is  not  fully 
motivated. 
The EMU has particular significance for trade. Many economists have long attempted to estimate this 
gain by looking at the extent to which fixed and relatively floating exchange rates affect trade and they 
have found a very small difference. However, a single currency is not the same as a fixed exchange 
rate.  The  practical  and  psychological  differences  are  probably  considerable.  Professor  Andrew  K. 
Rose  at  Berkeley  in  the  USA  has,  together  with  other  economists,  instead  compared  trade  within 
monetary  unions  with  the  trade  between  countries  without  a  monetary  union,  where  he  has  made 
adjustments for such facts as monetary unions often share the same language, culture and regulatory 
framework. 
When Rose recently presented such a study for Sweden, his opinion was that the EMU could over the 
course of a few decades increase trade and integration by as much as 30-50 per cent. Rose himself 
admits  that  the  figures  are  uncertain  and  other  economists  believe  in  much  smaller  trade  gains. 
However,  even  the  more  cautious  calculations  indicate  that  the  monetary  union  could  provide 
considerable  gains.  For  instance,  Professor  Torsten  Persson  estimates,  using  an  alternative 
calculation of Rose's material, that the gains of a monetary union are only about one-fifth of what Rose 
claims. This would still involve a clear trade gain if the reasoning is applied to Sweden. Hopefully, the 
new debate stimulated by Rose's articles will lead to new insights in this very important field. 
What  about  the  disadvantages?  After  all,  giving  up  one's  own  currency  also  involves  giving  up  a 
certain amount of one’s autonomy. 
The  arguments  against  a  possible  Swedish  membership  of  the  EMU  have  often  touched  on  the 
opportunity to pursue an independent stabilisation policy. The starting point for this is that the Swedish 
economy could for one reason or another find itself out of synch with economic developments in the 
eurozone,  what  is  known  as  an  asymmetrical  shock.  Having  an  independent  monetary  policy  and 
currency  would  then  give  us  the  opportunity  to  stabilise  our  economy  ourselves  -  act  as  a  form  of 
shock-absorber, which we will lose if we have a joint monetary policy governed by the prospects for 
inflation and the business climate throughout the eurozone. 
This  was  also  the  primary  reason  why  the  Calmfors  Commission's  report  on  the  consequences  of 
Swedish  membership  in  the  EMU1  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Sweden  should  wait  until  its  labour 
market and wage formation showed sufficient flexibility to deal with a serious disturbance. However, it 
should  be  noted  that  the  Commission  was  envisaging  a  “small”  eurozone  with  around  6  countries 
taking part, whereas now we are talking about 12 countries, representing 40-50 per cent of Sweden's 
trade. Moreover, in practice the Swedish business climate has rarely come seriously out of synch with 
the eurozone. When Sweden has done so, it has mainly been the result of mistakes in Sweden's own 
economic policy and not due to any unforeseeable external disturbance that has afflicted the Swedish 
economy.  Also,  in  this  respect  Sweden  has  changed  in  recent  years:  the  introduction  of  inflation 
targeting and expenditure ceilings should reduce the risks of new economic policy mistakes. 
In addition, there are strong indications that the correlation between Swedish and eurozone growth will 
increase  if  we  join  the  EMU,  as  trade  and  integration  with  the  euro  countries  will  thereby  be 
strengthened. We can see already how the long-term Swedish market rates have covaried strongly 
with those in the eurozone in recent years, even during periods with differences in business climate 
                                                      
1  Report on the EMU investigation (SOU 1996:158). 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 between Sweden and the eurozone. As far as a Swedish membership of the EMU would reduce these 
differences  in  business  climate,  it  will  lead  to  a  long-term  interest  rate  development  that  is  more 
adapted to the business climate. 
If we still believe that Sweden could become radically out of synch with the rest of Europe, there is of 
course an alternative to using an independent exchange rate and monetary policy as shock absorbers. 
The more robust budget situation Sweden enjoys today, for example, should provide a slightly greater 
scope than during the early 1990s for using fiscal policy for the purpose of stabilisation. One can also 
imagine building up buffer funds to pay for reduced payroll tax in crisis situations (known as internal 
devaluation) of the type introduced in Finland.2 Another variant of an asymmetrical disturbance is that 
asset prices – the property market and stock exchange – due to a too strong economic development 
are forced up for a short while. However, in situations such as this, the required tightening can usually 
be managed with the help of fiscal policy. 
Naturally,  stabilisation  policy  via  the  budget  has  its  limitations  since  it  only  works  with  delay  and  is 
dependent on many other long-term considerations. In addition, the Stability and Growth Pact, which 
Sweden  is  included  in  whether  or  not  a  member  of  the  EMU,  provides  a  limitation  on  increased 
government expenses. 
The most important “shock absorber” even if we do not join the EMU, but especially if we do, is that 
wages can adapt to changes in the competition situation, i.e. that there is a high degree of flexibility 
and pliability in wage formation. It would thus be possible to avoid an increase in unemployment during 
an  adaptation  period.  Naturally,  it  can  be  more  difficult,  politically,  to  achieve  this  than  to  adapt  an 
exchange  rate.  A  single  monetary  policy  therefore  requires  greater  discipline  from  labour  market 
parties  since  the  connection  between  wage  costs/inflation  and  monetary  policy  will  be  less  obvious 
than is the case today. 
The krona 
The  reasoning  I  have  pursued  so  far  has  assumed  that  the  exchange  rate  actually  functions  as  a 
shock absorber: that the floating exchange rate adapts to competitiveness and the business climate, 
i.e.  that  it  strengthens  against  other  countries  when  Sweden's  economy  shows  better  growth  and 
weakens when the Swedish economy shows weaker growth than other countries. The exchange rate 
would thus counteract imbalances that arise. If Sweden alone were to suffer a negative disturbance 
that required prices and wages in Sweden to develop differently than those in the euro countries, a 
floating exchange rate would facilitate the adaptation. 
Here the development of the krona in recent years gives some cause for reflection. Does the krona 
really  function  as  a  shock  absorber  in  practice?  Or  do  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  risk  being 
affected by so many other factors that the role as shock absorber is counteracted? It is difficult to see 
the most recent severe weakening of the krona as an adaptation to the fact that Sweden has come out 
of synch with the surrounding world. So what actually steers the krona rate? 
Since  the  1970s  the  krona  has  weakened  by  almost  90  per  cent  against  Sweden's  most  important 
competitor countries. Approximately half of this weakening can be explained by the fact that inflation in 
Sweden  has  been  higher  than  in  other  countries.  However,  now  inflation  in  Sweden  is  developing 
roughly  in  line  with  international  inflationary  trends.  The  weakening  of  the  krona  in  recent  years 
therefore cannot be explained by differences in the inflation rate. 
If we instead look at the exchange rate adjusted for inflation differences, the “real” exchange rate, we 
find some traditional explanations for much of the weakening that has taken place from the 1970s until 
the mid-1990s. Our terms of trade  were  weakened,  productivity developed more  weakly  in Sweden 
than in other countries and during certain  periods  investors  were concerned over  a rapidly  growing 
central government debt. 
However,  developments  during  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s  were  rather  different.  The  growth  in 
productivity and GDP has been better and the inflation rate as low as the average among our main 
trading  partners,  while  the  central  government  debt  has  declined,  which  should  have  favoured  a 
stronger krona. Nevertheless, the krona has depreciated. 
                                                      
2   A  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  stabilisation  policy  tools  within  the  EMU  can  be  found  in  the  report  “Stability  and 
from 
downloaded 
2001:62), 
EMU” 
which 
can 
be 
stabilisation 
(SOU 
http://finans.regeringen.se/propositionermm/sou/index.htm. 
policy 
the 
in 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 3
 A small part of the most recent depreciation can be explained by real economy factors: the terms of 
trade have deteriorated slightly due to falling prices on telecom products; exports have declined more 
heavily in Sweden than in many other countries following on from the economic slowdown in the USA; 
and a falling order intake for exports has created a declining demand for the krona. 
However, there are also other explanations that are not directly concerned with real economy factors, 
but have instead been steered by financial flows, i.e. that the krona has been affected by a net outflow 
of  capital  from  Sweden.  The  development  of  the  krona  and  the  stock  market  has  shown  a  strong 
correlation  since  the  beginning  of  2000.  This  is  probably  connected  with  foreign  investors  selling 
Swedish  shares  in  line  with  falls  on  the  stock market,  which  has  affected  Sweden  more  than  other 
countries, as a large part of the stock market value is owned by foreign investors. Moreover, Swedish 
investors have bought a  large amount of foreign shares, which  is probably connected  with the new 
pension system and the freer investment regulations for the AP pension funds. It has been possible for 
the  AP  pension  funds  to  increase  their  foreign  exchange  exposure,  i.e.  the  percentage  of  foreign 
assets, from 10 to 15 per cent with effect from this year. The funds can increase their exposure by five 
percentage points a year to a maximum of 40 per cent in 2006. 
On top of this comes a factor that is difficult to explain on the basis of classical exchange rate theories. 
The krona is affected to a large extent by general unease on the global financial markets. During times 
of financial unrest the krona weakens when investors leave the Swedish market for ones considered a 
safer investment. This was particularly noticeable during the Mexico crisis of 1995 and the Asia crisis 
of 1997-98. The recent unrest on the financial markets in connection with uncertainty over the global 
business climate has once again had a negative effect on the krona. Following the terrorist attacks in 
the USA we saw a further depreciation of the krona (and for some other minor currencies), as well as 
a weak development in the stock market. 
Finally, the generally stronger dollar must be mentioned as one of the explanations for the weak krona. 
Some of the dollar's strength can be attributed to higher productivity in the USA, but most economists 
still believe the dollar to have been overvalued on the basis of traditional economic theory. 
The  krona  has  thereby  been  steered  to  some  extent  by  factors  that  are  not  connected  with  the 
economic situation and developments in the real economy. This means that the weak krona does not 
function fully  as a shock absorber against the  outside  world. Sweden has an  undervalued currency 
despite our economy developing as well as other countries' economies. The monetary policy problem 
is that a weak krona risks creating inflation via import prices, which in turn can force a tighter monetary 
policy stance than would otherwise be necessary. 
There are international examples of how the exchange rate, instead of acting as a shock absorber, 
has rather worsened the effects of an economic slowdown. Japan and Switzerland have experienced 
prolonged crisis periods during the 1990s, while their currencies have remained very strong and have 
thus caused problems for the export industry. 
One  effect  of  the  weakening  of  the  krona  that  we  have  now  is  that  the  export  industry  and  the 
competitive  import  industry  should  become  more  competitive  in  the  short  term.  However,  there  are 
some structural problems here: an unmotivated weak exchange rate risks strengthening certain parts 
of the export industry that do not constitute expansive future sectors. Sweden's future hardly lies in 
competing with low costs and prices, but rather with quality, cutting edge technology and know-how. 
When the krona eventually appreciates to a level more motivated on the basis of fundamental factors, 
Sweden will have an industrial structure poorly equipped to meet the requirements of the future. 
Conclusions 
The  Riksbank  assumes  that  the  krona  will  appreciate.  It  is  possible  that  we  have  already  seen  the 
beginning  of  this  development  very  recently.  When  the  upturn  does  take  place,  it  may  prove  even 
stronger than the Riksbank estimated in its latest Inflation Report. This does not prevent the fact that 
the  recent  valuation  of  the  krona  has  brought  new  perspectives  to  the  question  of  Swedish 
membership in the third phase of the EMU, i.e. participation in the eurozone. 
The  volatility  of  the  krona  creates  difficulties  for  export  and  import  companies  in  making  decisions 
regarding  trade  and  investment.  However  well  monetary  policy  functions,  it  still  cannot  supply  the 
efficiency gains at the microeconomy level that ensue from a single currency. The effects on growth 
through both price competition over the borders and increased trade could be greater than we have 
previously often assumed. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 An independent monetary policy will of course remain the main argument against EMU membership. 
The question  is how valuable this is. In part, I do not consider the risk very  large of Sweden alone 
getting caught up in a crisis where these very instruments will be the best for stabilising our economy. 
In part, we have seen that the exchange rate can be governed for fairly long periods of time by factors 
on the financial markets that are not primarily related to the real economy. Instead of acting as a shock 
absorber  for  business  climate  developments  in  Sweden  that  are  out  of  synch  with  other  countries, 
there is a risk that the krona, by weakening more than motivated by fundamental factors, could instead 
upset Sweden's possibilities for stabilising its development. 
The economic gains of remaining outside the eurozone thus appear uncertain, while recent research 
indicates that Swedish debate has probably undervalued the integration gains from EMU. 
When you hold your first euro banknote next year and take a closer look at it, you will be able to see 
that Sweden is actually present, on the European map that adorns one side of every banknote. May I 
be permitted the cautious interpretation of this as a sign of things to come? 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 5
