 Urban Bäckström: The Swedish economy 
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Swedish  Shareholders’ 
Association, Stockholm, 27 November 2001. 
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to this evening’s meeting. I intend to talk about the Swedish 
economy and monetary policy. 
The past year has been marked by a successive weakening of economic activity in Sweden as well as 
abroad. Forecasters all over the world have made sizeable downward revisions to the prospects for 
growth both this year and next. 
Consider the picture of the economic future that Consensus Economics compiles once a month from 
the predictions of 200 professional observers. At the beginning of this year the combined assessment 
was that in 2001 and 2002, GDP growth in the United States and Sweden would amount to between 
2.6  and  3.5  per  cent.  It  was  foreseen  that  the  slowdown  would  be  comparatively  moderate  and  be 
followed by a quick recovery. Today, growth in the United States is judged to be just a modest 1 per 
cent or so this year and even weaker in 2002. In Sweden, GDP is now expected to rise 1.4 this year 
and 1.7 per cent next year. 
In other words, it now looks as though the slowdown will be both deeper and more protracted than 
many observers counted on less than a year ago. We are experiencing a simultaneous slowdown in all 
the leading economies. After the terrorist attacks on 11 September, moreover, there is an even greater 
risk of the cyclical decline being more pronounced and persistent. 
The almost simultaneous and marked change that occurred in the global economic climate in the latter 
part  of  last  year  was  triggered  to  an  important  extent  by  rising  energy  prices,  higher  interest  rates, 
falling  stock  markets  and  the  abrupt  swing  in  corporate  investment.  Weaker  demand  led  in  turn  to 
stock adjustments and thereby to further downward effects on orders and production. 
At  the  same  time,  falling  asset  prices,  not  least  in  stock  markets,  tended  to  subdue  private 
consumption.  On  top  of  this,  the  terrorist  attacks  entailed  a  loss  of  production  in  the  short  run  and 
postponed a cyclical upturn. 
In many respects, economic activity is following the normal cyclical pattern and is therefore not all that 
surprising.  After  a  long  period  of  expansion,  sooner  or  later  activity  turns  downwards  while  the 
economy  gathers  strength  for  a  renewed  upward  surge.  While  there  is  nothing  exact  about  the 
succession of cyclical phases, one can say that activity has always fluctuated more or less regularly. 
What was unexpected, however, is the rate at which activity has slackened. The downturn seems to 
have been accentuated by a reaction to the excessive optimism which the technological breakthrough 
had generated, giving rise to the notion of a new economy. We can all recall the virtually unbounded 
enthusiasm over the benefits that would flow from the new computer and telecom technologies. 
Expectations of a rapid future increase in profits and incomes inspired firms as well as households in 
many parts of the  world, perhaps above all  in the United  States. Investment and consumption both 
rose and so  did stock markets and production plans. This led in time to growing imbalances in the 
American economy, for instance between saving and investment as well as between current and more 
fundamental  stock-market  valuations.  Investment  was  probably  stepped  up  rather  too  quickly. 
Although optimism in other parts of the world did not become as excessive as in the United States, 
there  were  no  doubt  a  good  many  investment,  consumption  and  share-purchasing  decisions  that 
perhaps  would  not  have  been  made  if  a  more  long-term  view  of  economic  development  and  more 
realistic expectations had prevailed. 
Important to learn from history 
History has taught us that euphoric phases of economic activity tend to end in a sudden change of 
mood.  Economists  of  the Austrian  persuasion  see  investment  as  the  key  to  the  economic  cycle.  In 
connection with a technological breakthrough, firms are liable to exaggerate the innovation’s impact on 
productivity. They may overestimate the conceivable improvement in productivity, for example, as well 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 1
 as  the  duration  of  the  upswing.  As  a  result,  growth  cycles  generated  by  new  technology  not 
infrequently  culminate  with  undue  optimism  and  misplaced  investment.  When  profit  expectations 
ultimately fall back to more realistic levels, share prices drop. Corporate investment slackens as the 
economy’s aggregate capital stock is adjusted to match a more reasonable long-term return. This is 
accompanied  by  decreased  household  consumption,  not  least  of  capital  goods,  to  match  a  more 
realistic assessment of the long-term development of income. 
The Austrian School also provides us with a fundamental insight into economic policy’s limitations. If a 
technological  breakthrough  leads  to  a  period  when  the  growth  of  investment  and  consumption 
exceeds what is sustainable in the longer run, there is bound to be a fall-off. After a supply shock of 
this type, measures of economic policy are simply not capable of preventing an adjustment to a more 
realistic  appraisal  of  the  future.  The  necessity  of  the  adjustment  means  that  the  measures  only 
postpone it and presumably tend to make it all the more painful when it does occur. 
History teaches us that after a period of what I would call “growing pains”, the optimism about what the 
new technology can achieve will be restored, albeit in a more orderly, realistic guise. In my opinion, 
neither  the  rapid  fall-off  in  global  activity  nor  the  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  have  upset  the 
grounds for being optimistic about the new technology’s potential. 
Problems for many companies 
After the investment boom and the marked slowdown we are now experiencing, there is a risk of a 
good  many  companies  having  balance-sheet  problems.  One  sign  of  this  is  the  historically  high 
September  figure  for  the  12-month  increase  in  the  number  of  bankruptcies  world-wide  among 
companies with a credit rating from Moody’s. According to Moody’s assessments, we can expect an 
increasing number of bankruptcies up to the end of March. 
This has been accompanied by appreciably higher borrowing rates for companies with a low rating, as 
well as a down-grading of more and more companies. The group of firms with the highest credit rating 
has shrunk to a proportion that is small and even lower than at the time of the latest major slowdown in 
the early 1990s, for example. In view of the increased financing costs for firms with a low credit rating, 
there  is  a  risk  of  more  bankruptcies  in  the  future,  with  contagious  effects  among  other  firms  and 
sectors. For firms with a higher credit rating, on the other hand, the generally lower level of interest 
rates implies if anything that financing costs have been reduced. So the risk of increased problems 
with  credit  should  not  be  exaggerated,  though  it  does  look  as  though  to  some  extent  at  least,  the 
present fall in activity stems from the supply side. Above all, it appears to concern an overly rapid and 
abnormally high investment in the IT and telecom sectors. 
Inflation prospects difficult to assess 
One  consequence  of  the  Riksbank  basing  its  analysis  on  conditions  in  Sweden  —  and  not  being 
guided by the actions of other central banks — is that in the past the repo rate has been held at a 
considerably  lower  level  than  in  the  United  States.  There  have  also  been  periods  when  our 
instrumental  rate  has  been  below  that  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  The  central  factor  when  the 
Riksbank sets its instrumental rate is the prospects for inflation one to two years ahead. A prospect of 
inflation above the 2 per cent target normally leads to a repo rate increase, while if inflation is expected 
to be  lower than the target level, the repo rate should normally  be  lowered,  and if the rate of price 
increases is forecast to lie around the target level of 2 per cent, the rate should be left unchanged. 
The economic outlook in the rest of the world ought to imply a weak tendency in Sweden as well, with 
an  attendant  easing  of  inflationary  pressure  and  consequently  a  further  reduction  of  the  repo  rate. 
However, the decision-making situation is not that simple. Three things in particular make the picture 
more complicated: 
 2 
 Firstly, inflation is currently above the Riksbank’s 2 per cent target. The greater part of the 
increase is admittedly attributable to a number of clearly defined transitory factors that are 
calculated to drop out next spring. Food prices, for example, moved up in connection with 
mad-cow  and  foot-and-mouth  disease.  Moreover,  electricity  and  telecom  prices  rose  for 
reasons that did not seem to have to do with demand. But does this analysis hold or did the 
increase in inflation stem — wholly or in part — from an excessively overheated economic 
upswing?  There  are  also  survey  data  that  point  to  rising  inflation  expectations.  But  the 
picture is not clear-cut. 
BIS Review 98/2001
   Secondly, the picture may be upset by the weak exchange rate. In relation to comparable 
long-term equilibrium exchange rates, the Swedish krona is currently very weak even though 
there  has  been  some  appreciation  from  the  low  earlier  this  autumn.  With  the  important 
proviso that all else is equal between the economies, by itself the weak krona could warrant 
considerable differences in monetary policy between the Riksbank and other central banks. 
Thirdly, the Swedish economy is being stimulated by fiscal policy. A look at how household 
disposable income, after taxes and transfers, is developing this year and next illustrates this. 
Even  with  some  increase  in  unemployment  next  year  in  connection  with  the  economic 
slowdown,  everything  points  to  a  sizeable  increase  in  connection  with  increased  public 
spending and tax cuts. 
So on the one hand we have a continuation of weak activity next year, on the other excessively high 
current  inflation,  a  weak  exchange  rate  that  leads  in  time  to  a  stimulation  of  exports,  and  an 
expansionary fiscal policy that feeds consumer demand. In addition, the current repo rate of 3.75 per 
cent is comparatively low, not least when one considers that inflation is around 3 per cent. 
The  next  question  is  how  much  importance  should  be  accorded  to  each  of  the  various  factors  and 
which side of the balance carries most weight. 
As  regards  the  excessively  high  inflation  at  present,  we  have  tried  to  analyse  whether  there  are 
grounds for supposing that it stems from the Swedish economy having been more “overheated” during 
the recent upswing than we counted on earlier. The preliminary conclusion I believe can be drawn is 
that the explanation does not lie there. Most things suggest that inflation ought to fall back next spring 
as the transitory factors that pushed prices up drop out of the change figures. 
An alternative approach to whether the high inflation is temporary or more permanent involves looking 
at  the  development  of  by  far  the  most  important  component  of  costs,  namely  wages.  In  that  wage 
agreements have been completed, it is possible to arrive at a comparatively firm picture of how wages 
are developing,  at least during this  year  and next. With reasonable  assumptions about productivity, 
most things suggest that unit labour costs should be in line with the inflation target. This presupposes 
that  the  registered  increase  in  inflation  expectations,  above  all  among  labour  market  organisations, 
does not show up in  wage increases;  if that  were to  happen  it  would  be  very unfortunate and face 
monetary  policy  with  new  challenges.  It  is  therefore  important  to  take  very  seriously  the  discussion 
going on within the trade union movement regarding larger than expected price increases. 
The  weak  exchange  rate,  with  the  potential  economic  stimulus  it  represents  via  exports,  is  more 
complicated.  In  the  past,  a  marked  improvement  in  costs  for  Swedish  exports  relative  to  the  main 
competitor countries has tended to lead to an increased export market share. At the same time, there 
is no denying that the international economic slowdown is particularly evident in markets of importance 
for Sweden’s economy.  As long as those markets remain weak, a larger market share for Swedish 
firms will not yield a notable increase in volume. 
Another matter here is that in the IT and telecom sectors, on which the Swedish economy became 
increasingly dependent in the 1990s, the problems are not dependent on the krona’s exchange rate; 
here it is more global factors that are decisive. 
However, it can also be noted that the order inflow to manufacturing is now falling less markedly than 
earlier  this  year.  There  are  certain  signs  of  a  levelling  out,  usually  an  early  indication  of  a  possible 
upturn in the coming quarters. Analysts’ expectations of this year’s profits for listed companies have 
clearly worsened during the autumn but this has been accompanied by a substantial upward revision 
of next year’s profits. 
So  the  overall  appraisal  of  the  krona’s  exchange  rate  and  its  stimulatory  effect  is  not  entirely 
self-evident. 
Finally there is the question of economic policy’s aggregate impact on demand. What I have in mind is 
next year’s prospect of a relatively large increase in fiscal policy’s contribution to household disposable 
income,  accompanied  by  low  interest  rates.  An  expansionary  economic  policy  normally  tends  to 
stimulate cyclical activity, which implies that 2002 should be a fairly good year for domestic demand. 
However, there are at least two factors that could limit or counter this effect. 
One factor has to do with the lower share prices and the tendencies for house prices to stop rising and 
in certain cases to fall. In recent years, purchases of cars and other consumer durables have been 
stimulated  by  the  appreciation  of  assets  that  feature  in  household  wealth.  Conversely,  falling  asset 
prices  during  the  past  year  have  tended  to  subdue  these  purchases.  The  stimulus  from  economic 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 3
 policy may accordingly be dampened or delayed as long as asset prices continue to fall. Of course, 
the situation will be reversed if share prices and property prices instead stabilise, or even begin to rise 
once again. 
Another factor is connected with the risks in the labour market. The redundancy statistics suggest that 
employment  will  level  out  or  even  fall  next  year,  which  may  involve  an  attendant  increase  in 
unemployment.  Households  are  already  expressing  such  fears  in  Statistics  Sweden’s  surveys. 
Besides  the  direct  downward  effect  on  household  disposable  income,  a  weaker  labour  market may 
make people in Sweden more cautious when making purchasing decisions. 
Conclusions for monetary policy 
All  in  all,  growth  prospects  for  the  short  term  are  somewhat  more  unfavourable  than  when  we 
published  our  most  recent  inflation  forecast.  However,  the  major  economic  policy  realignment  in  a 
number  of  important  countries  looks  like  paving  the  way  for  a  recovery  after  a  time.  But  this  does 
presuppose  that  households  and  firms  really  do  start  to  consume  and  invest.  Major  risks  here  are 
saving imbalances and over-investment. 
In  Sweden,  too,  there  has  been  an  expansionary  realignment  of  economic  policy  that  is  helping  to 
strengthen  household  income.  Provided  there  is  an  international  recovery,  the  weak  krona  should 
have a stimulatory effect on exports. As regards inflation, the rate since April this year has been above 
the Riksbank’s target. The increase is mainly due to transitory factors and I envisage that it will, as 
before, dwindle during the spring. This presupposes, however, that the price rise does not spread to 
other items or lead to wage increases. Another argument for a future easing of inflationary pressure is 
the  existence  of  unutilised  resources  as  a  result  of  the  slowdown.  However,  in  my  opinion,  the 
Riksbank must watch developments closely to ensure that the recent rise in the inflation rate actually 
falls and does not stick. Most indicators appear to imply that inflation will be close to the target level of 
2 per cent, or at least within a small margin on one side or the other. 
This  evening  I  have  tried  to  present  a  general  account  of  my  preliminary  view  of  some  aspects  of 
assessments of the future path of inflation. I look forward to the continued discussion of these matters 
with  my  Riksbank  colleagues.  Our  decision  about  interest  rate  policy  is  due  at  the  meeting  next 
Tuesday, 4 December. The result of our discussions will be published the following day, 5 December, 
as will the fourth Inflation Report of 2001. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2001
