Alan Greenspan: The September 11 tragedy and the response of the financial
industry
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System,  at  the  American  Bankers  Association’s  Virtual  Annual  Convention  (taped  statement),
23 October 2001.
 I am pleased to speak once again to an American Bankers Association convention. This conference
was  rescheduled  in  respect  for  the  loss  of  our  colleagues  and  fellow  citizens  in  the  tragedy  of
September  11.  But  the  fact  that  the  conference  is  going  forward  in  cyberspace  is  a  testimony  to
American perseverance, to our technology, and to our flexibility. It is a metaphor for the ability of our
economy  to  circumvent  difficulties  and  innovate  around  obstacles  and--most  of  all--for  our
decentralized and diversified economic structure.
Our financial system has exactly such  a structure.  It still  has thousands of banks, with  hundreds of
foreign  competitors,  including  some  of  the  largest  banks  in  the  world.  In  addition,  market
developments, regulatory relief, and, most recently, legislative reform have ensured that the banks, the
insurance companies, the securities firms, the finance companies, and the host of other participants,
from pension funds to hedge funds and from trusts to mutual funds, are all, in effect, in each other's
business.  And  this  listing  does  not  even  take  into  account  a  capital  market  where  lenders  and
borrowers  deal  directly  and  where  increasingly  the  instruments  and  risks  originated  by  financial
intermediaries come to rest.
These activities could be done much more efficiently in a technology sense by far fewer entities, but
our seemingly crazy quilt structure creates a different kind of efficiency--one that emphasizes constant
cost minimization, innovation, and flexibility. And that is exactly what we saw a couple of weeks ago,
when literally within hours of the attack on the World Trade Center--with many of the participants still
grieving and with the loss of extraordinary personnel and resources--our financial system was finding
ways to return to operation.
Some examples will clarify this creativity of our system. With borrowers and lenders uncertain whether
the  financial  markets  were  open  and  with  communications  among  issuers,  their  banks,  and  the
settlement  system  impaired,  there  were  difficulties  in  rolling  over  maturing  commercial  paper.  The
resulting shortfalls in the coverage of billions of dollars of maturing paper were managed by rolling fails
into the next day's settlement or by drawing on bank lines, causing bank assets to balloon for a few
days.  Similarly,  disruptions  in  the  connectivity  of  communication  lines  and  the  shift  to  backup  sites
caused delays in payments and settlements, with  billions in funds building up at  a small number of
participants unable to send out funds covered  by  similar  amounts  of  Federal  Reserve  open  market
operations, overdrafts, and loans to those who could not receive. To facilitate the channeling of dollar
liquidity  to  foreign  financial  institutions  operating  in  the  United  States  and  to  meet  all  appropriate
demands for dollar liquidity, thirty-day currency swap lines  were  arranged  with major central  banks,
again in record volume. Fed and bank balance sheets ballooned with the maldistribution of reserves,
and domestic and foreign operations, but there was no fear of either credit or liquidity risk. Fed funds
borrowers and lenders, forced to deal directly because brokers were temporarily unavailable, quickly
reached  agreements  to  trade  at  the  targeted  federal  funds  rate.  Similarly,  in  response  to  losses  of
personnel and equipment at some participants, dealers agreed voluntarily to extend settlement in the
Treasury  market 
their
commitments,  real  and  implied,  to  avoid  the  disruptions  that  were  a  large  part  of  the  terrorists'
objective.
The list of adjustments and innovations goes on and on. But the point is clear that we are blessed with
a financial system that is creative, that is flexible, that is innovative. Banks--including the central bank--
were there when they were needed and did what was required with dispatch. We should be proud of
the banking system's role in minimizing the economic fallout of that tragic day.
in  particular--stepped  up 
to  T+5.  Crucially, 
lenders--banks 
to  meet 
BIS Review 88/2001
1
