 David Klein: The damage which rapid increase of government expenditure 
causes to economic growth 
Speech by Mr David Klein, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the conference on “Israel’s Economy as 
2002 Approaches”, Tel Aviv, 31 October 2001. 
 The background 
Every year the question “what is the desired budget deficit?” is raised, even though all governments in 
the last ten years adopted a policy which was supposed to reduce the deficit. Those favoring a rise in 
the  deficit  argue  that  the  tax  burden  should  not  be  raised,  certainly  not  across  the  board,  but  that 
government  expenditure  should  be  increased  to  meet  certain  “needs”.  Such  needs  are  natural  and 
understandable,  whether  one  is  dealing  with  security,  or  helping  families  in  need,  or  increasing  the 
water supply in hot, dry Israel, or providing aid for factories encountering difficulties in a competitive 
market, or improving education, particularly in development areas, or updating the items covered by 
the national health scheme, or relieving traffic congestion in the major metropolitan areas, etc., etc.; 
the list is endless. 
If the needs criterion were the only one, the budget deficit, and with it the government’s debt, would 
rocket. The reason that this does not occur is the worldwide consensus that a policy which increases 
government expenditure and the budget deficit by more than the rate of growth of the economy will-
beyond a certain limit-cause more harm than good. But where is that limit? 
The US provides an interesting example of this. As a result of the terrorist attacks on 11 September 
the need arose to increase federal government expenditure, and voices can already be heard referring 
to a return to “big government” in the US. To put matters into proportion, however, anyone looking at 
figures published recently by the OECD will see that public-sector expenditure in the US in 2001 prior 
to  the  attacks  was  estimated  at  30  percent  of  GDP,  the  lowest  in  the  world.  The  increase  in 
expenditure under discussion resulting from the state of emergency is less than one percent of GDP, 
with the main support being provided by tax cuts-some of that temporary due to concern about a rise 
in long-term interest and the depressing effect this would have on growth. Israel, on the other hand, 
using the same yardstick, has the highest figure, 54 percent of GDP, more than the other members of 
the OECD. Have we crossed the limit? 
All Israel’s governments and the parliaments which approved the budgets in the last decade answered 
in the affirmative: the share of public-sector expenditure in GDP in Israel is too high, and reducing it is 
the  best  way  to  cut  the  deficit  and  the  huge  government  debt.  Leading  the  process,  as  the  entity 
responsible for seeing the broad picture, was the Ministry of Finance, with the backing of the Prime 
Ministers,  and  insofar  as  it  matters,  also  of  the  Bank  of  Israel.  However,  there  were  always 
government ministers, Members of Knesset, various experts, commentators, and others who thought 
that a further response must be given to meet some specific needs. Thus it was, and thus it always will 
be. 
The  question  “where  is  the  limit?”  is  clearly  of  concern  to  other  countries  too.  Following  several 
decades  of  rapid  increases  in  government  budgets  throughout  the  world  since  the  middle  of  the 
twentieth  century,  increases  which  exceeded  their  countries’  rates  of  economic  growth,  and 
accompanied by increases in the tax and debt burden, the process halted, and with good reason. We 
will detail below the damage caused by rapid increases of government expenditure, and relate it to the 
current situation in Israel’s economy. 
Financing a rise in government expenditure by raising the tax burden  
When the increase in government expenditure is financed by higher taxes, two types of damage are 
caused:  
• 
People are less willing to invest and work, an “underground” economy is created, and there 
is a build-up of strong pressures to distort the tax system by granting exemptions for all sorts 
of reasons (the latest example is that of the Negev laws; the next in line is the recognition of 
BIS Review 94/2001 
 1
   mortgage interest as tax deductible. It is estimated that total tax benefits in 2001 will come to 
NIS 29 billion, 60 percent of which is via the capital market). The tax burden is being borne 
by a smaller and smaller part of the population.  
The second effect, to which we were exposed only in the last few years, offers an even more 
serious  threat:  international  competition  on  taxes.  This  encompasses  all  types  of  tax:  on 
individuals’  labor  income;  on  companies;  and  on  income from  capital.  Failure  to  meet  this 
competition provides an incentive to Israelis and Israeli companies to build their economic 
future abroad, and is an important factor for nonresidents considering whether to operate in 
Israel. It is clear that in open economy such as Israel’s the tax burden cannot in the long run 
be higher than that abroad. 
The tax burden in Israel relative to GDP is higher than the average in the OECD, although 
there are countries (France, Denmark, Italy, and Sweden) where it is higher than ours. 
Local-currency deposits are tax exempt; foreign-currency deposits in Israel are taxed. 
Savings schemes are exempt; tradable government and private indexed bonds are taxed.  
Unindexed government bonds are tax free, while similar private bonds are taxed. 
Distortions in the taxation of financial income 
Despite what was said above, the main problem in Israel is not so much the total tax burden as the 
composition of tax revenues. Among the numerous subjects requiring attention in this regard (such as 
the sharp rise in tax rates on labor income as the latter increases, with the top tax bracket applying at 
a relatively low level of income; the heavy burden of indirect taxes; low taxation on capital), we will 
concentrate here on just one, taxation of interest income of individuals and mutual funds. The current 
situation suffers from the following distortions: 
• 
• 
• 
The  tax,  where  applicable,  is  35  percent,  and  in  some  cases  higher.  There  is  thus  a  very  grave 
distortion here. 
This situation causes serious damage to the functioning of the financial markets in the following ways:  
• 
It obliges the business sector to depend on banks as almost the sole source of finance in 
Israel,  and  does  not  enable  it  to  develop  alternatives  via  the  capital  market.  Similarly  it 
creates  a  preference  among  households  for  savings  via  banks.  The  tax  system  thus 
strengthens the banks’ monopolistic hold over financial intermediation in Israel. 
Changes  in  the  composition  of  the  assets  portfolio,  i.e.,  switching  between  local-currency 
and foreign-currency assets, is affected by considerations of taxes which were introduced in 
a period when no NIS/foreign-currency market existed in Israel, and which needlessly affect 
the exchange-rate appropriate for Israel at any time. In this way one of the pillars supporting 
Israel’s economic growth-foreign trade-is undermined.  
The tradability of the government bond market is adversely affected as tax rules effectively 
exclude  households  from  this  market-another  blow  to  the  infrastructure  of  any  advanced 
capital market.  
The  tax  distortions  deter  foreign  financial  institutions  from  developing  services  for  Israelis, 
thus also impairing the financial markets in Israel. 
   These all undermine financial stability and the economy’s ability to withstand financial shocks, whether 
caused  domestically  or  from  abroad,  placing  an  open  economy  such  as  Israel’s  at  a  great 
disadvantage. 
The opportunity to iron out these distortions was sacrificed together with the program for sweeping tax 
reforms,  although  it  is  quite  simple  to  do  what  is  necessary  without  reference  to  any  other  reform. 
What needs to be done is to introduce one low rate of tax, say 5 percent on average, on all interest 
income above a certain threshold; that threshold should be determined in such a way that on the one 
hand it is not worth the trouble of deducting the tax at source, and on the other it is justified on social 
grounds.  The  change  should  be  planned  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  neutral  with  regard  to  the  total 
revenue obtained, i.e., the drop in tax revenues on one side should be matched by increases on the 
other. It is important to ensure that the collection system is simple as far as the definition of the tax 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2001
 base is concerned, and to set a lower rate, say 4 percent, on nominal interest, and a slightly higher 
rate, say 6 percent, on real or foreign-currency interest. 
This  change  could  be  implemented  without  much  preparation,  and  would  be  of  great  benefit  to  the 
economy. Clearly it should not made effective retroactively. 
Financing an increase in government expenditure by borrowing from the public 
Financing  an  increase  in  government  expenditure  by  borrowing  from  the  public  (by  the  sale  of 
government bonds) causes damage in the following ways: 
• 
The  first  derives  from  the  fact  that  the  government  already  has  a  large  debt  of  NIS 
430 billion,  more  than  90  percent  of  GDP,  due  to  budget  deficits  in  past  years.  This  debt 
obliges the government to allocate part of its tax revenues each year to service the debt. In 
2001  this  interest  payment  will  total  some  NIS  30  billion,  more  than  the  total  education 
budget,  and  several  times  larger  than  the  government’s  investments.  The  increase  in  the 
debt caused by budget deficits reduces the government’s ability to use its sources for current 
purposes,  and  creates  pressure  to  further  increase  the  debt  to  enable  expenditure  to  rise 
nonetheless. 
The second adverse outcome results from the effect of the government debt on the rate of 
interest. In Israel, as in every economy, the rate of interest on government bonds is used as 
a benchmark for fixing interest in the private sector. Mortgage interest rate is determined in 
this way, and interest on long-term loans, both those advanced directly by banks and those 
issued  in  the  form  of  private  bonds  on  the  stock  exchange  is  based  on  the  interest  the 
market  requires  from  the  government  on  bonds  it  issues.  In  other  words,  the  greater  the 
government debt, the greater the pressure on the cost of capital for the whole economy. A 
rise in the price of long-term capital eventually affects the price of short-term money, and this 
clearly harms investment and growth. 
This effect is clearly evident this year: the yield on 10-year government bonds declined in the 
first half of the year (from 5.6 percent in January to 4.3 percent in June), but went back up (to 
4.6 percent in September) when the government had to increase its borrowing because the 
deficit significantly exceeded the level originally planned. 
The  third  way  in  which  damage  is  caused  by  an  increase  in  the  government  debt  is  by 
drawing Israel further away from the international  norm according to  which  its  economy  is 
rated. This increasing deviation from the norm that requires the government debt/GDP ratio 
to be around 60 percent-and this year for the first time in many years we have recorded a 
rise  in  the  ratio-will  make  it  difficult  to  improve  Israel’s  rating  and  may  even  combine  with 
other factors to exert an influence in the opposite direction. This would mean a rise in the 
price of raising capital internationally, both for the government and the private sector. 
The fourth derives from the connection between a rise in the budget deficit and a rise in the 
balance-of-payments deficit. This was very clearly illustrated in the mid-1990s when due to 
expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  the  balance-of-payments  deficit  grew  to  a 
potentially critical level. As a result we had to adopt contractionary policies. A repeat of the 
first act in that performance is unfolding before our eyes now in 2001, with a rising budget 
deficit contributing to a rise in the balance-of-payments deficit. We say “the first act” because 
there  is  a  not  insignificant  chance  that  next  year’s  budget  deficit  will  be  higher  than  this 
year’s, meaning possible added pressure to further increase the balance-of-payments deficit. 
In  contrast  to  the  US,  which  can  print  dollars,  we  have  to  borrow  them  to  finance  the 
balance-of-payments deficit, and this would occur just at a time when foreign investment in 
Israel is falling. A declining foreign debt was one of the indications of the stability of Israel’s 
economy;  that  can  change.  The  relation  between  the  two  deficits  can  be  explained  quite 
simply: a rise in the budget deficit normally derives from an increase in current government 
expenditure. This expenditure does not generate exports, and sometimes prevents it, but it 
always increases imports. This has a bearing on the proposed budget for 2002: the greatest 
part by far of the increase in expenditure over the level in 2001 is in current expenditure, with 
only  a  small  part  directed  towards  increasing  investment,  and  the  proposed  rise  in  total 
government expenditure will almost certainly exceed the rate of economic growth. In other 
words,  the  budget  for  2002  proposes  to  increase  the  government  debt  by  at  least 
    BIS Review 94/2001 
 3
 NIS 12 billion, and to burden it, and the following budgets, with additional interest payments 
close  to  NIS  1  billion  a  year,  and  all  this  just  to  increase  the  government’s  current 
expenditure.  It  is  thus  possible  to  contribute  to  growth  by  increasing  the  budget  deficit 
thereby raising the standard of living, both public and private, for a time, but this cannot be 
maintained, because the rise in the budget deficit creates inflationary pressure, pressure on 
financial markets, and a rise in the foreign-currency deficit. This is a short-term policy, with 
part  of  the  bill  presented  for  immediate  payment  and  part  carried  forward.  Eventually  the 
outstanding balance of the bill has to paid, and it always comes out very expensive. 
The composition of the government debt 
Additional damage is caused to the economy, not deriving directly from the existence of the deficit but 
from the fact that almost half of the government’s domestic debt is not tradable. As the government 
moves to raising unindexed loans, the share of its tradable indexed debt in its total debt falls. In 1995 it 
made up 30 percent of the total debt; in the middle of 2001, it is down to 23 percent. The market for 
tradable indexed government bonds is drying up, and that is the market which determines the long-
term rate of interest in Israel. A two-pronged course of action is required: 
1. 
The  process  of  extending  the  term  of  unindexed  government  bonds  from  10  years  to 
30 years already started by the Ministry of Finance must continue, to provide an additional 
benchmark for long-term interest rates, in addition to the disintegrating benchmark provided 
by  indexed  bonds,  to  encourage  the  development  of  long-term  unindexed  uses  in  the 
mortgage market and other long-term projects. 
At the same time, the chapter of earmarked bonds in pension savings should be brought to a 
close, as has been done in all other savings channels, to deepen and stabilize the tradable 
bonds  market.  This  should  not  be  applied  to  existing  funds,  including  those  launched  in 
1995,  but  only  to  new  ones  introduced  from  the  date  the  change  is  implemented.  Such  a 
change would enable the realization of an important idea, which cannot be adopted as long 
as there are earmarked bonds: mandatory pension schemes up to a certain level of income, 
covering  all  employees  and  the  self-employed.  A  superficial  examination  of  the  country’s 
support structure for the weak, elderly sections of the population also shows the need for the 
situation to change. Mandatory pensions schemes (without earmarked bonds!) could provide 
another important layer to the meager support which old-age social security grants currently 
offer this low-income population. 
2. 
Summary: the importance of an order of priorities 
Those responsible for deciding on the extent of government expenditure and the rate of the budget 
deficit, from the government to the Knesset (parliament), must balance gains and losses, the pluses 
and the minuses. They must have a long-term view-based on the fact that Israel’s economy is an open 
one-of the trends of the budget aggregates: the tax burden, the government expenditure/GDP ratio, 
the  budget  deficit,  and  the  government  debt  burden.  The  basic  attitude  should  be  that  government 
expenditure can grow only if there is economic growth. No less important, however, is that there is a 
clear order of priorities within each of the above four components: 
How can the composition of tax revenues be improved over time to meet international competition, to 
broaden the tax base, and to reduce the inequality in the distribution of income in the economy? 
Should  the  order  of  priorities  for  government  expenditure  be  changed,  both  between  its  different 
elements (e.g., current expenditure as against investment) and within them (e.g., focusing expenditure 
on education on specific geographical areas, or ages, or types), and how can more responsibility and 
authority be devolved to government ministries in this field? 
The answers to these two questions contain great potential regarding the government’s contribution to 
economic growth. 
Two further questions: 
How should the budget deficit be financed (long-term as against short-term debt; indexed as against 
unindexed debt)? 
How can the share of the government’s tradable debt vis-à-vis nontradable debt be increased? 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2001
 The  answers  to  these  two  questions  contain  the  key  to  the  government’s  contribution  to  financial 
stability in the economy. 
The attitude towards the  trends  of the  aggregates and the order of priorities  within them should  be 
guided by: 
• 
• 
the general aim of placing the economy on the path of sustained growth, and  
the socially just approach of supporting the weaker sections of the population not of working 
age, and encouraging others to join the labor force. 
This is not an exact science. It is clear, however, that much more can be done in this direction. 
Finally, when the budget is presented to the Knesset for approval, the basis of growth for 2002 should 
be  reconsidered,  as  this  provides  the  basis  for  estimates  of  tax  revenue.  Instead  of  discussing  the 
probability of a sharp turnaround in the economy’s growth rate next year, the budget could be based 
on  a  more  modest  estimate  of  say  2  percent,  instead  of  4  percent,  and  a  certain  amount  of  the 
government’s approved expenditure could be frozen to ascertain that the target deficit is being met, 
even if the rate of growth is below the forecast. It can be made clear how the government will act if tax 
revenues exceed the forecast because of a higher rate of growth. We would prefer the extra revenue 
to  be  used  to  broaden  the  tax  brackets  on  individuals,  but  part  could  also  be  used  to  increase 
expenditure  more  favorable  to  economic  growth,  provided  that  a  certain  decline  in  the  share  of 
government expenditure in GDP is maintained. 
BIS Review 94/2001 
 5
