 Yutaka Yamaguchi: The economic situation and monetary policy in Japan1 
Speech by Mr Yutaka Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Economic Seminar of 
the Japan Research Institute, Tokyo, 26 November 2001. 
 I am honored to have been given the opportunity to talk before this distinguished audience. My topic 
today is the economic situation and monetary policy in Japan. There are many issues I would like to 
talk about related to this topic, but as my time is limited, I would like to focus on the current issue in the 
economy,  the  continuous  decline  in  prices.  The  phenomenon  had  long  been  forgotten,  as  it  last 
emerged just after the war, but it has caught the attention of many and has been actively discussed in 
recent years. I would therefore like to share my thoughts with you on policy actions that might be taken 
to stop the decline in prices, which naturally include monetary policy.  
The Economy: The Present Situation and the Outlook  
I. 
I  would  first  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  current  economic  situation  based  on  the 
Bank’s  semi-annual  report,  Outlook  and  Risk  Assessment  of  the  Economy  and  Prices,  “the  outlook 
report” for short, published on October 29.  
The Bank started publishing outlook reports last year, and the report is released twice a year in April 
and  October.  The  aim  of  publication  is  to  promote  public  understanding  by  enhancing  the 
transparency  of  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  comprehensive  disclosure  of  the  views  of  the 
Bank’s Policy Board members on the outlook for the economy. The October 2001 report covered fiscal 
years 2001 and 2002, the period from April 2001 through March 2003, and assessed the most likely 
scenario,  or  a  baseline  scenario,  for  economic  and  price  developments  during  the  period,  and  the 
upside and downside risk factors involved.  
There is only time today to give a brief summary of the conclusions of the outlook report. It concluded 
that, as a baseline scenario, Japan’s economy would go through a severe adjustment in fiscal years 
2001  and  2002.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  report  asserted  that  the  economy  would  stop 
deteriorating in fiscal 2002 if overseas economies started to recover in fiscal 2002. Even in that case, 
more time will be needed before clear signs of recovery can be confirmed and prices are expected to 
continue declining gradually in fiscal years 2001 and 2002. 
This outlook clearly involves a high degree of uncertainty and there exist both upside and downside 
risks  to  the  baseline  scenario.  Among  the  risk  factors  that  need  to  be  watched  closely  are 
1) developments  in  overseas  economies,  especially  those  in  the  U.S.,  and  in  IT-related  industries; 
2) developments  in  the  financial  markets  at  home  and  abroad,  especially  stock  prices;  and  3)  the 
impact of structural reform of the economy, fiscal consolidation, and the NPL disposal.  
Problems of the Price Decline  
II. 
If the consumer price index falls, albeit modestly, in fiscal years 2001 and 2002, this will be a post-war 
record of a continuous decline for three years. To consider the relation between prices and monetary 
policy, we need to examine the factors behind the price decline.  
The  projected  continuous  decline  in  prices  is  caused  by  two  factors.  The  first  is  the  downward 
pressures  on  prices  brought  about  by  weak  demand.  Given  the  baseline  scenario  that  I  mentioned 
earlier,  the  output  gap  in  the  economy  will  be  likely  to  widen  into  fiscal  2002.  The  second  is  the 
downward pressures from the supply side, for example, imports of low-priced goods, deregulation, and 
streamlining of distribution channels.  
These two kinds of pressures are both important as factors behind the price decline. But in relation to 
the short-term economic outlook, it is more of a concern that the downward pressures generated by 
weak demand will gradually intensify.  
                                                      
1  English translation prepared by the Bank’s staff based on the Japanese original. 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
 This analysis of the price decline does not mean that the Bank is worried only about the pressures due 
to weak demand and not about those from the supply side. The Bank is well aware of the necessity of 
stopping the continuous price decline in view of the severe economic situation, and is taking strong 
monetary easing measures unprecedented in the history of central banking.  
Then, what are the problems with the current continuous price decline?  
A  loss  of  price  stability,  regardless  of  whether  this  is  due  to  deflation  or  inflation,  could  cause  the 
following problems. Firstly, when prices are not stable, the signaling function of prices does not work 
properly  and  efficient  resource  allocation  is  hampered;  and  secondly,  uncertainty  heightens  which 
makes it difficult for economic agents to take decisions for the future. In other words, fluctuations in 
prices interfere with the most important function of a market mechanism: resource allocation.  
We should examine whether the ongoing gradual price decline could cause these problems. However, 
the Bank’s recent concern is more about the danger that a vicious circle might be generated by the 
price decline: a deflationary spiral emerges when a price decline leads to a recession and this in turn 
triggers  a  further  fall  in  prices.  A  deflationary  spiral  can  develop  for  various  reasons  but  the 
background common to all is that various contracts for economic transactions are mostly agreed at a 
fixed nominal value which cannot be adjusted flexibly for price declines. I will explain this focusing on 
three economic variables: interest rates, debts, and wages.  
The first point concerns interest rates, the so-called “zero interest rate constraint.” Currently, not all the 
market interest rates are zero, but short-term rates, which the Bank can control through its policy, are 
virtually zero and cannot decline further. Once nominal interest rates decline to zero, there will be no 
room left for monetary policy to affect aggregate demand or the level of prices by lowering nominal 
interest rates and, consequently, real interest rates.  
The second point concerns debts. Debts held by firms and households are usually fixed at a nominal 
value, and cannot be adjusted for price declines. Hence, repayment of debts becomes more difficult as 
prices decline and corporate sales and/or household income decrease. To make matters worse, Japan 
now faces the associated problems of excessive debts in the corporate sector and the large amount of 
the NPLs in the banking sector. The gravity of these debt problems aggravated by the heavier debt 
burden due to price declines is hampering the recovery of our economy. In the past, there were some 
cases where credit contracted substantially when the economy was in a deflationary spiral, and this 
was due to a vicious circle in which an increase in debt burden interacted with a price decline.  
The third point concerns wages. Nominal wages have a downward rigidity. In general, corporate profits 
decrease in cases where nominal wages remain rigid while sales decrease due to a price decline. In 
Japan, nominal wages have been adjusted with a certain amount of flexibility and careful analysis is 
needed to examine whether or not wage rigidity is exerting downward pressures on corporate profits 
and heightening the risk of falling into a deflationary spiral.  
From what I have said it is clear that developments in nominal income, including corporate profits and 
employee’s  income,  are  important  yardsticks  to  judge  whether  or  not  the  economy  will  fall  into  a 
deflationary  spiral.  For  example,  in  2000,  despite  some  negative  inflation  rates,  the  profits  of  firms 
marked an increase of 34 percent, and that of employee’s income was one percent. Therefore, the 
probability  of  the  economy  falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral  was  low.  After  the  turn  of  the  year,  the 
situation changed and began to give cause for concern, as corporate profits started to decrease and 
the year-on-year increase in wages has remained negative since summer 2001. Thus, although the 
pace  of  price  decline  was  almost  the  same  in  calendar  years  2000  and  2001,  the  implications  are 
different this year.  
Is  there  a  high  probability  of  Japan’s  economy  falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral  in  the  future?  In  the 
outlook report in October, the Policy Board members’ assessment was that, for fiscal 2002, economic 
growth  will  remain  negative  and  prices  will  continue  to  decline.  However,  this  assessment  did  not 
include the emergence of a deflationary spiral and we assumed that the deterioration of the economy 
would stop in the second half of fiscal 2002 if overseas economies started to recover. That was our 
baseline scenario and the associated downside risk factors should not be forgotten. If you recall my 
earlier explanation of deflationary spirals, I do have a deep concern about developments in corporate 
profits and financial system problems in a situation where nominal short-term interest rates reach zero. 
In  this  sense,  we  cannot  totally  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  economy  will  fall  into  a  deflationary 
spiral, and the situation warrants vigilant monitoring.  
2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 III. 
Effects and Limits of Current Monetary Easing Measures  
Outline of Current Monetary Easing Measures  
A. 
The Bank of Japan has taken strong monetary easing measures which no other central bank has ever 
adopted before, against the background of the Bank’s severe economic outlook. The framework of the 
current monetary easing measures can be summarized in the following four points.  
First, the main target  of market operations  was changed from the overnight call rate  to the  amount 
outstanding of the current accounts at the Bank. In addition, the new target was raised from four trillion 
yen to five trillion yen in March, to six trillion yen in August. Since September, in response to a surge in 
liquidity demand triggered by the terrorist attacks in the U.S., the Bank has provided the market with 
ample liquidity “aiming at above six trillion yen” without setting an upper limit. As a result, the amount 
outstanding  of  the  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  averaged  9.2  trillion  yen  for  the  September  and 
8.8 trillion yen for the October reserve maintenance period.  
Second,  the  Bank  has  committed  itself  to  continuing  the  above  mentioned  framework  of  monetary 
operations until the rate of increase of the CPI rises to and remains stably at or above zero percent. 
This commitment aims to drive down interest rates of longer maturity by clearly stating that the Bank 
will continue the current monetary easing measures in the future. This monetary easing effect is often 
called “the commitment effect” or “the duration effect.”  
Third, the Bank decided that it could increase its outright purchase of long-term Japanese Government 
Bonds (JGBs) when the Bank found it necessary to smoothly provide ample liquidity to the market, on 
the condition that the amount outstanding of long-term JGB holdings be within the amount outstanding 
of banknotes issued. In accordance with this framework, in August the Bank increased the amount and 
frequency of JGB outright purchase from twice a month amounting to 400 billion yen to three times a 
month amounting to 600 billion yen.  
Fourth, the Bank has established the so-called Lombard-type lending facility. By utilizing this scheme, 
financial  institutions,  under  certain  conditions,  are  now  able  to  borrow  funds  from  the  Bank  at  the 
official  discount  rate  as  long  as  they  have  eligible  collateral.  This  measure  has  strengthened  the 
monetary  easing  effect  in  the  sense  that  financial  institutions  have  been  ensured  access  to  ample 
liquidity and that money market interest rates have been stabilized. The official discount rate, which is 
applied  to  this  Lombard-type  lending  facility,  has  been  lowered  twice  in  2001,  in  February  and  in 
September, and is currently at 0.1 percent.  
The Strong Monetary Easing Effects in Financial Markets  
B. 
Current  monetary  policy  has  achieved  extremely  easy  conditions  in  the  financial  markets.  In  the 
money markets, short-term interest rates, including longer ones on term instruments, have declined to 
a lower level than in the zero-interest-rate period of 1999-2000. Since the unit for transactions of the 
overnight call rate was changed from 0.01 percent to 0.001 percent in early September, the rate has 
declined to as low as 0.001 percent to 0.004 percent, a microscopic world indeed.  
In the bond markets, the interest rates on JGBs continued to move at levels close to the historical low 
although they did not decline below the level marked in March this year. Furthermore, medium-term 
interest  rates,  such  as  that  of  JGBs  with  five  years  remaining  to  maturity,  are  moving  at 
0.4-0.5 percent, which is lower than the level in March.  
In  the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets,  credit  spreads  have  narrowed  with  the  decline  in  short-  to 
medium-term  interest  rates  and  investors  have  become  more  willing  to  take  risks.  Therefore,  the 
demand for issuance of new securities in firms with relatively high credit ratings has increased and the 
amount outstanding of issuance of CP and corporate bonds has maintained a high level. In Japan, the 
share  of  corporate  financing  through  the  capital  markets  is  still  relatively  small.  However,  it  has 
become important as a channel by which the monetary easing measures have permeated through the 
economy because the credit intermediation function of banks is weakened.  
By contrast, the effect of the current policy on asset prices such as stock prices and foreign exchange 
rates has been relatively limited. Although stock prices rose somewhat after the announcement of the 
monetary easing measures in March this  year, they  declined steadily from May onward reflecting  a 
deterioration in business conditions and successive downward revisions of the outlook for corporate 
profits. Stock prices have not shown a positive response to the increase in the outstanding balance of 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 3
 current accounts at the Bank since August. Foreign exchange rate of the yen also did not depreciate 
compared to levels in March, as the U.S. economy showed a faster-than-expected slowdown.  
Easing Effects on the Corporate and the Household Sectors  
C.  
The crucial point in assessing current monetary policy is whether the ample provision of liquidity by the 
Bank and consequent easing in the financial markets are affecting the economic entities outside the 
financial markets such as the corporate and household sectors. Regrettably, the easing effects have 
not fully permeated to the economy. The monetary base, the sum of banknotes and current accounts 
at the Bank, is increasing by 14 percent on a year-on-year basis. However, the growth rate of money 
supply  is  only  3.6  percent  on  the  same  basis,  somewhat  higher  than  at  the  beginning  of  this  year, 
mainly due to a shift of funds from maturing postal savings. More serious is the fact that bank lending 
is  contracting  at  1.9  percent  year-on-year  and  the  pace  of  this  decline  has  been  accelerating 
somewhat.  GDP  and  price  conditions  also  have  not  shown  any  improvement.  Business  capital 
spending and housing construction do not seem to be stimulated by the historically low interest rates.  
IV. 
The Monetary Policy and Prices  
Is Deflation a Monetary Phenomenon?  
A.  
I will return to the reasons behind the weak response of the economy to the strong monetary easing 
policy.  Instead,  here,  I  would  like  to  pose  a  question:  Is  it  fair  to  say  that  the  insufficient  monetary 
easing is causing continuous price declines and stagnant economic growth? For example, we often 
hear the argument that “both inflation and deflation are monetary phenomena and price declines can 
be stopped only by increasing money supply,” a simplified form of the quantitative theory of money. Is 
this kind of argument correct?  
A part of the above argument that “both inflation and deflation are monetary phenomena” does hold as 
a long-term economic relationship when the amount of money changes significantly. In fact, the policy 
objective of many central banks including the Bank, that is to attain “price stability,” is based on the 
understanding of this relationship. However, this relationship holds only over a sufficiently long period 
of time and can be interpreted as a sort of definitional or identical relationship. Therefore, at a practical 
level, it cannot be applied to the conduct of monetary policy.  
The first problem with the argument is that, as I mentioned above, it does not make a clear distinction 
between the relationship in the long term and in the short term. For example, if we look at the relation 
between  money  and  prices,  a  close  relationship  emerges  when  the  amount  of  money  increases  or 
decreases on an extremely large scale and has a dominant impact: The hyper-inflation experienced in 
Germany after World War I is one example. When the amount of money increases or decreases to a 
certain extent but not on an extremely large scale, a loose relationship is observed only if we look in 
the sufficiently long term. However, over a period of one year to a couple of years, unless the amount 
of money increases or decreases on an extremely large scale as I have just explained, the relationship 
between money and prices is not stable.  
The  second  problem  is  that  at  present  the  underlying  mechanism  in  the  argument  will  not  work  as 
theoretically assumed: a central bank’s efforts to expand liquidity, the current account balance at the 
Bank or the monetary base, will increase money supply in a broader sense, that is liquidity held by the 
corporate  and  household  sectors,  and,  consequently,  will  push  up  prices  and  the  level  of  business 
activity. Needless to say, monetary policy cannot actually resort to dropping banknotes from the sky--
this kind of policy is called “helicopter money” in economics textbooks. If such a policy is implemented, 
people  will  rush  to  purchase  goods  and  services  after  they  receive  the  cash,  and  prices  can  be 
expected to rise immediately. However, in actual monetary policy, money in a broad sense is provided 
through  a  series  of  “transactions”:  a  central  bank  purchases  financial  assets  such  as  government 
bonds from financial institutions, in turn creating money in a narrow sense, that is the current account 
balance  at  the  central  bank,  and  then  financial  institutions  make  lending  and  securities  investment. 
However, what is happening currently in Japan’s economy is that, although funds are abundant in the 
financial markets, they do not permeate outside those markets, that is, to the corporate and household 
sectors and money supply has not increased sufficiently. This has been both the cause and result of 
the stagnant growth in expenditures and the decline in prices. Given that the mechanism to increase 
money is not working properly, I think it is not following logical steps or is ignoring reality to argue that 
increasing money could solve all the problems.  
4 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 As  I  mentioned,  while  various  factors  affect  the  movement  of  prices,  the  most  fundamental  factor 
determining price developments is the balance between aggregate demand and supply for goods and 
services.  As  the  supply  capacity  changes  only  slowly,  it  is  the  movement  of  demand  that  mainly 
determines the short-term supply-demand balance. In fact, in the time-series data on the Japanese 
economy,  prices  begin  to  rise  only  after  the  economic  growth  rate  recovers  and  the  output  gap 
narrows. Statistical analysis of the dynamic correlation between the economic growth rate and the rate 
of increase in prices shows that the correlation coefficient is the highest when the economic growth is 
one to two years ahead of a consumer price increase. On the other hand, the rate of increase in prices 
does not seem to lead the economic growth rate.  
In  the  above  discussion,  it  is  clear  that  in  order  to  halt  the  continuous  decline  of  prices,  it  is  most 
important to promote a sustainable, not temporary, growth in aggregate demand. The implementation 
of monetary  policy  by the  Bank so far has been aimed at halting  the decline in prices by  providing 
ample  liquidity  to  the  markets  to  lower  interest  rates  thereby  stimulating  aggregate  demand.  The 
current difficulty in the conduct of monetary policy is that it cannot stimulate aggregate demand even 
with all the measures employed. We need to face up to this fact.  
Inflation Targeting  
B. 
Currently in Japan, we often hear the argument calling for the adoption of inflation targeting. However, 
this  argument  is  peculiar  in  the  sense  that  it  focuses  on  first  raising  prices  using  every  measure.  I 
believe  we should  devise  ways to stimulate economic activity first because prices in nature  are the 
result  of  economic  activity.  With  this  understanding  of  the  environments  surrounding  price 
developments and monetary policy, the Bank is currently reluctant to accept the recent argument for 
inflation targeting.  
More  fundamentally,  inflation  targeting  should  be  regarded  not  as  a  short-term  policy  tool  but  as  a 
framework for  improving  the  transparency  of  the  conduct  of monetary  policy.  As  a  possible  tool  for 
improving the transparency, the Bank considers that inflation targeting is worth examining as one of 
the options in the future. However, currently, as the short-term interest rate has already reached zero 
percent,  the  Bank  has  very  few  options  for  further  monetary  easing.  In  addition,  the  effect  of  the 
current  monetary  easing  policy  is  limited  because  of  the  NPL  problem.  In  such  circumstances,  it  is 
unlikely that the adoption of a too ambitious a target will improve confidence in monetary policy.  
At this point, I would expect a counter-argument that however limited the room available for additional 
monetary  easing,  adoption  of  an  inflation  target  will  of  itself  directly  affect  the  “expectation”  of 
economic agents and will produce inflation expectations. I would admit that “expectation” is one of the 
important  channels  by  which  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  can  permeate  through  the  economy. 
However,  controlling  “expectation”  solely  by  announcing  a  policy  is  unlikely  to  succeed.  I  think  the 
Bank  can  affect  people’s  expectation  only  if  the  announcement  is  accompanied  by  effective  policy 
measures. The Bank is in fact already strongly affecting people’s expectation by promising to continue 
the current monetary easing framework until the year-on-year increase in CPI rises and remains stably 
above zero percent. In fact, as I mentioned, the interest rate on the JGB with five years remaining to 
maturity is currently at 0.4-0.5 percent. This interest rate level clearly indicates that market participants 
are expecting the current historically low interest rates will continue for an extended period of time. In 
spite  of  this  market  development,  the  actual  and  expected  inflation  rates  do  not  show  any  signs  of 
upward movement.  
I understand that some argue that the Bank can cause inflation by purchasing any kind of assets. I will 
touch upon this issue later.  
As  an  example  of  successful  introduction  of  inflation  targeting,  some  cite  the  price  level  targeting 
adopted in Sweden in the first half of the 1930s. We at the Bank are also interested in the Swedish 
experience and have studied it. What we found was a great similarity between the Swedish policy and 
the Bank’s current policy framework.  
The  most  important  similarity  is  that,  while  both  the  Swedish  authorities  and  the  Bank  of  Japan 
declared their firm determination to prevent price declines, neither adopted a numerical target. In the 
Swedish comprehensive program for price stability, it was stated that “Monetary policy should not be 
tied systematically  to a particular  index figure.  A formal and simple rule for monetary  policy  did not 
appear feasible.” More specifically, the Riksbank, the Swedish central bank, stressed the importance 
of carefully monitoring various price indices while taking into account other economic variables such 
as  inventory  figures  and  productivity  data.  It  stated  that  implementation  of  the  policy  should  not 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 5
 depend  on  a  specific  price  index  such  as  the  CPI.  Therefore,  a  clear  distinction  should  be  made 
between the Swedish policy and the idea of overcoming deflation by adopting a rigid price targeting 
scheme using a specific price index.  
When comparing Sweden in the 1930s and Japan’s current situation, we should be careful because 
there  are  critical  differences  between  the  two  regarding  economic  and  financial  environments.  The 
significant differences are the following: (1) in the Swedish economy at the time, the level of nominal 
interest  rates  was  relatively  high  so  that  there  was  sufficient  room  for  interest  rate  cuts,  (2)  the 
Swedish financial system did not face a serious problem, (3) as a relatively small open economy, the 
depreciation of the currency in the foreign exchange market contributed to the prevention of price falls. 
In  sum,  there  is  a  difficulty  in  applying  the  specific  measures  used  in  Sweden  in  the  1930s  to  the 
current situation in Japan.  
Why Japan’s Economy is not able to Exit from the Deflation  
V.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  raise  a  question: What kind  of  economic  policies  are  required  to  exit  from  the 
ongoing deflation, and why is Japan’s economy unable to do so? As I have already mentioned, three 
factors in particular stand out as important: the constraints imposed by zero nominal interest rates, the 
NPL problem, and the weakening sentiment.  
 Constraints of Zero Nominal Interest Rates  
A. 
First let us consider the constraints imposed by zero nominal interest rates. Short-term interest rates 
are already  virtually  zero, five-year interest rates have also declined very close to  zero--the term of 
debt  financing  by  Japanese  firms  is  in  many  cases  five  years  or  less.  A  standard  mechanism  of 
monetary easing is: (1) inducing a decline in short-term interest rates by providing ample liquidity to 
the  money  market,  (2)  thereby  influencing  financial  variables  such  as  the  medium-  to  long-term 
interest rates, stock prices, and foreign exchange rates, (3) consequently, expecting such changes in 
financial  variables  will  affect  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions,  firms  and  households.  Now  that 
nominal interest rates have reached the point where no further decline is possible, monetary easing 
has also reached the point where little additional effect can be expected. Moreover, real interest rates 
could rise if a price decline continues in this economic setting.  
By the way, facing the limits of further monetary easing with the zero interest rate constraints, what 
kind  of meaning  does  the  massive  amount  of  liquidity  provision  to  the  financial markets  have?  It  is 
premature to give a definite answer to this question. The current policy adopted by the Bank is unique 
and has not been tried in other countries. The effects of such policy, especially in a situation where 
serious  problems  exist  in  the  financial  sector,  should  be  assessed  empirically  but  we  have  not 
accumulated sufficient experience and data to draw concrete conclusions. At the same time, this does 
not mean that we have no clues. One example is the surge in liquidity demand in the financial markets 
and the associated increase in the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank after the 
terrorist attacks in the US. The surge in liquidity demand itself took place not only in the U.S. but also 
in other countries and major central banks including the Bank provided a huge amount of liquidity in 
order to secure stability in the financial markets. While the Federal Reserve and the European Central 
Bank returned to normality in terms of liquidity provision within a week, in Japan, by contrast, liquidity 
demand has continued to be high. It appears that there are two factors at work here.  
The  first  factor  is  waning  incentive  to  invest  or  lend  funds  in  the  markets  with  the  decline  in  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate to 0.001 percent. Thus, financial institutions that hold excess funds 
would prefer to deposit them in their current accounts at the Bank even if it does not bear interest. 
Once such behavior spreads to other market participants, borrowers feel worried that they might not 
be  able  to  borrow  funds  in  the  markets,  and  subsequently,  an  increasing  number  of  financial 
institutions will start to defensively accumulate funds in their current accounts at the Bank.  
The second factor is the fact that the cost of yen funding through yen-U.S. dollar swaps has become 
negative for foreign banks. Foreign banks capable of funding yen at negative interest rates can earn 
an interest margin without worrying about credit risk by depositing the funds in their current accounts 
at the Bank. In this case, the negative yen funding rate works as a “sweetener” giving an incentive to 
foreign banks providing Japanese banks with dollar funds.  
These two factors, a disincentive to invest in the money markets and negative yen funding costs, give 
us  an  interesting  insight  into  the  meaning  of  current  market  operations  in  which  ample  liquidity  is 
6 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 provided with the current account balance as an operating target. That is to say, the disincentive to 
lend funds in the market was largely caused by the ample liquidity provision by the Bank. At the same 
time, the major reason why the Bank can provide ample liquidity without facing under-subscription in 
open market operations is that there is demand from foreign banks for excess reserves, and this itself 
is  not  expected  to  lead  to  a  revitalization  of  economic  activity.  Of  course,  we  still  cannot  deny  the 
possibility  that  the  demand  for  excess  reserves  will  lead  to  a  change  in  the  portfolio  of  economic 
entities and ultimately stimulate economic activity in the long run. The Bank is now closely examining 
this possibility while continuing the current massive provision of liquidity.  
 The NPL Problem  
B. 
The  second  reason  why  Japan’s  economy  is  unable  to  exit  from  the  ongoing  deflation  is  the  NPL 
problem. It is not the case that once the NPLs are disposed of, the deflation will end, and the economy 
will recover right away. I think that it is now widely understood that the disposal of the NPLs will rather 
be associated with short-term pain. It is also true, however, that once the economy recovers, the NPLs 
will decrease. Sustainable economic growth cannot be expected in a situation where a large amount 
of the NPLs remain and credit intermediation does not function fully, for the following reasons.  
First of all, in such a case, financial institutions are facing the risk of their capital being impaired by 
external factors such as a decline in stock prices and emergence of new NPLs following a downturn in 
the economy. Capital is the last line of defense against unexpected risks and losses. It is difficult for 
the management of the financial institutions to take risks when they are concerned about their capital 
position. From a macroeconomic point of view, sustainable economic growth may only be achieved 
with continuously favorable external conditions which will require delicate policy management.  
Secondly, until the NPL disposal is completed, it is difficult to adjust lending rates to levels adequately 
reflecting  risk  and  return.  Currently  Japanese  banks  are  competing  with  one  another  to  lend  to 
blue-chip  companies  and  credit  spreads  have  become  extremely  narrow.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Japanese banks are cautious about extending new loans to firms with low credit ratings and the banks 
have not increased credit spreads adequately on their lending to existing less creditworthy borrowers. 
In the current situation, if the banks drastically increase credit spreads, their borrowers are likely to go 
bankrupt and the banks will have to pay the price in the end. However, from the long-term perspective, 
unless the lending rates are set in an economically rational manner, the lending attitude of financial 
institutions  cannot  be  aggressive  and  consequently  it  is  hard  to  achieve  a  sustainable  economic 
growth.  
 Weakening Sentiment  
C. 
The third reason for the deflationary trend in Japan is weakening sentiment. Looking at households, 
their expenditure has been restrained reflecting their anxieties about the future including the viability of 
social security systems and employment concerns. In the corporate sector, investment appetite has 
receded  partly  because  the  economic  stagnation  itself  has  lowered  the  expected  rate  of  growth.  I 
understand that listing weakening sentiment as part of the background of deflation sounds like talking 
about  the  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  But  I  think  that  the  current  weak  demand  cannot  be  fully 
explained  by  the  zero interest rate constraint  and the NPL problem and there remain some kind of 
residual  factors  which  should  be  explained  as  weakening  sentiment.  Such  a  decline  in  demand 
caused  by  weakening  sentiment  can  hardly  be  solved  unless  people  become  confident  that  the 
economy  has  returned  to  a  clear  recovery  path.  At  the  same  time,  considering  the  state  of  typical 
households and firms, I think it is difficult to deny that, together with the stagnated economy, various 
institutional barriers are hampering their challenging spirit. For example, in the corporate sector, public 
corporations  are  depriving  private  institutions  of  their  business,  and  reviewing  legal,  taxation,  and 
regulation systems to cope with the era of globalization is lagging behind. As for the household sector, 
consumption  seems  to  be  stagnating  due  to  uncertainty  about  the  future  caused  by  the  problems 
related to the social security system such as pension benefits and the health care system.  
Conduct of Monetary Policy  
VI.  
I  have  talked  about  various  issues,  focusing  on  the  decline  in  prices.  Finally,  based  on  above 
discussion,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  what  the  Bank  of  Japan  can  do,  and  what  I  expect  from  the 
government, which is responsible for economic policy other than monetary policy.  
BIS Review 99/2001 
 7
 The Role that the Bank of Japan Should Play  
A.  
First,  the  role  the  Bank  of  Japan  should  play.  I  would  like  to  reemphasize  that  the  Bank  and  the 
government share the same goal of preventing a further decline in prices and of bringing the economy 
back to a sustainable growth path as soon as possible. Based on the preceding discussion, I would 
like to express my thinking on what role the Bank should play.  
First  of  all,  although  it  may  sound  like  something  which  goes  without  saying,  the  current  monetary 
easing  policy  should  be  tenaciously  continued.  The  effects  of  the  current  strong  monetary  easy 
measures have not fully  permeated to the real economy. But once there  is a  positive movement in 
accordance  with  the  progress  of  structural  reforms  such  as  the  NPL  disposal  and  improvement  of 
productivity  in  the  economy,  it  can  be  expected  that  the  monetary  easing  policy  will  support  such 
movement  and  have  powerful  effects.  It  is  extremely  important  to  be  tenacious  in  maintaining  the 
current monetary easing conditions, so that they could support any positive movement in the economy 
when it appears.  
The second role is the provision of liquidity in a swift and timely manner. Should there be uncertainty 
or concern in the financial markets for one reason or another, liquidity has to be provided in a swift and 
timely manner, so that such uncertainty or concern will not disrupt the markets. It is one of the central 
bank’s most important roles to maintain the stability of the financial markets and the financial system 
through  liquidity  provision.  Maintaining  that  stability  is  also  important  in  making  the  effect  of  the 
monetary easing continuously permeate through the economy.  
Now,  what  could  monetary  policy  do,  if  economic  conditions  deteriorate  further  and  the  risk  of  a 
deflationary spiral is heightened as a result? The Bank is aware of the argument that the Bank should 
not  only  increase  the  outright  purchase  of  long-term  JGBs  but  also  purchase  any  assets  such  as 
foreign-currency  denominated  assets,  stocks  and  even  the  NPLs  to  prevent  deflation.  As  I  have 
already expressed my thoughts on this issue on a different occasion, I will reiterate the conclusion in 
the  following  three  points.  First,  given  that  just  increasing  the  amount  of  liquidity  gives  only  limited 
stimulus  to  the  economy,  the  major  benefit  of  purchasing  such  assets  is  mainly  to  influence  their 
prices.  If,  however,  one  expects  to  influence  these  assets  through  a  change  in  the  supply-demand 
balance and thereby produce the effect of monetary easing, the purchase must be done on a large 
scale.  Second,  taxpayers  may  ultimately  have  to  pay  the  price  of  possible  loss  resulting  from  this 
large-scale purchase and this will also affect the microeconomic resource allocation. And third, such a 
policy implies that a central bank would be conducting an activity which is close to entering the domain 
of  fiscal  policy.  The  basic  rule  in  a  democratic  society  is  that  fiscal  policy  using  taxpayer’s  money 
needs  to  be  approved  as  part  of  a  budget  by  a  parliament  composed  of  members  elected  by  the 
people. I am not worrying about inflation when deflation is a concern, but claiming that such a policy of 
purchasing various assets should be discussed publicly in the context of governance in a democratic 
society.  
The Role that the Government Should Play  
B.  
As I mentioned earlier, the government and the Bank share a common goal of preventing further price 
declines and bringing the economy back to the path of sustainable growth as soon as possible. The 
role  that  the  government  should  play  in  this  is  also  quite  large.  The  first  role  is  to  foster  business 
conditions that are competitive and attractive in order to induce business fixed investment. To do this, 
it  is  important  to  deregulate,  to  review  the  taxation  system  drastically,  and  to  ensure  that  reform  of 
public  corporations  progresses  steadily.  Another  important  challenge  is  to  relieve  the  anxiety  of 
households  about  the  future  by  reviewing  the  social  security  system,  including  pension  benefits. 
Furthermore, I would like to reemphasize the importance of ensuring that the NPL disposal proceeds 
as expeditiously and smoothly as possible.  
The following point needs to be borne in mind. Progress in the economic and fiscal structural reform 
and NPL disposal is likely to lead to a decline in demand and to exert downward pressure on price 
levels in the short term. On the other hand, if a positive outcome of the structural reform bears fruit 
which  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  productivity  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  it  will  have  a  significant 
meaning  to  prevent  further  price  declines  through  a  revitalization  of  economic  activity.  When  we 
consider  economic  issues,  we  should  always  check  from  the  viewpoint  of  aggregate  demand  and 
productivity.  Of  course,  aggregate  demand  and  the  productivity  are  not  independent  of  each  other. 
Even if the growth rate recovers as a result of inefficient public investment, productivity could fall and 
consumption expenditure could be reduced due to concern about the future tax burden. On the other 
8 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 hand, if the growth rate declines substantially, firms reduce business fixed investment and the R&D 
expenditures necessary for improving productivity in the future.  
Whether  to  put  emphasis  on  aggregate  demand  or  on  productivity  needs  to  be  judged  objectively 
based on the economic conditions. No matter where the emphasis is put, the economic consequences 
need to be objectively recognized and shared among the people.  
Given  that  the  price  decline  will  inevitably  continue  to  some  extent  while  the  structural  reform 
proceeds, policy initiatives will be focused on preventing the decline in prices leading to a deflationary 
spiral.  Monetary  policy,  it  goes  without  saying,  must  play  an  important  role  in  these  efforts.  On  the 
other  hand, there  is a limit to  what can  be  achieved  by monetary policy  alone.  Improvement of the 
social safety net through measures to secure employment is necessary to prevent a sharp decline in 
consumption. It is essential that the stability of the financial system as a whole be secured when the 
NPL disposal is pushed forward.  
Finally,  one  of the  important issues  is the role that fiscal policy should  play. John Maynard  Keynes 
asserted  that  in  a  liquidity  trap,  monetary  policy  loses  effectiveness  and  fiscal  policy  is  necessary. 
However, the scope for mobilizing fiscal policy is limited in Japan given the high level of public debt. I 
would like to expect that, given the capacity for additional fiscal outlays is limited, the government will 
review  the  components  of  expenditures  drastically.  It  is  widely  accepted  internationally  that  the 
function of built-in stabilizer should be utilized during a recession. Given the current economic situation 
of our country, I think it is worth examining, leaving some room for this function to work.  
In concluding my speech today, I would like to add that, we at the Bank will continue to do our utmost 
as the nation’s central bank to provide the foundation for a stable and sustainable growth of Japan’s 
economy.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 99/2001 
 9
