David Clementi: The Bank of England's roles in monetary and financial stability
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Association of Private
Client 
(APCIMS)  Annual  Conference,  London,
19 October 2001.
Investment  Managers  and  Stockbrokers 
 Introduction
Thank you for the kind invitation to address your conference today. APCIMS performs an important
function, representing and informing the views of a wide range of private client investment managers,
brokers and banks. Its voice is increasingly heard in a number of public debates. At one time, back in
1984, I worked very closely with a number of private client firms as we sought to sell shares to the
retail market in British Telecom, the first of the large privatisation issues. It's good to see that a number
of the firms involved then are represented here today.
When Angela Knight asked me to speak, she said she wanted something which would allow us all, in
the midst of our day-to-day preoccupations, to lift our eyes to the horizon. That reminded me of Harold
Wilson's description of John F Kennedy: "he had his eyes on the horizon, but his feet on the ground."
"Keep your eyes on the horizon and your feet on the ground" certainly ought to be written into every
modern  central  banker's  contract  of  employment.  Looking  to  the  future,  assessing  risks  to  our
economic and financial systems, and - where necessary - acting on these assessments is absolutely
core to what we do. So I am very grateful for the opportunity to expand on our role here today.
I  want  to  cover  three  main  themes.  First,  I  want  to  explain  the  Bank's  approach  to  the  exercise  of
monetary  policy,  and  then,  second,  give  you  some  assessment  of  the  current  state  of  the  British
economy. And, third, I want to discuss the Bank's other key role - that of maintaining financial stability
in  the  system  as  a  whole.  That  role  is,  I  think,  less  well  understood  than  our  monetary  policy
responsibilities. But financial stability is every bit as crucial to our national welfare. So I'd like to spend
a few minutes setting out our objectives, and picking up on one or two themes of current concern.
Maintaining monetary stability
I turn first, though, to the Bank's better known role, that of maintaining monetary stability. Our target for
monetary  policy  is  extremely  clear.  We  aim  for  2½%  inflation  in  retail  prices  (excluding  mortgage
payments) at all  times. That target  is set by the  Chancellor.  And  it  is  symmetric:  that  is  to  say,  we
worry  as  much  about  being  below  the  target  as  we  do  about  being  above  it.  That  makes  sense
because the problems of severe deflation are just as great as the problems of severe inflation.
Since May 1997, when the current arrangements were put in place, RPIX inflation has averaged 2.3%.
If inflation is more than one percentage point either side of the target, we are required to write to the
Chancellor explaining the reasons for the miss and the steps we are taking to bring inflation back to
target.  There  was  a  flurry  of  excitement  earlier  this  year  when  inflation  reached  1.8%,  and  many
commentators thought that we might soon have to polish up our letter writing skills. But so far we have
not had to put pen to paper. Of course, a number of factors have contributed to the stability in inflation.
Monetary  policy  takes  time  to  affect  inflation,  so  inflation  in  the  early  part  of  this  period  reflects
decisions taken before the MPC was formed. And in the short term at least prices can reflect factors
other  than  monetary  policy.  But,  judged  against  previous  policy  regimes  in  this  country,  inflation
targeting has been successful. Of course, you might expect me to say that. But the growing credibility
of the arrangements is also reflected in measures of expected inflation in coming years, most of which
remain close to the 2½% target.
People often ask if this relative success at targeting inflation has come at a cost in terms of lost output
or employment. It is increasingly accepted, I think, that there is no such trade-off in the long run. And,
looking at the recent UK data, it is hard to see any trade-off even in the short run. Output has now
risen  for  36  consecutive  quarters,  the  longest  continuous  expansion  since  post-war  records  began.
And unemployment is close to its lowest level for a quarter of a century. In my opinion, that has not
happened by chance, but is the result of a range of policies. Achieving low and stable inflation is the
best contribution that monetary policy can make to the wider economic goals  of sustainable growth
and employment. Having an inflation target certainly does not mean that we take no interest in real
BIS Review 87/2001
1
activity.  We  have  discretion  over  how  rapidly  we  try  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  when  and  if  it
diverges from 2½%. And we regularly publish our best guess about the likely future path of growth up
to a two  year horizon. But the aim of policy is clear -  we  do  what  is necessary  to keep  inflation on
target.
So far, I have spoken as if monetary policy is carried out by faceless bureaucrats hidden deep within
the vaults of Threadneedle Street. Of course, as any of you who read the Diary columns regularly will
know,  nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth!  There  are  nine  of  us  on  the  Bank's  Monetary  Policy
Committee, and we meet once a month to make our interest rate decision. This is a rigorous process,
and rightly so.
The first stage occurs on the Friday before the policy meeting, with a briefing by Bank staff on all of the
data that have been released over the previous month. The following Wednesday afternoon, the MPC
meets  by  itself  to  have  a  detailed  discussion  of  all  of  the  key  issues  raised  by  the  data,  plus  any
tactical  considerations.  Then,  on  Thursday  morning,  each  member  indicates  the  factors  he  or  she
considers relevant, and gives his or her vote. The decision is announced to the public at 12 noon, with
the minutes of the meeting following two weeks later.
The regularity and the rigour of this process are absolutely key to the continued success of the UK
regime. We do not respond in an unreflective way to individual pieces of data. We do not choose the
timing of meetings to suit the headlines or some special interest group. And  we seek to avoid rush
judgements. Wherever possible, we try to take decisions in the round, on the basis of as broad a data
set as possible, and after detailed discussion of the alternative economic interpretations. Of course,
the Bank of England Act provides for flexibility where it is needed. Highly unusual events - such as the
terrible terrorist attacks - may demand a special meeting, such as the one we held on 18 September,
outside the normal timetable. But it is this regular, comprehensive, systematic analysis  which is the
backbone of the process.
Of course, agreement on process need not imply agreement on substance. Members of the MPC do
not always agree precisely on the appropriate stance of policy, as those of you who read our minutes
will  know.  Indeed,  an  industry  has  grown  up  geared  to  guessing  MPC  members'  personal  habits,
psychoanalysing  our  personalities  and  classifying  us  into  different  species  of  the  aviary.  But  it  is
important to recognise, I think, that disagreements are evidence of the strength of the system, not its
weakness. Economic analysis involves a great deal of peering into the future, so it is not surprising
that there should be differences of view. And the opportunity to explore and explain these differences
in a rational and open way is an important part of getting to a better answer.
The outlook for the economy
Let  me  turn  now  to  an  assessment  of  the  economy.  The  recent  debate  has,  of  course,  been
dominated  by  discussion  of  the  implications  of  the  terrorist  attack  on  the  United  States,  and  the
political and military response. The loss of life was grievous. Few of us will forget the sights we saw on
our  TV  sets  that  day.  And  for  those  most  closely  involved  the  feelings  must  still  be  of  the  utmost
intensity. Standing back, from an economic perspective I would say that the most serious impact has
been  on  sentiment,  particularly  in  the  United  States.  Consumer  confidence  there  has  fallen  quite
sharply.  Equity  prices  dipped  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  attack,  the  sterling  price  of  oil  has
fallen by some 18% since the start of September, and credit spreads have risen. Of course, equities
have since rallied strongly, with the FTSE100 for example now  back  above  its  pre-September  11th
levels. But substantial uncertainties remain. At the very least, firms and households are likely to delay
major expenditure decisions until things become clearer. And this may act as a drag on the recovery in
activity. The rise in the cost of security and insurance will also probably have a more long-lasting effect
on activity.
Discussion  of  the  attacks  has  somewhat  obscured  the  fact  that  the  world  economy  seemed  to  be
slowing more rapidly than expected even before 11 September. Overall activity in the US had been
weak, despite continued strength in some sectors, notably retail. And the euro area grew by just 0.1%
in the second quarter, as net trade slowed sharply. The monetary policy reaction has of course been
rapid. In the United States, in particular, interest rates have already been reduced by four percentage
points since the start of the year. And fiscal policy has been expanded. These actions should clearly
stimulate demand. But, as is always the case, the size and timing of these effects is extremely hard to
judge.
2
BIS Review 87/2001
So far this year, the UK economy has fared rather better than its main trading partners. GDP growth
has slowed from the peaks it reached during  2000.  But  the  economy  still  grew  by  0.6%  in  the  first
quarter  of  this  year,  and  0.4%  in  the  second.  Much  of  that  strength,  of  course,  reflects  domestic
demand growth, and particularly household consumption, which rose a further 1.3% in Q2. In many
ways, this should not be a surprise. Average earnings have been growing at around 4.5% per year,
house prices have been rising by between 10-15%, and total consumer borrowing is the highest in real
terms since 1988. But, even given these factors, consumption growth has been strikingly strong.
There are, of course, downside risks to the outlook for consumption in the UK. Consumer confidence
fell in September, even before the terrorist attacks. Despite the recent rally, equity prices are still much
lower than their peaks eighteen months or so  ago, and that  will have reduced consumers' financial
wealth. And there may be the first sign of easing in the labour market which, if it persists, will reduce
disposable incomes. Despite this, however, there is little sign yet of any sharp reduction in consumer
spending.  Retail  sales  volumes  grew  by  5.9%  in  the  year  to  September.  That  picture  of  continued
strength  is  corroborated  by  the  CBI  Distributive  Trades  Survey  measure  for  September  (gathered
largely  after  the  11  September  attack),  which  was  the  highest  since  October  1996.  And  the  higher
frequency  British Retail Consortium survey suggested that sales volumes  by  the  end  of  September
had returned to pre-attack levels.
I focus on the continuing strength of consumption because it - together with its partial correlate on the
output side, the retail service sector - is absolutely key to understanding why UK interest rates have
fallen  less far than in other countries.  But,  of  course,  elsewhere  in  the  economy,  things  have  been
looking less bright for some time. In particular, the manufacturing sector has been struggling under the
effects of sterling's ongoing strength and the weakening in the world economy which I have already
discussed. Manufacturing output today is little higher than it was in March 1998, and employment in
the  sector  has  fallen  considerably  over  that  period.  The  difficulties  faced  by  the  traded  sector  are
reflected in the UK's relatively weak net trade position, which has reduced GDP growth in 14 of the
last 17 quarters. Surprisingly, but encouragingly, manufacturing output rose by 1.4% in August - the
largest monthly rise for two years. Whether this pickup will persist is, of course, unclear at the moment.
In assessing whether some of these short-term movements are likely to last, the MPC is particularly
reliant on intelligence from firms. Like others, we pay close attention to the major industrial surveys.
But we are also able to call on our network of regional Agents, who talk each month to a wide variety
of companies, including, I know, some of you. It is clear from the Agents' reports that the confidence of
many of those they speak to has been hit in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. Labour hiring and
discretionary spending decisions may  be  deferred  for  a  while,  whilst  the  situation  becomes  clearer.
And investment could be reduced if businesses look for a higher return to cover any increased risk.
What does all of this mean for inflation? So-called 'upstream' prices - including raw material costs and
factory gate prices - remain very subdued. Some business costs, such as insurance, will rise, but that
should be at least partially offset by the sharp fall in oil prices. RPIX inflation rose briefly above target
in  August,  but  fell  back  to  2.3%  in  September. We  are  just  starting  to  put  our  next  formal  inflation
forecast together, and  you will be able to see the results of that exercise  in the November Inflation
Report.
At  this  point,  I  know  you  would  wish  a  crisp  conclusion  and  some  indication  of  where  I  think  rates
should move in the future. Some of you may even think you have detected clues in what I have said as
to where I think rates should go. If you have, though, that would be an over-interpretation. There are, I
think, clear downside risks. The world economy may slow further if adverse confidence effects persist.
Spending which is currently delayed may be cancelled. And the labour market may begin turning more
decisively  in  the  UK.  But  for  the  moment  these  risks  need  to  be  weighed  against  the  continued
strength  of  domestic  demand.  Of  course,  if  we  are  to  meet  our  inflation  target,  a  strong  domestic
economy will be needed to offset the weakening influence of overseas markets. We have cut interest
rates by 150 basis points since the start of the year in part to achieve this, and the full effect of these
reductions have still to come through. All this will make for an interesting November round where, as I
indicated  earlier,  we  will  look  carefully  at  all  the  data,  making  our  decision  firmly  in  the  light  of  the
inflation target we have been set.
Maintaining financial stability
Having discussed monetary policy, I now want to  turn to the other key role of the Bank of England
- that of maintaining stability in the overall financial system. This does not, of course, mean that we
BIS Review 87/2001
3
supervise  individual  banks,  building  societies  and  investment  firms.  Since  1997,  that  role  has  been
carried out by the FSA. The Bank, by contrast, is responsible for providing analysis of potential threats
to the system as whole. We are responsible for financial system infrastructure, in particular payments
systems. And, in exceptional circumstances, we would be responsible for undertaking official support
operations to prevent difficulties in one institution affecting other parts of the financial system.
Of course, we cannot do these jobs in isolation. Co-ordinating our system wide perspective with the
FSA's daily supervisory responsibilities and the Treasury's legislative role is essential to the smooth
functioning of the arrangements. A Memorandum of Understanding, signed by the Bank, the FSA and
the Treasury in October 1997, sets out our respective responsibilities, both in 'normal' times, and in a
crisis. And we work hard to foster these relationships, helped by the fact that I am a member of the
FSA Board and Howard Davies is a non-executive director of the Bank. The three institutions also get
together  at  least  monthly,  in  what  we  refer  to  as  the  'tripartite  Standing  Committee',  to  exchange
information and discuss current threats to financial stability. As you might expect, we have met more
frequently in recent weeks.
If  the  events  of  11  September  have  had  an  important  effect  on  monetary  policy,  they  had  huge
potential  implication  for  financial  stability  as  well.  In  the  immediate  aftermath,  a  key  priority  was  to
make sure that markets had adequate liquidity to continue and settle their business. In addition to its
extensive operations in the US market, the US Federal Reserve entered into swap arrangements with
the ECB, the Bank of England and other central banks to ensure a continued supply of dollar liquidity
in  other  key  markets.  And  the  main  payment  systems  extended  their  opening  hours  in  the  US,
enabling  the  huge  daily  volume  of  dollar  payments  to  be  made.  I  must  say  that  I  was  particularly
impressed by the speed with which most of the big firms affected in New York were able to switch their
operations  to  their  contingency  sites.  Some  of  those  sites  were  in  New  Jersey,  but  others  put
increased volumes through their London offices. There are of course a number of lessons which firms
based in the UK and elsewhere will want to take from the disaster. But, overall, I salute the US firms
and the US authorities for their actions, achieved at a time which for many involved was one of acute
personal anxiety.
More  generally,  we  -  like  other  central  banks  -  carry  out  macro-prudential  surveillance.  The  main
vehicle for reporting externally on the Bank's work in this area is the Financial Stability Review (FSR),
which  is  published  twice  a  year.  The  purpose  of  the  FSR  is  to  survey  potential  risks  to  financial
stability, to analyse ways of responding to these risks, and to encourage an informed debate. This type
of forward-looking analysis is absolutely key to avoiding the systemic risks of the future. I hope that
many of you have had the opportunity in the past to read it.
Achieving financial stability in the UK not only helps maintain prosperity, it also makes it an attractive
place to do business. Earlier this month, the Bank for International Settlements released the results of
its  2001  survey  of  global  turnover  in  foreign  exchange  and  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives
markets. And, yet again, the UK has done extremely well. Firms operating in the UK took over 31% of
the  foreign  exchange  market,  and  over  36%  of  OTC  business  -  roughly  twice  the  size  of  the  next
largest  country,  the  US.  Turnover  in  the  global  foreign  exchange  market  has  shrunk  somewhat  in
recent  years,  reflecting  in  part  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  But  there  have  also  been  important
improvements in market efficiency, with for example the increased use of electronic broking. That is
reflected in the sharp rise in underlying customer business with firms like yours, which is a welcome
development.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude at this point. It is clear that the events of 11 September, and
their aftermath, have given rise to considerable uncertainties. There is plenty, particularly overseas, for
central bankers to concern themselves with. When I spoke at a conference last week, one newspaper
commented that I always looked worried. Well, of course, central bankers are paid to worry. But when
reviewing the economic situation we need to achieve a sense of balance. The data do not all point in a
single direction. Certainly in the run-up to the November MPC meeting we will need to take a careful
look, as I indicated earlier, at all the data. Our feet will be on the ground, but our eyes will scan the
horizon! Thank you very much.
4
BIS Review 87/2001
