 Tony Latter: Derivatives from a Central Bank perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
Seminar Programme of the FOW Derivatives Expo, Hong Kong, 5 November 2001 
 Introduction 
Why may central banks be interested in derivatives? Although it is dangerous to generalise, and no 
two central banks may see them in precisely the same light, there are certain aspects of derivatives in 
which central banks, including the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, probably have a common interest. I 
should like to review some of these today. 
For present purposes one does not need to be too precise as to what is meant by derivatives, save to 
note that the focus here is only on financial derivatives, although these do of course share many of the 
same basic characteristics as commodity or other derivatives. The textbooks give various definitions of 
a financial derivative: for instance, that it is a contract the value of which depends on or derives from 
the  value  of  some  underlying  financial  asset  or  index;  or  that  it  is  an  instrument  which  does  not 
constitute  ownership  but  only  a  promise  or  option  to  convey  ownership.  At  its  widest,  the  definition 
could embrace all futures,  forwards, swaps, options,  warrants, convertibles,  asset-backed securities 
and so on, and all combinations or variations of those. At the end of the day it's probably fair to say 
that,  although  we may experience some difficulty  in  describing  exactly  what  a  derivative is,  we can 
usually recognise one when we encounter it. 
The  interests  of  the  central  bank  in  derivatives  will  tend  to  be  rather  broader  than  those  of  any 
commercial bank, trader or broker, because of its multiple policy responsibilities. The issues can be 
conveniently grouped under four headings: infrastructure, supervision, information, and operations. 
Infrastructure 
HKMA  is  probably  fairly  typical  of  most  central  banks  in  developed  financial  centres  in  having  a 
general concern for the stability and development of the financial infrastructure, but without necessarily 
being involved directly in the provision of that infrastructure, of which derivatives nowadays form an 
indispensable  part.  Derivatives  have  brought  substantial  benefits  to  the  commercial  community,  in 
facilitating  hedging  and  hence  business  planning  more  generally,  and  have  enabled  the  financial 
institutions to offer a progressively wider range of services and greater efficiency in the intermediation 
process, as well as to exploit market imperfections and other trading opportunities for their own gain. 
The range of available derivative products in Hong Kong is extensive. Exchange tradable derivatives 
include futures and options on the Hang Seng Index as well as on individual Hong Kong stocks and, 
since the launch a few weeks ago, on a selection of leading stocks of certain overseas exchanges. 
Exchange  traded  interest  rate  products  include  one-month  and  three-month  HIBOR  futures;  and 
futures  contracts  on  three-year  Exchange  Fund  Notes  are  expected  to  commence  trading  later  this 
month. 
Less visible, perhaps, to the outside observer, but no less important, is the trading of over-the-counter 
derivative products among financial institutions. Fewer high frequency statistics are available for OTC 
activity than for exchange-based activity, but the Bank for International Settlements publishes regular 
estimates and has recently released the results of its comprehensive triennial survey of activity in the 
world's  foreign  exchange  and  related  derivative  markets. The  HKMA  has  in  parallel  released  some 
details of the Hong Kong data which we collected and submitted for that survey.1 Briefly, in the three 
years up to April 2001, while, roughly in line with experience elsewhere in the world, turnover in the 
foreign  exchange  market  in  Hong  Kong  declined,  activity  in  OTC  derivatives  -  essentially  currency 
swaps and options, and interest rate swaps, options and forward rate agreements - rose by just under 
10%. Interest rate products accounted for almost two thirds of the total of this derivatives activity. 
The  apparent  buoyancy  of  interest-rate  related  activity  may  be  partly  attributable  to  the  growth  of 
composite products such as structured notes which include an option or swap element. Some of the 
                                                      
1   A fuller account will appear in the forthcoming November issue of the HKMA Quarterly Bulletin. 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 1
 growth in the interest rate swap market has also been associated with the continuing development of 
the  Hong  Kong  dollar  bond  market,  where  well-rated  names  may  combine  issuance  of  longer-term 
fixed-rate paper with a swap to secure floating-rate Hong Kong dollars at sub-HIBOR, or, particularly in 
the case of some international borrowers, link this also with a currency swap to obtain US dollars at 
sub-LIBOR. 
As regards exchange traded products, there has been a recent surge of activity in HIBOR futures. This 
may  owe  something  to  the  steep  downtrend  in  interest  rates  this  year,  which  could  have  prompted 
both those who expect it to continue and those who are content to lock in borrowing at current low 
rates, to enter the futures market in order to speculate or hedge on their respective hunches. 
All  in  all,  as  these  various  examples  illustrate,  the  derivatives  infrastructure  in  Hong  Kong  has 
developed well to meet the evolving requirements of the business and financial communities. 
Supervision 
Despite for the most part providing a beneficial service, derivatives trading also has the potential to 
bring disaster. Mere mention of the word Barings is no doubt sufficient to make the point. 
It is for this reason that the relevant authorities exercise supervision of derivatives activity. In the Hong 
Kong  context,  HKMA  supervises  the  banks  and  other  deposit  taking  institutions  to  ensure  suitably 
prudent behaviour, while the SFC regulates exchange trading and the other players. 
I should perhaps make the point here that supervision is not aimed at suppressing activity, but rather 
at  ensuring  that  risks  are  properly  identified  and  managed  and  that  disasters  which  might  threaten 
systemic stability are avoided. Particular emphasis is placed on ensuring that management possesses 
sufficient understanding of the derivatives business and the associated risks, and has the appropriate 
internal mechanisms in place for monitoring and control. 
Officialdom  in  general,  and  central  banks  more  especially,  are  sometimes  characterised  as  being 
opposed  to  speculation  and,  by  extension,  as  being  suspicious  of  derivatives,  which  are  often 
regarded  as  a  convenient  vehicle  for  speculation.  That  characterisation  is  mistaken.  We  are  not 
opposed  to  speculation.  Indeed,  we  recognise  very  clearly  that  financial  markets  cannot  operate 
efficiently if the speculator is excluded. He plays a key role in the price formation process and is the 
essential counterparty to the hedger. The textbooks tell us that if the speculator stabilises prices he 
makes a profit, while if he doesn't he loses. The fact that speculators still exist is then taken as prima 
facie evidence that their activity is on balance stabilising, although I am also conscious of the counter-
argument, namely that they are destabilising and lose money, but the population of them is constantly 
being replenished by fools who think they can do better. 
However,  although  we  acknowledge  the  generally  positive  role  of  speculation,  we  are  very  much 
opposed to manipulation. The key distinction is that, whereas the speculator takes a view based on 
the price which he observes in the market and acts upon it, the manipulator uses his resources and 
the  advantage  of  a  dominant  market  position  to  try  to  influence  the  price  -  in  other  words,  he  is  a 
potential  price  setter  rather  than  a  price  taker.  Particularly  in  small  markets  where  relatively  small 
deals may be able to move prices significantly, we need to be alert to this potential problem, which 
may, if unattended, seriously undermine one's vision of competitive, efficient markets. 
Information 
The prices at which derivatives trade contain information which may usefully supplement other market 
data available to central banks as a means of monitoring expectations and sentiment. 
Let me give just two examples. First, in the foreign exchange market, whereas the forward rate may 
provide a point estimate of the expected future rate, data on option prices for different strike prices can 
provide a probability distribution for the future rate. This additional information, available only as a by-
product  of  derivatives  trading,  may  be  of  interest  to  market  analysts,  including  the  monetary 
authorities. Within the HKMA we have conducted some research into this, which we are in the process 
of discussing with academics and other technicians. Second, with exchange traded products, where 
levels  of  activity  are  clearly  visible,  sudden  surges  or  collapses  in  turnover  may  hint  at  shifts  in 
sentiment  for  one  reason  or  another.  Although  it  may  not  always  be  clear  what  story  best  fits  a 
particular statistical movement, it is sensible to be alert to such developments and try to understand 
the signals which they may give. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2001
 Operations 
It may be considered natural for central banks, like any other financial institutions, to be active on their 
own account in the derivatives markets. Nevertheless, there are perhaps one or two cautions which 
might apply in the case of central banks. 
If a central bank is trading for profit - as it would usually be when, for instance, managing its foreign 
currency  reserves-  it  may  be  presumed  to  follow  the  normal  trading  strategies  of  any  portfolio 
manager,  within  specified  guidelines  and  subject  to  appropriate  risk  controls  of  course.  Derivatives 
may  usefully  be  part  of  that,  providing  an  efficient  avenue  for  pursuing  trading  or  hedging 
opportunities. It seems entirely reasonable for the central bank to be allowed to operate in this way, 
but, in derivatives as in the cash markets, the central bank may need to balance the objectives of fund 
management against those of its own monetary or exchange rate policy. 
There is also a question whether derivatives should be used as a deliberate tool for monetary policy 
purposes.  Typical  examples  would  be  use  of  foreign  exchange  forwards  or  options  to  assist  in 
maintaining  exchange  rate  stability.  A  couple  of  years  ago,  partly  in  response  to  some  academic 
debate on the subject, the HKMA did in fact examine the case for the Exchange Fund to write currency 
options. We concluded as follows: "… the writing of currency options by the HKMA appeared to be 
technically feasible and might be consistent with currency board principles if properly designed ….. In 
theory at least, the writing of currency options by a central bank could be a useful tool in helping to 
stabilise exchange markets under certain conditions …. However, … the theoretical benefits seemed 
to  be  outweighed  by  the  disadvantages  …  [including]  the  complications  that  the  writing  of  options 
would bring to the currency board system, and the possibility of negative perceptions that the HKMA 
was engaging in risky activities or lacked the means to support the currency board system in the spot 
market."2  
The feasibility and advisability of using derivatives as a monetary instrument are subjects which have 
been  debated  over  the  years  by  academics  and  policymakers,  and  a  few  countries  have  relevant 
experiences  to  tell.  A  number  of  points  seem  worth  making.  First,  in  most  instances,  if  you  are 
confident in your monetary policy you should probably be up front in supporting it by your actions. If 
you  don't  possess  sufficient  resources  for  that  support,  you  should  certainly  think  twice  before 
leveraging  yourself  in  derivatives,  even  if  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  such  a  strategy  might,  if 
successful, be profitable - for the potential downside could be considerable. Second, although central 
banks and governments are nowadays much more transparent about their operations than previously, 
use  of  derivatives  may  in  some  instances  provide  some  temporary  disguise,  but  disguise  would 
seldom be a very healthy reason for selecting a strategy. Third, as implied in the above quotation, the 
perception continues to exist that derivatives are a particularly risky activity, or one which might signal 
some degree of desperation. Despite the fact that such views may be irrational, a central bank may 
need to acknowledge public sensitivities and err on the side of conservatism in its operations. Fourth, 
in searching for the most cost-effective or reliable avenue for monetary operations, it should be borne 
in mind that the derivative markets may be more fickle and less liquid than the cash markets, perhaps 
the more so at the very moment when you might be most tempted to use them. 
In sum, I do not currently see a convincing case for using derivatives as a monetary policy tool. In the 
final  analysis,  however,  a  central  bank  is  entitled  to  keep  all  its  options  open  and  to  surprise  the 
markets if it so wishes, provided that it is ultimately accountable for its actions. 
Conclusion 
I have tried to briefly explain some of the angles from which central bankers generally, and the HKMA 
in particular, view derivatives. This is perhaps a rather dry topic and I feel sure that there are many 
more interesting and challenging aspects of derivatives which will be discussed during these two days 
of seminars related to the Derivatives Expo. 
                                                      
2   Record  of  discussion  of  the  Exchange  Fund  Advisory  Committee  Sub-committee  on  Currency  Board  Operations  on 
5 November 1999, reproduced in HKMA Quarterly Bulletin, February 2000. 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 3
