 Christian Noyer: Challenges ahead - the accession process 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Foreign  and 
Commonwealth Office, London, 12 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be able to be here today at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to 
share with you some thoughts on the process of EU accession and the challenges that this process 
poses for the accession countries. While recognising that this process raises challenges for the EU 
itself, I will not elaborate on those in my speech today. 
Undoubtedly, the enlargement of the European Union to embrace a number of countries from central, 
eastern  and  southern  Europe  and  the  Mediterranean  constitutes,  after  the  changeover  to  the  euro 
banknotes  and  coins,  one  of  the  main  challenges  currently  faced  by  European  policy-makers. 
However, I would be giving a somewhat misleading impression if I devoted my speech today solely to 
the “challenges ahead” without first mentioning the very foundations of the European structure. The 
latter form the basis for our capacity to actually meet those challenges. 
EU  enlargement  rests  on  the  proven  success  of  European  integration.  The  European  Union 
constitutes an unprecedented framework for the successful development of regional co-operation. Not 
only have the original objectives of European integration been achieved, namely to ensure peace and 
prosperity  in  a  historically  conflict-ridden  part  of  the  world,  the  European  Union  has  also  shown  its 
ability to overcome the various economic and political challenges with which it has been confronted 
throughout its almost 45-year history.  Such is the attractiveness of the European integration project 
that, since the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1957, nine countries have joined the original six, and a 
host of others are keen to do so. A key accomplishment of this progress towards “ever closer union” 
will become truly tangible in a few weeks' time, on 1 January 2002, when most of the citizens of the 
European Union will finally have the euro, our money, in their pockets. 
In many  ways, the prospect of EU accession has also been  instrumental  in triggering reform in the 
12 countries  currently  negotiating  entry  into  the  EU,  namely  five  Central  and  Eastern  European 
countries, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia; three Baltic States, Estonia, 
Latvia and Lithuania; two southern European countries, Bulgaria and Romania; and Cyprus and Malta 
in the Mediterranean. Following some troublesome years at the beginning of the transition process, 
the  accession  countries  have  made  substantial  progress  in  building  institutions  and  designing 
appropriate  policy.  The  accession  countries  have  now  generally  achieved  macroeconomic  stability. 
The  significance  of  these  achievements  can  be  demonstrated  by  the  resilience  shown  by  the 
accession countries to the Asian and Russian crises in 1997-1998 and, more recently, to the adverse 
developments in Argentina and other emerging market economies. 
However, a number of important challenges remain. The years to come will be crucial to ensure that 
the  current  significant  momentum  of  the  accession  process  is  maintained,  and  that  the  remaining 
difficulties are dealt  with effectively  in order to  permit the smooth integration of accession countries 
into the EU and, later on, into the euro area. 
The forthcoming enlargement of the EU will, no doubt, increase the diversity and complexity within the 
Union in an unprecedented way. In economic terms, the discrepancies in real per capita income and 
price  levels between the  accession countries  and the euro area are of a magnitude that has never 
been observed in previous enlargement rounds. In this regard, however, it should be borne in mind 
that the combined GDP of all the accession countries accounts for only around 5% of that of the EU. 
The  enlargement  also  confronts  European  policy-makers  with  enormous  challenges  in  political  and 
institutional terms. The sheer increase in the number of Member States that the current enlargement 
represents  renders  the  functioning  of  decision-making  bodies  more  difficult.  As  we  all  know, 
substantial institutional reforms are needed to ensure that the EU can continue to function effectively 
after enlargement. 
From  the  Eurosystem's  perspective,  there  are  five  economic  issues  that  appear  to  be  of  greater 
relevance at the current juncture: real convergence, inflation developments in the accession countries, 
monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  strategies,  capital  account  liberalisation,  and  the  structure  and 
functioning of the financial sector. Let me elaborate briefly on each of these. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 1
 Real convergence 
1. 
Sustainable  rates  of  GDP  growth  will  be  a  key  challenge  for  accession  countries  in  the  years,  and 
even decades, to come. 2000 was the first year since the beginning of the transition process in which 
all  accession  countries  experienced  positive  growth.  The  degree  of  real  convergence  with  the  euro 
area,  that  is,  the  catching-up  of  the  per  capita  income  and  price  levels  of  accession  countries  with 
those  of  the  euro  area,  has  remained  limited.  Looking  ahead,  it  appears  unlikely  that  the  overall 
growth differential between the accession countries and the euro area will be significantly higher than 
a  few  percentage  points.  Overall,  the  gap  between  the  average  GDP  per  capita  of  the  accession 
countries  and  that  of  the  euro  area  remains  large.  On  average,  GDP  per  capita  in  the  accession 
countries is, in terms of purchasing power parity, around 44% of that of the euro area, and this figure is 
even lower when current exchange rates are taken into account. The size of the gap, combined with 
the limited growth differentials, suggests that the process of real convergence will be a very slow one, 
likely to continue far beyond the tentative dates for EU accession and for the adoption of the euro. 
Hence, although differences in income levels are compatible with membership of EMU, it is important 
for  accession  countries  to  progress  in  the  process  of  real  convergence  with  the  euro  area.  In 
particular,  real  convergence  can  help  to  create  economic  cohesion  within  EMU  and  promote 
integration between Members States. Further real convergence will also help to minimise the risks and 
the effects of asymmetric shocks. Against this background, it seems crucial that accession countries 
pursue structural policies that enhance the potential output growth of their economies. 
Inflation developments 
2. 
With  regard  to  inflation  developments,  I  should  like  to  stress  that,  on  the  whole,  the  accession 
countries have made remarkable progress in bringing inflation down to single-digit rates. Inflation in 
the  accession  countries  is  expected  to  average  around  6%-7%  by  the  end  of  this  year.  However, 
reducing  inflation  from  relatively  low  levels  to  even  lower  ones  is  clearly  a  difficult  task.  Evidence 
points  to  a  number  of  micro  and  macroeconomic  factors  which  affect  current  inflation  rates  in  the 
accession  countries.  These  include  ongoing  price  liberalisation,  privatisation  processes,  relatively 
expansionary fiscal policies and stubborn inflation expectations. Inflationary pressures stemming from 
high  productivity  growth  in  the  tradable  sector  of  fast-growing  economies  –  known  as  the 
Balassa-Samuelson effect – have also been cited as one of the main reasons for higher inflation in 
catching-up economies, such as those of the accession countries. 
A closer examination of inflation developments in the accession countries shows, however, that the 
Balassa-Samuelson effect alone cannot explain the persistence of inflation differentials vis-à-vis the 
euro  area.  Moreover,  notwithstanding  its  importance,  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  should  not  be 
overstated when explaining current inflation rates in the accession countries. Indeed, most empirical 
studies estimate the Balassa-Samuelson effect within a range of 1 to 2 percentage points. This does 
not mean, however, that the pursuit of real convergence conflicts with further progress on disinflation. 
On the contrary, the process of disinflation should be advanced in the accession countries, at a pace 
determined  by  the  overall  economic  situation  and  in  particular  by  the  need  for  these  countries  to 
increase  real  convergence.  The  Maastricht  inflation  criterion,  which  will  not  be  revised  to  take  into 
account any possible Balassa-Samuelson effect, should not be seen as an immediate requirement for 
these countries, but rather as a medium-term objective for central banks. As the experience of some 
euro  area  participants  shows,  progress  in  nominal  and  real  convergence  can  be,  and  should  be, 
pursued in parallel. Indeed, the experience of countries such as Greece, Spain and Portugal confirms 
that a key element of their successful entry into the euro area was their success in controlling sources 
of  inflation  other  than  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect.  In  particular,  a  balanced  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy  mix  and  the  control  of  real  wage  increases  have  supported  the  disinflation  process  in  these 
countries, and allowed them to advance in the process of nominal convergence without compromising 
the gradual catching-up in real incomes. 
Monetary policy and exchange rate strategies 
3. 
With regard to monetary policy and exchange rate strategies, most accession countries have already 
indicated  their  intention  to  join  ERM  II  as  early  as  possible  after  entry  into  the  EU.  The  accession 
countries have also signalled their intention to adopt the euro as soon as possible, that is, after two 
years of ERM II membership. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 The whole issue of the timing of ERM II membership, both as to when to join and how long to remain 
in the system, is dependent on  a somewhat more complex question, namely  whether the discipline 
which ERM II imposes on its members is advantageous for the accession countries. The answer, in 
our view, is “yes”. 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to reflect on this question for a moment and explain why we hold this 
view. 
Being  small  open  economies,  most  accession  countries  cannot  disregard  exchange  rate 
developments when making their monetary policy decisions. The exchange rate is generally a more 
potent  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy  decisions  than  domestic  interest  rates,  and  it  also 
plays a crucial role in explaining the pass-through to price developments in most accession countries. 
Thus,  in  order  to  achieve  further  disinflation  and  sustainable  growth,  excessive  exchange  rate 
fluctuations need to be avoided. In our view, and this view is supported by our previous experiences 
with  the  EMS/ERM  framework,  ERM  II  provides  a  useful  mechanism  to  anchor  exchange  rate 
expectations. At the same time, ERM II, with its adjustable central rate and its current fluctuation band 
of ±15%, provides accession countries with the same degree of flexibility as the EMS/ERM following 
the decision to widen the fluctuation band in 1993. This may be suitable for accession countries. Given 
that  accession  countries  still  need  to  complete  the  process  of  restructuring  their  economies  and 
catching up in terms of real income, the flexibility inherent in ERM II and its wider fluctuation bands 
provides  accession  countries  with  sufficient  scope  to  accommodate  these  reforms.  Bearing  in  mind 
that ERM II constitutes a multilateral arrangement, and that it is consistent with the regional integration 
process in which all accession countries are deeply involved, ERM II is likely to have fewer potential 
weaknesses  than  other  alternative  exchange  rate  arrangements  have  shown  over  recent  years.  Of 
course, as for any exchange rate arrangement, coherence between macroeconomic policies must be 
ensured for successful participation in ERM II. 
With  regard  to  the  length  of  the  period  of  ERM  II  membership,  in  view  of  the  varying  degrees  of 
convergence of the accession countries, limiting the duration of ERM II membership to the minimum 
permissible time to qualify for the adoption of the euro – that is, two years – may not be an optimal 
choice for all accession countries. Longer membership of ERM II may, in some cases, be helpful since 
it would allow accession countries to retain the exchange rate as an instrumental policy variable during 
the  catching-up  process.  Indeed,  this  option  has  proven  useful  for  most  of  the  current  euro  area 
participants. Again, it is worthwhile to recall the examples of Greece, Portugal and Spain. In the case 
of  Greece,  the  final  revaluation  of  the  drachma  on  17  January  2000  took  place  at  the  request  of 
Greece,  with  the  agreement  of  the  EU  authorities,  to  support  the  country's  efforts  to  preserve 
sustainable price stability and progress in real convergence without jeopardising the competitiveness 
of the economy. Portugal and Spain, which participated in the EMS/ERM for a longer period of time, 
also  used  the  option  of  realigning  the  respective  exchange  rates  of  the  escudo  and  the  peseta  at 
several points along the road towards entry into the euro area. 
Participation in ERM II should, therefore, not be seen as a mere “waiting room” prior to the adoption of 
the euro. Instead, it should be regarded as a meaningful and flexible framework for increasing nominal 
and  real  convergence  with  the  euro  area,  and  for  tackling  the  challenges  faced  by  the  accession 
countries as they progress towards the adoption of the euro. Indeed, the experience of current euro 
area  member countries  in  the  fields  of  inflation  and  exchange  rate  developments  strongly  suggests 
that  the  existing  institutional  framework  for  accession  to  the  euro  area,  including  the  convergence 
criteria  as  defined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  is  sound.  Furthermore,  this  framework  should  be 
sufficiently flexible to accommodate most of the challenges that accession countries will face on their 
path to the eventual adoption of the euro. 
Capital account liberalisation 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  fourth  economic  issue  I  would  like  to  refer  to  is  capital  account 
liberalisation.  In  several  accession  countries,  capital  movements  are  still  subject  to  a  number  of 
restrictions.  The  most  relevant  restrictions,  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  apply  to  short-term 
portfolio investments. Although transitional periods may be allowed under the Treaty in the early years 
of EU membership, as well as prior to accession under the Europe Agreements, thus far, only a few 
countries have requested them. In those few cases, transitional periods mainly relate to areas that are 
not particularly relevant from a monetary policy point of view (e.g. real estate purchases). 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 3
 Despite the generally positive impact of capital liberalisation on the growth prospects of the accession 
countries, one should bear in mind that the speed of capital account liberalisation may carry risks for 
countries  with  underdeveloped  financial  sectors,  especially  in  a  context  of  fixed  or  tightly  managed 
exchange rate regimes. If not carefully sequenced and supported by consistent macroeconomic and 
structural policies, capital account liberalisation could pose some risks to macroeconomic or financial 
stability in the accession countries. It is therefore crucial that the right policies are put into place before 
EU accession. 
Financial sector structure and functioning 
5. 
The last issue I would like to elaborate on concerns the structure and functioning of the financial sector 
in the accession countries. Partly for historical reasons, the financial sector in the accession countries 
is largely dominated by the banking sector, whereas other financial sector intermediaries still need to 
be further developed. Over the past few  years, significant progress has been  made in restructuring 
and consolidating the banking sector. This progress has been accomplished through the large-scale 
privatisation  of  state-owned  banks  and  through  the  extensive  opening-up  of  the  banking  sector  to 
foreign ownership. Undoubtedly, this process has contributed to greater integration with the EU and 
significant efficiency gains. It has also supported the strengthening of financial stability and provided 
the banking sector with know-how and capital. 
However,  the  degree  of  financial  intermediation  remains  rather  low  and  the  challenges  ahead  are 
considerable.  Given  the  major  implications  that  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  financial  sector 
may  have  for  macroeconomic  developments,  a  strengthening  of  the  accession  countries'  financial 
markets, including the enhancement of legal frameworks and prudential supervision, is needed. The 
principal  reasons  for  this  are  twofold.  First,  the  weakness  of  the  financial  sector  has  been  partly 
responsible for the relatively modest growth rates observed in some accession countries during the 
last  decade.  In  spite  of  substantial  structural  reforms  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy,  the  as  yet 
insufficient  development of the financial sectors may  have made the transition to a fully functioning 
market economy more costly in many accession countries. Financial sector development is, therefore, 
crucial if potential economic growth is to be increased and real incomes are to catch up with those of 
the euro area. Second, financial stability in the accession countries is of great relevance to the ECB, 
since  it  is  a  central  aspect  of  ensuring  the  smooth  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  an  enlarged  euro 
area. Financial sector vulnerabilities have to be avoided as they may complicate the efficient working 
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. They may also pose great challenges for the conduct 
of monetary policy, for central banks' credibility and for the maintenance of price stability. 
Finally, accession countries have embarked on the process of developing a modern financial market 
infrastructure. This is essential in order to facilitate the transition from a planned to a market economy 
and, at the same time, to support the conduct of a single monetary policy in an enlarged euro area. 
Setting up such a financial infrastructure is, however, a difficult task. First, preparatory work in this field 
is subject to very long lead times and, therefore, needs to be implemented years before the adoption 
of the euro. Second, the target of this preparatory work is a moving one: certain components of the 
euro  area  financial  infrastructure  may  need  to  be  adapted  before  new  Member  States  can  be 
integrated into the euro area. Furthermore, there is an ongoing debate in international fora about the 
optimal  structure  of  modern  financial  markets  in  an  increasingly  integrated  global  financial  system. 
More  and  more,  market  pressures,  economies  of  scale  and  efficiency  gains  point  to  the  need  for 
further consolidation of the financial infrastructure. In the context of EU entry, and taking into account 
the  relatively  small  size  of  the  financial  sectors  in  the  accession  countries,  plans  to  develop  the 
financial market infrastructure may need to bear in mind the specific conditions applying to accession 
countries. Indeed, there is a risk that accession countries may now be investing considerable efforts 
and resources to develop infrastructures similar to those that some euro area countries are trying to 
rationalise. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  shall  conclude  with  a  few  brief  remarks  of  a  more  general  nature.  The 
ultimate goal of entry into the euro area is an ambitious one and, for this reason, it is necessary to start 
preparing for this prospect well in advance. Broadly speaking, the prospect of EU membership should 
encourage accession countries to make all the macro and microeconomic adjustments necessary to 
join  the  euro  area.  In  this  way,  EU  accession  may  set  in  motion  a  virtuous  cycle  of  long-term 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 sustainable economic growth. As the experience of current euro area participants shows, accession 
countries may encounter difficulties, and even sometimes feel frustration, during the different stages of 
this process. However, these difficulties should not discourage accession countries from going ahead 
with the project of entry into EU and, later on, the euro area. 
Undoubtedly,  EU  enlargement  poses  great  challenges  to  both  the  accession  countries  and  to  the 
European Union itself. Creating the right economic and political conditions and adjusting the European 
institutions for the eventual integration into the EU of all accession countries is certainly an enormous 
task.  However  –  and  here  I  come  back  to  what  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech  –  the 
project of European integration should not be regarded just as a stimulating exercise of facing up to 
never-ending “challenges ahead”, but rather as a historic opportunity to deepen and extend the idea of 
Europe. I am confident that we, as Europeans, and more specifically in our central banking function at 
the ECB, will be able to master the “challenges ahead” and, in this way, to contribute to the completion 
of the European project through the successful integration of the future Member States into the euro 
area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 5
