 Svein Gjedrem: Norwegian monetary policy in the age of the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  at  the  conference  on  EMU  and  the  euro 
hosted  by  The  European  Commission,  Euro-Info  Centre  and  NHO  (Confederation  of  Norwegian 
Business and   Industry), Oslo, 30 October 2001. 
Please note that the text may differ slightly from the actual presentation  
 Introduction 
Welfare  and  prosperity  in  Norway  rely  on  the  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and 
knowledge. The EU accounts for about 80 per cent of Norway's foreign trade. By   virtue of the EEA 
Agreement,  Norway  is  part  of  the  internal  market.  The  Norwegian  economy  is  interwoven  with 
European economies. This has also been reflected in   Norway's monetary policy throughout much of 
the post-war era. 
 
Monetary  policy's  most  important  task  is  to  provide  a  nominal  anchor  for  the  economy.  Since  the 
Second  World  War,  there  have  been  several  monetary  policy  reforms  in  Norway.  In  the  period 
between 1972 and 1986, monetary policy was to a limited extent focused on curbing the effects of cost 
shocks on prices.  
During this period, inflation was high and variable. Consumer prices rose almost twice as much as in 
Germany. At the same time, the krone's value against the German mark was almost halved. 
From 1986 to 1992, Norway operated a fixed exchange rate regime. The fixed exchange rate was the 
anchor  for  inflation  in  Norway.  The  difference  between  inflation  in  Norway  and  Germany  narrowed 
substantially.  
From 1986 to 1990, monetary policy was oriented towards maintaining a fixed exchange rate against a 
trade-weighted basket of currencies. In 1990, the krone was pegged to the European currency unit, 
the  ECU.  The  peg  was  abandoned  in  December  1992  when  international  currency  turbulence 
compelled Norway and several other countries to discontinue the fixed exchange rate system against 
the ECU. However, monetary policy was still geared towards maintaining a stable krone exchange rate 
against European currencies. The ECU was used as the main reference for European currencies. The 
euro took over this role when it was introduced on 1 January 1999. 
 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 1
  
Developments  since  the  beginning  of  1997  indicated  that  the  exchange  rate  was  no  longer  an 
appropriate operational target of monetary policy. Norges Bank therefore placed increasing emphasis 
on  low  and  stable  inflation  as  a  precondition  for  exchange  rate  stability.  In  our  opinion,  the  best 
contribution monetary policy could make to a stable krone exchange rate against the euro was low and 
stable inflation in line with inflation in the euro area. Monetary policy was therefore oriented towards 
bringing inflation over time into line with that aimed at by the European Central Bank. 
Guidelines for economic policy in Norway 
 
On 29 March, the Government issued new guidelines for monetary policy. Monetary policy shall now 
be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary  policy  is consumer 
price  inflation  of  2½  per  cent.  At  the  same  time,  new  guidelines  for  fiscal  policy  were  drawn  up, 
providing  for  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central  government  budget  equivalent  to  the 
expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2001
 The  new  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  did  not  entail  any  significant  change  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Quantifying an inflation target, in line with international practice, has made it easier to 
explain and understand Norwegian monetary policy.  
The implementation of monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  influences the economy  with considerable and variable lags.  Our analyses indicate 
that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two years is 
thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. 
The effects of interest rate changes are uncertain. In addition, it may be difficult to assess the current 
situation.  Different  indicators  may  point  in  various  directions  and  economic  statistics  are  normally 
published with a lag. This suggests that a gradualist approach to setting interest rates is appropriate. 
We will then acquire new knowledge and can adjust interest rates underway.  
If evidence suggests that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the 
interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged 
interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is just as important to avoid 
an inflation rate that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. 
Economic policy in the euro area 
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 also meant the introduction of a single monetary policy 
in  the  eleven  member  countries.  Greece  joined  as  the  twelfth  country  on  1  January  2001.  The 
population of the euro area is a little more than 300 million and the euro area economy accounted for 
about  16  per  cent  of  world  GDP  last  year.1  Price  stability  is  the  primary  objective  of  the  single 
monetary policy in the euro area. The Governing Council of the European Central Bank has defined 
price stability as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the 
euro  area  of  below  2  per  cent.  The  project  will  be  completed  in  January  and  February  2002.  On 
1 January, euro banknotes and coins will be put into circulation. During a changeover period, national 
currencies can be used as a means of payment alongside the euro. This period is no longer than two 
months in any of the member countries. As from the beginning of March, the euro will be the only legal 
tender in all euro area countries, and all prices will be in euros. 
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  is  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  If 
asymmetric shocks across euro area countries occur, the national authorities can use fiscal policy to 
stabilise economic developments. While adhering to the Stability and Growth Pact, fiscal policy could 
become  more  effective  in  the  small  and  medium-sized  economies  since  the  exchange  rate  and 
interest  rates  will  not  in  principle  be  affected.  In  addition,  local  wage  determination  and  investment 
flows will over time contribute to reducing differences in profitability and production costs.  
The responsibility for fiscal policy rests with the national government of each euro area country. Fiscal 
policy can be adapted to the economic situation, provided the provisions of the Stability and Growth 
Pact  are  adhered  to.  Under  the  Pact,  Member  States  are  committed  to  pursuing  the  medium-term 
objective of budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus. Fiscal policy can be used to deal with 
cyclical fluctuations, but the budget deficit must not exceed 3 per cent of GDP unless it is deemed to 
result from an unusual event or severe economic downturn. 
In Norway, fiscal policy also has a long-term anchor, and monetary policy is oriented towards low and 
stable inflation. The guidelines for the use of petroleum revenues set limits on the structural budget 
deficit.  Like  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  the  EU,  these  guidelines  will  contribute  to  economic 
stability.  
 
                                                      
1   GDP calculated in a common currency based on purchasing power parity. 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 3
  The economic situation and the monetary policy stance 
Growth forecasts for the global economy have been revised downwards markedly in recent months. 
Since December 2000, growth forecasts for our trading partners have been halved for 2001. The tragic 
events of 11 September will have a further dampening effect on activity in the US, Asia and European 
economies. 
In the euro area, high oil prices, livestock diseases, the decline in the ICT sector and reduced demand 
in  the  US  have  had  a  negative  impact  on  economic  developments.  GDP  growth  has  also  slowed 
considerably over the last year. Unemployment has shown a substantial decline in recent years and is 
low in many of the smaller countries. Unemployment is high in the large countries. Particular structural 
features, such as wide regional disparities, are contributing to the high level of overall unemployment. 
The terrorist attacks of 11 September have reduced demand in the aviation and travel industries. The 
European Central Bank has cut its key rates by 1 percentage point so far this year.  
Until the autumn, the Norwegian economy had remained relatively insulated from the world economic 
slowdown.  It  now  appears  clear  that  Norway  will  also  be  affected  by  the  slowdown.  A  number  of 
Norwegian  enterprises  in  export  industries  and  the  travel  industry  have  felt  the  effects  of  growing 
caution  among  households  and  businesses  worldwide.  Investment  in  mainland  enterprises  will 
probably also decline. 
However,  the  economic  situation  in  Norway  is  different  from  that  of  the  euro  area.  The  Norwegian 
economy is still characterised by high capacity utilisation with a limited supply of labour. Registered 
unemployment has been low and stable since the autumn of 1998. Employment is growing sharply in 
the public sector and the construction industry. 
In recent years, consumer price inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading partners. 
The year-on-year rise in prices was 2.4 per cent in September. Stable prices for imported consumer 
goods is contributing to containing inflation in Norway. The rate of increase in prices that is primarily 
influenced by domestic costs is high.  
It is not a new phenomenon that Norway is at a different stage of the business cycle than the euro 
area countries. One reason for this is that changes in the external environment often have a different 
impact on the Norwegian economy than other European economies. For example, a sharp rise in oil 
prices  has  a  dampening  impact  on  purchasing  power  and  the  activity  level  in  the  euro  area.  In 
contrast,  this  tends  to  boost  petroleum  investment  and  household  confidence  in  Norway.  The 
development of a national oil industry and restructuring in the 1980s and 1990s have also contributed 
to a cyclical path that is specific to Norway. For example, petroleum investment was probably one of 
the main driving forces behind the booms in the mid-1980s and in 1997-1998. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2001
  BIS Review 90/2001 
 5
 Norwegian labour costs have risen by 5-6 per cent annually in recent years, while labour costs in the 
euro area countries have increased by less than 3 per cent annually. When cyclical developments are 
not synchronised and labour costs are at different levels, interest rates will also vary.  
In the current situation, Norwegian interest rates on a par with interest rates in the euro area would 
lead to instability. If monetary policy had not contributed to curbing demand, the pressure on economic 
resources would have led to accelerating inflation.  
Countries  participating  in  EMU  have  gained  access  to  a  large,  liquid  financial  market  in  their  own 
currency,  with low transaction costs. The risk of exchange rate losses associated with cross-border 
investment and borrowing in the euro area has been eliminated. This can result in substantial gains, 
not least for some of the smaller countries. The business sector in the euro area is taking advantage of 
this. The volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations has increased substantially each year 
since the introduction of the common currency in January 1999.  
 
Financial markets are small and fairly illiquid in Norway compared with the euro area. Combined with 
the uncertainty associated with exchange rate developments, this can add a premium on the required 
rate of return on investments in NOK. This can in turn contribute to a higher long-term interest rate in 
Norway than in the euro area countries over time. In the long term, financial market participants expect 
Norwegian interest rates to be close to 1 percentage point higher than in the euro area. 
Exchange rate developments after the introduction of the euro 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2001
 Before the  introduction  of the euro on  1 January  1999, it  was assumed that the establishment of a 
large currency area in Europe could result in more substantial exchange rate fluctuations than earlier. 
Foreign trade for EMU as a whole accounts for a smaller portion of the economy than for Germany, for 
example. The focus on exchange rate changes could thus be expected to fade. The Norwegian krone 
would also be affected by such increased fluctuations.  
For  Norway  and  other  countries  on  the  rim  of  the  euro  area,  exchange  rate  fluctuations  have  not 
increased since the introduction of the euro. To the contrary, the effective exchange rates for pound 
sterling, the Swiss franc, the Swedish krona and the Norwegian krone have varied somewhat less than 
in the period 1996-1999. These currencies have also fluctuated somewhat less against the euro than 
they did against the German mark the last few years before 1999.  
 
Market  participants  also  seem  to  assess  the  risk  of  future  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  krone 
exchange rate against the euro as fairly moderate. This uncertainty, which is indicated by the costs of 
hedging  against  future  exchange  rate  fluctuations  in  the  short  term,  is  now  relatively  limited  for  the 
Norwegian krone compared with other currencies on the rim of the euro area. 
 BIS Review 90/2001 
 7
 Changes in the terms of trade  are an important source of exchange rate fluctuations. The terms of 
trade measure the prices for goods and services that we export in relation to the prices for those we 
import.  Commodities  account  for  a  substantial  share  of  Norwegian  exports.  Commodity  prices  are 
subject  to  wide  variations.  Experience  shows  that  a  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  results  in  a 
depreciation,  whereas an  improvement leads to an  appreciation. The  exchange rate  thus  acts as a 
stabiliser, a buffer that partly curbs the effects of changes in the terms of trade on economic activity. 
Developments in the krone exchange rate can also contribute to restraining the effects on prices of 
higher wage growth and other domestic cost disturbances when there is confidence that inflation will 
be stable over time. 
Oil and gas are the commodities that account for the largest share of Norwegian exports. A substantial 
portion of the revenues from the sale of oil and gas is invested in foreign equities and bonds through 
the Government Petroleum Fund. The Fund has thus diminished the impact of short-term fluctuations 
in oil prices on the domestic use of petroleum revenues. In the last 20 years, fluctuations in the terms 
of  trade  have  been  three  to  four  times  greater  for  the  Norwegian  economy  including  the  petroleum 
sector  than  for  the  mainland  economy.  The  Petroleum  Fund  thus  relieves  pressure  on  the  krone 
exchange rate. The relatively low level of uncertainty that market participants seem to attach to krone 
exchange rate developments may be a reflection of this. 
Introduction of euro banknotes and coins 
The  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  from  1  January  2002  has  no  direct  consequence  for 
Norwegian monetary policy. For households and businesses in the euro area, the new currency will 
become a physical reality, not just an accounting currency. The practical advantages of the common 
currency will become more apparent. The euro may be used in twelve countries. The costs connected 
with  currency  exchange  between  the  twelve  countries  disappear. When  the  national  currencies  are 
withdrawn, price differences between the euro area countries will become more apparent. The result 
may  be  increased  competition  and  lower  interest  rates  over  time.  Euro  area  citizens  will  develop  a 
more positive attitude to the euro as their money. They will experience that the euro is stable, as it will 
be reflected in a stable level of retail prices. 
The changeover period, from the introduction of euro banknotes and coins until the national currencies 
cease to have legal tender status, is short. Norwegian enterprises and households will also have to 
exchange their cash in euro area countries’ national currencies. There seems to be a perception that 
exchange between two foreign currencies in Norwegian banks must be made via Norwegian krone, so 
that two exchange transactions are actually made, with fees being charged twice. I would like to use 
this opportunity to point out that there is no rule that stipulates that, for example, German banknotes 
are to be exchanged into Norwegian banknotes before being exchanged into euro banknotes. 
The UK, Sweden and Denmark have so far chosen to remain outside EMU. Sweden and the UK have 
inflation targets and floating exchange rates, while Denmark’s monetary policy is oriented towards a 
fixed exchange rate against the euro. These three countries are important to Norway, both because of 
their geographical proximity  and because they account for close to 40 per cent of Norway’s foreign 
trade. If these countries join EMU some time in the future, it is possible that the use of the euro by 
Norwegian households and businesses will increase somewhat. However, extensive use of the euro 
as a means of settling domestic payment transactions is unlikely. In those cases where we have seen 
partial or total currency substitution, such as in some countries in Eastern Europe and Latin America, it 
has usually  been a result  of strongly deteriorating confidence in the  local currency. Confidence can 
deteriorate  when  inflation  is  high  and  variable  or  when  government  finances  are  on  the  verge  of 
collapse. 
By influencing the volume of NOK in circulation, Norges Bank will always be able to ensure that the 
internal value of the Norwegian krone is maintained in line with the guidelines for monetary policy. 
If the introduction of the euro increases efficiency and economic growth in the participating countries, 
this will have positive spillover effects on the Norwegian economy. Stable economic developments in 
the euro area are also very important for the Norwegian economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
8 
 BIS Review 90/2001
