Yutaka Yamaguchi: The current state of the Japanese economy
Remarks by Mr Yutaka Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the JCIF International
Finance Seminar, Bank of Japan, 17 October 2001.
 It is my great honor to be here at this JCIF seminar. Taking this opportunity, I would like to explain the
state  of  Japan's  economy  and  the  nature  of  confronting  problems.  I  would  also  like  to  share  my
thoughts on how to  address the current  difficult  situation  and,  in  particular,  how  the  Bank  of  Japan
could contribute in such a process.
1. Global economic developments
I would like to start with the state of the global economy, in particular that of the United States, which
forms the basis of my assessment of Japan's economy. Currently, discussion about the prospect for
the US economy focuses on two issues. The first is the duration of the ongoing economic adjustment
process, which started in the IT-related areas, as well as the pace of the subsequent recovery. The
second is the economic impact of the tragic terrorist attacks in September.
The impact of the terrorist attacks in the US
Regarding the impact of the terrorist attacks, given great multi-faceted uncertainties, it is premature to
make informed judgement even if we narrowly focus on the economic areas. It is however safe to say
that we have succeeded in dealing with the most immediate challenge after the attacks, which was to
avoid  market  disruption  and  to  maintain  the  well-functioning  of  financial  markets  with  respect  to
liquidity and settlements.
Soon after the attacks, central banks including the  Bank of Japan, Finance Ministries, and financial
regulatory bodies in the world made a swift move while maintaining a close contact among each other.
In the area of central banking, central banks in major countries swiftly provided significant amount of
liquidity to money markets and declared their determination to secure the well-functioning of financial
markets and settlement systems. I think that these central bank actions exactly followed a textbook of
crisis management. At the same time, participants of financial markets also made their best efforts to
preserve  the  functioning  of  markets  and  to  execute  transactions  smoothly.  As  such,  thanks  to  the
coordinated efforts by the financial authorities, both at home and abroad, and market participants, we
successfully avoided disruption in financial markets, which could have extended subsequent negative
effects to the economy as a whole.
Currently, our focus has shifted to how the attacks and the subsequent developments will affect the
global  economy  especially  that  of  the  United  States.  On  this  point,  as  stated  by  the  other  financial
authorities abroad, we are confident that the attacks will not threaten a basis for economic growth in
the medium and long term. At the same time, however, we cannot deny greater uncertainties and a
loss of risk appetite in the near term. Looking at the US financial markets, for example, the stock price
has  almost  recovered  the  level  recorded  before  the  terrorist  attacks,  but  still  continues  nervous
movements.  In  the  meantime,  credit  spreads  have  remained  widened.  If  such  market  situation
persists, it may affect corporate financing accordingly. In fact, downward revision of earnings involving
restructuring  is  spreading  in  the  corporate  sector  and  there  is  a  risk  that  capital  spending  will  be
depressed further.
Economic adjustment starting from the IT sector
In trying to  assess  the  impact  of  the  terrorist  attacks,  we  should  note  that  the  adjustment  in  the  IT
sector  had  already  dragged  down  the  US  economic  growth  before  the  terrorist  attacks.  Therefore,
more fundamental issue for the prospect of the US economy is when the IT sector adjustment will end
and how rapidly the subsequent recovery will proceed.
Let  me  turn  the  clock  back  for  a  moment  and  review  how  the  prospect  for  the  US  economy  has
changed  since  the  end  of  the  last  year.  As  you  may  recall,  at  the  time  of  the  FOMC  meeting  in
November  last  year,  risks  were  weighted  towards  inflation  rather  than  economic  weakness.  It  was
BIS Review 87/2001
1
early January that the FED started to lower the federal funds rate. Until this spring, however, prevailing
view was that the US economy would see recovery in the second half of this year, with the main issue
being the shape of the recovery: i.e. V or U or others. According to the Blue Chip Economic Indicators,
an average forecast for the US economic growth in 2001 was 2.6 percent in January, which was lower
than four percent-plus in 2000 but not a significant slowdown. The forecast has now markedly declined
to 1.1 percent, which is 2.4 percent point lower than the forecast made a year ago.
In retrospect, we can point out two pillars supporting the prevailing view until spring that the recovery
would take place in the second half of the year. The first pillar was the expectation that the IT-related
demand would recover relatively soon. Another was the belief that significant room for expansionary
macroeconomic policies, both monetary and fiscal, would be effectively used to prevent the economy
from  falling  into  a  serious  recession.  In  addition,  it  was  often  pointed  out  as  a  favorable  financial
condition that, unlike the post-bubble period in Japan, the US financial system did not have a serious
balance sheet problem.
Regarding  the  IT-related  demand,  as  shown  in  the  forecast  by  the  industry,  optimistic  view  on  the
recovery  has  receded  in  terms  of  its  timing  as  well  as  its  pace.  On  the  policy  front,  the  FED  has
reduced the federal funds rate from 6.5 percent at the beginning of the year to the current 2.5 percent
in  early  October.  It  is  very  unusual  to  reduce  the  rate  by  4  percent  point  in  just  nine  months.  Tax
reduction of totaling $1,350  billion in the  next  ten  years  was  decided  and  refunding  started  in  July.
Additional fiscal measures are currently being discussed. Such decisive policy measures both in the
monetary  and  fiscal  areas  notwithstanding,  the  risks  foreseen  by  the  FOMC  are  still  mainly  on  the
downside. In the corporate sector, adjustment in production and stocks has not managed to catch up
with  a  decline  in  demand  especially  in  the  IT-related  sectors.  It  seems  difficult  to  expect  an  early
recovery in fixed investment given a decline in a capacity utilization rate and deterioration in corporate
profits. Although consumption has so far shown resiliency, deterioration  in  employment and income
environment,  together  with  adverse  wealth  effect  caused  by  a  fall  in  stock  prices,  have  heightened
uncertainty.  All  in  all,  while  significant  uncertainty  remains,  more  cautious  views  are  warranted
regarding the near term prospect of the US economy.
Adjustment caused by a significant change in expectation
Observation  of  the  significant  change  in  expectation  and  the  consequent  pressure  for  economic
adjustment in the US prompts me to share a question with you. When bull expectation collapses, how
much can monetary policy alleviate the consequent economic adjustment? Since the mid-90s, the US
technology and telecom sectors have led the IT-related demand as they experienced an investment
boom with massive new entry to the market. The boom reflected a rise in the expected rate of growth
based on the good prospect for the Internet business. It also reflected the unique characteristics of the
information  industry  such  as  the  economy  of  scale  and  the  network  externality.  The  significant
development in the IT areas has also raised the expected rate of growth for the  US economy as a
whole.  However,  as  economic  slowdown  becomes  more  evident,  cautious  views  are  apparently
growing with respect to the IT-led increase in productivity. In this regard, the new GDP series show
that growth rate of output and productivity for the period since 1998 have been significantly lower than
the previous estimate. The data revision made it necessary for us to re-evaluate the rise in productivity
growth in the second half of the 1990s, which has invited heated discussion under the title of "the rise
of the new economy." What I would like to discuss here, however, is not whether and to what extent
productivity growth accelerated during the period. Rather, I would like to ask how effectively monetary
policy can adjust an extreme swing in expectation and the resultant effects on activity. In this regard,
Chairman Greenspan stressed in his congressional testimony in July that monetary and fiscal policy
could not eliminate booms and busts in economic activity. He argued that often people were prone to
recurring bouts of optimism and pessimism and there was no tool to change such human nature. As a
central banker, with the current state of Japan's economy in mind, I read the Chairman's statement
with great interest as well as sympathy.
2. The state of Japan's economy
I  have  reviewed  the  global  economic  developments  focusing  on  the  US  economy,  which  would
certainly affect Japan's economy in a significant manner. In the October monthly report, the Bank of
Japan  disclosed  its  views  on  recent  economic  and  financial  development  that  was  "adjustments  in
economic activity are becoming more severe, as the substantial decline in production has a negative
influence  on  employment  and  income  conditions."  In  April,  the  Bank  published  a  half-yearly  report
2
BIS Review 87/2001
called  "Outlook  and  Risk  Assessment  of  the  Economy  and  Prices"  which  showed  relatively  harsh
outlook at that point. But our views today are even more cautious than in April.
The "baseline scenario" we had in April was as follows. First of all, in the first half of this fiscal year,
the economy was likely to remain sluggish as a result of a decline in exports and production against
the background of a global economic slowdown. Second, in the latter half of this fiscal year, progress
in  the  adjustment  in  the  US  economy  would  lessen  the  downward  pressure  on  Japan's  economy.
Third, it would nonetheless take time for the economy to exhibit a clear recovery because of persistent
pressure on the  economy arising from various structural problems. Fourth,  it seemed likely that the
output gap would continue widening and prices would remain weak throughout this fiscal year. Against
this  "baseline  scenario",  we  identified  four  major  risks:  developments  in  overseas  economies,
especially that of the United States, and in the IT-related areas; developments in asset prices such as
stock  prices;  the  effects  of  structural  adjustments  including  disposal  of  non-performing  loans;
uncertainties felt by the public with respect to the future.
Reviewing the economic developments in the past six months, the negative effects of the first two risks
has proved to be evident. On the first risk, overseas economies have slowed down much faster than
expected.  Consequently,  exports  and  production  continue  to  decline  sharply  and  fixed  investment
started to decrease against the background of deterioration in corporate profits. Such adjustment in
the  corporate  sector  is  now  affecting  household  income  through  softening  employment  and  wages.
Consumption has held up relatively well but we are now seeing weaker indicators there. The negative
impact of the second risk, i.e.  weaker asset prices,  is also becoming evident. In  particular,  a  fall  in
stock prices has not only hurt the business and household sentiment but also weakened the capacity
of financial institutions.
Under  the  circumstances,  prices  continue  to  decline.  As  often  discussed,  we  cannot  ignore  the
supply-side factors in explaining the current price decline in Japan. As global competition intensifies,
firms  are  increasingly  utilizing  low  cost  imports.  Supply-side  factors  also  include  rationalization  of
distribution system and the effects of deregulation. The price development this year, however, appears
to be affected equally or even more by weak demand rather than the supply-side factors.
3. Monetary easing measures since March
Against the background of such severe economic developments, the Bank adopted in March strong
monetary easing measures with firm determination to prevent a continuous price decline and to form a
basis for a sustainable growth. In August, the Bank took further easing steps based on the framework
adopted  in  March.  Furthermore,  after  the  terrorist  attacks  in  September,  the  Bank  took  every
necessary measure in monetary operations in order to secure smooth fund settlement and financial
market stability. The current monetary easing measures consist of four components.
First, the main operating target for monetary operations was changed from the overnight call rate to
the outstanding balance of current accounts held at  the  Bank of Japan. The new  target  was raised
from about four trillion yen to five trillion yen in March and further to six trillion yen in August. As I will
discuss  a  moment  later,  the  Bank  did  not  simply  raise  the  target  regardless  of  demand.  The  Bank
decided the level of the target such as five trillion or six trillion based on a judgement that it was the
maximum  demand  for  the  current  account  balance  at  the  time.  In  September,  the  Bank  swiftly
responded  to  a  surge  in  demand  for  liquidity  following  the  terrorist  attacks.  At  the  subsequent
Monetary Policy Meeting, the Bank decided to provide ample liquidity aiming at above six trillion yen,
without  specifying  the  limit.  In  practice,  the  outstanding  balance  of  the  current  accounts  increased
toward the end of September going beyond twelve trillion yen. In October, as money market conditions
relaxed  after  successfully  passing  the  September-end,  the  half-year  book  closing,  the  outstanding
balance  has  declined  from  its  peak  but  still  stays  at  far  above  six  trillion  yen,  the  level  before  the
terrorist attacks. As such, the call rates stay at effectively zero, reflecting the fact that ample liquidity
has  been  provided  to  the  market  far  exceeding  the  required  level  under  the  reserve  requirement
system, about four trillion yen.
Second, the Bank committed itself that the new monetary policy framework would continue until the
CPI  inflation  rate  will  stably  stay  at  or  above  zero  percent.  This  is  the  clear  commitment  on  the
continuation  of  monetary  easing  in  the  future  which  is  expected  to  extend  easing  effect  to  interest
rates with longer terms. This effect is often called "commitment effect" or "duration effect."
Third, the Bank decided that, while setting an upper limit, it would increase the outright purchase of
long-term  government  bonds  if  it  deemed  necessary  for  providing  liquidity  smoothly.  Based  on  this
BIS Review 87/2001
3
decision,  in  August,  the  Bank  increased  the  outright  purchase  from  400  billion  yen  per  month  to
600 billion yen per month in terms of volume and from twice a month to three times a month in terms
of frequency.
Fourth, the Bank established the so-called Lombard-type lending facility. Using this facility, financial
institutions with collateral can always borrow funds from the Bank at the official discount rate under the
conditions pre-specified by the Bank. The facility strengthens the monetary easing effect by reducing
concerns  over  available  liquidity  and  stabilizing  market  rates.  The  official  discount  rate,  which  is
applied to the Lombard-type facility, was reduced twice in February and September and is currently at
0.1 percent.
4. The effect of monetary easing
The Bank believes that the current easing measures are very strong in nature. In fact, the policy to
induce short-term interest rates to effectively zero and to make commitment about future policy based
on CPI is an unusual step into uncharted territory. Nonetheless, in view of the worsening economic
conditions, we decided to take such an unusual step into uncharted waters as long as some effects
were thought to exist at least theoretically. The textbook of economics does not give us any guidance
regarding the uncharted territory we have stepped in. At best, the theoretical concept of "liquidity trap"
presented by Keynes is close to the current situation of Japan's economy. Still, Keynes did not provide
monetary policy prescription to exit "liquidity trap," for he simply argued that monetary policy would be
ineffective  and  fiscal  expansion  was  necessary  in  such  a  situation.  In  conducting  monetary  policy,
therefore, we have endeavored to carefully avoid the risk of being caught by dogmatic views regarding
the effects and limits of our entrusted policy tools.
As a result, as  time  passes,  we  have  accumulated  more  knowledge  about  the  effects  and  limits  of
monetary easing measures in the uncharted territory. Based on the experience in the past six months,
I  would  like  to  provide  tentative  answers  to  the  questions  and  hypothesis  that  I  had  before  the
adoption of the current easing measures.
The outstanding balance of current accounts
The  first  question  was  whether  a  central  bank  could  increase  the  outstanding  balance  of  current
accounts even after short-term rates had reached zero. Given the fact that we experienced a shortfall
in  bids,  or  "under-subscription,"  for  open  market  operations  under  the  previous  zero  interest  rates
policy, we were not so certain whether we could increase the current account balance smoothly. On
this point, our tentative conclusion, to no surprise, is, "with little room left for a rate decline, the current
account balance can be increased only when there is demand for it and cannot be increased without
demand."
In fact, in May, the Bank frequently experienced a shortfall in bids even at 0.01 percent. To cope with
the situation, the Bank decided to change the unit of bidding rates for open market operations from
0.01 percent to 0.001 percent, which enabled the market operation rate to decline further. As a result
of this change, we have not experienced a shortfall in bids so far. If such a shortfall happens again for
some reasons, however, can we cope with the situation by simply reducing the unit of bidding rates
further to 0.0001 percent? This is an interesting theme for economics but I remain skeptical.
In any case, however, the Bank can increase the current account balance flexibly as long as demand
for  liquidity  increases.  Demand  for  liquidity  could  rise  for  variety  of  reasons  such  as  concern  for
smooth  operation  of  settlement  system  or  financial  system  instability.  In  sum,  the  current  account
balance can be increased when a certain stress gives incentives for financial institutions to hold larger
amount of liquidity in the current account from a precautionary motive. In practice, the balance was
raised substantially in response to such a precautionary motive in the end of 1999 in preparations for
the Y2K problem and in early 2001 during the process of introducing the Real Time Gross Settlement
system. We could raise the current account balance above 12 trillion yen in September because of a
surge in demand for liquidity caused by the terrorist attacks, the collapse of a large retailer, and a fall
in stock prices. The effects of those factors were also amplified in the period approaching the end of
September. The rising demand for liquidity also reflected waning incentives of financial institutions to
invest their funds in money markets. Investing 10 billion yen overnight earns merely 273 yen, which is
not  sufficient  to  cover  various  transaction  costs.  When  interest  rates  significantly  decline,  financial
institutions prefer to hold funds with the Bank of Japan even without any interest earnings. Once such
4
BIS Review 87/2001
movement  spreads  among  financial  institutions,  funding  in  money  markets  becomes  more  difficult
which will force the borrowers to build up the current account balance from a precautionary motive.
What  is  important  therefore  is  not  whether  we  can  increase  the  current  account  balance  under  the
effectively zero interest rate but what effects such an increase may have. The surge in  demand for
liquidity after the terrorist attacks is not  a  favorable  development  as  it  reflects  rising  concern  in  the
financial  markets.  It  may  not  stimulate  economic  activities.  Having  said  this,  increasing  the  current
account  balance  in  response  to  rising  demand  for  liquidity  is  one  of  significant  contribution  that  a
central bank could make because it relieves concern in the markets.
Interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and stock prices
The second issue was whether a substantial increase in the current account balance would affect the
asset prices such as interest rates, foreign exchange rates and stock prices. The effect of monetary
policy permeates to the real economy through significant changes in these asset prices. Needless to
say, an increase in the current account balance results in a decline in overnight interest rates. Once
overnight interest rates reach zero percent, however, we can no longer expect a change  in  interest
rates to promote portfolio rebalancing. Therefore, if an additional supply of current account  balance
results in a change in the prices of financial assets, it could be achieved either through a) reallocation
of money from no-risk-no-return current accounts to higher-return-higher-risk assets, or b) effects on
inflation expectation for the future. Such effects through these routes could exist at least theoretically
and qualitatively.
Let  me  review  the  financial  market  developments  since  March  from  the  above  viewpoints.  Not
surprisingly, short-term interest rates declined to effectively  zero thanks to ample liquidity  provision.
The  Lombard-type  facility  also  helped  to  stabilize  interest  rates.  Interest  rates  in  the  medium-term
zones  also  went  below  the  level  experienced  under  the  previous  zero  interest  rate  period  as  the
"duration effect" worked strongly. In contrast, long-term rates have risen somewhat compared to the
level recorded before the March easing measures. They did not decline even after an increase in the
outright  purchase  of  the  long-term  government  bonds  in  August.  Rather,  in  these  days,  the  JGB
market is becoming sensitive to the news implying a possible increase in JGB issuance such as the
prospect  for  the  supplementary  budget.  On  the  other  hand,  stock  prices  once  rose  soon  after  the
monetary  easing  in  March  but  have  continuously  declined  after  May,  reflecting  deterioration  in
economic activities in general and corporate profits in particular. Stock prices did not respond to the
monetary policy change in August. Looking at foreign exchange rates, against the background of the
more than expected slowdown of the US economy, the yen has not depreciated in comparison to the
March level.
Corporate financing in capital markets
The  third  issue  is  the  effect  of  a  current  account  balance  increase  on  the  corporate  financing
environment in capital markets such as the CP and corporate bond markets. Facing the weakening
role  of  banks  as  financial  intermediaries,  enhancing  the  function  of  capital  markets  could  be  an
important  route  of  monetary  easing.  In  this  regard,  the  environment  for  corporate  financing  has
improved  after  the  easing  measures  in  March.  In  particular,  the  outstanding  balance  of  CPs  has
maintained the historical high and the outstanding balance of corporate bonds has been showing a
two to three percent growth on a  year-on-year  basis.  Credit  spreads  of  CPs  and  bonds  have  been
narrowing, indicating more risk appetite of investors. Against this background, corporations are more
willing to issue CPs and bonds. It should be noted, however, that those firms capable of issuing CPs
and bonds often enjoy relatively high credit ratings and, therefore, such monetary easing effect has
not benefited those businesses without access to capital markets.
Bank lending
The fourth issue is the impact on bank lending. In this regard, the easing measures since March have
not apparently changed banks' lending behavior. In practice, the declining trend in bank lending has
mildly  accelerated.  On  the  other  hand,  growth  in  money  supply,  deposits  held  by  households  and
corporations, has changed little at an annual rate of around three percent. The decline in bank lending
and moderate growth in deposits should result in an increase in some other investment. In the past
year, banks increased investment in the government bonds and the current accounts with the Bank of
Japan, both assets free of credit risks.
BIS Review 87/2001
5
Then, why doesn't bank lending increase? I will try to give an answer to this question by focusing on
financial institutions' lending behavior against the background of the relatively weak credit demand. At
the time of an economic downturn, creditworthiness of corporations generally deteriorates and banks
have to widen spreads for lending; otherwise they lose profits. However, with deteriorating corporate
profits, banks face a decline in the number of projects with sufficient profits to cover wider spreads. In
ordinary  financial  environment,  even  with  the  widening  of  spreads,  monetary  easing  brings  lending
rates down by lowering banks' funding costs and, consequently, can eventually promote an increase in
lending. In the current situation, banks' funding costs cannot go down further because interest rates
are effectively at zero. To make matters worse, banks hold a large amount of non-performing assets
and unprofitable loans in their portfolio built up in the past. By holding such unprofitable loans for a
long time, it will become more difficult for banks to cover by operating profits the necessary cost to
deal with the non-performing assets. Needless to say, banks are making efforts to improve profitability
of their lending activities by enhancing the credit quality of unprofitable but viable companies through
various supports. Nevertheless, there are a substantial number of non-viable companies. Furthermore,
making progress in structural reforms in the economy and  industries means, looking from the other
side,  a  reduction  of  banks'  unprofitable  loans  and  non-performing  assets.  Therefore,  from  a  macro
perspective,  it  is  inevitable  to  a  certain  degree  that  banks'  lending  and  balance  sheet  shrink  in  the
process of structural reforms in the economy and industries. Also, for the purpose of restoring sound
financial system, it is a necessary condition that banks put emphasis on profitability.
To sum up, the Bank of Japan's abundant liquidity provision has induced desirable impact on the CP
and corporate bond markets but the overall effect has not sufficiently transmitted to agents outside the
financial system. As a result, we have not seen improvement in  economic and price  developments.
How  can  we  change  such  a  situation?  That  is  the  big  challenge  for  Japan's  economy  and  for  the
conduct of monetary policy.
5. Inflation targeting
I would like to offer some of my thoughts on this difficult challenge in the final part of my speech. But
before  doing  that,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  inflation  or  price  level  targeting,  which  has  been
frequently discussed. Can it be a prescription for the current problems confronting Japan's economy?
I  will  start  by  explaining  what  I  think  inflation  targeting  exactly  is.  In  my  understanding,  inflation
targeting has been introduced as a mechanism to improve the transparency of monetary policy. But I
do not think that inflation targeting is the only way to increase transparency. I believe that the way to
increase transparency should be judged based on the unique situation of each country. For example,
in the United States, interest rates have been cut substantially in a short period of time this year but
the  CPI  inflation  rate  changed  little  during  the  course  staying  at  around  three  percent.  If  inflation
targeting were adopted during this period, should there be any difference in the conduct of monetary
policy  or  subsequent  developments  in  the  US  economy?  Or  could  we  expect  more  transparency
regarding  monetary  policy?  I  have  to  say  that  I  am  skeptical.  Price  development  is  one  of  very
important economic indictors and many central banks including the Bank of Japan carry price stability
as  a  policy  objective.  Still,  I  think  it  difficult  to  make monetary  policy  judgment  solely  based  on  the
development of a single price index.
Having said this, I do not deny the benefit of inflation targeting. Main reason the Bank of Japan thinks
it  inappropriate  to  adopt  inflation  targeting  is  that,  in  the  current  economic  and  financial  situation,
monetary  policy  alone  cannot  prevent  a  price  decline.  As  I  have  already  discussed,  even  after
exhausting orthodox policy measures, the Bank of Japan has been engaged in monetary operations to
significantly  increase  the  current  account  balance  as  well  as  making  use  of  the  "duration  effect".
Despite  such  dedicated  efforts,  however,  economic  activities  have  not  been  stimulated  and  prices
have  not  stopped  declining.  In  that  sense,  it  is  indispensable  to  bring  the  economy  back  to  an
"ordinary" state first. As stated in the Bank's report on price stability published in autumn last year, we
think that the adoption of inflation targeting is one of the issues to be examined when the economy
goes back to an "ordinary" state. Since this spring, the Bank has held the Workshop on Price Stability
for three times in order to promote the mutual understanding of the issues related to prices between
academics and the Bank staff. Making use of the outputs of such a workshop, the Bank will continue
studying the meaning of price stability and inflation targeting in the context of the conduct of monetary
policy.
6
BIS Review 87/2001
6. Should the Bank buy any kind of assets?
But I think the ongoing discussion on inflation targeting here in Japan is somewhat different from the
discussion abroad which places inflation targeting as a tool to increase transparency. I dare say that
many argue that "the Bank of Japan should meet an inflation target by purchasing any kind of assets"
and claim that such policy is inflation targeting. In practice, those who call for the adoption of inflation
targeting argue that we can cause inflation if the Bank purchases all kinds of assets. Should the Bank
increase  the  outright  purchase  of  long-term  government  bonds  aggressively?  Should  the  Bank
purchase foreign currency denominated assets or private debts? Discussions over these issues have
been widely covered in the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings, speeches by my fellow board
members, or papers written by the Bank staff. Therefore, I would like to touch upon the following two
issues from somewhat different perspective.
The  first  issue  is  the  purpose  of  adopting  such  measures.  By  and  large,  it  might  be  true  that,  if  a
central bank continues purchasing all kinds of assets, almost by definition, inflation can be created in
the end. However, our goal is not to cause inflation but to realize a sustainable growth. As can been
seen in the past experience of Japan's economy, it is not correct to assume that inflation comes first
followed  by  an  economic  upturn  or  an  increase  in  growth  rate.  What  happened  in  the  past  was
opposite: an  economic upturn and a rise in growth rate came first and inflation followed  with a lag.
Therefore, the focus should be how to stimulate economic activities or, in other words, how to make
corporations invest more and households spend more.
The  second  issue  is  the  governance  of  a  central  bank  in  a  democratic  society.  The  only  explicit
constraint  for  the  choice  of  assets  to  be  purchased  by  a  central  bank  is  a  legal  one.  The  Bank  of
Japan Law stipulates the type of assets to be purchased for the purpose of monetary operations. For
example,  the  Bank  can  and  does  purchase  government  bonds  and  commercial  bills  but  cannot
purchase stocks. Real estates can be purchased for business use but not for the purpose of monetary
operations.  Then,  leaving  such  legal  constraint  aside,  what  kind  of  assets  should  a  central  bank
purchase?
Central  banks  in  industrial  countries  usually  do  not  purchase  stocks  or  corporate  bonds  for  the
purpose of monetary operations. It seems that there are probably two reasons.
The first reason is that stocks and corporate  bonds have more credit risk compared to government
bonds or the short-term commercial bills with plural good names, meaning they are protected by the
credit of a bank and a company. If a central bank increases purchasing of stocks and corporate bonds,
it  may  earn  profits  but,  with  a  certain  probability,  may  incur  a  loss.  A  central  bank  itself  does  not
directly feel a pain because it can issue liabilities without interest rate cost. But taxpayers eventually
incur the loss as transfer from a central bank to the Treasury  decreases. This is the  very reason  a
central bank is required to issue banknotes by purchasing safe assets. As a second reason, a central
bank needs to decide the specific names of stocks and corporate bonds to be purchased. Given the
fact that a central bank does not have any advantage over commercial banks in making judgment on
the quality of individual companies, it is a natural conclusion that a central bank's market operations
should be as neutral as possible to resource allocations.
If a central bank purchases variety of assets aggressively, although it takes a form of monetary policy,
it is effectively stepping into the territory of fiscal policy. The reason is that the bank has to incur a loss,
which  will  be  transferred  to  taxpayers  in  the  end,  and  engages  in  micro  policy  regarding  resource
allocation. Is a central bank allowed to engage in such policy? As a general rule in a democratic state,
an independent central bank is entrusted monetary policy function that is to provide liquidity. On the
other hand, the use of tax revenue should be decided as fiscal policy by elected representatives in the
form of the budget approval process in the Diet. Admittedly, there is no absolute standard for the type
of assets held  by  a central bank and  it cannot be free from the state of the economy and financial
markets. For instance, fiscal surplus in recent years has prompted the US authorities study the type of
assets to be purchased by a central bank assuming that the Treasury securities will diminish in coming
years. However, when requiring a central bank to purchase all kinds of assets, especially on a large
scale, it should be clearly noted that such purchase effectively has a nature of fiscal policy, which must
be decided by voting in the Diet. This point should be recognized first before discussing the type of
assets to be purchased in light of the state of the economy.
In this connection, there is an argument that "independence on monetary policy granted to a central
bank is operational independence and its objective should be decided by the government." In such an
argument, an inflation target appears to be assumed as the objective that should be decided by the
government. Looking at central banks overseas, however, the objectives of monetary policy are clearly
BIS Review 87/2001
7
stipulated by law; no central bank decides its objectives by itself. The Bank of Japan is no exception
and the Bank of Japan Law sets its objective as "contributing to the sound development of the national
economy through the pursuit  of price stability." Although many central banks carry price stability as
their  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy,  whether  such  an  objective  is  defined  in  the  form  of  a
specific numerical target depends on each country. The Federal Reserve and the European Central
Bank do not employ inflation targeting. On the other hand, in the case of the United Kingdom, inflation
target was set at 2.5 percent by the government in 1997 and has been maintained thereafter. Even in
this case, however, the Bank of England does not conduct monetary policy mechanically but rather in
a  flexible  manner:  It  has  sometimes  lowered  the  policy  interest  rate  when  inflation  was  above  the
target  and  tightened  when  inflation  was  below  the  target.  What  is  important  here  is  that  the  UK
government itself assumes significant responsibility in setting the inflation target. The mandates of the
UK Treasury require fiscal policy to ensure sound public finances over the medium term and, at the
same time, to support monetary policy over the short term. In the case of Japan, to discuss the issue
of whether the government should decide the objective of monetary policy beyond those stipulated in
the Bank of Japan Law, we believe that the following points should be examined: the objective itself;
consistency between the target and necessary policies to achieve it; cooperation from the government,
including fiscal policy, to achieve the target.
7. Conclusion
I  have  covered  various  issues  today.  Before  finishing  my  remarks,  as  a  conclusion,  I  would  like  to
briefly  summarize  my  view  on  what  the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  should  do  in  order  to
overcome the current severe economic situation.
The first point I  would  like to make here is that the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  completely
share the policy objective: needs to prevent a continuous decline in prices and to bring the economy
back  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Bank  of  Japan  commits  itself  that  the
current  procedures  for  monetary  operations  will  be  maintained  until  the  annual  CPI  inflation  rate
restores the level at or above zero percent in a stable manner.
Second, the Bank of Japan has already established a framework to provide sufficient liquidity to the
economy. Under the framework, the Bank provides far more current account balance than required to
achieve zero short rates. Therefore, lack of liquidity should not be a cause for difficulties in financing
economic  activity  as  a  whole.  Although  it  is  rarely  pointed  out,  the  current  pace  of  growth  in  the
monetary base is significantly exceeding that in the period after the initiation of the aggressive fiscal
policy under Finance Minister Takahashi in 1931. Furthermore, if demand begins to rise for the current
account balance going forward, the Bank of Japan can easily accommodate it. I believe, and strongly
hope,  that  the  current  policy  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  make  a  significant  contribution  from  the
monetary  side  to  the  structural  reforms  led  by  the  government  and  to  the  consequent  creation  of
private demand.
Then,  what  should  be  done  to  create  demand?  This  point  is  discussed  in  the  interim  report  of  the
Advanced-Reform  Program  and  the  Reform  Schedule  approved  by  the  Council  on  Economic  and
Fiscal Policy. Among them, I myself would like to stress the following points.
To nurture competitive and attractive business environment to promote investment. Important steps for
that  purpose  are  decisive  deregulation  measures,  revision  of  tax  system,  and  reform  of  special
government entities.
To promote private consumption by alleviating households' concern for future through the overhaul of
social security system including the pension scheme.
To  deal  with  the  associated  problems  of  excessive  debts  in  the  business  sector  and  the
non-performing loans in the banking system. It is not realistic to  expect an instant economic upturn
simply by eliminating the non-performing loans. At the same time, however,  with a large amount  of
non-performing  loans  left,  financial  intermediaries  cannot  function  properly.  Under  malfunctioning
financial system, it is difficult to expect a sustainable economic growth. Progress has to be made in
dealing  with  the  non-performing  loans  based  on  the  policy  stated  in  the  interim  report  of  the
Advanced-Reform Program approved by the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy.
Finally, I  would  like to  touch  upon  the  possible  role  of  fiscal  policy.  Keynes  claimed  that,  when  the
economy fell into a liquidity trap, monetary policy was no longer effective and fiscal policy was required
to play its role. At the same time, however, given the high level of government debts in Japan, it is also
8
BIS Review 87/2001
true that only limited room is left for fiscal policy. Such limited room calls for decisive new measures.
According  to  the  minutes  of  the  Council  on  Economic  and  Fiscal  Policy,  members  argue  that  it  is
dispensable  that  the  components  of  fiscal  expenditure  be  reviewed  with  a  view  to  creating  private
demand. We hope that analysis will be made on the way spending reallocation can stimulate private
demand and that decisive actions will follow accordingly. I would also like to add that, looking at the
globally prevailing view about fiscal policy, standard prescription for an economic downturn is to leave
room for the built-in stabilizers to work. How should we think about this point?
In order to form a basis for a stable and sustainable growth of Japan's economy, the Bank of Japan is
determined to continue making every effort as a central bank including those efforts to deal with the
non-performing problems.
Thank you very much for your attention.
BIS Review 87/2001
9
