The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: The state of the UK economy and the Bank of
England’s conduct of monetary policy
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Welsh
Development Agency/Bank of England Dinner, Brangwyn Hall, Swansea, on 16 October 2001.
 Thank you, David for that kind introduction. And thank you, too, for agreeing to co-host this dinner in
the Brangwyn Hall this evening. It gives me great pleasure to add my welcome - on behalf of the Court
of the Bank of England - to all of our guests. We are grateful to you for joining us.
I  should  like  to  say  a  few  words  this  evening  about  the  state  of  the  economy,  and  in  particular  to
account to you - as stakeholders - for the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.
If  you  look  back,  since  the  recession  of  the  early  1990s  the  UK  has  enjoyed  9  years  of  steady
progress.
Inflation  over  that  period,  on  the  Government's  target  measure,  has  averaged  just  2.6%  -  and  has
been more stable than at any time in our history. Now some people think that's all we care about at the
Bank  of  England  -  and  we  certainly  do  care  about  it  -  it  is  after  all  what  we  are  paid  for.  But  it  is
certainly not all we care about. Low inflation is not simply an end in itself - it is a necessary means to
the end of sustainable growth, to sustained high levels of employment, and to rising living standards
which are, of course, the really good things of economic life.
And  what  gives  me  personally  -  and  my  colleagues  -  real  satisfaction  is  the  fact  that  stable,  low
inflation has over this period been accompanied by steadily increasing overall output and employment,
and by a progressive fall in unemployment.
GDP growth since the Spring of 1992 until this summer has averaged just about 3% a year - which is
well  above  most  estimates  of  our  trend  rate  of  2¼%-2½%  -  and  the  longest  period  of  sustained
quarter-by-quarter growth we have enjoyed since quarterly records began in the UK in 1955.
Employment increased steadily from a low point of 25 ½ mn people in the Spring of 1992 to a peak of
over 28mn in the summer of this year. And the rate of unemployment has fallen from a peak of over
10½% on the LFS measure to around 5%; while on the Claimant Count measure it has fallen from
some 10% to just over 3%, which means that the number of people claiming unemployment benefit, at
under 950,000, is the lowest for 26 years.
And  what  has  been  a  good  period  for  the  UK  economy  as  a  whole,  has  also  been  good  -  in  an
absolute sense - for Wales. Here on an LFS basis the rate of unemployment fell from the recent peak
of over 10½% in November 1993 to below 6% in July this year for the first time since these data were
collected;  and,  on  the  Claimant  Count  basis,  unemployment,  which  touched  10%  in  the  winter  of
1992--93, had fallen to 3.8% in August, the lowest rate since June 1975.
But I freely acknowledge that it doesn't necessarily feel like that today - certainly not to everyone. I am
only too well aware that there are a lot of people in every part of the UK - both business people who've
been under real pressure and employees who have lost their jobs - who will react to these statistics by
saying "Well you could have fooled me!" That may well be true of some of you here this evening. The
Bank receives detailed reports every month from each of our 12 agencies throughout the UK, including
reports from Sue Camper based in Cardiff.
Many of you will know Sue already - and I encourage those who don't to make yourselves known to
her. The reports which she and her fellow agents make each month, based on their direct, first hand,
knowledge  of  what's  happening  in  their  area,  are  fed  directly  into  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee
process. They play a vital part in informing our understanding of the macro-economic statistics which
in themselves can only capture the overall, aggregate, picture. So we do know, I promise you, about
the job losses and plant closures particularly in manufacturing.
Those  on  the  receiving  end  won't  thank  me  for  saying  this  but  some  of  those  problems  at  the
micro-economic level are an inevitable characteristic of every economy. Needs, tastes, technologies
and  productive  techniques  are  constantly  changing  even  in  the  most  benign  macro-economic
environment,  and  the  rise  and  fall  of  individual  businesses  or  business  sectors,  as  comparative
advantage  shifts  -  nationally  and  internationally  -  is  a  painful  but  necessary  facet  of  economic
BIS Review 85/2001
1
progress. Obstructing such change cannot help in anything but the short term. The more constructive
approach  is  to  encourage  the  redeployment  of  resources  to  alternative  activities  where  there  is  a
prospect of comparative advantage. Happily that is the path - the path to greater supply-side flexibility
- that is increasingly being followed by UK regional and national authorities. And it's the  path being
followed here in Wales by the National Assembly under First Minister Rhodri Morgan. It is the path that
is being followed by the WDA and its subsidiary Finance Wales, as well as ELWa. If we know at the
Bank about plant closures and job losses, we know, too, about NEDS (the Welsh National Economic
Development Strategy) and we know about the new activity, creating new jobs, including, for example,
Technium.
I said a moment ago that some of the current micro-economic problems are inevitable - a normal and
necessary facet of economic progress. But the pressures we currently face go well beyond that. The
effects  of  BSE  and  then  of  foot  and  mouth  disease  on  agriculture,  and  the  impact  on  the  rural
economy more generally, have been wholly abnormal. And the pressures on the wider economy have
recently been hugely aggravated by the international economic environment - first, by the persistent
strength of sterling against the euro; then, by the global economic slowdown - including the dramatic
contraction of activity in the previously booming high-tech sectors, and most recently  by  the vicious
terrorist attacks in the United States.
With the best will in the world, there is nothing that we can do - certainly  not through  our domestic
monetary policy - that goes to the causes of these problems.
That's obviously true in the case of the problems in agriculture.
Many people suppose that interest rates would have a predictable effect on exchange rates, but in fact
it's not as simple as that. Many other factors influence exchange rates which can respond perversely
to interest rate changes even for quite long periods of time. Despite the 4% cut in the US rates this
year the dollar is still stronger against the euro - where rates have fallen by only 1% - than before the
interest rate cuts started. And sterling, too, rose against the euro even though we cut interest rates
earlier, and by more, than the ECB. The conundrum in fact has been the persistent relative weakness
of the euro, since its introduction, and I very much welcome its modest recovery since the summer.
But  on  top  of  this  exchange  rate  effect,  external  demand  for  goods  and  services  produced  in  this
country  has  been  adversely  affected  by  the  unusual  simultaneous  slowdown  in  the  world's  three
largest  currency  areas  -  the  US,  the  Eurozone  and  Japan  -  that  we  have  seen  this  year.  And  the
terrorist attacks - with their inevitable effect on business and consumer confidence at least in the short
term - could not have come at a worse time.
We can't, as I say, do anything directly ourselves to reduce the negative impact on the economy of
these  exogeneous  shocks.  What  we  can  do  is  to  try  to  compensate  for  them  by  encouraging  the
growth of domestic demand, and in particular consumer spending. And that in effect is what we have
been trying to do through six cuts in interest rates so far this year, which have brought the mortgage
rate,  for  example,  to  its  lowest  level  for  years.  In  the  year  to  June  final  domestic  demand  grew  by
3½%;  but  a  fall  in  external  demand  helped  to  reduce  the  growth  of  total  output  to  just  over  2¼%.
Overall  UK  manufacturing  output  in  particular  fell  by  2%  in  the  year  to  August,  and  while  that  is
substantially less than the equivalent fall in Japan (of over 11%) and in the US (of 5½%), that's cold
comfort to British industry.
The  imbalance  within  the  economy  which  these  figures  reflect  -  notably  the  continuing  imbalance
between the internationally-exposed companies and sectors, which are having a really rough time, and
the domestically-orientated sectors which are doing much better - is certainly not ideal.
The continuing imbalance is not without risks. On the one side, we may find it increasingly difficult to
offset  the  negative  impact  of  the  global  slowdown  in  the  face  of  increasing  domestic  private  sector
debt;  and  if  the  slowdown  in  the  UK  spreads  beyond  manufacturing  to  the  services  sectors  it  may
cause unemployment to rise which in turn could slow the growth of consumer spending. But, on the
other side, we may find it difficult to moderate the growth of domestic demand when the international
environment improves.
There is no doubt that if we could simply redraw the map, we would opt for stronger external demand
and  weaker  consumption  growth.  That  would  represent  a  more  sustainable  balance  within  our
economy.  Sadly  that  is  a  choice  that  we  are  not  immediately  free  to  make.  Doing  what  we  can  to
encourage  domestic  demand  growth  to  compensate  for  the  global  economic  weakness  is  certainly
preferable to an unnecessary slowdown in the economy as a whole. And that is the path we must for
the time being continue to pursue.
2
BIS Review 85/2001
So  what  then  are  the  prospects?  Before  the  11th  of  September  the  chances  were  that  the  US
economy - which is of course key to the whole global outlook - was close to the bottom of its cyclical
slowdown,  and  that  we  would  see  a  gradual  pick  up  into  next  year.  The  Eurozone,  which  is  a
particularly important trading partner for the UK, was also expected to recover lost momentum. That
prospect may well have been set back by the terrorist attacks. These clearly had a direct impact on
some sectors, including for example, air travel and the aerospace industry. And they had an effect on
consumer and  business  confidence  more  generally.  But  the  degree  and  duration  of  the  set-back  is
very far from clear.
We  need  to  be  careful  not  to  exaggerate  the  likely  consequences.  The  effects  on  confidence,
particularly consumer  confidence,  are  already  showing  signs  of  abating;  and  global  equity  markets,
although  they  remain  volatile,  quite  quickly  recovered  much  of  their  initial  losses.  Nor  should  we
underestimate  the  swift  and  strong  policy  response  both  in  the  US  and  elsewhere.  Looking  further
ahead  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  the  supply  side  of  our  economies  has  been  materially  affected:  in
particular the potential for modern technology to spread across different sectors, with the promise of
improving  productivity,  remains  intact,  even  if  this  is  delayed  by  earlier  excesses  and  by  the  more
recent  damage  to  business  confidence.  There  is  little  reason  that  I  can  see  to  suppose  that  global
growth  will  not recover to at  least its  earlier trend rate over the next 2-3  years once  the  immediate
shock has been absorbed.
But in the meantime, the UK cannot be wholly immune from a more pronounced or prolonged global
slowdown in the short term than  we  had previously expected - if that  is indeed  what  occurs - even
though  we  are  better  placed  than  some  others  to  withstand  it.  Inflationary  pressures  remain  well
contained. Domestic demand appears to have been sustained into the third quarter, underpinned by
increasing government spending in line with the Chancellor's intentions and by the easing of monetary
policy. And consumer confidence in this country - on most of the evidence - seems to be holding up
well despite the terrorist  attacks. While business confidence  generally  weakened further in the third
quarter,  it  remains  stronger  in  the  services  sectors  than  in  manufacturing.  And  on  the  basis  of  last
week's  BCC  survey  -  it  is  notable  that  confidence  in  the  services  sectors  here  in  Wales  actually
increased quite strongly.
No-one can know quite how things will turn out in the present climate of uncertainty. We cannot rule
out a further slowdown here in the UK. But all-in-all I am still persuaded on the evidence that we will
avoid the overall recession that is widely spoken of in the media - though it may be a bumpy ride for a
time. But there is one thing of which you can be absolutely sure. And that is that the Monetary Policy
Committee will continue to track all the evidence as it becomes available with the utmost attention; and
if it suggests that the overall economy is weakening unnecessarily, so that overall demand is falling
short  of  our  supply-side  capacity  to  meet  that  demand,  with  the  implication  that  inflation  will  fall
materially  below  the  Government's  symmetrical  2½%  target,  then  we  will  not  hesitate  to  ease
monetary policy further try to reduce that effect. That is what we are required to do; and that is what
we would anyway wish to do.
The corollary, of course, is that as and when external demand recovers, we will be equally vigilant in
ensuring that domestic demand is reined back to accommodate it! But that may  be  now  somewhat
further ahead.
BIS Review 85/2001
3
