Bank of Japan’s October report of recent economic and financial
developments1
Bank of Japan, 15 October 2001
 The Bank’s View2
Adjustments in economic activity are becoming more severe, as the substantial decline in production
has a negative influence on employment and income conditions. In addition, the terrorist attacks in the
U.S. have further heightened uncertainty in Japan’s economy.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  continue  to  decline,
reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies but also sluggish demand for IT-related goods.
Business  fixed  investment  is  also  decreasing  noticeably  while  exporting  conditions  continue  to
deteriorate.  Housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public  investment  is  declining.  Meanwhile,
private  consumption  remains  almost  flat  on  the  whole,  although  somewhat  weak  indicators  are
increasing recently.
Industrial production continues to decline considerably, reflecting these developments in final demand
and  also  strong  excessiveness  in  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  materials.  The  decrease  in
corporate profits, particularly in manufacturing, has become evident and household income weakens
gradually.
Moreover,  while  such  perception  is  becoming  widespread  that  a  further  deceleration  in  overseas
economies  is  inevitable  due  to  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  U.S.,  precautions  against  the  business
outlook are intensifying among Japanese exporting firms.
Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, although inventory adjustments in IT-related goods
worldwide are expected to continue for the time being, the prevailing view is that the adjustments will
be  basically  completed  by  around  next  spring.  However,  there  exists  a  risk  that  the  prolonged
downturn in U.S. private consumption affected by the terrorist attacks would induce another round of
adjustments  in  the  Japanese  economy,  starting  from  the  decline  in  exports  such  as  of  consumer
goods.  Under  these  circumstances  for  exports,  uncertainty  toward  the  economy  is  growing  further.
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a
downward trend judged not  only  from  the  continuous  decline  in  corporate  profits,  but  also  from  the
successive  downward  revisions  of  firms’  investment  plans  in  the  IT-related  sector.  Private
consumption  is  likely  to  weaken  gradually  along  with  the  deteriorating  employment  and  income
conditions. Thus, the income-generating mechanism from corporate profits to employment and wages
is  starting  to  work  adversely,  and  at  the  same  time  government  spending  is  projected  to  follow  a
downward  trend.  Consequently,  it  may  take  quite  a  while  for  overall  production  activity  to  stop
declining, although the decrease in the production of IT-related goods may eventually come to an end.
Overall, adjustments in economic activity, starting from the decline in exports since the beginning of
this  year,  will  surely  affect  domestic  demand  gradually.  At  the  same  time,  concern  that  another
substantial  decline  in  exports  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  is  growing.  Moreover,
while the economy continues to be in a fragile state, continuous attention should be paid to the risk of
a negative impact on the economy induced by developments in foreign and domestic capital markets
via corporate and household confidence.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  declining  mainly  reflecting  the  softening  of  international
commodity prices. Domestic wholesale prices are also declining somewhat faster because the effects
from high crude oil prices and the depreciation of the yen in the past have dissipated, while prices of
electrical  machinery  and  materials  continue  to  decrease.  Consumer  prices  are  weakening  owing
mainly  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  and  their  substitutes.  Corporate  service  prices
continue to decrease.
                                                     
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
October 11 and 12, 2001.
2
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on October 11 and 12 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 84/2001
1
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  with  the  prolonged  adjustments  in  economic
activity, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market will exert downward pressure
on  prices  gradually.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by
technological innovations, the decreases  in the  prices of goods and services reflecting deregulation
and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  price  developments.  Overall,
prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high
degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will
further intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around zero percent as the Bank of Japan
provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the current account balances
held  at  the  Bank  at  above  6  trillion  yen  due  to  the  changes  in  the  guideline  for  money  market
operations decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on September 18.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  basically  level  on  the  whole.  The  Japan  premium  remains
negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds are recently moving around 1.35-1.40 percent. As for the yield
spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds, while
spreads  between  bonds  with  relatively  high  credit  ratings  and  government  bonds  remain  mostly
unchanged,  those  between  bonds  with  low  credit  ratings  and  government  bonds  seem  to  be
expanding somewhat.
Stock prices are recently starting to recover slightly.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 120-122 yen to the
U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  However,  the  lending
attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by small firms are becoming slightly more cautious. In
corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  fund-raising  conditions  for  firms  continue  to  be  generally
favorable.
On the other hand, credit demand in the private sector is  declining faster mainly because firms are
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts.
In  view  of  this,  private  banks’  lending  is  following  a  downward  trend.  The  amount  outstanding  of
corporate bonds issued is growing at about 2 percent on a year-on-year basis. Meanwhile, the amount
outstanding of CP issued continues to be at a high level, significantly exceeding that of the previous
year, due to the favorable environment for issuing CP.
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in September was higher than that of the previous month.
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels.
Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy: witness the permeation of easiness
in money market conditions, stably low interest rates, higher growth in monetary indicators, and the
generally favorable conditions in corporate bonds and CP markets. However, against the background
of  deteriorating  corporate  earnings  and  the  more  cautious  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions,
fund-raising conditions of small firms are apparently becoming more severe. Hence, the developments
in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing need closer monitoring.
In addition, it is necessary to carefully monitor the effects of the terrorist attacks in the U.S. and the
subsequent developments on global financial markets and economic activity.
2
BIS Review 84/2001
