 European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Frankfurt, 8 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today's meeting 
of the Governing Council of the ECB.  
The  Governing  Council  conducted  a  comprehensive  and  in-depth  examination  of  monetary  and 
economic  developments.  Against  the  background  of  the  available  evidence,  it  analysed  the 
implications  for  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  taking  a  forward-looking  and 
medium-term perspective. As a result, the Governing Council decided to lower the key ECB interest 
rates by 50 basis points. At this new level, the key ECB interest rates continue to be appropriate to 
ensure a favourable outlook for price stability over the medium term. 
In  assessing  the  information  which  has  accumulated  over  the  past  few  weeks  we  concluded  that 
inflationary  pressures  have  further  diminished.  This  was  particularly  apparent  from  the  information 
under the second  pillar of  the  ECB's monetary  policy strategy,  while information relating to the first 
pillar  was  also  judged  consistent  with  today's  decision.  The  Governing  Council  considered  today's 
assessment to be in line with available forecasts and its view of economic developments in the period 
ahead.  It  is  expecting  these  views  to  be  broadly  confirmed  by  further  incoming  information  on  the 
economic  situation.  The  ECB  will  publish  its  own  projections  in  the  December  issue  of  the  Monthly 
Bulletin.  
Let me elaborate somewhat on the assessment provided under the two pillars of the monetary policy 
strategy of the ECB. 
With  regard  to  the  first  pillar,  after  having  grown  at  a  strong  pace  over  the  previous  few  months, 
M3 growth  increased  further  in  September.  However,  the  recent  evolution  needs  to  be  seen  as  a 
reflection of an increased liquidity preference of investors in an environment of a relatively flat yield 
curve until August, developments in global stock markets and a surge in financial market uncertainty 
following the terrorist attacks of 11 September. In addition, the growth of credit to the private sector 
has continued to decline over recent months. Overall, despite the acceleration in M3 growth, current 
monetary developments do not signal risks to price stability in the medium term. We will continue to 
closely examine the underlying dynamics of monetary growth.  
Regarding the second pillar, much clearer signals of a further reduction of inflationary pressures from 
the demand side have accumulated over recent weeks. Euro area real GDP growth will be weak in the 
second half of 2001. This is to be seen against the background of the ongoing weakness of the world 
economy, which depresses the demand for euro area exports. As a consequence, and also taking into 
account  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  following  the  terrorist  attacks  of  11  September,  the  current 
environment is likely to lead to delays in investment activity and, to some extent, also to negatively 
affect private consumption growth in the euro area. Real GDP growth in the euro area is expected to 
remain below potential growth also for part of next year.  
Further ahead, however, the conditions exist for a recovery to take place in the course of 2002 and 
economic growth to return to a more satisfactory path. The uncertainty currently overshadowing the 
world  economy  should  diminish,  and  there  are  no  major  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  which  would 
require longer-term adjustment. Economic policies in the euro area as a whole remain geared towards 
price stability, the objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact, wage moderation and structural reform. 
Further positive effects on economic growth should stem from the impact of tax reductions in several 
member countries and from the fact that financing conditions are favourable.  
As regards the outlook for prices in the euro area, recent developments confirm our earlier expectation 
of a gradual decline in inflation rates, resulting from the unwinding of the previous increase in energy 
prices and the absence of further shocks to food prices. In addition, and crucial for the medium term, 
two factors support the view that wage developments are less of a risk than was previously the case. 
First, the slowdown in economic activity should contribute to containing inflationary pressure stemming 
from the labour market. Second, there is now sufficient evidence that the increase in consumer price 
inflation was temporary, and this will help to keep inflation expectations low. Looking forward, inflation 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 1
 rates over the next few months will probably show some volatility, on account of base effects resulting 
from  previous  price  movements.  However,  such  short-term  fluctuations  should  not  distract  from  the 
medium-term trend. We can now expect that price stability will be safely restored in 2002. This view is 
confirmed by bond yield developments, which are consistent with financial markets expecting inflation 
rates in the euro area to be clearly below 2% over the medium term. 
Overall, as our assessment now points to a further abatement of inflationary pressures, this allowed us 
to  reduce  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  50  basis  points.  This  follows  three  previous  interest  rate 
reductions this year, bringing the total decrease to 150 basis points. The new level of interest rates is 
appropriate to maintain price stability over the medium term. This, in turn, will favour an environment 
conducive to restoring higher economic growth in the euro area. Interest rates across the entire yield 
curve are now very low by all measures and liquidity conditions are supportive to economic growth. 
At this juncture, I should like to recall our position as regards the impact of slower economic growth on 
the euro area countries' fiscal positions. While it is natural for an economic slowdown to have adverse 
effects  on  Member  States'  budgets,  it  is  important  that  especially  those  countries  with  a  budget 
position still not close to balance or in surplus and/or with high public debt-to-GDP ratios adhere to 
their  medium-term  consolidation  plans.  The  current  slowdown  should  not  substantially  change  the 
scope for reaching the medium-term commitments they made under the Stability and Growth Pact and 
in the context of their stability programmes. Let me again emphasise that a medium-term perspective 
and continuous consolidation are essential for the conduct of fiscal policy in all euro area countries. 
This  would  give  a  firm  signal  to  investors  and  consumers,  thereby  supporting  confidence  and 
contributing to a recovery. 
In their efforts to further expand the production potential of the euro area, governments should also 
give  greater  impetus  to  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  Fiscal  reforms,  including  those 
related to pension systems as well as to the level and composition of public revenue and expenditure, 
would  provide  the  correct  incentives.  Labour  and  product  market  reforms  will  be  beneficial  to 
employment  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  will  improve  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy  to 
adverse shocks in the future. While it may be perceived as more difficult to advance in these areas in 
an environment of weaker economic activity, the need to properly address rigidities should be much 
more obvious now than at times of buoyant growth. The current weakness should therefore be taken 
as a challenge to be met by stepping up reforms rather than allowing efforts to abate.  
Finally, I would like to inform you that the Governing Council has decided that, as from today, it will – 
as  a  rule  –  assess  the  stance  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  only  at  its  first  meeting  of  the  month. 
Accordingly, interest rate decisions will normally be taken during that meeting.  
At  the  second  meeting  of  the  month,  the  Governing  Council  will  deal  for  the  most  part  with  issues 
related to other tasks and responsibilities of the ECB and the Eurosystem. After the second meeting of 
the  month,  a  press  release  on  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  decisions  will  no  longer  be  issued. 
Obviously, if warranted by the circumstances, the Governing Council can still decide to change the key 
ECB  interest  rates  at  any  time,  regardless  of  previously  scheduled  meetings  (as  was  recently 
demonstrated by the decision to lower interest rates on 17 September 2001). 
We are now at your disposal for questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 91/2001
