 A H E M Wellink: The role of the Nederlandsche Bank 
Address  by  Dr  A  H  E  M  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
Russia-Netherlands Economic Forum at The Hague on 29 October 2001. 
 Introduction  
It is with great pleasure that I’ve accepted the invitation to deliver a brief address this morning, not 
least, of course, because this Forum has been organised in co-operation with our colleagues of the 
Bank of Russia. At the request of the organising committee, I shall dwell briefly on the main tasks of 
the  central  bank  of  our  country,  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  as  well  as  on  the  relations  with  the 
European Central Bank.  
Some of you probably also attended the previous conference, held in Amsterdam in May 2000, which 
had  ‘Transition  to  the  Market  Economy:  Actual  Problems  in  Financial  and  Banking  Sectors’  for  a 
theme.  One  of  the  items  highlighted  on  that  occasion  was  financial  stability.  Who  could  have 
suspected  at  the  time  that  a  mere  eighteen  months  later,  on  the  eleventh  of  September,  an  act  of 
unprecedented brutality would put the international financial system under threat?  
11 September: also an attack on financial stability  
On Tuesday the eleventh of September, it was soon brought home that the system of (international) 
payments was running the risk of becoming seriously unsettled. It was not at all certain either at that 
point  whether  the  financial  markets  would  continue  to  function  properly.  Fortunately,  despite  some 
minor hitches, payment systems could be kept operational. Even so, the American financial markets 
did not open again until the seventeenth of September. Since that day, the FED, the ECB and several 
other central banks have cut their interest rates. All in all, the monetary authorities have managed to 
ward off the acute threat to the financial system by a wide range of monetary measures. Their actions 
were swift and well co-ordinated. Presently, the authorities are seeking to cut off terrorist groups from 
their  financing  sources  by  tracking  and  freezing  their  bank  balances.  It  may  be  clear  that  this  is  a 
comprehensive  operation  for  the  international  banking  system.  In  our  country,  the  scope  of  the 
supervisory legislation will be extended to include trust offices and special financial institutions. The 
existing legislation, such as that governing the disclosure of unusual transactions, will be adjusted as 
well. These measures all serve to safeguard the integrity of the financial system.  
I firmly believe that the currency markets would have grown quite restless if it hadn’t been for the euro 
or the ECB. And the policy measures taken by the European central banks in response would have 
been  far  more  difficult  to  implement  than  without  the  ECB  as  contact  for  consultations  and  co-
ordination. This s a tangible example of the benefits brought by a single European currency and single 
central bank.  
Distribution of tasks between the Nederlandsche Bank and the ECB  
I already mentioned  it briefly  a moment ago:  payment systems, financial markets, interest rate cuts 
and  bank  balances.  These  are  all  terms  that  refer  to  the  Nederlandsche  Bank’s  three  key  tasks: 
contributing to and implementing the monetary policy, exercising prudential supervision and promoting 
the smooth operation of payment systems. By ensuring an adequate performance of these tasks, the 
Nederlandsche Bank controls the stability of the Dutch financial system. Financial stability in turn is 
difficult to achieve without properly functioning central banks. If we had a blazon, which we don’t, it 
would  probably  read  "Guardian  of  financial  stability".  The  fact  that  stability  is  among  our  chief 
objectives manifests itself in the following highly coherent areas of activities, which I will briefly explain:  
- 
- 
- 
contributing to and implementing the European monetary policy 
promoting the smooth operation of the payments system 
exercising  supervision  on  banks,  collective  investment  schemes  and  foreign  exchange 
offices. 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 1
 As  you  know,  on  1  January  1999,  the  responsibility  for  the  monetary  policy  of  the  member  states 
participating in the Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU, was transferred to the Eurosystem. The 
Eurosystem comprises the ECB and the central banks of the euro area. So, instead of an unshared, 
national responsibility, monetary policy has become a shared, supranational task. The objective has 
not changed, though: maintaining price stability. The most important decision-making body within the 
Eurosystem is the Governing Council of the ECB. It is made up of the Executive Board of the ECB and 
the twelve central bank governors of the participating countries. The members of this council operate 
in a private capacity, and are there to promote European interests. National motives may not come 
into  play  in  the  Council’s  decision-making  process,  which  proceeds  from  the  "one  man,  one  vote" 
principle. To prepare for the meetings, the governors can however draw on their own organisations’ 
expertise,  which,  after all,  is extensive. Together  with the contribution of the  ECB organisation, this 
makes for a multifaceted approach to issues.  
The decentralised set-up of EMU was chosen deliberately and is laid down in the EU Treaty. It implies 
that  the  implementation  of  the  monetary  policy  is  practically  fully  delegated  to  the  national  central 
banks. Consequently, instead of to the ECB, the commercial banks in the Netherlands must turn to the 
Nederlandsche  Bank  for  liquidity,  and  hold  the  statutory  cash  reserves  on  an  account  with  the 
Nederlandsche  Bank.  Besides  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  national  banks  are  also 
entrusted  with  the  management  of  the  ECB  reserves.  So,  we  do  not  just manage  our  own  gold  en 
foreign exchange reserve assets, but also a part of the gold holdings in Frankfurt. Another example of 
the  decentralised  approach:  should  the  Eurosystem  decide  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange 
markets,  the  dealing  rooms  of  the  national  banks  will  also  assist  in  the  practical  execution  of  the 
measures involved.  
The second key task consists in promoting the smooth operation of payments. This task is assigned to 
us  under  the  Bank  Act  and  in  our  capacity  as  participant  in  the  ESCB.  For  the  settlement  of 
transactions to be efficient, it is essential to have a payments system that is reliable. Everybody should 
be able to rest assured that the banknotes and coins they receive are genuine. This, of course, applies 
to guilders and euro alike. The Nederlandsche Bank orders the banknotes from Johan Enschedé in 
Haarlem,  manages  the  supplies,  sees  to  the  distribution,  checks  whether  incoming  banknotes  are 
soiled or false etc. The responsibility for the minting and issuing of the coins rests with the Minister of 
Finance.  The  coins  are  minted  by  the  Koninklijke  Nederlandse  Munt  at  Utrecht,  but,  just  as  the 
banknotes, distributed by the Nederlandsche Bank.  
The  Nederlandsche  Bank  not  only  deals  with  cash  payments,  but  also  with  non-cash,  or  funds, 
transfers. Funds transfers must be settled smoothly and at a reasonable fee. Under my chairmanship, 
a working committee composed of senior officers who are currently conducting a survey of the fees 
involved by payments and of the payments infrastructure. On the basis of the final report, which will 
probably  appear  in  February  2002,  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  will  make  recommendations  towards 
enhancing  the  efficiency  and  the  competitive  and  innovative  power  of  the  Dutch  payments  system. 
The  Nederlandsche  Bank  will  also  contribute  to  the  efficiency  of  payments  by  ensuring  that  the 
payments  systems  and  securities  transaction  systems  are  secure  and  reliable.  This  task  is  called 
"oversight".  
And, last but not least, we come to supervision. As the supervisory task is purely a responsibility of the 
national authorities, the introduction of EMU has hardly had consequences for this task. However, the 
financial world and, consequently, supervision are really in a state of flux. Think, for example, of the 
ongoing process of concentration and internationalisation. Also the dividing lines between the various 
kinds  of  institution  are  fading  as  financial  conglomerates  are  formed.  The  products  and  services 
offered by these conglomerates are growing increasingly complex. In view of the attendant risks and 
uncertainties, today’s consumers must be better and more extensively informed than they used to be 
in the past.  
The developments I just sketched call for a new supervisory approach in the Netherlands. Recently, 
the three supervisory authorities, the Securities Board of the Netherlands, the Pensions and Insurance 
Supervisory Authority of the Netherlands and the Nederlandsche Bank, submitted a proposal to the 
Minister  of  Finance  regarding  an  adjustment  of  the  current  supervisory  practice  to  the  changed 
circumstances.  To  be  precise,  they  proposed  that  supervision  should  be  split  up  into  behavioural 
supervision  and  prudential  supervision.  In  the  situation  as  envisaged,  the  Securities  Board  of  the 
Netherlands was to deal with behavioural supervision, including customer protection, while prudential 
supervision  would  be  the  domain  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  the  Pensions  and  Insurance 
Supervisory Authority of the Netherlands. In addition, the Nederlandsche Bank would continue to be 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2001
 responsible for the supervision of the system, meaning that it would continue to promote the stability of 
the financial system.  
Why national supervisors?  
The question regularly arises whether we should not be working towards a single European prudential 
supervisor.  
One important argument in favour of national supervision is that national supervisors maintain close 
relations with individual institutions and financial markets in their countries. They are better placed to 
interpret  information  and  identify  and  deal  with  problems  swiftly  and  effectively  than  a  single 
supranational supervisor would be. This helps the decision-making process. Of course, the ongoing 
internationalisation  of  the  financial  sector  does  have  implications  for  supervision.  That  is  why 
supervisors are continuously consulting on an international level about harmonisation of the rules and 
a  level  playing  field.  Besides,  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  has  exchanged  so-termed  memoranda  of 
understanding with supervisors in a number of countries.  
Synergy benefits 
The  three  key  tasks  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  which  I  just  discussed,  do  not  stand  alone,  but 
interact. In each of the areas of activities, the Nederlandsche Bank has a key role. I’m aware that this 
isn’t  the  case  in  all  countries.  In  my  view,  however,  the  "Dutch"  model  has  evident  advantages, 
especially  given  the  high  degree  of  concentration  of  our  banking  system.  In  our  country,  banking 
supervision, monetary policy and payments are literally accommodated under one roof. I consider this 
essential, because of the common ground between the three areas and the synergy benefits for the 
information supply.  
The benefits brought by the combination of the said task areas are manifest not only in good times, but 
also in bad times. In the event of a crisis, adequate and rapid action based on the latest information is 
imperative. The way in which the key tasks are organised at the Nederlandsche Bank enhances the 
quality  of  the  decision-making  process.  This  was  once  more  made  clear  by  the  tragic  event  in  the 
United States. 
A final word  
Central banks play a pivotal role in bringing about financial stability. There can be no stability without 
confidence. Confidence in the value and authenticity of money; confidence, also, in the solvency and 
integrity  of  the  financial  institutions  to  which  we  entrust  our  money;  confidence  in  the  adequate 
operation  of  the  financial  infrastructure;  and,  confidence  in  the  independence  and  expertise  of  the 
monetary  and  supervisory  authorities.  Confidence  is  not  gained  overnight,  but  takes  time  to  grow 
because, to be trusted, the guardian of stability requires a track record. The Bank of Russia is a young 
central bank. It was founded in 1990 and, just like the ECB, is still in the middle of building up such as 
track record. I am convinced that the mutual contacts and exchange of ideas during this Forum will 
contribute to this process.  
BIS Review 90/2001 
 3
