 Bank of Japan’s November report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 19 November 2001 
 The Bank’s View2 
Adjustments in economic activity are becoming more severe, as the substantial decline in production 
is beginning to have an adverse effect on private consumption through decreases in employment and 
income. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  continue  to  decline, 
reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies but also sluggish demand for IT-related goods. 
Business fixed investment also continues to decrease while the deterioration in exporting conditions 
persists.  Housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public  investment  is  on  a  downward  trend. 
Moreover, private consumption seems to be weakening gradually. 
Industrial production continues to decline considerably, reflecting these developments in final demand 
and also strong excessiveness in inventories of electronic parts and materials. Corporate profits are 
deteriorating,  particularly  in  manufacturing,  and  the  weakness  in  household  income  is  becoming 
evident amid the decrease in the hours worked and the rise in unemployment. 
Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, the prevailing view is that inventory adjustments in 
IT-related  goods  worldwide  are  expected  to  be  mostly  completed  by  around  next  spring.  However, 
while the world economy has decelerated further since the terrorist attacks in the U.S., final demand of 
IT-related goods is likely to be stagnant for the time being. Moreover, if the downturn in U.S. private 
consumption persists, it may induce another round of adjustments in the Japanese economy, starting 
from the decline in exports such as of consumer goods.  
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downward  trend,  particularly  in  the  IT-related  sector,  amid  the  decline  in  corporate  profits.  Private 
consumption will also continue to be weak along with deteriorating employment and income conditions 
and the more cautious consumer sentiment. Government spending is projected to follow a downtrend 
at  the  time  when  the  substantial  decline  in  exports  and  production  is  negatively  affecting  private 
consumption through the decrease in household income. Consequently, it may take quite a while for 
overall  production  activity  to  stop  declining,  although  the  decrease  in  the  production  of  IT-related 
goods may eventually come to an end.  
Overall, adjustments in economic activity, starting from the decline in exports since the beginning of 
this  year,  will  surely  dampen  domestic  demand  further.  At  the  same  time,  concern  that  another 
substantial  decline  in  exports  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  is  growing.  Moreover, 
while the economy continues to be in a fragile state, continuous attention should be paid to the risk of 
a negative impact on the economy induced by developments in foreign and domestic capital markets 
via corporate and household confidence. 
With regard to prices, import prices continue to decline mainly reflecting the softening of international 
commodity prices. Domestic wholesale prices are also declining faster from the effects of the decline 
in  crude  oil  prices  in  addition  to  the  continuous  decreases  in  prices  of  electrical  machinery  and 
materials. Consumer prices are weakening owing mainly to the decline in prices of imported products 
and their substitutes. Corporate service prices continue to decrease. 
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, international commodity prices such as of crude 
oil and nonferrous metals remain weak. Also, with the prolonged adjustments in economic activity, the 
balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  domestic  market  will  increasingly  exert  downward 
pressure  on  prices.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by 
technological  innovations, the decreases  in the prices of goods and services reflecting deregulation 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
November 15 and 16, 2001. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on November 15 and 16 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 1
 and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  price  developments.  Overall, 
prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high 
degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will 
further intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring. 
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around zero percent as the Bank of Japan 
provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the current account balances 
held at the Bank at above 6 trillion yen. 
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  basically  continue  to  be  level.  The  Japan  premium  remains 
negligible. 
Yields on long-term government bonds dipped and are recently moving around 1.35 percent. As for 
the  yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government 
bonds, while spreads between bonds with relatively high credit ratings and government bonds remain 
mostly unchanged, those  between bonds  with low credit ratings and government bonds continue to 
expand slightly. 
Stock prices continued to be weak, but are recently rebounding. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 121 -123 yen to the 
U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks appear to be more cautious in extending loans to firms 
with  higher  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies.  The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  small  firms  are  becoming 
more cautious. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the fund-raising conditions for firms continue to be 
generally favorable, although the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings is deteriorating 
slightly. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  is  declining  faster  mainly  because  firms  are  decreasing  their 
business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. As for the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued, the year-on-year growth rate 
is slowing due to the decrease in the issuance of corporate bonds with low credit ratings. Meanwhile, 
the amount outstanding of CP issued continues to be at a high level, significantly exceeding that of the 
previous year, due to the generally favorable environment for issuing CP.  
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in October remained relatively high while the rate declined 
slightly from the previous month.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy in terms of money market conditions 
and  interest  rate  levels.  However,  as  private  banks  and  investors  are  becoming  slightly  cautious  in 
taking  credit  risks,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  with  higher  credit  risks  and  small  firms  are 
apparently  becoming  severe.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions  and 
corporate financing need closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2001
