 Glenn Stevens: The economic scene 
 Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Committee for 
Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Luncheon, Adelaide, 3 September 2014. 
 Thank you for the invitation to visit Adelaide. 
As you know the Reserve Bank Board met here yesterday and decided to leave the cash 
rate unchanged. The statement issued after the meeting gave the reasoning for the decision, 
in the usual concise fashion. Today I will give some broader remarks about the global and 
domestic economies and financial conditions. 
The global economy has continued its expansion this year. Estimates for global growth are 
running at about 3¼–3½ per cent. This is a bit better than the 2013 outcome and close to, 
albeit  a  little  below,  the  three-decade  average,  which  is  3.6  per  cent.  We  are  now  in 
September,  so  unless  something  pretty  dramatic  happens  soon  in  one  of  the  large 
economies, those estimates should be a pretty accurate guide to the annual outcomes. 
For  Australia’s  particular  group  of  trading  partners,  weighted  by  export  shares,  growth  is 
running at about 4½ per cent, which is somewhat above the 30-year average. This strength 
reflects  the  continued  increase  in  the  weight  of  China  as  a  destination  for  exports.  Even 
though China is growing more slowly than it used to – at a mere 7½ per cent this year – the 
fact that its growth is so much stronger than most others combines with its increased weight 
to push up the weighted-average growth of our trading partner group. 
The determined pessimists among us will see the increased weight of China as a concern: 
what  if  something  goes  wrong  and  the  Chinese  economy  experiences  a  sharp  slowing  in 
growth?  In  fact  this  is  a  question  that  could  be  put  for  most  economies  now  –  nearly 
50 economies,  including  the  United  States,  European  Union,  Japan,  Russia  and  Canada, 
now  have  China  as  their  number  1  or  2  trading  partner.  The  full  ramifications  of  the 
continuing rise in the weight of China’s economy and, in time, its financial system in world 
affairs  will  be  the  topic  for  numerous  lengthy  books.  But  in  short,  the  whole  world  is  now 
more dependent on China than it was. 
For today, probably the most important point to note is that the near-term task of the Chinese 
authorities is to manage the desired slowing in credit growth and moderation in asset values. 
Housing prices are falling in many Chinese cities at present. This is not unprecedented – it is 
the  third  time  in  the  past  decade  this  has  occurred.  (Yes,  house  prices  can  fall,  even  in 
China.) This area – the asset price and credit nexus – is the one to watch, more than the 
monthly exports or PMIs and so on. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  international  scene  is  the  exceptionally  low 
volatility of financial prices and the compression of risk premia. Yields on sovereign debt of 
the  major  countries  are  very  low,  the  lowest  on  record  in  some  cases.  Spreads  on 
investment-grade and financial corporate bonds have reached multi-year lows. 
Nowhere  is  this  phenomenon  more  striking  than  in  Europe.  Two  years  ago,  some  major 
European countries faced a crisis of sovereign credit. Their governments were experiencing 
borrowing  rates  that  suggested  that  markets  had  very  serious  questions  about  their 
budgetary sustainability. Now, these same countries are borrowing more cheaply than they 
did  in  2007,  prior  to  the  eruption  of  the  crisis  –  even  though  they  are  now  carrying 
considerably more debt than they were back then.1 
                                                 
1  There is obviously the potential for multiple equilibria here. If market participants think debt is unsustainable, 
and borrowing costs correspondingly rise, that itself can be the thing which makes the position unsustainable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Corporate  borrowing  costs  are  similarly  low.  Investment  grade  bonds  in  the  US  and  euro 
area  and  Australia  are  yielding  only  around  100  basis  points  more  than  the  equivalent 
government  bonds  and  even  “junk”  bonds  from  these  countries  are,  on  average,  yielding 
around 6 per cent or less. Some entities (Graph 1) have issued debt with 50 or even 100-
year  maturities.  Given  the  uncertainty  about  the  state  of  the  world  over  that  horizon,  the 
returns on offer to investors in financial claims seem strikingly low.2 
Graph 1 
  Another pricing puzzle is exchange rates. Many in Australia have commented at length about 
the relatively high value of the Australian dollar against the US dollar. The Bank has made its 
views on this pretty clear and so I won’t reiterate them today. But it’s worth noting that many 
other countries have had a similar puzzle to ours – so the real question is why the US dollar 
has remained as low as it has. 
Overall  then,  the  global  environment  remains  “interesting”,  with  significant  challenges, 
uncertainties  and  puzzles.  All  that  said,  from  Australia’s  point  of  view,  the  world  economy 
continues to grow, inflation remains contained, our terms of trade though falling remain high, 
and financial conditions are remarkably accommodative. 
On the domestic front, we had the latest estimates of national income and spending today. 
The latest quarter was expected to be one of slower growth than the preceding one, which 
had  been  quite  a  strong  one,  in  part  because  of  some  temporary  factors  which  could  not 
continue. Taking the two quarters together suggests a picture of moderate growth. 
There  will  no  doubt  be  a  huge  amount  of  breathless  analysis  of  these  data  and  intense 
speculation about what they mean. It will be worth remembering to take a step back and look 
at the longer perspective. In that spirit, allow me to offer an update of a chart from a speech I 
gave here two years ago (Graph 2). 
                                                                                                                                                      
If the stock of public debt is, say, 100 per cent of GDP or more, and the rate of interest is 6 per cent rather 
than 3 per cent, that amounts to 3 per cent of GDP per year in additional servicing costs. Few governments 
could easily manage an increase in servicing costs of that size. 
2  How many such entities will exist in their current form when such debts fall due is an interesting question. Of 
the 30 companies that were included in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in 1964, about half had disappeared 
through merger, buyout or bankruptcy by 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 2 
   Compared  with  last  time  I  showed  you  this,  it  is  pleasing  that  the  US  and  the  UK  have 
recorded some solid growth, and New Zealand – one of Australia’s closest trading partners – 
has been growing particularly well, as the task of re-building much of their second largest city 
gets into full swing. Some of these countries have been recording growth faster than ours 
lately.  That  they  have  sped  up,  and  may  even  be  starting  to  close  the  gap,  should  be 
welcomed. This chart was prepared prior to today’s data so the line for Australia is not quite 
up to date. Even so, there is still not much doubt about which country, among this group, has 
had the most consistent performance. 
Of course these data are already somewhat dated. We can ask what has been happening 
more  recently.  The  answer  is  that  growth  is  continuing.  Most  survey  indications  are  that 
business conditions  have  improved  a  little,  and  that  household  sentiment  has  recovered  a 
fair bit of the fall seen in April and May. Those measures are close to average. 
We have seen the unemployment rate print higher in July, after several months where it had 
not changed much. Because of measurement issues, interpretation of that monthly figure is 
even more hazardous than usual, and this may remain so in the months ahead. Nonetheless, 
the  data  cannot  be  dismissed  and  are,  on  their  face,  concerning.  Other  indicators  have 
mostly  suggested  a  slight  improvement  in  the  labour  market  this  year,  not  an  accelerating 
deterioration. The Bank’s reading, which we have had for a while, is that the labour market 
has  a  degree  of  spare  capacity,  and  that  it  will  be  a  while  before  we  see  unemployment 
decline consistently. 
Looking ahead, ideally, the non-mining part of the economy would see a further pick-up to 
grow a bit above trend for a while, having been below trend for a while up to recently. We 
may  not  be  quite  there  yet,  but  we  are  I  think  slowly  building  a  foundation  for  better 
performance. 
What  can  we  do  to  help  this?  The  main  thing  the  Reserve  Bank  can  do  is  run  an 
accommodative monetary policy so as to lend support to demand in the non-mining areas of 
the economy. Rates of interest are at very low levels, and have been steady there for over a 
year now. Most observers expect they will be there for some time yet. The rate we actually 
set, the overnight rate, is as low as it has been on a consistent basis in my lifetime. Rates of 
interest  that  matter  more  for  most  borrowers  are  similarly  very  low,  and  in  fact  have  been 
declining slightly even though the Reserve Bank Board has not changed the cash rate for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  over a year now. They are lower than in recent previous cycles, even though the economy 
today is nothing like as weak as it has been on most of those occasions. 
Monetary policy doesn’t just work on the borrowers; the savers or investors matter too (and 
in fact there are more of them). The low returns on offer on safe investments in Australia, and 
the  ultra-low  returns  on  such  assets  internationally,  are  certainly  having  an  effect  by 
prompting investors to “search for yield”. Not only are returns on financial instruments low, 
but  yields  on  the  existing  stock  of  physical  assets  –  houses,  commercial  property, 
infrastructure assets – are being bid down. Some of that  search is of course coming from 
offshore. 
That’s  a  big  part  of  how  accommodative  monetary  policy  works:  by  prompting  substitution 
towards higher-risk assets; raising asset prices, which increases collateral values and makes 
credit extension more viable; improving the cash flows of debtors; and so on. 
All those things are quite normal parts of the so-called “monetary transmission mechanism”. 
In  some  ways  that  term  is  a  misnomer  because  while  some  of  the  “transmission”  is 
somewhat mechanical, a lot of it isn’t. It depends on the behaviour and general frame of mind 
of the myriad households, businesses large and small, investors and financial market players 
and so on. The final linkages in the “mechanism” are those that connect changes in financial 
behaviour  to  changes  in  spending  on  real  goods  and  services.  And  while  high  enough 
interest rates really can, more or less, force people to curtail their borrowing and spending, 
low rates can’t make them borrow and spend. They have to want to. 
The  power  of  monetary  policy  to  boost  domestic  demand  depends  importantly  on  some 
sectors of the economy being in a position to respond to lower costs of debt, higher collateral 
values, reduced incentives to save and so on, by spending more today, with confidence that 
their income in the future will allow them to service and repay the debt. 
Which sectors would be available to lead such an expansion? In the broad, there are three. 
There are households, governments and firms. Let’s think about each briefly. 
Households being willing to increase their debt and lower the share of current income being 
saved was a striking feature of Australia’s economic landscape from the early 1990s until just 
prior to the financial crisis. Consumption spending consistently rose faster than income and 
the ratio of debt to income went from about 60 per cent in 1993 to 150 per cent by 2006. 
Households are servicing that higher debt quite well – mortgages make up most of their debt 
and arrears are running at about one half of 1 per cent, which is low by global standards. But 
as I have argued before, it seems unlikely that household debt can rise like that again. Nor 
would  it  be  desirable.  So  while  we  can  expect  that  household  consumption  spending  can 
grow in line with income, or maybe a little faster given the rise in net worth over the past two 
years, the odds are against households being a driver of strong growth the way they were a 
decade ago. 
What about the government sector? Most governments in Australia are trying to strengthen 
their own balance sheets by containing the build-up in debt that has been occurring.3 Public 
final  spending  is  scheduled,  according  to  the  stated  intentions  of  federal  and  state 
governments, to be subdued over the next couple of years. In fact, it is forecast to record the 
most subdued growth for a long time. By and large then, the public sector is not in the phase 
of using its balance sheet to expand demand faster than normal. 
                                                 
3  Here  it  is  worth  noting  that  proposals  to  fund  infrastructure  spending  by  “asset  re-cycling”  still  amount  to  a 
fiscal stimulus, other things equal. Selling assets for this purpose is a financing device just like selling bonds. 
In one case the private sector is absorbing a real asset; in the other it is absorbing a financial claim on the 
government. Either way, the private sector is transferring financial resources to the government, who is then 
going to use those resources to acquire goods and services. In one case the government has less debt on its 
books, though also less assets. The effect on aggregate demand is the same. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  That leaves the business sector. What can we say about its balance sheet? The business 
sector is of course very diverse. But in the broad we can observe that its leverage is mostly 
low,  and  probably  lower  than  it  was  a  decade  ago  in  most  instances,  in  contrast  to  either 
households or governments. It also seems that holdings of cash have been increasing of late 
(Graph  3).  The  available  data  from  the  listed  company  sector  show  a  modest  increase, 
leaving  aside  the  resources  sector.  Looking  at data  from  the  financial  aggregates,  we  can 
compare  the  evolution  of  business  credit  and  business  holdings  of  deposits  and  like 
products, over time (Graph 4). 
Graph 3 
 Graph 4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  This data includes fund managers’ holdings of cash assets, which from other data appear to 
have risen by close to $200 billion since 2006. But overall, this comparison suggests a very 
marked improvement in the liquidity of the business (and fund management) sectors’ balance 
sheet over the past five years. 
My  conclusion  would  be  that  many  businesses  are  in  a  position  to  play  their  part  in  the 
growth dynamic over time. The fact that in some areas outside of mining the level of gross 
fixed  capital  spending  is  barely  above  depreciation  rates  suggests  that,  over  time,  capital 
spending in those areas will have to increase. The forward estimates of non-mining business 
capital  spending  released  recently  do  show  a  further  upgrading  of  intentions.  That  won’t 
offset the impending fall in mining investment and it would be good to see further, and more 
substantial,  upgrades  over  time.  But  the  available  data  suggest  that  things  are  at  least 
heading in the right direction. 
This  is  not  some  call  for  business  leaders  to  play  a  role  in  driving  growth  out  of  a  public-
spirited desire to help the economy. That would be a fruitless call because doing that isn’t 
their  job.  Their  responsibility  is  to  run  their  companies  in  the  interests  of  the  companies’ 
owners. My argument simply is that, at some point, it is going to be in the interests of the 
owners  for  investment  to  take  place  in  new  technologies,  better  processes,  new  lines  of 
business and, in time, more capacity. At some stage, the equity analysts, shareholders, fund 
managers, commentators and so on will want to be asking not “where’s your cost cutting or 
capital return plan?”, but “where’s your growth plan?” 
As  business  responds  to  trends  that  foreshadow  sustainable  increases  in  demand  and 
incomes, some of the response will come from smaller and newer players. Some of these will 
probably be among the most innovative enterprises. There isn’t much focus on what these 
entities are doing in the general commentary on the economy, perhaps because there are 
fewer  established  data  sets.  Measuring  innovation  and  so  on  is  less  straightforward  than 
measuring how many building approvals were issued in any given month. 
But my suspicion, admittedly based on some rather indirect measurement, is that innovation 
is  occurring.  For  example,  according  to  a  regular  ABS  survey  on  innovation  in  Australian 
companies, the trend over recent years is for more companies to be developing innovations 
and  fewer  to  be  abandoning  attempted  innovations  (Graph  5).  We  can  also  observe  that 
growth  in  labour  productivity  per  hour  has  picked  up  in  the  past  couple  of  years,  which 
suggests changes to practices in work places. And one crude gauge of “animal spirits” – the 
number of new companies registered with ASIC – has been rising quite strongly since 2011 
(Graph  6).  No  doubt  there  are  all  sorts  of  reasons  for  registering  corporate  entities,  but 
perhaps this shows that there are some out there taking a risk.4 And in the end, that’s the 
vital ingredient for private sector growth. 
                                                 
4  We might also look at how many patent applications are occurring. It appears that they increased strongly in 
2013,  but  this  was  due  to  a  change  in  legislation  triggering  a  rush  in  applications  just  prior  to  new 
arrangements taking effect. So the underlying trend is not clear. See http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/uploaded-
files/reports/intellectual-property-report-2014-low-res.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Graph 5 
Graph 6 
    
Having talked a little about what monetary policy can do to help the current situation, I need 
to be clear that there are also things that it can’t do, and some things that it shouldn’t do. 
Monetary policy can create conditions of easier funding and help the ability of the financial 
sector to extend credit. But it can’t, for example, add to the supply of land zoned for housing, 
or improve the responsiveness of the construction sector to demand for additional housing 
stock. Other policies have to do that – and it’s important that they do if we are to see easy 
credit  result  in  more  dwellings  as  opposed  to  just  higher  prices  for  the  existing  dwellings. 
Monetary policy can’t create the additional infrastructure that most people agree we need. 
Funding  conditions  are  not,  in  fact,  an  impediment  to  infrastructure.  The  real  issues  are 
governance, risk-sharing and pricing – areas where other policies have to be right. Monetary 
policy can’t directly cause the innovation and technological change that is so important for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  wellbeing  of  our  citizens  over  time.  Other  policy  areas  have  to  be  right  –  and  then  the 
innovators and their backers have to be willing take the necessary risk. 
As for things that monetary policy should try to avoid, we are also cognisant of the fact that 
monetary policy does work initially by affecting financial risk-taking behaviour. In our efforts 
to stimulate growth in the real economy, we don’t want to foster too much build-up of risk in 
the  financial  sector,  such  that  people  are  over-extended.  That  could  leave  the  economy 
exposed to nasty shocks in the future. The more prudent approach is to try to avoid, so far as 
we  can,  that  particular  boom-bust  cycle.  It  is  stating  the  obvious  that  at  present,  while  we 
may desire to see a faster reduction in the rate of unemployment, further inflating an already 
elevated level of housing prices seems an unwise route to try to achieve that. 
Conclusion 
The future has no shortage of challenges, but that is hardly new. Sensible policies in many 
areas  are  needed  to  help  with  the  required  adjustments.  That  includes  monetary  policy, 
within the limits of its powers. A very accommodative interest rate structure, and a degree of 
stability and predictability, has been in place for some time now. 
Indeed the conduct of policy could perhaps be described as boring. If so, I would regard that 
as a small success. While the financial markets like to think about almost nothing else than 
what will happen to interest rates next month, I suspect most people are happy not to have to 
think about such things, and prefer focusing on issues of more enduring importance for their 
business  or  their  lives.  And  it’s  those  things  that,  well  attended  to,  will  deliver  our  future 
prosperity and wellbeing. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
