Charles I Plosser: Communication challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  before  the  2014  US  Monetary  Policy  Forum  –  “Initiative  on 
Global  Markets”,  at  the  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School  of  Business,  New  York  City, 
28 February 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President Plosser believes the Federal Open Market Committee has to revamp its 
current forward guidance regarding the future federal funds rate path because the 
6.5 percent unemployment threshold has become irrelevant. 
President Plosser points out that before offering new forward guidance, the FOMC 
ought to be clear about its purpose. Is it purely a transparency device, or is it a way 
to  commit 
to  add  more 
accommodation today? 
President  Plosser  notes  that  commitment  is  required  to  be  successful  in  either 
approach  to  forward  guidance.  Policymakers  cannot  maintain  discretion  and 
simultaneously  commit  to  forward  guidance  and  expect  that  guidance  to  be 
effective. 
to  a  more  accommodative 
future  policy  stance 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to return to this event. The organizers have put together another great and 
timely program with distinguished participants. However, with Governor Stein and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, Evans, and myself all here, I am beginning to wonder if we are in Washington 
rather than in New York. Nevertheless, it is great to be on the program with so many of my 
fellow policymakers. If you listen carefully to each of us, you will understand why I start with 
the usual caveat that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
Communication  and  transparency  have  been  important  themes  in  monetary  policy 
discussions  over  the  past  decade  or  more.  Indeed,  in  2007  this  Monetary  Policy  Forum 
began with Alan Blinder’s keynote address titled “Making Monetary Policy and Talking about 
It.” In part, this emphasis on communication and transparency reflects the steady evolution in 
the theory and science of monetary policy. Reflecting this emerging consensus, the Federal 
Reserve during the tenure of Chairman Bernanke has taken a number of actions to promote 
increased transparency about its actions and policies. In fact, President Evans and I served 
on  a  subcommittee  led  by  current  Chair  Yellen  specifically  focused  on  improving 
communication. 
Our  efforts  to  improve  communication  took  on  heightened  importance  as  the  FOMC 
responded to the financial crisis and recession. Since December 2008, the federal funds rate 
target has been near zero. Since the nominal funds rate cannot go below zero, we had to 
develop alternative policy tools in an effort to provide further accommodation to support the 
recovery. We also had to figure out how and what to communicate about these new tools. 
Thus,  well-understood  communication  practices  about  traditional  policy  tools  gave  way  to 
untested ways to describe these new tools. The task was further complicated because one of 
the unconventional tools was so-called forward guidance. Forward guidance seeks to inform 
the public about the future path of policy rather than describing a policy action taken today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Thus, effective forward guidance is all about communication and what it conveys or doesn’t 
convey. 
In  my  brief time  today,  I  will  focus  on  why  I  think  communication  is  such  a  challenge  and 
discuss some of the choices the Committee faces going forward. 
Current state of affairs 
First, communication is difficult because monetary policy is more complicated than it used to 
be. With the traditional policy tool at the zero lower bound, the Committee has focused on 
two unconventional tools. The first is the purchase of long-term assets, and the second, as I 
mentioned,  is  forward  guidance.  The  asset  purchase  program  has  had  many  dimensions, 
such as the overall volume of purchases, the pace of purchases, the kinds of assets targeted 
for  purchase,  and  the  criteria  for  starting  and  stopping  the  purchases.  Policymakers  have 
tried to fine-tune the program along each dimension  while assessing the trade-offs among 
them and the trade-offs with other policy tools, such as the traditional funds rate decision. 
With so many moving parts to our policy framework, it is not surprising that communication is 
very complicated. 
We are now in the third round of asset purchases, or quantitative easing. Since September 
2012, the FOMC has added some $1.3 trillion in long-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed 
securities to its balance sheet through this program, buying at a pace of $85 billion a month 
in 2013. This program, known as QE3, is already twice the size of the last round of asset 
purchases that was initiated in November 2010, known as QE2. 
In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases 
from  $85  billion  to  $75  billion  per  month.  In  January,  it  announced  a  further  reduction  to 
$65 billion. The FOMC is now on a path of measured reductions, which, if continued, will end 
the  purchase  program  late  this  year.  If  the  economy  continues  to  improve,  we  could  find 
ourselves  still  trying  to  increase  accommodation  in  an  environment  when  history  suggests 
that policy should perhaps be moving in the opposite direction. 
Communication about the future path of asset purchases has, at times, been imprecise and 
confusing.  Last  June,  the  Committee  suggested  that  it  might  begin  to  reduce  the  pace  of 
purchases in the fall and perhaps end them when the unemployment rate reached 7 percent. 
However, the Committee did not even begin the tapering process until unemployment had 
reached 7 percent. It now seems unlikely that the program will end until the unemployment 
rate is below – or as indicated in the FOMC statement, perhaps “well below” – 6.5 percent. 
Why  is  the  6.5  percent  unemployment  rate  important?  Because  the  Committee  made  it 
important. The Committee, in essence, told the markets that the 6.5 percent unemployment 
rate  was  an  important  quantitative  marker.  In  December  2012,  the  FOMC  indicated  that  it 
intended  to  keep  the  federal  funds  rate  target  near  zero  at  least  as  long  as  the 
unemployment  rate  was  above  6.5  percent,  the  inflation  rate  between  one  and  two  years 
ahead  was  projected to be  no  more than  2.5  percent,  and  inflation  expectations remained 
well anchored. However, it is important to remember that these guideposts were thresholds, 
not triggers. The FOMC had not made a commitment to act once a threshold was reached, 
nor did it indicate how policy would evolve after a threshold was reached. It simply signaled 
that it would not act prior to crossing one of the thresholds. 
Yet, the 6.5 percent threshold will soon become irrelevant, and it probably is already. So the 
Committee,  at  a  minimum,  has  to  revamp  its  communications  regarding  the  future  federal 
funds rate path. Given that we are still easing policy by buying assets, it is pretty clear that 
even though the threshold will soon come and go, the Committee is unlikely to contemplate 
raising rates as long as it is buying assets. Put another way, the practical constraint at this 
point for raising the policy rate is no longer the unemployment rate but the fact that we are 
still buying assets. Indeed, the Committee has acknowledged that it will likely be appropriate 
to  keep  rates  at  their  current  low  rates  well  past  the  time  unemployment  falls  below 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
6.5 percent. Therefore, in my view, the threshold has already lost its meaning as a guidepost. 
It needs to be replaced with something that is more relevant and informative. 
This poses the challenge of how and what to communicate about policy going forward. Our 
actions and the data have made the current form of forward guidance outdated and mostly 
irrelevant.  Indeed,  one  could  reasonably  wonder  whether  the  inflation  threshold  has  any 
meaning  at  this  point.  In  other  words,  by  allowing  the  unemployment  threshold  to  pass 
without taking action, the public might conclude that the Committee could easily decide to let 
the inflation threshold pass without taking action as well. 
Competing roles for forward guidance 
Before we offer further forward guidance, it is important to be clear about what this forward 
guidance is intended to accomplish. As Yogi Berra is reported to have said, “You have to be 
careful if you don’t know where you’re going because you might end up somewhere else.” 
One  way  to  think  of  forward  guidance  is  that  it  is  just  another  step  toward  increased 
transparency and effective communication of monetary policy. This approach seeks to clarify 
how  policymakers  will  alter  policy  as  economic  conditions  change,  that  is,  to  describe  a 
reaction function.  By  being more  transparent  about  how  policy  will  evolve  as  a  function  of 
economic  conditions,  this  approach  can  help  the  public  form  more  accurate  expectations 
about the future path of monetary policy. 
Economists have learned that expectations play an important role in determining economic 
outcomes. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary 
policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If 
monetary  policymakers  can  reduce  uncertainty  about  the  course  of  monetary  policy,  the 
economy is likely to perform more efficiently. 
Of course, in order to communicate something about the reaction function, you have to have 
one.  That  means  in  order  to  be  successful  with  this  approach  to  forward  guidance, 
policymakers must be able to agree on how they will systematically respond to changes in 
economic conditions. To be useful, however, the reaction function need not be mechanistic. 
Qualitative  information  about  such  a  function  and  how  it  will  be  implemented  can  also  be 
useful and meaningful. Nevertheless, some degree of commitment to abide by the specified 
reaction  function  is  necessary,  if  the  communication  is  to  achieve  the  desired  result  of 
reducing policy uncertainty and providing meaningful forward guidance. The excuse that “this 
time is different” undermines the commitment and the credibility of the information that the 
communication is seeking to provide. I would add that a committed and credible approach to 
such a systematic approach to policy is helpful and informative regardless of whether you are 
at the zero lower bound or not. 
A somewhat different rationale or view of forward guidance is that it is a way of increasing 
accommodation in a period when the policy rate is at or near the zero lower bound. Some 
models suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, or optimal, to 
indicate  that future  policy  rates  will  be  kept  “lower for  longer” than  might  otherwise  be  the 
case. Thus, policymakers intentionally commit to deviating from what they would otherwise 
choose  to  do  in  normal  times,  such  as  following  the  Taylor  rule.  In  these  models,  such  a 
commitment  would  tend  to  raise  inflation  expectations  and  lower  long-term  nominal  rates, 
thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. 
This  approach  asks  more  of  forward  guidance  than  just  articulating  a  reaction  function.  It 
takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence 
and manage the public’s beliefs about the future policy path in ways that are different from 
how  they  may  have  behaved  in  the  past.  As  I  have  indicated  in  previous  speeches,  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
approach to forward guidance can backfire if the policy is misunderstood.1 For example, if 
the  public  hears  that  the  policy  rate  will  be  lower  for  longer,  it  may  interpret  this  news  as 
policymakers  saying  that  they  expect  the  economy  to  be  weaker  for  longer.  If  that  is  the 
interpretation  of  the  message,  then  the  forward  guidance  will  not  succeed  and  may  even 
weaken current spending. 
The  FOMC  has  not  been  clear  about  the  purpose  of  its  forward  guidance.  Is  it  purely  a 
transparency device, or is it a way to commit to a more accommodative future policy stance 
to add more accommodation today? This lack of clarity makes it difficult to communicate the 
stance of policy and the conditionality of policy on the state of the economy. 
Note that most formulations of standard, simple policy rules suggest that the federal funds 
rate should rise very soon – if not already. In other words, the zero lower bound no longer 
appears to be binding. However, the FOMC has provided forward guidance indicating that 
the federal funds rate will need to be low for some time to come. 
How  do  we  reconcile  this  apparent  incongruity?  It  could  be  that  the  FOMC  is  using  its 
forward guidance as a commitment device or signal for a more accommodative policy well 
into the future, as in the second approach I have discussed. Or, it could be the FOMC views 
forward  guidance  as  a  device  for  increased  transparency  but  that  it  doesn’t  think  the 
standard rules apply in the current environment. Then what rules do apply? If policymakers 
are  not  relying  on  a  rule  or  a  rule-like  reaction  function,  policy  is  purely  discretionary  and 
forward  guidance  becomes  ineffective.  In  either  case,  we  have  an  opportunity  and  an 
obligation to provide more transparency and better communication. 
This leads me to suggest that there is a more fundamental tension underlying our forward 
guidance and communication challenges. Forward guidance in either of the two approaches 
that  I  have  discussed  requires  a  degree  of  commitment  to  conduct  future  policy  in  some 
particular manner. That commitment is central to the success of either approach. Yet, I would 
suggest that the old “rules versus discretion” debate is alive and well. This, of course, is not a 
new tension within the FOMC, nor is it one that is likely to go away in the near term. But the 
heightened weight and prominence given to forward guidance as a policy tool has certainly 
shined a spotlight on this longstanding debate. 
The desire to maintain flexibility to respond to “events on the ground” is a strong one. One 
can make the case that discretion is deeply ingrained in most policy institutions, particularly 
the Fed. Yet, the desire to maintain discretion is anathema to the commitment required for 
successful  forward  guidance.  Policymakers  cannot  maintain  discretion  and  simultaneously 
commit to forward guidance and expect that guidance to be effective. 
So,  I  conclude  as  I  began:  Forward  guidance  and  clear  communications  remain  important 
challenges for monetary policymakers. 
 
                                                
1   See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s 
(SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
