  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Seizing opportunities amid a growing banking 
environment 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Asian Bankers’ Philippines International Banking Convention. 
Makati City, 29 August 2014. 
 The  theme  of  your  convention  this  year  is  “The  Drive  for  Growth  and  Sustainability  in  the 
Philippine Banking System”. This is quite timely in light of the government’s goal to push the 
real  economy  onto  a  sustainable  upward  growth  trajectory.  Given  that  an  essential 
component to achieving this goal is a resilient, responsive and responsible banking system, 
today’s  convention  presents  a  good  platform  for  discussing  the  state  of  the  Philippine 
economy and the banking system. We hope the different sessions would help bring to fore 
ways by which we can harness the power of the banking system to raise economic growth so 
that it would deliver a higher quality of life for more. 
Opportunities 
Let me begin therefore with an overview of the opportunities that could drive growth. Well, 
the Philippines is listed as the world’s 12th largest in terms of population. We are a country of 
100 million people, mostly young, with a median age projected to stay around 30 years in the 
next two decades. 
Ours is a growing and consuming population which transacts about 2.5 billion payments per 
month in cash and check payments with electronic transactions at only 1% of the total. This 
represents opportunities to technology innovations that will extend the reach of efficient and 
competitive payments systems across our country. After all, our people embrace technology 
and  mobile  communications  in  a  manner  that  has  raised  our  mobile  phones  to  around 
110 million, more than our population. 
In  the  last  nine  quarters,  we  saw  deposit  accounts  grow  by  nearly  7  million  or  17.5%  to 
nearly 47 million. About 93% of the new accounts have outstanding balances of about one 
hundred  thousand  pesos  or  less.  This  shows  sustained  expansion  of  the  retail  base  of 
savers. This is a base that represents those who have learned the value of safekeeping their 
hard-earned  savings  and  who  perhaps  aspire  to  migrate  from  savers  to  investors  in  the 
future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are just a few figures and trends that define opportunities. 
Macroeconomic perspectives 
Indeed, the  Philippines  is  a  land  of  opportunity  and  growth.  And the  opportunities  here go 
beyond the consumer market. For a better perspective, let us take a macro-point of view. 
First, the country’s GDP growth continues to be above its long-term average. Although there 
has been some moderation in growth, the country’s GDP continues to prove resilient against 
external and domestic headwinds. Philippine economic growth accelerated to 6.4 percent in 
the  second  quarter  of  2014,  the  second  fastest  among  major  Asian  countries  tied  with 
Malaysia. 
This growth trend supports the view of the BSP that the economy has the capacity to absorb 
the recent tightening in monetary policy settings. 
Second,  inflation  has  been  within  the  national  government’s  target  ranges  in  the  last  five 
years and is expected to remain so over the policy horizon, albeit closer to the upper end of 
our  target  range.  This,  notwithstanding  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  that  include  price 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  pressures from higher food prices short-term volatility in international oil prices and pending 
petitions for adjustments in power rates and transport fares. The BSP is closely monitoring 
these risks and their impact on inflation. 
Third,  the  country  continues  to  enjoy  a  healthy  external  liquidity  position,  which  should 
provide a strong buffer against potential external shocks. The current account continues to 
perform  well  due  to  resilient  remittances  from  Overseas  Filipinos,  sustained  rise  in  BPO 
revenues, and higher tourist receipts. 
Cash  remittances  from  OFs  coursed  through  banks  for  the  period  January  to  June  2014 
reached US$11.4 billion, higher by 5.8 percent compared to the same period a year ago. The 
country’s Gross International Reserves stood at US$80.6 billion as of end-July 2014, enough 
to cover 11 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of services and income. That 
level is also equivalent to 7.7 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original 
maturity, and 5.6 times based on residual maturity. These figures are above commonly used 
standards for these metrics. 
Fourth,  our  banking  sector’s  scorecard  as  of  June  2014  shows  consolidated  figures  for 
assets, loans, deposits and capital at uniformly record high levels. In particular: assets were 
at  P10.28  trillion;  loans  stood  at  P5.2  trillion;  deposits  climbed  to  P7.9  trillion;  capital 
registered at P1.2 trillion. In addition, our semestral stress tests validate that our universal 
and commercial banks are in a position to withstand extreme but plausible shocks in credit 
and market risks. 
Credit  conditions,  on  the  other  hand,  remain  supportive  of  economic  growth.  Double-digit 
growth  in  bank  loans continues, rising  by  20%  in  June  2014 for  universal  and  commercial 
banks.  The  sustained  expansion  in  bank  lending  reflects  the  strong  underpinnings  of  the 
domestic economy. Nevertheless, as in other jurisdictions, we are on guard for any possible 
build-up  of  asset  price  bubbles  and  its  implications  for  the  system  and  the  economy, 
especially in the context of monetary policy normalization. 
At this juncture, we are pleased to note that the NPL ratio of universal and commercial banks 
remains  low  at  only  2.1%  as  of  June  2014.  This  is  a  good  indication  that  sustained  loan 
growth has not come at the expense of credit quality. 
Given all these, it can therefore be said that the financial pie has expanded and is getting 
even bigger as the real economy continues to expand. 
Policy tracks towards strengthening the banking system 
Even as we say this, however, economic literature presents evidence that for an economy to 
continue to expand, it is essential to have a well-functioning banking and financial system. 
Indeed  economic  growth  helps  to  grow  the  financial  sector,  just  as  the  finanical  sector 
supports economic growth. 
Consistent  with  this,  the  BSP  has  adopted  essentially  five  tracks  to  strengthen  our  own 
banking system: 
1.  First,  we  have  adopted  regulations  that  would  help  ensure  that  our  banks  continue  to 
operate  soundly.  In  particular,  we  adopted  the  principles  of  the  capital  requirements  for 
Basel 3, in “one go” and at a higher level than Basel standards starting January 2014. 
Basel  3  is  meant  to  reduce  the  risk  of  systemic  banking  crisis,  with  the  quality  of  capital 
further improved to ensure its ability to absorb losses. Based on March 2014 Basel 3 CAR 
report, Philippine banks remained above the regulatory minimum requirement. On solo basis, 
CAR stood at 15.45%, of which Common Equity Tier 1 ratio accounts 13.44%. The BSP and 
the  banking  sector  are  collaborating  on  the  forthcoming  implementation  of  the  other 
components of the Basel 3 framework. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2.  Second,  we  continue  to  refine  regulations  to  achieve  greater  financial  inclusion, 
particularly  leveraging  off  of  technology  by  optimizing  the  use  of  electronic  money.  To 
illustrate, it took more than 160 years before the number of local bank offices reached 9,884 
yet it only took 4 years before the number of e-money agents reached 10,620. 
At the same time, the BSP continues to strengthen consumer protection with the release of a 
comprehensive consumer protection framework. 
3.  Third,  we  have  worked  to  strengthen  the  governance  in  banks.  In  particular,  we  have 
imposed  fit  and  proper  criteria  on  directors,  while  clearly  articulating  their  duties  and 
responsibilities,  including  the  expectation  for  each  board  member  to  exercise  objective 
judgment at all times. Banks also have to institutionalize a Compliance System to reinforce 
checks and balances in the institution. Further, we have highlighted the importance of having 
an effective risk management system. All these are accompanied by regular monitoring and 
strengthened enforcement actions. 
4. Fourth, we have fully supported the further liberalization of the entry of foreign banks into 
the Philippine market. 
5.  Fifth,  we  are  committed  to  the  timely  and  appropriate  adoption  of  international  banking 
reforms  to  our  domestic  economic  conditions.  We  subscribe  to  the  general  principles  and 
objectives of the international reform agenda, but we are also pragmatic in our approach to 
their  adoption.  While  we  are  in  agreement  with  the  goals,  we  believe  that  implementation 
must follow the principle of proportionality to country-specific circumstances. 
One  such  reform  concerns  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  or  FMIs,  the  piping  that  allows 
trades to be processed and critical risk information to be properly monitored. For a market 
such as the Philippines, this is critical but it is also a clear challenge. 
Certainly,  we  need  FMI  pipelines  to  execute  market  transactions,  provide  transparency, 
ensure  price  discovery,  introduce  risk  mitigation,  and  generate  efficiencies.  Nevertheless, 
many of the FMIs identified by global reforms may not be in synch with the scale of market 
activity and associated risk in most Asian jurisdictions. 
Central counterparties, trade repositories and exchanges for OTC derivatives, among others, 
require a fair amount of investment and a lot of preparation. This is work that does not only 
involve the BSP, but other financial market regulators as well. 
This is the reason why the financial market infrastructure as well as the other international 
reforms are being discussed at the Financial Sector Forum, which is composed of the BSP, 
the  Insurance  Commission,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  the  Philippine 
Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
Quality Improvement among our banks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  followed  these  policy  tracks  to  strengthen  our  banking 
system. Within this framework, our banks could generally have the leeway to take on more 
risk exposures, if they so choose. In addition, the regulatory framework is such that it would 
allow banks to be able to withstand added, if not healthy, competition. 
There are evolving competitive forces expected to come from banks outside the region which 
have an interest to service activities in the country as well as future Qualified ASEAN Banks 
(QABs) who exemplify ASEAN integration. 
I am confident in the ability of our banks to be up to these challenges. Yes, we may not be a 
big market with big banks but our continuing reform agenda has made our banks stronger 
and more stable. And we have an economy whose prospects attract the interest of not just a 
few. 
In  Moody’s  recent  publication  on  banking  system  outlooks  covering  67  jurisdictions,  the 
Philippines  was  the  only  banking  jurisdiction  rated  positive.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) has rated our micro-finance policy framework as the best in 
the world for the past five years. 
Indeed, there is something to be said about the quality of our banking environment and of the 
institutions that operate in it. With ample funding liquidity, the challenge for our banks is to 
identify those initiatives in the real economy, which can reasonably absorb available funding. 
Challenges 
Today, the Philippine banking industry is vastly different from what it was during the Asian 
Financial Crisis. We have achieved sizeable gains since then. 
Moving forward, part of the challenge is to recognize that gains are never absolute. In this 
imperfect world, there is always something that can be made better or something that market 
needs  to  change  in  time  especially  since  we  operate  in  a  global  environment  that  is  in 
constant change. 
Among others, heightened financial and trade integration make our own domestic operations 
vulnerable to external factors. The most significant of these factors is the speed and degree 
of normalization of monetary policies in advanced economies and how these would impact 
their  own  growth  prospects.  Geopolitical  risks  that  could  impact  trade  and  prices  of 
international commodities add to our list of challenges. 
On the domestic front, as I mentioned near the top of my remarks, the risks that tilt future 
inflation to the upside are mainly weather and supply side-related, as well as those stemming 
from volatilities in the financial markets. The BSP has acted pre-emptively to ward off these 
inflation threats through calibrated tightening of policy stance. We have earlier raised RR and 
increased SDA and the policy rates. We have opted to act in this manner so that banks and 
other stakeholders would be guided in their own assessments of the risks they face in their 
transactions. We will not hesitate to make further adjustments, if these are needed, in order 
to  keep  inflation  expectation  well-anchored  and  therewith  limit  the  occurrence  of  second 
round effects. We will also continue to work with other agencies of government to address 
supply  bottlenecks  that  affect  movement  of  good  and  services.  We  will  likewise  remain 
vigilant that none of these effects pose risk to financial stability. 
We  will  continue  to  be  involved  in  initiatives  in  implementing  governance  reforms  in  the 
country, including our initiatives for AEC 2015. Finally, we will continue to work on a more 
inclusive financial system that that will sustain and promote inclusive growth. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have shared my assessment of our prospects and flagged some key 
challenges. At the end of the day, we have to nurture the gains we have achieved through 
time and address the pending issues which we believe can only make us better. 
Markets  will  always  evolve,  just  as  they  are  changing  right  now.  But  Philippine  banks,  in 
general, have proven themselves to be resilient while remaining responsive to the needs of 
stakeholders.  This  is  the  mark  of  a  strong  banking  industry,  one  which  can  tap  growth 
opportunities while acting responsibly in managing the public’s savings. 
In the end, it boils down to choices we make. And thus far, our record in the banking system 
speaks for itself. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. Mabuhay!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
