Rundheersing Bheenick: Unlocking our potential in these uncertain 
times... 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 28 February 2014. 
 The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius’ website 
1. 
The  year  2013  saw  the  Bank  scoring  many  “firsts,”  reaching  new  “highs,”  and 
establishing new records. We sharpened our focus on financial stability and macroprudential 
policy. It was also the year that marked the start of my third mandate as Governor, this time 
without any hullabaloo. I view this mandate as a vote of confidence in my stewardship of the 
Bank and would  wish to take this opportunity to lay out the platform for taking the Central 
Bank  and,  by  implication,  the  economy  to  still  greater  heights.  Successfully  tackling  the 
challenges ahead does not rest on my shoulders alone, but depends crucially on the support 
of public policy-makers, Bank staff, and private stakeholders. 
2. 
My personal experience at the helm of the Bank has been filled with ups and downs 
and I expect the third mandate to be no different on this score. Anybody hankering for a quiet 
nine-to-five life, five days a week, would be well-advised to stay well-clear of the shoes of a 
Central Bank Governor. Faced with the continual global economic uncertainty, I had to focus 
my  efforts  on  maintaining  domestic  macroeconomic  stability.  Our  achievements  speak  for 
themselves.  Our  failures  generated  substantial  public  scrutiny  and  media  coverage. 
However, out of every failure comes a lesson and we have learnt our lessons over time. 
The Letter to Stakeholders now forms part of our regular calendar and its release 
3. 
is eagerly awaited. We see it as part of our communication strategy to inform, enlighten, and 
explain.1 We share our successes and failures sans états d’âme or chest-beating. At the start 
of  my  new  mandate,  I would  also  like  to  extend  the  traditional Letter to Stakeholders  by 
sharing my personal strategic vision for the Bank and the economy. I hope that this provides 
food for thought for our public policy-makers, private sector operators, and decision-makers 
to better extend our footprints in the region and to better position the country globally. 
4. 
The letter is structured as follows: Part I provides the context of domestic and global 
developments  and  gives  a  brief  overview  of  trends  in  monetary  policy.  Part  II  focuses  on 
some areas of concern, listed in the text below, and readers seeing this on the website can 
navigate to the issues of interest to them. Part III highlights the main developments of the 
past  year.  Keeping  in  line  with  past  practice,  issues  are  discussed  in  greater  detail  in  the 
links at the end of the relevant paragraphs. As a departure from my previous Letters, details 
on operational developments are provided in the Annex and a Box is devoted to the Ponzi 
outbreak  that  threatened  to  rock  the  financial  sector  in  the  early  part  of  the  year.  Part  IV 
presents  some  other  highlights  of  the  year,  not  captured  elsewhere,  such  as  regional 
cooperation  and  the  close  association  of  the  Bank  in  the  work  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board. Part V concludes. 
                                                
1  This  letter  was  finalised  on  Sunday,  26  January.  Its  publication  was,  however,  delayed  on  account  of  the 
rescheduling of the December 2013 meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to 3 February 2014, 
and  the  need  for  members  to  observe  the  silence  period  of  two  weeks  before  and  after  MPC  Meetings  in 
accordance with the MPC Code of Conduct. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Context 
I. 
Domestic developments. National accounts data over the last few  years provide 
5. 
abundant  evidence  that  our  economy  has  gradually  lost  steam.  Targeting  the  high  GDP 
growth  rates  achieved  in  the  1970’s  is  mere  wishful  thinking  today  –  unless  complex 
structural adjustments are first made to very many areas of our economic life. Back in the 
1970’s,  our  country  had  a  reservoir  of  labour,  together  with  access  to  preferential  export 
markets, and high saving and investment rates culminating in high growth rates. Long gone 
are those days of sustained GDP growth rates above 5 per cent. Excluding the sugar boom 
of  the  early  1970’s,  our  natural  rate  of  growth  hovers  around  4  per  cent,  which  is  a  more 
realistic  benchmark  in  the  absence  of  deep  structural  reforms.  Our  sources  of  growth  are 
qualitatively different from the growth drivers of most African countries; our human capital still 
remains key to our progress. We have to live up to the fact that drastic changes are needed 
and that we need to go beyond business-as-usual, undertake structural reforms, re-skill our 
labour,  raise  more  capital,  step  up  our  saving  effort,  enhance  productivity  and 
competitiveness and accelerate diversification efforts. 
6. 
A critical subject that I would like to highlight is the persistent rise of domestic credit 
as a share of GDP in our economy. Over the last ten years, we have constantly surpassed 
the credit growth rate of Sub-Saharan African countries and of small states generally. Credit 
to  households  and  the  private  sector  topped  Rs300  billion  for  the  first  time  in  December 
2013, representing over 83 per cent of GDP. While we have not reached the notorious credit 
growth  peaks  of  Spain  and  Ireland,  we  are  almost  replicating  the  credit  growth  pattern  of 
Singapore, without, however, the decisive steps which Singapore initiated to curb excessive 
leverage and cool property demand. This sustained increase in credit has gone hand-in-hand 
with  rising  indebtedness,  in  the  household  as  well  as  the  corporate  sector,  and  increasing 
concentration of credit risk. As regulator, we had to take prudential measures to protect the 
financial sector and the economy at large. We deemed it advisable to introduce a series of 
macroprudential  measures  on  loan-to-value  ratio,  debt-to-income  ratio,  sectoral  limits  and 
additional provision for certain sectors to manage the budding risks. 
7. 
One  of  my goals  in  my third mandate  is to reinforce  the  resilience  of the  banking 
sector  and  to  foster  its  sustained  growth.  Regulators  have  learnt  many  lessons  from  the 
global financial crisis, chief among which is the need to improve the monitoring, surveillance 
and governance of financial institutions to guard against current risk as well as to prepare 
them for potential future shocks. In 2013, we took determined steps to improve the regulatory 
and  supervisory  landscape  facing  financial  institutions  and  give  it  a  more  forward-looking 
approach.  We  addressed  a  number  of  both  micro-  and  macro-level  issues.  We  issued 
several new guidelines, and brought improvements to existing ones, to adapt the regulatory 
framework to the evolving needs of the financial sector, and to bring it closer to international 
best practice. As detailed elsewhere, we also enhanced our approach to off-site surveillance 
and  on-site  inspection  of  individual  institutions.  There  was  considerable  interest  from  new 
players  in  gaining  entry  to  the  local  banking  sector;  we  received  seven  applications  for  a 
banking licence in 2013. (More on this issue) 
8. 
I  must  concede  that  we  still  have  to  cover  some  ground  to  de-risk  our  financial 
system  and  add  depth  to  the  financial  market.  The  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme,  a  special 
bank resolution regime, an Ombudsperson for the sector, a National Payment Switch (NPS), 
the introduction of Sukuks and cross-border resolution are some of the areas where we are 
trailing well behind. Not because we at the Bank have been sleeping at the wheel, but mainly 
because  of  lingering  difficulties  in  securing  the  enabling  legislation  –  except  in  one  case, 
where  despite  the  appropriate  legislative  amendments,  a  key  player  has  not  modified  its 
behaviour to facilitate the objective which these amendments seek to further. I am mystified 
by  such  foot-dragging  on  initiatives  designed  to  increase  the  safety  of  our  banking  and 
financial system. (More on this issue) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Global backdrop. At the global level, there was increasing evidence in the second 
9. 
half of the year, of the recovery taking hold in some key economies, but little sign of a take-
off  as  “escape  velocity”  continued  to  prove  elusive.  Lingering  recession  plagued  the  euro 
area for much of the year with, however, a significant improvement in the major Eurozone 
countries in Q4. Major emerging markets such as China and India slowed down. The deeper 
recession in the euro area has had a particular impact on global growth: the downward draft 
from weak balance sheets, depressed confidence, and low demand, worsened prospects for 
export-led recovery for trade partners such as Mauritius. Tight fiscal and financial conditions 
prevailed,  with  the  spectre  of  a  possible  US  debt-default  arising  from  fiscal  brinkmanship 
adding to the uncertainty. Mid-year speculation about possible “tapering” by the US Federal 
Reserve  sparked  increased  volatility  of  capital  flows  which  abated  when  “tapering”  was 
actually launched – a clear sign of market nervousness in conditions of extreme uncertainty. 
10. 
Regulators  are  still  striving  to  reform  the  regulatory  framework  to  minimise  the 
likelihood of future financial crises and if they occur – as they surely will – to ensure that their 
systemic impact is contained. The sheer amount of public money pumped into ailing banks 
during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  –  either  to  bail  them  out,  to  avert  collapse,  or  to 
provide  liquidity  support  –  has  compelled  policymakers  to  find  ways  and  means  to  limit 
reliance  on  such  recourse  in  future.  Good  progress  has  been  made  on  rules  on  capital, 
leverage,  and  liquidity  for  banks.  But  there  is  still  much  ground  to  cover  on  the  reform 
agenda. The implementation of new reforms has been uneven across countries worldwide 
and remains a challenge, especially as the pressure to reform has abated as the crisis has 
receded further in the past. 
11. 
Financial  institutions  guilty  of  delinquency  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis  are 
being pinned down by regulators. Banks have had to dig deep into their pockets to pay hefty 
fines for such offences as manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, Libor, rigging 
foreign  exchange  markets,  and  collusion  among  banks  to  undermine  a  government 
programme as in Hungary. Bank executives, directors, and traders have been fired or jailed. 
Regulators are becoming unyielding in bringing offenders to justice. Over time, it is expected 
that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  will  have  to  improve  their  internal  controls  to 
prevent irregularities and improper behaviour. 
Trends  in  global  and  domestic  monetary  policy.  The  recent  years  of  global 
12. 
economic mayhem have put monetary policy to a severe test. Central bankers everywhere 
have  been  scratching  their  head,  reflecting  on  the  ideal  approaches  to  monetary  policy 
formulation  in  the  post-Global-Financial-crisis  era.  Faced  with  tough  monetary  policy 
dilemmas,  many  large  central  banks,  grappling  with  the  zero  lower  bound,  resorted  to 
“forward  guidance”  as  an  additional  tool  in  their  arsenal,  with  a  focus  on  signalling  their 
monetary  policy  intentions  through  an  enhanced  communication  strategy.  The  prolonged 
period of ultra-loose monetary policies around the world brought to the forefront issues such 
as asset price bubbles, volatile capital flows, dollarization, and imported instability. The twists 
and  turns  of monetary  policy  in  major  economies  have  rocked  the  boat for  smaller  central 
banks, pushing them in uncharted waters, and forcing them to intervene to combat currency 
appreciation that threatened to throw their economies out of kilter if left unchecked. 
13. 
Such  has  indeed  been  the  case  for  Mauritius,  where  the  situation  is  further 
complicated by two idiosyncratic factors. First is the entrenched divergence of opinion among 
Monetary  Policy  Committee (MPC) members, which surfaced during the year, pitting Bank 
executives against “external” members. Unlike the situation in most developing economies, 
our MPC comprises a majority of external members who outnumber the Bank members 5–3. 
A  second  issue  is  the  raging  controversy  around  growth  versus  inflation,  with  the  Bank 
resolutely  sticking  to  its last  and  not  allowing  itself to  stray  from  its  core  mandate  of  price 
stability. Mercifully, the vociferous calls from some policy quarters and interested exporters’ 
lobbies for currency depreciation, which engulfed the Bank in the first half of 2012, were no 
longer heard. The voting pattern in the MPC inevitably weighs on the overall credibility of the 
monetary policy decision-making process. The time is ripe for a review of legislation to give 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the Bank operational independence in the formulation and implementation of monetary policy 
as is the case not just in most developing economies, but also in a number of major central 
banks,  including  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank and even the Bank of Japan. 
14. 
An acid test for a central bank is the management of inflation expectations. Despite 
the  tussle  at  the  level  of  the  MPC,  I  am  pleased  to  report  that  both  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations  have  stayed  at  low  levels,  giving  the  country  a  stable  macro-economic 
environment which has led, in turn, to a higher level of support for the Bank and its policies 
among the wider population, notwithstanding much negative coverage in some parts of the 
mainstream  press  and  in  business  publications.  A  sustained  communication  strategy,  with 
increasing reliance on Open Mouth Operations, facilitated this outcome. However, the fight 
against inflation is a continuing one. At 4 per cent year-on-year in December 2013, inflation is 
far below the double-digit levels greeting me on arrival at the Bank in early 2007. We should 
not  lose  sight  of the fact  that  many  of  our peers,  in  the  various  regional  groupings  on the 
continent  to  which  we  belong,  are  doing  better  on  this  score.  The  Association  of  African 
Central Banks (AACB) had a target of 3 per cent meant to be achieved by 2012. SADC has 
an inflation target of 3 per cent by 2013–2018 – which goes to say that we must step up our 
efforts to bring domestic inflation even lower. 
Areas of concern 
II. 
Beyond Vision 2020 Vision 2020 was a futures exercise with a difference. It was 
15. 
conducted in the mid-1990’s. It sketched out a coherent view of likely future outcomes for our 
society and our economy. Wide participation in the exercise led to broad ownership, which 
facilitated our transition from an agricultural economy to a service-oriented and knowledge-
based economy. I believe that we must explore all avenues to enable the Mauritian economy 
to avoid the middle income trap. Strategic planning is vital. We find ourselves in dire need of 
long-term  vision  –  just  as  we  did  in  the  early-1990’s.  Vision  2020  was  led  by  the  public 
sector  and  drew  on  the  support  of  academia,  business  leaders,  opinion-makers,  non-
governmental organisations, and other stakeholders. Now, when the public sector is suffering 
from  limited  planning  capacity  and  expenditure  constraints  while,  in  parallel,  the  private 
sector has burgeoned, I would encourage private sector organisations to take centre stage, 
set up a think-tank and take the lead in fashioning a strategy and a vision for the country. 
This will mark a new stage in our much-vaunted public / private sector partnership, that lies 
at the root of our economic success, and will signal that the private sector has come of age 
and is ready to look beyond self-interest to focus on the common good. 
An  adult  approach  to  understanding  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  There  has 
16. 
been  an  open  debate  between  the  Bank  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development (MOFED) on several economic  issues this year. Although I appreciate these 
vivid discussions, I fear that there is a discernible tendency in the press and among other 
economic  commentators  to  blow  some  issues  out  of  proportion,  to  fan  dissension,  and  to 
spread  misunderstanding,  raising  misguided  questions  about  the  independence  of  the 
Central  Bank  and  the  effrontery  of  an  “unelected”  Governor  not  heeding  the  wishes  of 
elected  officials.  The  incontrovertible  international  evidence  of  superior  outcomes  from 
independent  central  banks,  with  governors  immune  to  short-term  political  pressures,  is 
occulted. There  is  a failure  to  appreciate  what  “coordination”  between  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy means. In an ideal world, coordination would entail both parties working together for a 
common goal. However, if all adjustments have to be borne by one side, then this can hardly 
qualify as “coordination”. Regrettably, much of the time, this has been the case for monetary 
policy, where compromises were expected from the Bank. 
Unfortunately  –  or  fortunately,  depending  on  where  you  stand  on  the  issue  –  our 
17. 
hands are bound by the statute setting up the Bank, with the result that adjustments cannot 
come from the monetary policy side; and the Bank gets blamed unfairly for actually doing the 
job for which it was set up in the first place! I would make an appeal for a better-informed and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
more  adult  approach  to  understand  the  differing  perspectives  where  coordination  between 
monetary and fiscal issues is needed. The Bank’s monetary policy has been subject to much 
criticism  by  economic  agents  and  doubts  were  cast  on  whether  we  should  not  throw 
overboard our IT-lite monetary regime in favour of – in the order proposed, and at roughly 
one-year  intervals  – (i) pegged  exchange rates vis-à-vis  each  of  three major  currencies of 
export  interest  (which  would  have  been  quite  a  feat!),  (ii)  exchange-rate  targeting  and  (iii) 
nominal GDP-targeting. Predictably, the Bank resisted these calls – just as we had resisted 
earlier  calls  from  the  IMF  to  move  from  our  hybrid  regime  to  a  pure  Inflation-Targeting 
framework. 
Rethinking  our  economic  strategy.  A  rethinking  of  our  economic  strategy  is 
18. 
warranted in the light of the new global economic paradigm characterised by muted growth 
prospects in our traditional advanced economy partner countries, combined with a slowdown 
in  growth  momentum  in  emerging  economies.  I  strongly  believe  that  a  rebalancing  of  the 
economy, away from consumption and towards investment and exports, is urgently required 
if we want to contain rising current account deficits, sustain strong growth, and graduate to a 
high-income economy. While monetary policy through an appropriate level of the Key Repo 
Rate  (KRR),  could  contribute  to  a  more  balanced  economy,  it  should  be  accompanied  by 
appropriate  fiscal  policies  and  supported  by  bold  structural  policies  to  raise  productivity 
across public and private sector enterprises. 
New roles of central banks. Central banks have been responsible for cushioning 
19. 
some of the financial damage arising from the disorderly financial and monetary conditions 
triggered by the global financial crisis. However, this has come at a dear price, with central 
banks’ buffers dwindling and their fire-power compromised by the continued ultra-low returns 
on  their  investment  portfolios.  Central  banks  in  key  economies  have  become  the  new 
economic  game-changers,  taking  the  strain  of  propping  up  their  financial  sector  and  their 
economies on their own balance sheets. The Bank has faced similar challenges and has not 
been immune from some of the problems affecting its (bigger) peers elsewhere, such as the 
US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National Bank, and 
the Reserve Bank of India. 
20. 
Restoring  the  health  of  the  Mauritian  economy  is  no  longer  the  only  item  on  the 
agenda anymore, as the Bank’s efforts to prop up the economy by combating appreciation 
and absorbing liquidity have combined with negligible returns on its reserves to raise serious 
concerns about the health of the Bank’s balance sheet. Expansionary monetary policy has 
recently been scrutinized by global fund managers and economists, who argue that the effect 
of monetary easing is felt only by big corporations and ignores SME’s. Some have gone even 
further,  declaring  that  in  recent  times,  expansionary  monetary  policy  might  have  been  of 
purely  cosmetic  benefit.  Central  banks  such  as  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  US  Federal 
Reserve have launched initiatives to aid SME’s, thus making their own policy decisions more 
significant. With the advent of the crisis, it is normal that the roles of central banks changed 
to tackle the issues in hand. Now that we are emerging from the crisis, there are increasing 
calls  for  central  banks  to  return  to  their  core  mandate  and  avoid  taking  on  extra 
responsibilities which they are ill-equipped to handle.  
The  continuing  challenge  of  “negative  carry”  for  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet. 
21. 
Faced with a low interest-rate environment, compounded by heightened volatility in financial 
markets  –  especially  in  the  fixed  income  space  where  bank  reserves  are  traditionally 
concentrated – we have strived to generate a decent return on our reserve assets without 
compromising on their safety. The Bank was trapped in a pincer movement of low-yielding 
reserves  and  a  rising  volume  of  reserves.  On  the  one  hand,  reserves  continued  to  be 
affected by the near-zero return on US- and Euro-denominated assets and by the significant 
decline  in  gold  prices  in  2013.  On  the  other  hand,  reserves  increased  as  a  result  of  our 
actions,  prompting  the  structural  excess  rupee  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  which  was 
showing  disturbing  signs  of getting  dangerously  out  of  hand. We  had  no  alternative  but to 
issue longer-term paper, in the form of 5-Year Bank of Mauritius (BOM) Bonds, in addition to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the BOM Bills and Notes which we have been issuing since 2010 to bring the excess liquidity 
to a reasonable level. The “carry”, that is the difference in yields between the rising volume of 
reserve  assets  in  our  portfolio  and  the  weighted  yield  on  BOM  paper  issued  to  mop  up 
excess liquidity, continued to remain negative and currently stands at around 3 percentage 
points. 
22. 
The  impact  on  the  Bank’s  finances  would  have  been  even  worse  had  we  not 
pursued a conservative diversification strategy in search of safe, liquid, and higher-yielding 
currency  assets.  Because  our  statutory  mandate  as  the  international  reserves  manager  of 
the country is security, liquidity, and then return, – in precisely that order – we have been 
constrained in terms of how much we could potentially expand the risk envelope in search of 
higher yield. With revenues generated from external assets showing little upside, considering 
the  risk  limits,  and  with  the  supply  of  Government  paper  remaining  constrained,  at  least 
partly  because  of  greater  recourse  to  foreign  currency  debt,  the  Bank  has  suffered  rising 
balance  sheet  stress. With  the  large  volume  of  BOM  paper  outstanding  at  end-December 
2013, the sterilisation cost is expected to reach Rs700 million in the coming year. 
Danish debt management model. The transfer of the debt management function, 
23. 
for  both  domestic  and  external  debt  to  the  Bank,  was  an  initiative  of  MOFED  and  was 
inspired by the Danish model. We did not, however, consider it appropriate to set up a full-
fledged Debt Management Unit within the Bank as this was not justified by the low level of 
transactions  and  would  have  caused  much  duplication  of  work  already  done  by  other 
Divisions  at  the  Bank.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  reviewed  the  current  debt 
management  arrangements  in  December  2013.  It  identified  some  duplication  in  the  work 
done by the Bank and within MOFED, and has noted several inefficiencies. These will need 
to be addressed, along with the obstacles preventing the development of a secondary market 
for Government paper. 
The  problem  of  excess  liquidity  exacerbated  by  Special  Funds.  Large  and 
24. 
growing balances in Special Funds such as the National Resilience Fund, the Build Mauritius 
Fund  and  the  Road  Decongestion  Program  Fund,  all  financed  by  Budget  measures  and 
transfers,  are  creating  difficulties  for  the  Bank  to  achieve  its  objective  of  monetary  and 
financial stability. The Treasury places these funds with commercial banks, further inflating 
the level of excess liquidity, and handicapping the Bank in the management of liquidity in the 
banking  system.  To  add  insult  to  injury,  the  Bank’s  actions  and  authority  were  further 
undermined by the Treasury effectively acting as a lender of first resort via the deployment of 
these  funds  to  cash-strapped  commercial  banks,  which  would  otherwise  have  taken  the 
normal route of seeking accommodation from the Bank and enabled the repo rate corridor to 
gain  traction.  I  have  complained  against  both  of these  practices  as  I  believe  that  a  Single 
Treasury  Account,  placed  at  the  central  bank,  does  represent  best  practice  and  that  it  is 
unhealthy  for  the  single  largest  player  on  the  financial  market  to  frustrate  the  Bank  by  its 
actions. We are now exploring the possibility of requiring a higher Cash Reserve Ratio from 
Special Fund deposits in excess of transaction balances. 
Dynamic provisioning – Too late in the game. At the core of the Bank’s problem 
25. 
lies  a  weak  balance  sheet. The  combination  of Operation  Reserves  Reconstitution  (ORR), 
embarked upon hesitantly – and, that too, only after securing a now-problematic agreement 
to  co-share  the  attendant  costs  with  the  Treasury  −,  open  market  operations  at  rising 
volumes, and low yields on reserve assets, allied with a “negative carry”, has proved lethal 
for  the  Bank’s  finances.  In  a  much-earlier  letter,  I  had  mentioned  dynamic  provisioning  – 
allowed by the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, incidentally – as a mechanism for the Bank to salt 
away some profits for the lean years ahead. We tried to apply this approach in July 2007 to 
our profits for the Financial Year 2006/2007. At that time, we were clearly ahead of the game 
– only to be charged with accounting trickery. Some will recall how the Bank was pressured 
into reversing these provisions and distribute them as profits via a second dividend payment 
in July 2008. Had the concept of dynamic provisioning then gained support from the Bank’s 
board and from the Treasury, the Bank would have been in better shape today and would 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have absorbed sterilization costs reasonably well. It is too late in the game to hanker after 
dynamic provisioning. I can only renew my call to the authorities concerned to help alleviate 
the  Bank’s fragile  balance  sheet,  and  possibly  draw  some  inspiration  from  Australia  which 
shored up the fire-power of its central bank by a massive injection of resources in the final 
quarter of 2013. 
Islamic  banking  products  –  On  hold?  Since  2007,  we  have  taken  a  number  of 
26. 
initiatives  to  promote  the  development  of  Islamic  banking  in  Mauritius,  including  the 
establishment  of  an  appropriate  legislative  framework  for  Islamic  finance  as  well  as 
becoming a full member of the Islamic Financial Services Board and a founder-member of 
the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation,  both  key  institutions  in 
international  Islamic  finance.  The  Public  Debt  Management  Act  2008  was  amended  to 
provide  for  the  issuance  of  Sharia-compliant  instruments  such  as  sovereign  Sukuks  by 
Government.  Unfortunately,  the  public  debt  issuance  calendar  has  never  provided  for  the 
issuance of Sukuks, as proposed by the Bank in its capacity as debt adviser to Government, 
and  this  severely  compromises  the  prospect  of our  jurisdiction  playing  a  bigger  role  in  the 
growing world of international Islamic finance. (More on this issue) 
27. 
the  conduct  of  Commodity  Murabahah 
Transactions  (CMT’s)  to  provide  Islamic  Banking  Institutions  (IBI’s)  operating  in  Mauritius 
with an instrument for liquidity management. The CMT’s, to be conducted under the umbrella 
of a Master Agreement, which will be finalised in consultation with the IBI’s and the banking 
industry, will extend the range of tools available to the Bank for the conduct of Open Market 
Operations. 
finalising  preparations 
We  are 
for 
A year of measurable progress 
III. 
Economy.  The  Mauritian  economy  maintained  its  positive  growth  momentum  in 
28. 
spite  of  soft  external  economic  conditions  in  our  main  trading-partner  countries,  thus 
maintaining  its  unblemished  record  of  positive  GDP  growth  throughout  the  global  financial 
crisis.  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  grown  by  3.2  per  cent  in  2013.  All  the  major  economic 
sectors  recorded  positive  growth  rates,  with  the  exception  of  Construction  and  Agriculture. 
Rigidities in the labour market, coupled with a growing structural skills mismatch, continued. 
Female and youth unemployment remained matters of concern. First-time job-seekers were 
not helped by generous salary increases which went into effect in the second half of the year. 
Although downside risks to growth persist, mainly emanating from the uncertain recovery and 
soft external demand for our exports of goods and services, with their knock-on effects on 
subdued  domestic  private  investment  and  consumer  spending,  there  is  some  upside 
potential  with  the  Eurozone  expected  to  emerge  from  recession  in  2014.  (More  on  this 
issue) 
Monetary policy. Recent MPC meetings have witnessed persistent divergence of 
29. 
views on the appropriate monetary policy stance between, on the one hand, the three Bank 
executives,  and,  on  the  other,  the  external  members  who  predominate  on  the  MPC.  The 
majority held the view that given what they perceived to be subdued inflation risks, monetary 
policy  should  support  growth  and  employment.  My  two  Deputy  Governors  and  I  were  in 
favour of a small hike in the KRR to signal our concerns about inflation risks, and risks to 
financial stability, stemming from a prolonged period of low interest rates in the country. We 
thus saw a 25 basis points cut in June to 4.65 per cent after fifteen straight months on hold. 
The cut was effected against a backdrop of rising inflation, from 2.9 per cent year-on-year in 
January  2013  to  3.7  per  cent  in  May,  the  latest  data  point  available  to  the  June  MPC 
meeting. We ended the year with year-on-year inflation at 4 per cent in December. (More on 
this issue) 
30. 
In my opinion, negative real interest rates – relative to saving deposit rates offered 
by banks, typically 25–115 basis points below the KRR – have contributed to a significant 
decline in the savings rate, given a boost to consumption leading to a sharp deterioration in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the  current  account  deficit,  and  fuelled  speculation  in  search  of  higher  yield  beyond  the 
safety  of  bank  deposits.  Little  wonder  then  that  Gross  National  Saving  continued  its 
downward slide from 15.1 per cent of GDP in 2012 to 14 per cent in 2013. Low on-lending 
rates  have  in  turn  induced  growing  indebtedness  of  the  corporate  sector,  driven  partly  by 
speculative  investment  in  the  property  sector.  The  misallocation  of  credit  has  increased 
vulnerabilities in the banking sector and the economy at large. Given such risks, we strongly 
believe that the MPC should start normalizing interest rates. 
Exchange rate policy. Stressed conditions on export markets sparked considerable 
31. 
support for currency depreciation among exporters and their lobbyists, including the crypto-
lobbyists  embedded  in  different  parts  of  the  economic  and  financial  establishment. 
Consumers rarely get invited to the debate on the subject and their voices go unheard. We 
thus tend to lose sight of the fact that Mauritius imports twice as much as it actually exports, 
with food and fuel accounting for a major part of the import bill, which makes the exchange 
rate a strong detonator for social unrest, if mismanaged. It is our responsibility to manage the 
exchange  rate  in  the  best  interest  of  all  our  countrymen,  as  provided  for  in  the  Bank’s 
statutes. We have held the view that supporting a narrow sectional interest, at the expense of 
the wider public interest, is a matter of fiscal/industrial policy. 
32. 
The year 2013 saw the Bank stepping up its intervention on the foreign exchange 
market  –  we  intervened  on  238  days,  that  is,  almost  every  working  day,  and  successfully 
transacted nearly 80 per cent of the time – to combat unwarranted appreciation not in line 
with  fundamentals,  smoothe  out  volatility,  and  continue  the  ORR  programme  on  which  we 
embarked  in  mid-2012.  Have  we  succeeded  in  our  objective  of  aiming  for  exchange  rate 
stability? The exchange rate statistics speak for themselves. At the start of my first mandate 
as  Governor  in  2007,  the  rupee  was  under  considerable  pressure  from  speculative 
transactions and over-borrowing, resulting in a volatile currency. I am happy to record that 
our  rupee  did  not  suffer  from  the  extreme  volatility  affecting  most  countries  across  all 
continents, whether BRICS, emerging markets, or frontier economies, during 2013. In Sub-
Saharan  Africa,  our  currency  came  second,  behind  the  Botswana  pula.  I  draw  some 
satisfaction from the fact that we have been able to stabilise the rupee. This is no mean feat 
for a small open African economy, with euro-biased exports and dollar-biased imports. 
Liquidity in the banking system. I  have  discussed  earlier  the factors  underlying 
33. 
the excess liquidity in the banking system. We continued with our efforts to mop up/sterilise 
this veritable deluge of liquidity through the issuance of our own instruments – which reached 
an  all-time  record  of  Rs20  billion  outstanding  in  August  2013.  The  management  of  this 
surplus liquidity, which threatened to de-stabilise domestic financial conditions, stretched the 
resources  of  the  Bank.  Given  the  structural  nature  of  the  excess  liquidity,  the  Bank  went 
beyond its traditional short-term liquidity management instruments and started issuing 5-Year 
BOM  Bonds  in  addition  to  the  3-Year  BOM  Notes.  We  took  extra  care  not  to  create  any 
financial  fragmentation  by  piggy-backing  the  issuance  of  BOM  securities  on  the  regular 
auctions of the corresponding tenors that we conduct on behalf of the Treasury. (More on 
this issue) 
Debt management. The lengthening of the maturity profile of Government debt is 
34. 
part of the Debt Management Strategy, on which the Bank advised the Treasury, to mitigate 
rollover and refinancing risks. The exercise continued during 2013 with the issuance of more 
medium-  and 
to  maturing  securities. 
Correspondingly, the share of short-term obligations by original maturity (inclusive of short-
term  borrowings)  was  halved,  plunging  from  36  per  cent  in  June  2007  to  18  per  cent  in 
December 2013. The share of medium- and long-term obligations surged from 64 per cent to 
82 per cent over the period. In addition, greater recourse by Government, especially since 
calendar year 2009, to long-term foreign loans and grants to finance a significant part of its 
budget deficit – irrespective of its devastating double effect on rupee liquidity, which I discuss 
elsewhere  –  also  contributed  to  lengthen  the  maturity  structure  of  public  debt.  Provisional 
long-term  Government  securities, 
relative 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
data  for  end-September  2013  record  external  debt  at  around  Rs45  billion,  three  times  the 
level of June 2007 when it was Rs13.5 billion. (More on this issue) 
Reserve  management.  At  the  start  of  my  Governorship  in  2007,  the  reserve 
35. 
portfolio of Rs43.1 billion, or USD1,289 million, was overwhelmingly invested in USD, GBP 
and Euro which accounted for just above 75 per cent of reserve assets. This was not unusual 
for  central  banks  as  these  were  the  three  major  currencies. We  were  ahead  of  the  game 
when  I  initiated  an  active  portfolio  diversification  strategy  to  hedge  against  portfolio  risk 
arising from this concentration. We sought out currencies such as the Swedish Krona and 
the  Norwegian  Kroner,  which  were  less  correlated  to  the  three  major  currencies,  and 
included them in our reserve portfolio, thus reducing the key currencies to just below 60 per 
cent in December 2013. We diversified our reserve portfolio further through increasing our 
gold holdings, when we bought two tons of gold from the IMF Gold Sales in 2009. 
36. 
Few now recall how we came under attack from two opposite fronts at the time: one 
charged that we should not have bought any gold in the first place while the other attacked 
for  not  buying  a  bigger  volume!  When  gold  prices  soared  in  the  period  2010–2012,  there 
were  murmurs  of  reserve  mismanagement,  supported  by  hypothetical  estimates  of  the 
notional “losses” we suffered by not investing up to 50 per cent of our reserves in gold. Gold 
prices fell nearly 30 per cent to USD1,204 in 2013, its sharpest decline since 2001, pushing, 
for example, the Swiss National Bank to a SFR9 billion loss in 2013. I wonder how our Bank 
would have coped if we had followed the advice to invest half of our reserves in the yellow 
metal!  In  hindsight,  the  diversification  strategy,  which  we  pursued  primarily  in  search  of 
greater security, has clearly paid off, especially when viewed against the backdrop of several 
other central banks actually incurring capital losses in their portfolio during the financial crisis. 
37. 
The  Euro  Zone  struggled  with  recessionary  conditions,  with  attendant  risk  to  the 
global  growth  outlook  for  most  of  2013.  For  a  small  economy  like  Mauritius,  critically 
dependent on export demand from the Euro Zone, there is a clear need for more vigilance, 
and  a  more  aggressive  diversification  drive.  In  mid-2012,  when  the  country’s  import  cover 
was at 4.5 months, the Bank decided to embark on ORR to increase the level of Bank foreign 
reserves  to  6  months’  import  cover.  The  year  2013  saw  the  external  reserves  topping 
Rs100 billion  for  the  first  time,  to  stand  at  Rs103.5  billion  at  end-December  2013,  or 
USD3.43  billion,  representing  5.6  months  of  import  cover. The  Bank  is well  on  the  way  to 
meet the basic objective of the ORR. 
Forex intervention. We continued to intervene actively, almost on a daily basis, on 
38. 
the domestic foreign exchange market during the year to remove unwarranted volatility. The 
Bank  purchased  foreign  currency  of  nearly  USD1.1  billion  –  a  record  –  and  sold  the 
equivalent  of  USD470  million.  We  thus  doubled  our  foreign  currency  purchases  from  the 
level  of  the  previous  year  when  we  bought  nearly  USD525  million.  It  would  have  been 
extremely dangerous for the Bank to envisage forex purchases at such elevated levels if we 
did  not  have  an  alternative  to  placing  the  accumulating  reserves  arising  therefrom  in  low-
yielding traditional reserve assets. We used a major part of the proceeds to provide foreign 
currency to the State Trading Corporation, at its request, to finance the import of food and 
fuel, major items in the consumer price basket, at stable exchange rates which in turn led to 
stability  in  the  prices  of these  products  in  the  domestic market. Our forex  intervention  has 
turned out to be the proverbial stone that helped us to bag the two birds of exchange rate 
stability and price stability, both major policy objectives of the Bank. (More on this issue) 
Safety of systemically-important banks. We achieved definite progress in 2013 in 
39. 
our  endeavours  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  banking  industry  and  reduce  financial 
stability risks. Back in 2012, I had urged the large banks to reduce the complexity of their 
group  structures  and  segregate  their  banking  and  non-banking  activities.  This  measure 
seeks to limit the risk of contagion to the banks, enhance market discipline and transparency, 
and  ensure  that  bank  boards  and  management  focus  attention  on  the  core  business  of 
banking. We also pressed for periodic rotation of directors at the level of bank boards. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
restructure will benefit depositors, bank creditors, and shareholders. The law was reviewed in 
2013 to facilitate the restructuring process. Three banking groups have already reached an 
advanced stage in reorganising their corporate structure, which will safeguard their banking 
activities  from  risks  arising  from  other  business  segments  of  the  same  corporate  group. 
Further, one bank, formerly operating as a branch of an international bank, incorporated as a 
subsidiary  in  May  2013.  The  objective  is  to  protect  affiliates  of  foreign  banks  operating  in 
Mauritius  from  any  potential  problem  affecting  their  parent  banks  in  their  home  country. 
(More on this issue) 
40. 
A  long-standing  characteristic  of  the  domestic  banking  sector  is  the  predominant 
presence of a few large banks. Any problem arising in these banks could trigger contagion 
across the financial system and affect the real sector. The Bank has the duty to mitigate this 
risk for the safety of the financial system and the economy generally. I first publicly flagged 
this issue for attention in September 2011. We are now proceeding to establish a framework 
for Domestic-Systemically Important Banks, drawing on the recommendations made by the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in October 2012. The draft framework has been 
issued to the industry for comments. Under our approach, banks reckoned as systemically-
important will be subject to more stringent conditions, including the maintenance of a capital 
surcharge for their systemic importance. This measure will be applicable to banks as from 
the first quarter of 2016, thus giving them ample time to prepare for the change. 
Macroprudential  measures.  We  had  to  roll  out  quite  rapidly  a  wide  range  of 
41. 
macroprudential  measures  to  cope  with  rapidly-emerging  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
system. I first drew attention to the matter in my Statement of 5 October 2013, prefacing the 
Annual  Report  of  the  Bank  for  the  Financial  Year  2012–2013.  We  issued  relevant 
guidelines  in  October  2013.  The  macroprudential  measures  are  now  being  implemented. 
Banks  will  apply  the  measures  in  a  phased  manner  to  allow  them  and  their  customers  to 
adjust smoothly to the new requirements. The measures encourage banks to adhere to more 
prudent  lending  standards,  thus  reducing  the  vulnerability  of  the  banking  sector  to  credit 
concentration and customer default risk in the targeted sectors. (More on this issue) 
Basel III. We followed up on the Consultation Paper on the Implementation of Basel 
42. 
III in Mauritius, which we issued in October 2012, by circulating a draft Guideline on Scope of 
Application of Basel III and Eligible Capital to the banking industry. This sets out the rules 
and tentative timelines to implement some of the elements of the stronger Basel III capital 
framework. Higher capital requirements under Basel III will strengthen the ability of banks to 
operate under stress conditions and will help to protect depositors. We shall ensure that the 
transitional arrangements to implement the new standards allow the banking sector to meet 
the higher capital standards through adequate earnings retention and capital raising, while 
still supporting lending to the economy. 
Disclosure of information to guarantors. Guarantors have rarely been apprised of 
43. 
their extant financial liability in case of default by any borrower whose original debt they may 
have guaranteed, typically years before the borrower defaults and the guarantee is actually 
enforced. I had asked for an amendment in the banking legislation to empower the Bank to 
require every financial institution to make a statement of account available to the guarantor of 
any  credit  facility.  The  law  was  amended  in  December  2012.  Accordingly,  we  issued  the 
Guideline  on  Disclosure  of  Information  to  Guarantors  to  the  industry  for  consultation  in 
September 2013, and it became effective in January 2014. The guideline provides guidance 
to financial institutions, setting out the framework, and prescribing the instances, for issuing 
statements of accounts in written or electronic form to guarantors of credit facilities. (More on 
this issue) 
Future of banking. Rapid developments in the banking and payments technology 
44. 
landscape, combined with increasing competition for banking business, are fuelling a drive 
for more efficient, automated, and reliable delivery platforms and information systems. The 
year 2013 saw a number of domestic financial institutions upgrading their IT systems to reap 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efficiency gains, enhance their capacity to grow their business, cater for new products, and 
offer better service to their customers. Enabling technology allows banks to move closer to 
their  customers,  while  gradually  shifting  from  the  conventional  “brick  and  mortar”  branch-
banking model to adapt to the needs of customers on the look-out for faster, 24/7, on-the-
spot  access  to  banking  services.  We  are  fast  moving  towards  a  cash-lite  society,  with 
consumers accessing banking services through the Internet and mobile phones. The entry of 
mobile financial service providers in the low-value payments space has brought some much-
needed competition, to the benefit of customers. To meet these challenges, we have been 
adapting  our  regulatory  framework  to  cater  for  electronic  delivery  of  banking  services. We 
introduced  the  Guideline  on  Mobile  Banking  and  Payment  Systems  in  February  2013  to 
complement the Guideline on Internet Banking which we had issued in 2001. (More on the 
issue) 
45. 
The Bank’s monitoring and surveillance functions require it to obtain and analyse a 
large volume of data from banks and other regulated financial institutions. We are concerned 
by the rising reporting burden on banks and run the risk of suffering from data overload at our 
end.  We  are  now  embarking  on  a  landmark  project  to  automate  dataflow  from  financial 
institutions,  set  up  a  data  warehouse,  and  introduce  Business  Intelligence  tools  for  users. 
The project will radically improve the entire system of data management at the Bank as well 
as  reduce  the  reporting  burden  on  financial  institutions.  The  technology  envisaged  for  the 
transmission of information, XBRL – or eXtensible Business Reporting Language – is used 
by major regulators and authorities across the world. We expect to roll out the new system in 
the  next  18  months.  It  will  drastically  improve  the  collection,  storage,  and  processing  of 
information at the Bank. (More on this issue) 
Protection of customers of financial institutions. Ever since I joined the Bank, I 
46. 
have  been  stressing  the  need  to  have  an  Ombudsperson  for  the  entire  financial  sector  to 
provide a low-cost recourse for consumers of financial services to address and resolve their 
grievances. However, the law makes provision for the post of an Ombudsperson for banks 
only,  to  be  filled  by  an  officer  of  the  Bank.  This  is  clearly  insufficient.  Some  progress  has 
been achieved in the protection of customers with an amendment to the Banking Act 2004 in 
December  2012  to  give  powers  to  the  Bank  to  require  financial  institutions  to  establish 
procedures  to  that  effect.  We  accordingly  issued  the  Guideline  on  Complaints  Handling 
Procedures  in  August  2013,  detailing  a  broad  range  of  measures  to  be  implemented  by 
financial institutions to deal with complaints and grievances from their customers. The Bank 
has been collecting information on complaints received by banks. (More on this issue) 
It has also been quite some time since I began urging banks to review their rates 
47. 
and  charges.  The  increasing  number  of  complaints  received  at  the  Bank  from  the  public 
prompted us to set up a Task Force in July 2012 to inquire into the terms and conditions of 
banking and related financial contracts, including fees, commission and charges. Members of 
the public were invited to submit their comments and proposals. The Task Force has been 
considering  the  issues  raised  during  the  representations  and  will  be  releasing  a  public 
consultation document this year with a view to ensuring that both consumers and banks have 
a  fair  deal.  The  recent  amendments  to  the Banking  Act  2004  to  protect  consumers  of 
financial services are welcome and support the same objective. (More on this issue) 
Exchange  of  information  among  regulators.  We  broke  new  ground  in  sharing 
48. 
information with foreign regulators from countries where our domestic banks have extended 
their  footprint.  I  felt  it  imperative  to  improve  cross-border  supervisory  collaboration  and 
sharing  of  information  between  ourselves  as  home  regulator  and  the  host  regulators.  We 
already  had  in  place  bilateral  agreements,  or  memoranda  of  understanding,  with  the 
concerned  host  supervisors.  We  achieved  a  new  milestone  in  cross-border  supervisory 
cooperation by organising “Supervisory Colleges” for our two systemically-important banking 
groups, namely, the Mauritius Commercial Bank and State Bank of Mauritius, in November 
2013.  The  Bank  is  among  the  first  central  banks  in  Africa  to  have  organised  such 
Supervisory Colleges. We capitalised on the presence of the host supervisors at the Bank to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
hold  an  inaugural  workshop  on  Crisis  Management  for  the  two  banking  groups. (More  on 
this issue) 
Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau.  The  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau 
49. 
(MCIB)  has  proved  to  be  instrumental  in  supporting  credit  intermediation  by  offering  a 
platform  for  information  sharing  on  borrowers’  characteristics  and  indebtedness.  We  have 
successfully  enlarged  the  range  of  participants  in  MCIB,  which  now  includes  utility  bodies. 
MCIB  has  facilitated  prudent  lending  by  financial  institutions.  This  is  well  captured  in  the 
Depth  of  Getting  Credit  index  of  the  World  Bank’s  Doing  Business  2014  survey  where 
Mauritius has topped the list of African countries for several years. This year, we have scored 
6 over 6 in the Depth of Getting Credit index and the country’s overall rank improved by ten 
notches to 42nd in the 2014 edition of the survey. 
Reinforcing  the  surveillance  process.  The  financial  crisis  has  forced  bank 
50. 
regulators and supervisors to re-examine their approach to fulfilling their functions. We drew 
on  the  experience  of  other  countries  and  our  own  deep  knowledge  of  local  conditions  to 
upgrade our compliance-based and risk-based approach to regulation and supervision. We 
enhanced  our  off-site  surveillance  by  extending coverage  of  information collected,  and the 
parameters monitored, which in turn enabled a deeper analysis of the evolving conditions. 
We streamlined the templates used to gather information. Concurrently, during the year, we 
reviewed the methodology for conducting on-site examination on the operations and affairs 
of  financial  institutions.  The  new  risk-focused  methodology  is  more  comprehensive  and  is 
modelled on the internationally-acknowledged CAMEL framework – quite familiar to the Bank 
as  we  have  been  using  it  for  years  now  for  off-site  surveillance.  Emerging  risks  can  be 
proactively identified, at the level of both individual institutions and the industry as a whole, 
and  measures  can  be  taken  rapidly  to  address  them.  We  applied  this  new  approach  in 
21 on-site examinations carried out in 2013. 
Shadow  banking.  The  financial  scam,  unfurling  over  the  country  in  early  2013, 
51. 
underlined the necessity to review the domestic regulatory and supervisory framework which 
is characterised by the presence of several agencies. Legislative changes were brought in 
December 2013 to transfer the supervision of credit unions and money lenders to the Bank 
from the Registrar of Co-operative Societies and the Accountant General, respectively. It is a 
step  in  the  right  direction  towards  consolidating  oversight  of  financial  intermediaries.  We 
have already earmarked a dedicated team to look into the various issues associated with this 
added responsibility. However, credit unions and money lenders represent a small fraction of 
the  financial  sector.  Insurance  companies,  for  instance,  are  offering  certain  quasi-banking 
products and have a more dominant position in the financial sector. Financial intermediation 
outside the banking sector tends to undermine the role of the Bank in effectively conducting 
monetary policy and ensuring the soundness of the financial sector. We may have plucked 
the low-hanging fruit but much more needs to be done to minimise risk to the system and to 
our jurisdiction. 
Islamic  banking.  In  September  2013,  I  had  the  signal  honour  of  being  elected 
52. 
Deputy Chairman of the Governing Board of the International Islamic Liquidity Management 
Corporation (IILM) – a supranational body, launched in October 2010 and headquartered in 
Malaysia,  which  is  engaged  in  issuing  Islamic  liquidity  instruments  to  facilitate  liquidity 
management  by  Islamic  banking  institutions.  The  Bank  is  a  founder-member  of  IILM.  This 
election raises the profile of our jurisdiction in the global Islamic financial services industry. 
We shall get a further boost from the 2014 Summit of the Islamic Financial Services Board 
(IFSB),  which  the  Bank  will  be  hosting  in  Mauritius  in  May  2014.  This  will  see  the 
participation  of  some  300  leading  lights  in  the  world  of  Islamic  finance  around  the  theme 
“New Markets and Frontiers for Islamic Finance: Innovation and the Regulatory Perimeter”. 
We ended the year with an application for an Islamic “window” operation from an established 
bank. (More on this issue) 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Polymer banknotes. Another “first” in the year was the issue of polymer banknotes, 
53. 
in three denominations (Rs25, Rs50 and Rs500) from two different note-printers. Launching 
these new generation notes, on 22 August 2013 during the Annual Meeting of the AACB in 
Mauritius  (itself,  yet  another  “first”)  –  in  the  presence  of  a  parterre  of  guests  comprising 
32 Governors and heads of central bank delegations representing 44 countries, the General 
Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  and  the  President  of  the  African 
Development Bank – Dr The Honourable Navinchandra Ramgoolam, GCSK, FRCP, Prime 
Minister of the Republic of Mauritius, delighted his audience by calling Governors “the new 
rock  stars  of  the  day,  with  some  of  you  actually  younger  than  the  Rolling  Stones!”.  The 
Mauritian  currency-using  public  is  also  delighted  by  these  notes  and  has  given  it  an 
enthusiastic reception. Sadly, our attempt to introduce such notes several years earlier, in a 
previous currency procurement cycle,  was stymied by a narrow,  legalistic, interpretation of 
the applicable law in some decision-making quarters, which necessitated an amendment to 
legislation before we could proceed down this line. I am not aware of any other central bank 
which faced  such  a situation.  Currency  in  circulation  crossed the  Rs30-billion  mark for the 
first time in December 2013. (More on this issue) 
Payments  system.  A  robust  and  efficient  payments  system  is  at  the  heart  of  a 
54. 
modern economy. The payments landscape is evolving rapidly and its effective oversight is 
becoming a matter of increasing concern. I laid much emphasis on the full modernization of 
retail  payments  which  impact  on  high-volume,  low-value  transactions.  When  I  joined  the 
Bank in 2007, Electronic Funds Transfer did not exist and cheques were cleared manually. 
We now have a modern and effective electronic clearing system, with the Cheque Truncation 
project fully rolled out on 5 December 2013. This was preceded by a historic event early in 
the year when cheques were cleared manually for the last time on 31 January 2013. In some 
countries,  cheques  themselves  are  becoming  history  as  the  world  moves  to  a  cash-lite  or 
cashless society. 
55. 
We  are  setting  the  scene  to  move  to  the  next  stage  which  will  entail  making  still 
greater use of electronic money. Unfortunately, we have failed to make any progress with the 
NPS – on which we have been engaged since 2009 and to which I alluded in my 2010 Letter 
to Stakeholders. It has been delayed for reasons beyond the control of the Bank. While we 
are  entangled  in  fighting  incomprehension,  in  some  decision-making  quarters,  and 
overcoming resistance from vested interests, Mauritius has become a laggard in this area as 
several  African  countries  have  gone  ahead  and  implemented  NPS’s  to  achieve  greater 
efficiency and lower transaction costs in their jurisdictions. I believe the main hurdles have 
now been cleared and the Bank is moving ahead with the implementation of the project in the 
course of 2014. We have a lot of catching-up to do. (More on this issue) 
Virtual currencies. It is quite possible that virtual or digital currencies may play an 
56. 
increasing role and become the currency of the future, replacing notes and coins. This would 
be  the  logical  continuation  of  the  process  that  includes  electronic  banking,  electronic 
payments and electronic settlement. If such a scenario materialises, financial regulation and 
oversight will no doubt change beyond recognition to cope with the new financial landscape 
that will go hand-in-hand with a bigger role for virtual currencies. We are not there yet, and 
not likely to do so in the foreseeable future. 
57. 
No currency is safe as such, but there is greater comfort in a currency issued by a 
sovereign,  and  regulated  by  an  official  institution.  The  virtual  “currencies”  making  the 
headlines do not offer such comfort, even if they offer greater convenience in settlements in 
some cases. Additionally, some have a high degree of anonymity and can be misused for 
criminal activities. The growing popularity of Bitcoin, for example, ― which had seen at one 
point  an  increase  in  its  value  of  5,000  per  cent –  is  tempting for  individuals  seeking  rapid 
returns  on  their  outlays.  Whether  such  outlays  should  be  termed  “speculation”  or 
“investment”  is  a  matter  of  judgement.  These  virtual  “currencies”  are  unregulated  digital 
money and are not issued, or guaranteed, by any central bank. During the year, the Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
issued an Advisory, cautioning the general public to exercise utmost diligence when dealing 
with virtual “currencies”. 
 
Box – Ponzi schemes 
This  year,  the  Bank  exposed  two  large  scams  which  seriously  damaged  thousands  of 
Mauritians financially. The Ponzi schemes we uncovered followed the classic model of those 
in the USA in the 1920’s, where one fraudster, Charles Ponzi, offered abnormally high and 
unusually consistent yields from a fake investment scheme, paying out the returns not from 
profits, but from the capital, and then running off with the capital itself. 
Similarly, following complaints from victims, we discovered in 2013 that unscrupulous local 
criminals had slipped through the existing regulatory framework to trick people to invest their 
savings in similar Ponzi schemes. The ill-effects of the local Ponzi schemes soon gave rise 
to a growing number of complaints to regulators as many thousands of local people realised 
they were being defrauded. 
As  the  fraudulent  schemes  came  to  light  in  December  2012,  I  immediately  informed  the 
police, as the two schemes at the centre of the evident fraud had been set up by companies 
that were not licensed to receive funds for investment. I also then asked banks to provide 
details  of  any  accounts  they  were  handling  for  the  two  principal  fraudulent  companies 
involved,  and  the  nature  of  the  due  diligence  procedures  they  had  carried  out  on  these 
companies. 
In January 2013, the Bank began to conduct extensive on-site investigations of banks and 
other  financial  institutions  to  find  the  sources  of  the  known  fraud,  to  check  for  any  similar 
undetected practices and to review action to prevent any further deception. In March 2013, in 
the light of the growing number of complaints and public controversy, I set up a help desk at 
the  Bank  for  people  to  provide  information  on  the  investments  they  had  made  with  the 
companies and to present any further complaints. We also allowed people to use the help-
desk to check the credentials of any other financial schemes in which they were proposing to 
invest, to ensure such schemes were properly licensed. From the date of setting up the help 
desk, the Bank had received by 31 December 2013, a total of 3,630 complaints covering a 
sum of Rs937 million identified by potential victims. 
The consequences of these scams on the financial sector were fortunately limited. By taking 
swift action, we at the Bank were able to limit the monetary damage done by this financial 
fraud. Furthermore, on the basis of the results of our investigations, we levied penalties on a 
number of banks for failing to protect their customers from the scams and failing to identify 
the fraudulent schemes operating through their systems. In addition, we called upon banks in 
Mauritius  to  radically  review  their  oversight  of  customer  accounts  and  their  due  diligence 
procedures for vetting financial schemes. 
Moreover, I considered it timely to have a thorough assessment of the flaws in our system 
that  led  to  the  failure  to  detect  the  Ponzi  schemes.  So  I  called  on  assistance  from  the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which had had extensive experience in dealing with such types 
of financial scams. The two assessors from the RBI came up with 29 recommendations to 
improve  our  regulation  of  banks  and  their  practices,  out  of  which  25  measures  are  being 
implemented to tighten up our systems. The RBI report also noted that “different agencies 
and  banks  were  appreciative  of  the  pro-active  role  played  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  in 
handling the issues related to the Ponzi frauds.” They added that the “BOM’s examiners did 
a commendable job (at one bank) in bringing out KYC/AML weakness in the bank.” The RBI 
report  revealed  many  dubious  practices  in  the  banks  concerned  and  a  lack  of  computer-
based systems for screening for fraud. In particular, the RBI report was critical of the high 
proportion of large transactions in cash handled by the banks for these companies without 
this  alerting  them  to  the  fraudulent  activities.  In  addition,  there  had  been  strange  events 
involving alterations in the status of the directors of the fraudulent companies, changes in 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
company names which the banks had ignored, and no checks had been made on whether 
the companies had appropriate licences for the activities in which they were involved. 
The RBI report in its recommendations called for extension of the powers of the Bank in line 
with those of the Financial Services Commission under the Financial Services Act of 2007. 
This  would  allow  it  to  take  legal  proceeding  against  such  fraudsters  and  to  freeze  their 
assets. The RBI report considered that “the quantum of financial penalties imposed by BOM 
on banks is paltry and does not provide effective deterrence. There is a need to substantially 
increase the same. Moreover, imposition of these penalties also should be disclosed in the 
public domain.” 
Part of the radical improvement we are introducing is that the Bank has made it mandatory 
for  all  financial  institutions  to  put  in  place  an  internal  whistleblowing  policy.  Financial 
institutions have a special position of trust in the national economy, and employees working 
with  them  have  an  individual  and  collective  responsibility  regarding  their  conduct  and 
practices. We believe that there should be a proper framework in place for people to report 
any irregularities or unethical practices within financial institutions where they work, without 
fear  of  recrimination.  We  have  also  extended  our  programme  of  customer  education,  our 
checks  on  hiring  employees,  and  their  in-service  training  to  prevent  Ponzi  schemes  going 
undetected in the future. 
In  addition,  the  Bank  has  set  up  a  Market  Intelligence  Cell  which  has  been  mandated  to 
collect information from formal and informal sources to help detect any existing or potential 
financial crime and fraud, and carry out investigations. 
In  the  wake  of  the  Ponzi  scams  and  financial  frauds,  proposals  were  made  to  amend  the 
existing  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Financial 
Services  Commission  to  include  a  framework  for  handling  exigencies,  such  as  the  Ponzi 
scams. We expect amendments to be agreed and implemented in 2014. 
Could  these  frauds  have  been  prevented?  There  is  no  easy  answer  to  this  question. 
However, lessons have been learnt. I believe that one key way of preventing the recurrence 
of Ponzi schemes is through financial literacy programmes. Although the 2012 World Bank 
report indicates a relatively high percentage of adults accessing formal financial institutions 
(80.1 per cent in Mauritius, compared to 24.1 per cent in Sub-Saharan Africa), I believe that 
there  is  still  room  for  improvement.  Human  nature  often  falls  prey  to  greed  and  this  has 
certainly  been  the  case  for  thousands  of  our  citizens  in  search  of  above-market  returns. 
People  need  to  recognise  that  if  a scheme  looks too good  to be  true, it  probably  is.  They 
should take advice, before investing their lifetime’s savings. Promoting banking access to the 
uneducated  and  retirees  should  be  a  foremost  priority  for  the  banking  sector,  eventually 
resulting  in  benefit  for  both  parties,  but  basic  education  about  banking,  its  risks  and 
advantages  is  clearly  needed  as  part  of  the  package.  So  too  is  the  need  for  better 
surveillance by banks and regulators. (More on this issue) 
 
 Other highlights of the year 
IV. 
Regional cooperation. We scored another “first” on the regional cooperation scene 
58. 
in  2013  when  the  Bank  hosted  the  37th  Assembly  of  Governors  of  the  Association  of 
African  Central  Banks  in  August  and  I  assumed  chairmanship  of  the  Association.  The 
Assembly  was  preceded  by  a  Symposium  on  the  theme  “Financial  Inclusion  in  Africa:  the 
Challenges  of  Financial  Innovations  for  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Stability  of  Financial 
System”. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius delivered the Keynote Address at 
the Symposium when, as mentioned earlier, he launched the first-ever polymer notes issued 
by the Bank. The presence of Mr Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the BIS, Mr Donald 
Kaberuka,  President  of the  African  Development  Bank,  and  Mr  Jaseem  Ahmed,  Secretary 
General  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  amidst  a  record  turn-out  of  Governors  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
AACB meetings, raised the profile of the meeting and enriched discussions. As Chairman of 
the AACB, my overarching priority for 2014 will be to operationalise the Community of African 
Banking  Supervisors,  established  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  help  to  carve  out  a 
coordinating role for it in overseeing the work and initiatives in this area at the level of the 
various sub-regional groupings on the continent. (More on this issue) 
Financial Stability Board. Another honour bestowed on us was my appointment in 
59. 
July 2013 as the non-FSB Co-Chair of the FSB-RCG (SSA) for a term of two years. Let me 
elucidate these mysterious-sounding acronyms. First, the FSB, or Financial Stability Board: 
this is an emanation of the Group of Twenty leading economies (G-20) and was established 
in April 2009 when it was tasked with the coordination, at the international level, of the work 
of  national  financial  authorities  and  international  standard-setting  bodies  to  develop  and 
promote  the  implementation  of  effective  regulatory,  supervisory  and  other  financial  sector 
policies. The only African country in the G-20 is the Republic of South Africa. Second, the 
RCG: this stands for Regional Consultative Group, which the FSB set up in 2010 to extend 
its global reach beyond the G-20 membership and help it to address financial stability issues 
from  a  wider  perspective.  Six  RCG’s  have  been  set  up  and  are  supported  by  the  FSB 
Secretariat, based at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. Each RCG has two co-
chairs, one from the FSB members and the other from the non-FSB members. Third, SSA 
stands  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  We  accepted  the  invitation  to  join  the  RCG  (SSA)  at  its 
inception in 2011. As non-FSB Co-Chair of the RCG (SSA), I was honoured to participate in 
the  November  2013  FSB  plenary  session  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Russia,  under  the 
Chairmanship  of  Governor  Mark  Carney  of  the  Bank  of  England,  where  I  reported  on  the 
work of our RCG and shared our concerns. 
Overseas  engagements.  The  Bank’s  presence  was  well  appreciated  on  the 
60. 
international scene by our peers and international financial institutions and this is reflected in 
the  ever-growing  invitations  addressed  to  the  Bank  to  attend  regional  and  international 
events.  Representing  the  Bank  on  the  global  stage  offers  benefits  such  as  increased 
visibility,  networking,  sharing  ideas  and  exposure  to  cutting-edge  solutions  to  domestic 
issues.  Key  staff  represented  the  Bank,  at  both  regional  and  global  level,  attending 
conferences such as Financial Stability Board Regional Consultative Group, IMF/World Bank 
Annual  Meetings,  COMESA  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors,  and  the  Committee  of 
Central  Bank  Governors  in  SADC.  I  believe  that  our  exposure  to  the  global  community 
through meetings and conferences is indeed the way forward to broadening our horizon. 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility:  Bamboo  Garden.  Work  progressed  on  the 
61. 
Bamboo  Garden  Project,  which  we  launched  as  part  of  the  Bank’s  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility initiative. The Garden, to be located at Dubreuil, Midlands, in the centre of the 
island,  covers  a  plot  of  land  of  around  10  acres.  We  have  enlisted  the  services  of  the 
Agricultural Research and Extension Unit, of the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Production 
and  Security,  for  its  implementation.  The  project  also  benefits  from  the  support  of  an 
Advisory Panel  which  we have established to oversee the botanical, aesthetic, and design 
aspects of this innovative project. (More on this issue) 
Corporate Social Responsibility: Athletics. We have been collaborating with the 
62. 
Mauritius Athletics Association since 2007 to organise the Bank of Mauritius Inter Club Youth 
Championship Competition. The 7th Edition of the Championship was held over two days in 
November at Maryse Justin Stadium, Réduit, and saw two new national records, bringing to 
34 the rich harvest of records since 2007. Several commercial banks have joined us since 
2011 to co-sponsor the Championship, enabling us to provide greater and more sustained 
support throughout the year to promising atheletes. (More on this issue) 
Communication with stakeholders. I have continued to maintain the high degree 
63. 
of interaction with stakeholders which I initiated when I joined the Bank in 2007. I could not 
have  engaged  in  the  process  of  reinforcing  the  regulatory  landscape  without  consultation 
with the banking industry. Effective policy-making is best achieved through discussion with 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stakeholders. Regular dialogue with them has undoubtedly helped the Bank to move quite 
rapidly on several fronts. Besides, the outbreak of the financial scams in early 2013 made it 
essential for the Bank to intensify communication with members of the public to keep them 
informed  of  developments  as  well  as  cautioning  them  against  scammers  and  fraudulent 
schemes. 
64. 
Here, I  would  like  to  highlight that,  as far  back as  November  2009,  the  Bank had 
released  a  series  of  statements  on  its  website  under  the  caption  Financial  Education  to 
draw the attention of the public to various types of financial frauds. The statements contain 
tips on how to identify scams and the procedures to report suspicious financial activities. I 
urge members of the public to visit the Bank’s website – which is itself in the process of being 
revamped to make it more user-friendly – to familiarise themselves with the recent updates 
and help us detect any suspicious financial activity. I wish to reiterate the necessity for the 
public to exercise utmost diligence when dealing  with individuals or companies  with  whom 
they are placing money. (More on this issue) 
Closing remarks 
V. 
65. 
I would like to place on record my deep appreciation for the work accomplished by 
Mr Iqbal Belath, former Second Deputy Governor, who left the Bank in October 2013 at the 
end  of  his  tenure.  He  had  complemented  our  senior  leadership  line-up  with  unparalleled 
commitment. I had much pleasure serving the Bank alongside him and drawing on his steady 
support. He facilitated the integration of his successor at the Bank during the handing-over 
period.  I  welcome  Mr  Issa  Soormally,  who  took  over  as  Second  Deputy  Governor,  on  this 
engaging journey in the top echelons of the central bank. 
66. 
Although 2013 has been a relatively decent  year for the Bank, I believe we could 
have achieved much more. Our successes – in areas such as price stability, exchange rate 
stability,  and  financial  stability  –  are  either  taken  for  granted  or  only  understood  by  the 
cognoscenti;  our  failures  are  exposed  to  the  public  eye  and  known  to  all  and  sundry. 
Although  we  have  been  fairly  successful  in  achieving  our  mandate  of  price  and  financial 
stability,  I  am  left  to  wonder  how  much  better  our  results  would  have  been  with  greater 
cooperation from our stakeholders. I can only renew my call for strengthened collaboration 
and hope that this time my call does not fall on deaf ears. 
67. 
We  are  striving  to  find  the  right  balance  between  inflation  and  interest  rate  in  the 
context of slowing growth rate. Our exchange rate policy has yielded the desired results over 
time and we are confident we can further fine-tune our exchange rate management policies. 
The  domestic  economy  remains  exposed  to  growing  threats  such  as  elevated  consumer 
imports,  stagnating  exports,  a  quasi-structural  current  account  deficit,  high  corporate 
indebtedness, and low household savings. The mandate of the central bank is traditionally 
restrictive in nature and the tools in our arsenal are limited, thereby bounding our influence 
on every macroeconomic indicator. The public is quite right in having high expectations of its 
central bank, but these should not be unrealistic. 
68. 
With a new year comes new challenges and we have to be ready to face them head 
on. The world economy is on a still nascent recovery path. As a small economy, dependent 
on  the  export  outlook  arising  from  this  recovery,  we  have  to  remain  vigilant  to  external 
threats, including a possible relapse, and the heightened volatility likely to be provoked by 
the withdrawal of the massive stimulus that has propped up developed economies. We have 
already borne the brunt of the prolonged global crisis without too much wear and tear. I have 
no doubt that 2014 will see brightening prospects for the country and its citizens. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
Annex 
Domestic developments 
New guidelines 
7.1 
Guideline on Mobile Banking and Mobile Payment Systems. The Bank issued 
the  Guideline  on  Mobile  Banking  and  Mobile  Payment  Systems  in  February  2013.  The 
objective  of  the  guideline,  which  is  intended  for  providers  of  mobile  banking  and  mobile 
payment  services,  is  to  promote  a  sound  financial  system  in  Mauritius  and  regulate  the 
mobile banking and mobile payment systems. 
Guideline on Complaints Handling Procedures. The amendments to the Banking 
7.2 
Act  2004  in  December  2012  laid  down  specific  provisions  in  relation  to  the  protection  of 
customers  of  financial  institutions.  The  Guideline  on  Complaints  Handling  Procedures  was 
issued  in  August  2013.  It  requires  all  banks  to  appoint  a  complaints  officer  to  deal  with 
complaints and grievances from their customers. (More details on this issue are provided at 
paragraph 46.1) 
7.3 
Guideline  on  Disclosure  of  Information  to  Guarantors.  The  Guideline  on 
Disclosure  of  Information  to  Guarantors,  issued  in  September  2013,  sets  out  the 
responsibilities of financial institutions towards guarantors. Section 37(7) of the Banking Act 
2004 requires every financial institution to provide a statement of account to the guarantor of 
a credit facility extended by it, in line with guidelines issued by the Bank. (More details on this 
issue are provided at paragraph 43.1) 
7.4 
Guideline  on  Maintenance  of  Accounting  and  Other  Records  and  Internal 
Control Systems. In November 2013, the Bank issued a new Guideline on Maintenance of 
Accounting and Other Records and Internal Control Systems. The purpose of this Guideline 
is  to  incorporate  up-to-date  best  practices  into  the  existing  Guidance  Note  on  General 
Principles for Maintenance of Accounting and Other Records and Internal Control Systems, 
issued by the Bank in November 1994. 
Revised guidelines 
Guidelines  on  Section  46(2)  of  the  Banking  Act  2004  –  Appointment  or 
7.5 
Reappointment of Senior Officers. The guideline  was reviewed in July 2013 to enhance 
the definition of a senior officer and to introduce a cooling period for a senior officer who has 
taken  up  employment  in  another  financial  institution.  However,  the  revised  Guideline  was 
kept in abeyance until further notice following representations made by the Mauritius Bankers 
Association. 
Guideline on Credit Concentration Risk. The Guideline on Credit Concentration 
7.6 
Risk  was  amended  in  September  2013  following  the  review  of  the  aggregate  large  credit 
exposure limits that apply to banks and non-bank deposit taking institutions. The guideline 
was  again  reviewed  in  November  2013  to  incorporate  certain  macroprudential  measures, 
namely sectoral concentration limits to be put in place by banks. 
Guideline  on  Standardised  Approach  to  Credit  Risk.  In  December  2013,  the 
7.7 
Bank reviewed the Guideline on Standardised Approach to Credit Risk. This Guideline now 
incorporates  the  new  risk  weights,  as  prescribed  by  the  macroprudential  measures,  for 
claims secured either by residential property and/or commercial real estate. 
Click here to return to main document 
8.1 
In line with the mandate of the Bank to ensure the stability of the financial system, 
and using powers in the banking legislation, I decided to take the initial steps to implement a 
Deposit Insurance Scheme in Mauritius. In July 2012, after consultation with banks, I sent to 
the  Ministry  of  Finance and  Economic  Development (MOFED)  a  Deposit  Insurance  Bill for 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
submission  to  Parliament.  In  October  2013,  I  again  approached  the  MOFED  to  bring  the 
proposed Bill before Parliament. I am still awaiting a response from them. 
8.2 
One of the outcomes of the global financial crisis abroad was the adoption of new 
rules governing bank recovery and resolution. In December 2013, after nearly one  year of 
deliberation,  the  member-states  of  the  European  Union  finally  reached  an  agreement  to 
ensure that failing banks can be wound up in a predictable and efficient way, with minimum 
recourse  to  public  money.  It  is  now  one  of  the  requirements  of  the  European  Financial 
Stability  Board  (EFSB)  that  an  effective  bank  resolution  mechanism  is  provided  in  the 
banking  laws.  Similarly,  one  of  the  mandates  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programmes of the World Bank and the IMF is to make sure that each country under review 
has  an  effective  legal  framework  for  bank  resolution.  Since  an  ailing  bank  which  has  an 
international  presence  may  have  cross-border  implications,  it  is  necessary  that  proper 
safeguards  are  provided  in  the  law  to  address  cross-border  issues.  In  line  with  these 
measures abroad, we have informed MOFED of our decision to come forward with proposals 
for changes to the Banking Act 2004 to provide for an effective bank resolution mechanism 
for Mauritius. 
Click here to return to main document 
Islamic  banking  products  –  On  hold?  The  Public  Debt  Management  Act 2008 
26.1 
amended the legislative framework to enlarge the scope of Government securities to include 
the issue of Sukuk bonds in Mauritius. Whilst this legislative amendment provides the Bank 
with  the  power  to  issue  Sharia-compliant  instruments,  this  project  has not  come to fruition 
yet.  The  Bank  has  continually  pressed  MOFED  on  this  matter,  but  no  progress  has  been 
made,  no  discussions  held  and  no  support  provided  to  agree  on  a  framework  for  the 
issuance and management of Sukuk bonds. My original aim was to position Mauritius as a 
regional  financial  centre  that  incorporates  a  niche  market  for  Islamic  finance.  But  other 
African  countries  have  now  taken  the  lead  and  already  issued  Sharia-compliant  sovereign 
papers that have gained acceptance and recognition worldwide. So it seems we have missed 
the boat on this one. 
Click here to return to main document 
Economy. Growth in the Mauritian economy slowed down to 3.2 per cent in 2013, 
28.1 
from 3.4 per cent in 2012. All the major economic sectors however registered positive growth 
rates,  with  the  exception  of  Construction  where  real  output  contracted  by  9.4  per  cent: 
Information and Communication expanded by 7.7 per cent; Finance and Insurance Activities 
by 5.3 per cent; Wholesale and Retail Trade by 3.5 per cent; Real Estate Activities by 2.9 per 
cent; Transport and Storage by 2.6 per cent and Accommodation and Food Service Activities 
by  2.5  per  cent.  Final  consumption  expenditure  growth  is  estimated  at  2.6  per  cent. 
Excluding aircraft and marine vessels, investment posted negative growth of 5.7 per cent in 
2013,  compared  with  a  marginal  contraction  of  0.8  per  cent  in  2012.  The  forecast  for  the 
savings rate is 14.2 per cent of GDP at market prices in 2013, compared with 15.1 per cent 
in 2012. 
Click here to return to main document 
29.1  Monetary policy. Three major changes were brought to the MPC during 2013: first, 
the composition of the MPC was once again amended to provide, in addition to the Governor 
and the two Deputy Governors, for two external members appointed by the Prime Minister 
and  a further three  external  members  appointed  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development; second, the MPC published a Code of Conduct to govern the MPC meetings; 
and third, explicit provisions were made for the MPC to take into consideration the views of 
the Bank, MOFED and any other appropriate institution in order to improve the coordination 
between monetary and fiscal policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
a. 
b. 
Under the new arrangements, the MPC has to publish a Code of Conduct to govern 
its meeting and to report once a year to the Board of Directors of the Bank on how 
well  it  has  complied  with  that  Code.  The  objective  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  is  to 
provide  guidance  and  set  ethical  standards  to  be  adhered  to,  at  all  times,  by  the 
members of the MPC. The MPC adopted a Code of Conduct for its members and 
this was published on the Bank’s website in July 2013. 
Under  the  new  arrangements,  the  MPC  has  to  take  into  account the  views  of  the 
Bank, those of the MOFED and the views of such other institution or organisation as 
the MPC thinks fit to do its work. Accordingly, the Financial Secretary expressed the 
views  of  MOFED  at  the  March,  June  and  September  2013  meetings  while 
representatives  from  the  Association  des  Consommateurs  de  l’Ile  Maurice  and  a 
freelance  consultant  shared  their  observations  at  the  June  and  September  2013 
meetings,  respectively.  I  firmly  believe  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  forward-
looking,  accompanied  by  transparent  communication  to  the  stakeholders.  The 
presentations  by  the  Bank’s  Staff,  MOFED,  external  consultants,  and  other 
organisations are henceforth published one week after the release of the minutes of 
the MPC meeting. 
29.2 
At  the  March  2013  meeting  of  the  MPC,  with  domestic  and  external  economic 
conditions still subdued and the threats to the growth outlook seen to continue outweighing 
inflation  worries,  the  MPC  decided,  by  majority  vote,  that  the  KRR  remained  broadly 
appropriate at the current juncture and left it unchanged at 4.90 per cent per annum. Then, at 
the  June  2013  meeting,  as  the  same  majority  considered  the  domestic  economy  still 
vulnerable to the subdued external environment against a benign global inflation outlook, the 
MPC cut the KRR by 25 basis points to 4.65 per cent per annum. In September 2013, the 
MPC maintained the KRR at 4.65 per cent, again by a majority decision. 
Click at 
• 
https://www.bom.mu/?id=20285&Archive=Y  for  the  Minutes  of  the  MPC  meetings 
released in 2013, and 
https://www.bom.mu/pdf/Research_and_Publications/Inflation_Report/Inflation 
Report_Oct13/contents.htm for the Inflation Report, October 2013. 
 Click here to return to main document 
Liquidity  in  the  banking  system  The  Bank  reviewed  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio 
33.1 
(CRR)  requirements,  with  effect  from  the  maintenance  period  starting  26  July  2013,  and 
banks  are  now  required  to  keep  cash  reserves  of  their  rupee  deposit  base  in  Mauritian 
rupees. For Euro- and GBP-denominated deposits, balances at the Bank should be in Euro 
and GBP, respectively. USD balances should be kept for USD-denominated as well as for all 
foreign currency-denominated deposits other than Euro and GBP. The CRR has now been 
imposed on all Government deposits as well. 
33.2 
To address the persistent excess liquidity in the banking system, the Bank further 
refined the computation of the CRR with effect from the fortnight beginning 4 October 2013. 
The average CRR on rupee deposits was increased from 7.0 per cent to 8.0 per cent, and 
the  daily  minimum  for  rupee  deposits  from  5.0  per  cent  to  5.5  per  cent.  The  fortnightly 
average  CRR  and  the  daily  minimum  balance  on  foreign  currency  deposits  were  reduced 
from  7.0  per  cent  and  5.0  per  cent  to  6.0  per  cent  and  4.5  per  cent,  respectively.  I  am 
pleased to note that the increase in the CRR has indeed resulted in the normalisation of the 
money market rates. 
33.3 
Against  the  backdrop  of  recent  rigging  scandals  of  benchmark  rates  in  some 
jurisdictions  abroad,  the  Bank  has  been  monitoring  the  procedures regarding  contributions 
submitted for computation of PLIBOR, the Port Louis Interbank Offered Rate. In the light of 
developments  taking  place  worldwide  and  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders  in  the 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
industry,  the  Bank  decided  to  publish  rates  for  tenors  that  are  actively  traded.  So  from 
2 December 2013, the Bank only publishes Overnight and the One-Week tenors, where most 
of the transactions take place. 
33.4 
The  Bank  has  continued  to  support  the  reforms  in  the  sugar  industry  through 
stimulus packages. As part of this support, the Bank renewed the Protocol d’Accord with the 
Mauritius Sugar Syndicate to grant them facilities under the Special Line of Credit for Sugar 
Crop Year 2013 for loans to small and medium planters. The Bank has made Rs1.2 billion 
available,  at  the  rate  of  3  per  cent,  for  banks  to  on-lend  at  a  maximum  rate  of  interest  of 
3.5 per cent. This facility has been extended up to 31 January 2014, with repayment at latest 
by 31 May 2014. The Bank has also continued the Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency 
scheme, introduced in June 2012, aimed at enabling eligible export and tourism operators to 
refinance  rupee-denominated  debt  to  address  currency  mismatch  between  their  income 
streams and their existing debt servicing commitments. 
33.5 
Unfortunately, I have to report there has been no real progress with the project for 
the  secondary  trading  of  medium-  and  long-term  government  securities.  We  have  already 
made  amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004  and  to  regulations  made  by  the 
Financial Services Commission (FSC), in respect of fees. The main item yet to be agreed on 
is the exit facility for banks engaging in this line of business. We are still discussing a draft 
Memorandum of Understanding for trading of the securities on the Stock Exchange with the 
FSC, and the exit mechanism with MOFED. 
Click here to return to main document 
Debt management. In 2013, the Bank issued Treasury Bills and Treasury Notes for 
34.1 
nominal  amounts  of  Rs33.3  billion  and  Rs12.3  billion,  respectively.  The  Bank  also  issued 
5-Year, 10-Year and 15-Year Government of Mauritius Bonds as well as 15-Year Inflation-
Indexed  Government  of  Mauritius  Bonds  for  total  nominal  amounts  of  Rs6.9  billion, 
Rs3.3 billion, Rs2.6 billion and Rs1.0 billion, respectively. Overall, in 2013 the Bank issued a 
net amount of Rs9.4 billion as Government securities. 
Click here to return to main document 
Forex intervention. During 2013, banks and foreign exchange dealers made total 
38.1 
purchases  in  foreign  exchange  of  the  equivalent  of  USD4.1  billion,  compared  with 
USD3.9 billion  in  2012,  an  increase  of  nearly  5  per  cent.  Total  sales  in  2013  in  foreign 
exchange amounted to USD4.0 billion, compared with USD3.9 billion in 2012, an increase of 
just  over  2 per  cent.  The  total  turnover  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  in  2013  clearly 
shows that there was no liquidity constraint in this market and the level of business activity in 
foreign currency remained relatively stable compared with the previous year. 
Click here to return to main document 
Banking sector performance. The banking sector continued to grow in 2013, with 
39.1 
assets reaching over Rs1 trillion. Growth in banks’ assets was mainly driven by Segment A 
business.  Banks  remained  profitable  and  adequately  capitalised  with  a  comfortable  buffer 
over the minimum regulatory capital adequacy ratio of 10 per cent. One of the key strengths 
of  our  banks  is  the  quality  of  capital,  with  Tier  1  capital  representing  a  considerable 
proportion of the capital base. At end-December 2013, the Capital Adequacy Ratio stood at 
16.4 per cent. 
39.2 
The  quality  of  the  credit  portfolios  of  banks  remained  strong,  despite  a  slight 
increase in the ratio of non-performing loans to gross loans. At the end of September 2013, 
non-performing loans accounted for 3.5 per cent of gross loans, against 3.1 per cent a year 
earlier.  We  are  closely  monitoring  the  evolution  in  credit  quality.  The  cover  ratio  (specific 
provision to non-performing loans) was 41.3 per cent in September 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
39.3 
Banks continued to expand their domestic network with six additional branches set 
up  in  2013.  This  brought  the  total  number  of  branches,  including  head  offices,  of  banks 
operating  in  Mauritius  to  227  at  the  end  of  December  2013,  while  there  were  a  total  of 
450 ATM’s compared with 441 at the end of December 2012. 
Click here to return to main document 
41.1  Macroprudential measures. The global financial crisis underscored the necessity 
to rely on macroprudential regulation, in addition to other measures, as a policy tool to curb 
potential systemic risk. The Bank introduced the following five macroprudential measures in 
October 2013: 
a. 
The  loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio  aims  at  constraining  excessive  credit  growth  and 
restricting losses in the event of customer default, or decline in property prices, by 
imposing  a  cap  on  the  size  of  the  loans  relative  to  the  value  of  the  properties 
financed.  The  Bank  introduced  the  maximum  LTV  limits  as  a  macroprudential 
measure  to  discourage  speculation,  prevent  excessive  leverage,  and  reduce 
systemic risk associated with the rapid expansion of credit in the construction sector. 
Customers borrowing from banks to purchase property for the first time will not be 
affected by these measures. 
The  debt-to  income  (DTI)  ratio  provides  protection  to  households  from  debt  traps 
and aims at containing housing credit growth. Banks in Mauritius use the DTI as a 
microprudential  measure  to  assess  borrowers’  repayment  capability.  Concerned 
with  the  growing  level  of  household  indebtedness,  we  introduced  the  DTI  ratio  to 
ensure that borrowers are not overleveraged whenever they borrow for the purchase 
or construction of a property. 
The  three  additional  macroprudential  measures  consist  of  risk-weighted  assets, 
additional  portfolio  provisions,  and  sectoral  limits.  The  measure  on  risk-weighted 
assets  requires  banks  to  maintain  higher  risk  weights  in  the  targeted  borrower 
segments.  The  additional  portfolio  provision  ensures  early  provisioning  against 
future  credit  losses  in  more  vulnerable  sectors.  The  objective  behind  the  sectoral 
credit limits is to contain exposure of banks to three sectors, namely, Commercial, 
residential  and  land  parceling,  Tourism  and  Personal.  Overall,  these  measures 
should strengthen the resilience of our banking sector. 
b. 
c. 
Click here at http://www.bom.mu/?id=72427 for the guidelines on macroprudential measures. 
Click here to return to main document 
Disclosure of information to guarantors. Section 37 of the Banking Act 2004 was 
43.1 
amended  in  December  2012  to  enable  the  Bank  to  require  every  financial  institution  to 
provide  a  statement  of  account  to  the  guarantor  of  a  credit  facility  extended  by  it,  in 
accordance with guidelines issued by the Bank. Accordingly, a Draft Guideline on Disclosure 
of  Information  to  Guarantors  providing  guidance  to  financial  institutions  was  circulated  to 
banks,  to  non-bank  deposit  taking  financial  institutions,  and  to  the  MBA  for  views  and 
comments. Following the consultation process, the Guideline was issued to the industry in 
September 2013 and became effective on 1 January 2014. 
Click here at http://www.bom.mu/?id=90738 for the Guideline. 
Click here to return to main document 
Future of banking. Technology is changing rapidly today and is having an impact 
44.1 
on  banks’  business  models.  Whilst  electronic  delivery  channels  for  banking  products  and 
services have been around for years now, accessing banking services through the Internet 
and  mobile  phones  is  becoming  increasingly  popular  in  Mauritius.  Consumers  make 
payments using credit cards, debit cards and they transfer funds electronically or shop online 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
instead of paying by cash or bank cheque. I welcome this trend as another step towards a 
cash-lite society. 
Click here to return to main document 
to 
implement 
international 
fora.  The  Bank  has  decided 
45.1 
A staff study visit to the Reserve Bank of India has led to a better understanding of 
the  integrated  system  of  data  collection,  storage  and  processing,  using  an  automated 
system. It enabled the project team to prepare the Request for Proposal to invite bids for the 
envisaged system. The bids received are presently at evaluation stage. 
As a producer of macroeconomic statistics, the Bank is an active player in national 
45.2 
and 
the  most  up-to-date 
internationally-agreed standards. The Statistics Division has contributed to the preparation of 
the  forthcoming  IMF  Balance  of  Payments  Compilation  Guide,  due  for  release  soon.  In 
particular, we have shared our experience in the collection of data on offshore entities. With 
the new powers conferred upon the Bank to regulate credit unions and money lenders, the 
Depository  Corporations  Survey  will  eventually  be  extended  to  include  these  financial 
institutions as well. At the national level, together with other official data-producing agencies, 
the  Bank  has  actively  participated  in  the  sub-committee  on  “Harmonisation  of  Business 
Surveys” to reduce the reporting burden of the private sector. 
Keeping in line with usual practice, we have posted the Advance Release Calendar 
45.3 
on our website at the start of the year to inform users of the forthcoming releases. For the 6th 
year  running,  the  Bank  has  conformed  with  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  by 
keeping the public briefed on the dates of specific data releases. According to set timelines, 
the Bank has conducted its annual Foreign Assets and Liabilities Survey, the annual Global 
Business Companies Category 1 Survey and the quarterly Inflation Expectations Survey in 
2013. The Statistical reports with varying frequencies (daily, weekly, monthly and annual) are 
freely available and are published on the Bank’s website. 
Click here to return to main document 
Protection of customers of financial institutions. Section 96A of the Banking Act 
46.1 
2004  requires  all  banks  to  appoint  a  complaints  officer  to  deal  with  complaints  and 
grievances from customers. Following consultation with the banking industry, we issued the 
Guideline  on  Complaints  Handling  Procedures  in  August  2013.  It  became  effective  on  1 
November 2013. The key features of the Guideline are as follows: 
a. 
Banks  have  to  set  up  a  complaints  desk,  duly  indicated  for  that  purpose,  at  their 
main office to receive customers. 
For branches, there is no need to have a formal complaints desk but there should be 
a place for complainants, duly indicated, which may be with any front desk officer. 
Financial institutions are required to retain details of complaints for at least a period 
of 7 years as from the date of their receipt. 
Financial  institutions  are  required  to  provide  the  Bank,  on  a  quarterly  basis,  with 
information on complaints they have received. 
In terms of information available at the Bank, the most frequent complaints made by 
b. 
c. 
d. 
46.2 
bank customers are in relation to the following: 
– 
Funds  have  been  taken  from  their  accounts  by  the  use  of  cheques  with  forged 
signatures 
Early repayment fees 
Insurance Premiums on loans 
Excessive fees and commissions have been charged 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
Charges have been applied when the account falls below a minimum balance 
Delay in crediting bank accounts on cheque deposits 
Rescheduling of loans 
Investment in banking products where capital is not guaranteed 
Withdrawals on ATM 
Fraudulent withdrawals over the counter 
Interest rate on fixed deposits 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Click here to return to main document 
47.1 
The Economic and Financial Measures (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013 brought 
amendments to the Banking Act 2004 for the protection of consumers of financial services. 
The new legal provisions have capped at 2 per cent the amount of penal interest rate that 
can  be  charged  by  financial  institutions  on  a  loan  or  credit  facility  granted  in  Mauritius 
currency to an individual on or after 1 January 2014. For borrowers who find themselves in 
difficulty, provision has also been made for the contractual rate of interest to cease to apply 
and  for  interest  rate  at  the  KRR  to  apply  subject  to  certain  conditions.  I  welcome  these 
amendments to the law. 
47.2 
I  hope  to  share  the  work  of  the  Task  Force  on  Unfair  Terms  and  Conditions  in 
Banking  and  Related  Financial  Contracts  with  the  public  in  the  course  of  this  year  which 
should pave the way for a better deal for users of banking and financial services. 
Click here to return to main document 
Exchange of information among regulators. Supervisory colleges have evolved 
48.1 
the  world  over  as  an  important  component  of  effective  supervisory  oversight  of  an 
international  banking  group.  They  assist  in  reducing  supervisory  overlap  and  filling  in  the 
gaps for better supervisory co-operation. The revised Core Principles for Effective Banking 
Supervision include the enhanced Core Principle on Home-Host Relationships. This requires 
the home supervisor to establish bank-specific supervisory colleges for banking groups. The 
Bank has endorsed this principle from the Basel banking-standards setter and has set up a 
Supervisory  College  for  the  two  largest  local  banks  which  have  established  either 
subsidiaries or branches in several overseas jurisdictions. The initiative aims at dealing with 
supervisory issues and establishing a co-operation mechanism for cross-border supervision 
of  these  institutions.  Each  college  comprises  home  and  host  supervisors  of  the  Mauritius 
Commercial Bank and the State Bank of Mauritius on the African Continent and in the Indian 
Ocean Region. This has offered an excellent opportunity for the supervisors, as well as the 
banks themselves, to share information that will help the Bank in the conduct of consolidated 
supervision. Participants have expressed interest for the supervisory colleges to be held on a 
regular basis. 
Click here to return to main document 
Islamic  banking.  Since  joining  the  Bank  in  2007,  I  have  taken  a  number  of 
52.1 
initiatives  to  promote  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Mauritius.  These  include  a 
legislative  and  regulatory  framework  for  the  conduct  of  Islamic  banking  in  Mauritius.  In 
November 2007,  the  Bank  was  admitted  as  an  Associate  Member  of  the  IFSB  and  was 
subsequently upgraded to full membership in September 2009. Such adherence of the Bank 
to international organizations conveys the commitment of the Mauritian authorities towards 
the implementation of comprehensive Islamic financial services industry in our country. The 
IFSB Summit brings together a wide range of interested partners. This includes Governors 
and  deputy  governors  of  member  central  banks,  senior  officials  from  supervisory  and 
regulatory  bodies  and  other  stakeholders  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry, 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
representatives from international institutions, industry experts and academia participating as 
speakers at meetings and other events. 
Click here to return to main document 
Polymer banknotes. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius was the Guest 
53.1 
of Honour at the ceremony for the launch of the new polymer banknotes. After a video clip 
was shown on the history of banknotes in Mauritius, the new polymer notes were launched. 
The Chief Executive of De La Rue (printer of the new Rs25 and Rs50 banknotes) and the 
Representative  of  Oberthur  Fiduciaire  (printer  of  the  new  Rs500  banknotes)  presented 
mementos to the Prime Minister. 
53.2 
The  polymer  notes  of  Rs25,  Rs50  and  Rs500  denominations  have  innovative 
security  features  designed  exclusively  for  the  polymer  material.  The  polymer  notes  last 
longer  than  paper  banknotes  thereby  reducing  processing,  replacement  costs  and 
environmental  impact.  The  polymer  banknotes  are  now  in  circulation  alongside  the  paper 
banknotes.  Following  the  issue  of  polymer  banknotes  on  22  August  2013,  a  total  value  of 
Rs761.8  million  was  in  circulation  by  31  December  2013.  (This  was  made  up  of 
Rs82.2 million  worth  of  the  Rs25  notes;  Rs100.2  million  worth  of  the  Rs50  notes;  and 
Rs579.4 million worth of the Rs500 notes.) 
The Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 was amended in December 2013 and a new section 
53.3 
43A entitled “Reproduction of currency notes, bank notes or coins” was added. It is now an 
offence for any person, without the written permission of the Bank, to use, in any size, scale 
or colour, any photograph of, or any drawing or design resembling, any Mauritius currency 
note, bank note or coin in any advertisement or on any merchandise or product which that 
person manufactures, sells, circulates or otherwise distributes. 
Click here to return to main document 
Payments  system.  I  have  personally  ensured  that  our  payments  infrastructure  is 
55.1 
modern, resilient and stable. In 2007, as part of a major re-structuring exercise, I set up a 
new  division  to  look  exclusively  into  payments  system  matters.  Since  then  several  new 
payment  schemes  have  been  introduced  and  existing  ones  are  being  constantly  revisited 
and improved. In 2013 we took new initiatives to further improve the payments system. 
55.2 
The  NPS  will  be  a  central  infrastructure  for  routing  all  electronic-based  payment 
transactions from cards, Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s), Point-of-Sale (POS) terminals, 
and  mobile  devices  for  local  clearing  and  settlement.  Current  electronic-based  payments, 
even  for  local  transactions,  mostly  use  international  networks  and  are  very  costly  for  both 
merchants and consumers. The NPS has the potential to provide value-added services such 
as pre-paid cards, e-payment gateways and mobile payments. It should not be viewed as a 
replacement  for  card-based  transactions  as  many  people  believe,  but  rather,  as  a  public 
good to help the Bank achieve its statutory goals of maintaining financial stability, create new 
opportunities and provide a level playing field to all banks. 
55.3 
The  Bank  has  put  much  emphasis  on  designing  and  being  part  of  an  integrated 
African regional payment system. We have pursued this objective through our presence in 
two  main  regional  blocks,  namely,  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC) 
and  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  (COMESA).  Besides  being  a 
settlement bank, we also host the platform for the Regional Payment and Settlement System 
(REPSS) which is a cross-border payment system for COMESA. The Bank is also an active 
member  of  the  SADC  Payment  Systems  initiative.  During  the  course  of  2013,  we  have 
worked  towards  enhancing  the  REPSS  by  providing  training  and  technical  support  to 
member-states. The Bank hosted delegations from Malawi and Burundi for on-site training 
and guidance which then led to Malawi joining Rwanda, Swaziland and Mauritius as active 
participants in the system. I expect that the system will gain further momentum through the 
forthcoming participation of Kenya and Egypt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
55.4 
In order to further facilitate trade flows between Mauritius and region, the Bank has 
also taken the decision to join the cross-border payment system of the Common Monetary 
Area (CMA) countries. The CMA member-states are South Africa, Swaziland, Lesotho and 
Namibia.  As  South  Africa  is  not  a  member  of  COMESA,  participation  in  this  initiative  will 
allow all Rand-based payments to be cleared directly and at a lower cost within the same 
day.  In  the  longer  run,  this  system  will  encourage  our  importers  to  request  their  Southern 
African trade partners to invoice them in Rand rather than US dollars. 
Click here to return to main document 
Ponzi schemes. This year I initiated a series of actions to deal with the issues arising from 
the financial scams known commonly as Ponzi schemes. The recommendations of the RBI 
assessors  ranged  from  the  reinforcement  of  “Know  Your  Customer”  procedures  and  due 
diligence  in  banks,  to  the  setting  up  of  dedicated  cells  to  gather  market  intelligence  and 
enhanced  coordination  among  regulators.  These  recommendations  are  in  line  with  the 
restructuring  and  redefining  of  our  mandate.  They  reinforce  our  commitment  towards 
financial  literacy,  consumer  education  and fair  treatment  of  consumers,  on  all  of  which  we 
had initiated work in early 2012. Among the lessons of the recent financial scam is the need 
for everyone – both young and old – to acquire a basic knowledge of finance and economics. 
Such knowledge is necessary for anyone who is faced with managing a household budget, 
making financial investments, and preparing financially for retirement among others. 
Click here to return to main document 
Regional cooperation. Another priority for me as Chairman of the AACB is to enlist 
58.1 
the  support  of my  colleagues  in  the  Bureau  in  our  joint  efforts  to  improve  performance  on 
meeting the convergence criteria set out in the African Monetary Co-operation Programme. 
This  is  all  part  of  the  overall  objective  of  the  long-term  pursuit  of  regional  and  continental 
monetary union. Despite some positive signs of global economic recovery, we still have to 
remain vigilant in this region to protect our economies from adverse global shocks. The Bank 
hosted the meeting of the Working Committee on the Detailed Programme and Budget of the 
CABS, which was established upon a decision of the Association of African Central Banks 
Assembly of Governors taken at its 37th meeting. The meeting was held in Mauritius from 
20 to  22  January  2014  to  develop  a  comprehensive  plan  and  budget  as  directed  by  the 
Governors. 
58.2 
from 5 to 7 March 2013. 
Click here to return to main document 
The Bank hosted the meeting of the SADC Subcommittee of Banking Supervisors 
Corporate Social Responsibility.  A  Landscape  Architect  has  been  appointed for 
61.1 
the  design  of  the  Bamboo  Garden.  A  Project  Management  Committee,  chaired  by  the 
Second Deputy Governor and including representatives of the Bank’s employees, oversees 
the  project.  The  garden  will  initially  have  120  varieties  of  bamboo,  from  both  local  and 
imported  sources.  50  varieties  of  local  species  have  been  collected  and  propagated  at 
Wooton,  not  far  from  the  Midlands  site,  on  our  behalf  by  the  Agricultural  Research  and 
Extension  Unit.  Additional  varieties  will  be  introduced  subsequently.  In  addition  to  bamboo 
plants, the project will also include a bamboo museum, an administrative unit, a restaurant 
and an amphitheatre. The project, which is in line with the Maurice Ile Durable concept, is 
expected to attract local and foreign visitors. 
62.1 
Young  athletes  aged  9  to  14  years  participated  in  the  7th  Edition  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius Inter Club Youth Championship Competition held in collaboration with the Mauritius 
Athletics  Association.  The  event,  which  has  become  part  of  the  Bank’s  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility  to  the  nation,  and  which  is  in  conformity  with  the  Government’s  policy  to 
democratize sports, has more than surpassed our initial objectives. A number of athletes who 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have competed in the Bank’s Inter Clubs Youth Championships since the maiden edition in 
2007  are  now  representing  Mauritius  in  international  tournaments.  This  year,  around  950 
athletes, 650 athletes from Mauritius and 300 from Rodrigues participated in the event. The 
preliminaries in Rodrigues were held on 9 November 2013. During the two-day competition, 
two records were established: 
– 
Relay Colt 4x50 m – girls in 31.11s established by Jane Brabant, Selena Ramsamy, 
Laeticia Favory and Anastasia Monique of Beau Bassin Athletic Club as compared 
with the previous record of 32.08s; and 
Pentathlon  with  161  points  established  by  Bryan  Tonta  of  Rose  Hill  Athletic  Club, 
improving his own previous record of 155 points. 
 Click here to return to main document 
Communication  with  stakeholders.  Click  here  at  http://www.bom.mu  to  access 
64.1 
the section on “Financial Education” located in the menu of the Bank’s website. Information 
on  financial  frauds  and  their  prevention  is  provided  in  the  sub-sections  “Types  of  financial 
frauds” and “Prevention of financial crime” under the section “Financial Education”. 
Click here to return to main document 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
