  Timothy Lane: Are we there yet? The United States and Canada after the 
global financial crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  Carleton 
University, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here at Carleton University. 
It has been a long time since I was a student here, but I still get caught up in the back-to-
school feeling of September. It’s a time of fresh starts and renewed energy. 
Today I would like to talk about the economies of the United States and Canada and how our 
economic ties are evolving as the recovery from the financial crisis of 2008–09 continues. I 
will  discuss  the  impact  on  Canada  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  unconventional  monetary 
policies,  and  how  Canada  will  be  affected  as  these  policies  are  gradually  brought  back  to 
normal. While there are risks associated with this process, the Bank of Canada sees it as a 
positive sign that the U.S. economy is experiencing its own fresh start and gaining renewed 
energy. 
Ties that bind ... sort of 
Let  me  start  with  the  ties  between  the  United  States  and  Canada.  We  are  more  than 
neighbours; perhaps we are more like fourth-year roommates. Economically, we need each 
other and have strong links. Over the years, we’ve been through good times and bad. We 
live comfortably together, provided that we respect each other’s space. 
On the whole, having our fortunes linked with those of the United States works in Canada’s 
favour.  Our  businesses  can  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  of  a  much  larger  market. 
That means more jobs in Canada. 
But, over the past several years, we have also been reminded that these strong ties expose 
us  to  adverse  forces  in  times  of  stress.  The  old  cliché  is  that  “when  the  U.S.  sneezes, 
Canada catches a cold.” There is an element of truth to that adage, but it only goes so far. 
Our economies do not move perfectly in sync, partly because they are structurally different: 
most  obviously,  ours  is  much  more  reliant  on  natural  resources.  And  despite  the  strong 
influence  of  the  United  States,  as  economic  policy-makers  in  Canada,  we  have  plenty  of 
scope to follow a different path. 
To explore these ties – particularly as they relate to my own field, monetary policy – let’s take 
a closer look at the financial crisis of 2008–09, the subsequent worldwide recession and the 
bumpy recovery. First, I’ll talk briefly about how Canada’s experience through that period has 
been similar to, yet different from, that of the United States. Then I’ll elaborate on where we 
are now, the challenges facing policy-makers in the United States, and what they mean for 
Canada. 
Tales of a global recession 
The financial crisis, which started with an overheated and precariously financed U.S. housing 
market, did not just affect Canada – it triggered a worldwide recession. In 2008, the dramatic 
failure of Lehman Brothers was effective, if nothing else, in concentrating minds: the world 
looked into the abyss and took notice. 
In a historic display of consensus, the G-7 agreed to take whatever steps were required to 
stem  the  crisis.  They  lowered  policy  interest  rates  sharply  (Chart  1)  and  in  a  coordinated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  manner;  they  flooded  the  financial  system  with  liquidity  to  quell  the  panic;  and  they  stood 
behind systemically important financial institutions. 
 
 the  crisis  and  beyond, 
 
These  aggressive  and  coordinated  policy  actions  prevented  a  financial  and  economic 
collapse that could have rivalled the Great Depression. Nonetheless, they did not prevent a 
severe  and  protracted  global  recession,  which  led  to  a  period  of  weak  and  uneven  global 
growth that continues to the present day. 
Through 
the  Federal  Reserve  acted  aggressively  and 
unconventionally – first to stem the crisis and, later on, to support the recovery. Like other 
central banks, the Fed began by boldly lowering its standard monetary policy instrument, the 
federal funds rate, as low as it could go. With policy interest rates at their lower bound, the 
Federal  Reserve  also  went 
forward  guidance  – 
communicating how long those rates would be likely to stay at their current level and, more 
recently, the factors that they would take into account in deciding when to start raising them. 
The Fed also innovated by introducing large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs), best known as 
quantitative  easing,  or  QE.  QE  provides  an  injection  of  liquidity  into  a  stalled  economy 
through  the  central  bank’s  purchases  of  financial  assets  such  as  government  bonds  and 
mortgage-backed securities. 
These operations have had pervasive effects on financial markets – not only in the United 
States  but  globally.  They  work  through  a  variety  of  channels,  including  by  pushing  down 
long-term interest rates and the external value of the U.S. dollar and pushing up the prices of 
risky financial assets such as equities (Chart 2). 
 
in  providing 
to  unusual 
lengths 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
As  a  related  effect,  these  operations  by  the  Federal  Reserve  –  together  with  the 
unconventional  policies  of  central  banks  of  other  major  economies  –  have  pushed  the 
volatility  of  financial  assets  down  to  near  historically  low  levels  (Chart  3).  The  resulting 
exceptionally buoyant financial conditions suggest that risk and vulnerability have increased 
in  the  financial  system.  But,  during  this  period,  returning  the  United  States  to  sustained 
economic growth has been of paramount importance. 
 
 
While there was some concern that QE could have resulted in runaway inflation, that hasn’t 
happened. In fact, the U.S. economy remained weak and inflation mainly below the Federal 
Reserve’s target. That’s because QE was being carried out in the context of the widespread 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  private sector deleveraging after the financial crisis; and, despite the unprecedented scale of 
the operations, it was still not enough to break the economy out of its post-crisis funk. 
Canada: innocent bystander? 
Here  in  Canada,  we  didn’t  have  a  homegrown  financial  crash. While  the  Bank  of  Canada 
acted promptly and aggressively to provide liquidity to keep financial markets functioning, no 
banks had to be rescued and house prices didn’t plunge. This is not to say we were lily pure. 
In  fact,  in  2007,  a  specialized  Canadian  market  collapsed  –  the  market  for  non-bank-
sponsored asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). It was only through timely and forceful 
action by the public and private sectors that this situation was resolved without generating 
wider fallout. 
Nevertheless,  the  recession  in  Canada  was  painful.  This  was  mainly  because  our  exports 
collapsed. It’s not just that about three-quarters of our exports go to the United States, but 
also  that  they  are  linked  to  sectors  of  the  U.S.  economy,  such  as  housing  and  business 
investment, that fared particularly badly in the recession. 
To get us through this period of very weak exports, we also relied on stimulative monetary 
policy.  Like  the  United  States  and  other  advanced  economies,  we  lowered  rates  to  their 
“effective lower bound” – in our case, 1/4 per cent. Unlike the United States, we did not need 
QE,  although  we  did  provide  forward  guidance  for  our  policy  rate,  itself  a  form  of 
unconventional monetary policy, for the year following April 2009. Our financial system was 
more  robust,  so  easy  monetary  policy  was  transmitted  into  expanding  credit  for  Canadian 
households  and  companies.  In  contrast  with  the  United  States,  we  had  a  buoyant,  albeit 
uneven, housing market through the recession and beyond. 
Another important factor is that natural resource prices remained at elevated levels, so our 
resource industries recovered quickly. These prices were supported by the strong growth in 
China and other emerging-market economies, which slowed down with the global recession 
but  quickly  picked  up  again.  The  resource  economy  powered  ahead,  boosting  disposable 
incomes, employment, engineering investment and government revenues. 
Canada bounced back quickly. By late 2010, we had passed the pre-crisis peak in GDP and 
employment – we were out of the recovery and into the expansion. At the Bank of Canada, 
we saw a need to get interest rates off the floor and raised them in a series of steps to 1 per 
cent. 
But then we were in for a round of disappointments and challenges of our own. As Canada’s 
recovery unfolded, our economy became increasingly unbalanced. Our non-energy exports, 
after  picking  up  quickly,  stalled  well  below  their  pre-recession  level  (Chart  4).  Economic 
growth became increasingly reliant on building more and more homes, mortgaged at rock-
bottom interest rates and driving up the indebtedness of Canadians to unprecedented levels 
(Chart 5). That source of growth was increasingly tapped out. And it built up vulnerabilities in 
our financial system, which could spell trouble down the road. 
Another disappointment was that, last year, even as the U.S. economy began to strengthen, 
Canadian non-energy exports did not pick up as expected. Why not? This is a puzzle we are 
much closer to understanding – but our understanding is still imperfect. I won’t dwell on this 
topic, as my colleagues have already said a lot about our weak export sector.1 Suffice to say 
that weak exports have meant that Canada has had to rely on exceptional monetary policy 
stimulus for even longer than we expected. Our policy interest rate has stayed at 1 per cent 
since 2010. 
                                                
1  S.  Poloz,  “Float  of  the  Loonie,”  Speech  delivered  to  the  Société  de  développement  économique  de 
Drummondville in Drummondville, Quebec, on 16 September 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      
What effects did the Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policies have on Canada 
during this period? Our analysis indicates that, for Canada, their net effect has been positive. 
The  Fed’s  policies  have  pushed  down  our  market  interest  rates  and,  by  promoting  U.S. 
growth,  have  added  to  the  demand  for  our  exports.  On  the  downside,  these  policies  may 
have  been  one  of  the  factors  putting  upward  pressure  on  the  Canadian  dollar.  But,  on 
balance, the effects have been positive for Canada. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Morning in America? 
So where are we now, in this long process of getting back to sustained economic growth? 
The U.S. economy is in expansion, with the private sector taking the lead. 
The headwinds that came from deleveraging – consumers whittling away at heavy debt loads 
– are abating and the net worth of those consumers has improved markedly (Chart 6). And 
the  process  of  fiscal  consolidation  –  bringing  the  federal  budget  deficit  down  to  a  more 
sustainable level – is largely complete (Chart 7). 
 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But growth has remained fairly modest. It’s not quite clear why. Perhaps uncertainty about 
demand is still holding back business decisions and investment. Given the rocky road of the 
last few years, this is to be expected. 
While U.S. housing markets are reviving, they are following an uneven and uncertain path, 
and there is a lot of room for improvement. Home construction is well below its pre-recession 
level, and the excess housing stock has largely been depleted (Chart 8). 
 
  
Likewise,  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  labour  markets,  which  are  a  long  way  from 
normal. 
On  average,  about  200,000  net  new  jobs  were  created  each  month  during  the  past  three 
years. Unemployment, which spiked during the recession, has fallen by about 4 percentage 
points since its peak. 
How does Canada compare? 
Since  Canada  experienced  a  shorter  recession,  our  labour  market  conditions  did  not 
deteriorate as much, and were also faster to recover. For instance, by January 2011, Canada 
had recovered the number of jobs it lost during the recession – whereas the United States 
only  reached  that  point  in  May  of  this  year  (Chart  9).  But  since  2011,  Canada  has  been 
creating  new  jobs  at  a  much  slower  pace  than  has  the  United  States.  Similarly,  our 
unemployment rate did not rise as much during the recession, but has been coming down 
more slowly – and, if measured in the same way, is now at about the same level as it is in the 
United States. 
In both countries, the unemployment rate does not fully capture the labour market slack. In 
both 
long-term 
unemployment  and  involuntary  part-time  employment,  while  wage  gains  continue  to  be 
moderate relative to historical norms (Chart 10). And here, as in the  United States, young 
people are having a hard time finding jobs, and many have dropped out of the workforce. Our 
comprehensive  measure  of  labour  market  slack  has  shown  less  slack  than  in  the  United 
States, but the gap has been narrowing (Chart 11). 
the  United  States  and  Canada, 
there  are  still  elevated 
levels  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
      
In all, while the U.S. economy is improving, there have been bumps in the road, and there 
will be more as the expansion continues. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What is the Fed doing? 
It is in this context that the Federal Reserve has been winding down its QE purchases and 
has signalled its plan to return gradually to a more normal monetary policy stance, starting 
sometime  next  year.  The  precise  timing  and  pace  of  that  exit  will  depend  on  how  the 
economy  is  performing.  Like  most  decisions,  this  involves  a  balancing  of  risks.  Tightening 
monetary  policy  too  early  could  plunge  the  economy  back  into  recession.  Moving  too  late 
could let inflation take off and require more tightening to get it back under control. It could 
also result in bigger financial imbalances which, later on, if they unwind, could throw inflation 
into another downdraft. 
A formal difference between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada is the Fed’s “dual 
mandate”  to  promote  the  goals  of  maximum  employment  and  stable  prices.  This  is  in 
contrast to the Bank of Canada’s monetary policy framework: a target of 2 per cent inflation. 
But this contrast between our inflation target and the Fed’s dual mandate is not as sharp as it 
seems. When inflation expectations are well anchored, bringing inflation sustainably to the 
target depends mainly on bringing the economy to its potential – in other words, closing the 
output gap. In assessing the output gap, conditions in the labour market are one of the main 
things we look at. 
Last week, the Fed reconfirmed that it will likely end its QE program at its next meeting in 
October.  This  means  that  the  Fed  no  longer  expects  to  be  purchasing  additional  financial 
assets under that program, which it has been gradually tapering since last January. 
The  next  challenge  for  the  Fed  is  how  to  unwind  the  various  other  elements  of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  stimulus,  which  include  ultra-low  interest  rates,  a  large 
volume  of  excess  reserves  in  the  financial  system  and  a  large  Federal  Reserve  balance 
sheet (Chart 12). The composition of that balance sheet (e.g., government bonds of different 
maturities, mortgage-backed securities) may also matter. When is it time to start to reverse 
these policies? What are the right pace and sequence for each element? 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    
A key step in normalizing policy will be to start increasing the target for the federal funds rate, 
which is currently still in a range of 0 to 1/4 per cent. This can be accomplished, in part, by 
gradually raising the interest rate the Fed pays on excess reserves. 
The Fed will also remove excess reserves from the financial system, in order to control short-
term interest rates. They have introduced and test-driven an overnight reverse repo facility 
that they will use for that purpose. 
Restoring the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to its normal size is a process that is likely to 
be accomplished over a longer period. It is important to note, however, that the size of its 
balance  sheet  will  not  hinder  the  Fed’s  ability  to  control  the  policy  rate  and  liquidity  in  the 
economy.  The  framework  they  have  outlined  will  limit  the  risk  that  large  excess  reserves 
could lead to excessive loan creation and a sharp increase in inflation. 
Does this sound complicated? Yes – because it is complicated. But we have full confidence 
in our colleagues at the Federal Reserve to manage this process well. 
How will the renormalization of monetary policy play out in the financial system – both in the 
United States and globally? Asset prices, risk spreads and volatility are at levels that reflect 
the  abundant  liquidity  provided  through  unconventional  monetary  policies  in  the  United 
States and some other countries, together with expectations that interest rates will be kept at 
very  low  levels  for  a  long  time.  While  the  Federal  Reserve  will  seek  to  guide  the 
renormalization  process  so  that  markets  readjust  smoothly  as  monetary  policy  is  brought 
back to normal, there is an important risk that there will be some bumps along the way. 
What will the exit mean for Canada? 
On the whole, the Federal Reserve’s planned exit from unconventional monetary policies is 
part of a good news story for Canada. It is a sign that a sustained U.S. expansion is  well 
under  way.  A  more  sustained  U.S.  expansion  –  a  stronger  housing  market  and  robust 
business  investment  –  should  help  our  non-energy  exports,  which  remain  below  their  pre-
recession level. As the U.S. economy regains vigour, it should also contribute to improved 
business and consumer confidence in Canada. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, from a policy-maker’s perspective, the renormalization of U.S. monetary policy will 
act to tighten Canadian monetary and financial conditions. The same analysis indicating that 
QE  had  stimulative  effects  on  Canada  should  also  work 
in  reverse:  unwinding 
unconventional policies will tend to push up market interest rates in Canada and dampen the 
U.S.  expansion.  This  effect  would  only  be  partly  offset  by  the  downward  pressure the  exit 
would put on the value  of the Canadian dollar. In the event that the Fed’s renormalization 
does not play out smoothly in financial markets, the impact on Canada could be significant. 
So  how  will  all  of  this  influence  what  the  Bank  of  Canada  would  do?  You  can  probably 
already anticipate my answer: “It depends.” 
The Bank of Canada’s goal is to achieve our 2 per cent target for inflation in a sustainable 
way, which requires that our economy run close to its full potential. We will need to assess 
the  various  countervailing  effects  in  the  context  of  Canadian  economic  and  financial 
conditions  more  generally.  Like  the  Fed,  we  will  balance  the  risks  of  acting  too  soon  and 
stifling burgeoning economic growth against the risks of acting too late and letting inflation 
overshoot and fuelling imbalances in our housing markets. But that balance of risks is likely 
to be different here than in the United States. 
Thus, while monetary policy in the United States has an important impact in Canada, I want 
to  stress  that  Canadian  monetary  policy  is  independent  and  can  diverge  from  the  Fed’s 
policies. In fact, our policy rate is already higher than the Fed’s as a result of the moves we 
made four years ago in response to the improving economic conditions at that time. Looking 
forward, as always, our rate decisions will depend on the state of the Canadian economy. 
Preserving  the  value  of  money  by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable  is  our 
mandate. 
Are we there yet? 
Let me conclude. The financial crisis of 2008–09 reminded us how tightly linked the U.S. and 
Canadian economies are – for better or for worse. 
And  the  economic  recovery  has  shown  us  that  healing  after  a  financial  crisis  is  slow  and 
often painful. 
The steps taken by the U.S. Federal Reserve, the central bank closest to the epicentre of the 
crisis,  prevented  the  crisis  and  subsequent  recession  from  being  much  worse.  And  they 
continue to support the U.S. and global economies through that long healing process. 
The  Fed’s  unconventional  monetary  policies  affected  Canada  through  various  channels, 
notably by pushing down market interest rates worldwide. By the same token, as Fed policy 
returns  to  normal  –  which  is  likely  to  be  a  different  state  than  before  the  crisis  –  that  will 
tighten  financial  conditions  in  Canada.  But  this  will  be  happening  against  the  backdrop  of 
stronger economic growth. 
It’s another step away from the dark days of the Great Recession and an affirmation that the 
hard work of economic reconstruction over the last six years is taking hold. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
