Kikuo Iwata: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and Japan’s 
recent economic and financial developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Centre for the Study of East Asian Development (ICSEAD), Kitakyushu, 24 March 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I express my thanks for having such a large audience gathered from Kitakyushu and other 
regions, and also for giving me an opportunity to speak in front of you. 
About a year ago, I was appointed as Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, on March 20, 
2013. In the 40 years up to that time, I had been teaching in college while studying as an 
economist within academia, and in the latter half of those years I consistently emphasized 
that  the  biggest  challenge  for  Japan’s  economy  was  to  overcome  deflation  at  the  earliest 
possible time, and that the role of monetary policy to that end was critical. 
On April 4, 2013, shortly after the current governor and deputy governors, including myself, 
assumed  their  duties,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  introduce  an  unprecedented  scale  of 
accommodative monetary policy called quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE), 
and so far, it has been pursuing the policy as scheduled. 
Today, I will explain the aim of the QQE in light of recent developments in Japan’s economy. 
To  understand  the  QQE,  it  is  necessary  to  gain  your  understanding  of  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index 
(CPI) that the Bank aims at – or, in other words, the Bank’s inflation targeting policy – and 
the thinking behind the policy. Let me start with this point (Chart 1). 
I. 
Price stability target 
Why is deflation problematic? 
A. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  overcoming  deflation  at  the  earliest  possible  time  was  the  biggest 
challenge for Japan’s economy. 
While deflation is “a persistent decline in prices”, it often seems to have been used to refer to 
“a situation in which the economy is in a vicious cycle of price decline and recession” – that 
is, the same meaning as “deflationary recession”. 
In terms of sentiment toward spending in everyday life, you might often think that a decline in 
prices  is  a  favorable  thing.  As  prices  of  various  goods  and  services  decline,  you  can  get 
more at the same price. What is the problem (Chart 2)? 
Decline in aggregate demand due to deferred spending 
At the outset, we need to acknowledge the difference between prices in general and those of 
individual goods and services. 
As for the former, there are indicators such as the CPI and the domestic corporate goods 
price  index.  Price  stability  that  the  Bank  aims  at  is  defined  by  the  CPI.  The  CPI  shows 
changes in the total amount of expenditure required to purchase the equivalent goods and 
services purchased by households at a given time, which is called the “reference period”. 
The CPI is calculated by giving a value of 100 for the reference period and comparing prices 
of the observation period with those of the reference period. Inflation is defined as a situation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in which the CPI persistently rises; on the contrary, deflation is defined as a situation in which 
the CPI keeps falling. A price rise or fall of individual items such as vegetables and television 
sets does not constitute either inflation or deflation. 
Keeping that in mind, let me now explain  what the consequence of a persistent decline in 
general prices – rather than price declines in individual goods and services – will look like. 
To be sure, a decline in prices itself will have the effect of raising your real income. However, 
a persistent decline in prices means that the more you wait, the more goods and services 
you can get at the same price. In other words, it means that the value of cash and deposits 
increases just by holding them. Thus, firms and households will hoard  money as much as 
possible  and  defer  actions  that  are  associated  with  spending,  such  as  consumption  and 
investment.  Put  in  the  jargon  of  economics,  aggregate  demand  will  decline.  That  is  a 
problem. 
If aggregate demand declines and sales of goods and services decrease, firms will reduce 
production to a level consistent with the decline in sales. As corporate profits will decline and 
employee  income  will  fall  accordingly,  people’s  consumption  and  housing  investment  –  as 
well as firms’ business fixed investment – will further stagnate. Namely, aggregate demand 
will further decline, and that will induce a further decline in price levels. Thus, the economy 
will be trapped in a vicious cycle of price declines and recession (Chart 3). 
Increase in effective debt burden 
In addition, as a decline in prices means that the value of money for goods and services will 
increase, for those who borrow money, the value of money that they will have to repay in the 
future will increase. Thus, that represents an increase in the effective debt burden. 
It might be easier to understand if you consider a case in which you have a mortgage. As the 
amount to be repaid is fixed while wages and real estate prices decline due to deflation, you 
feel the debt service burden gradually increase. 
The  effective  burden  of  debt  you  already  have  will  become  heavier  and,  even  for  future 
borrowings,  somewhat  more  than  nominal  interest  rates  suggest.  Therefore,  firms  and 
households will become cautious about borrowing money. In addition, households and firms 
that  have  already  borrowed  will  try  to  repay  their  debts  as  soon  as  possible,  even  by 
restraining their consumption and investment. 
Thus, housing investment and firms’ business fixed investment will stagnate and aggregate 
demand will become compressed, thereby resulting in a vicious cycle of recession and price 
declines (Chart 3). 
Why is stable and moderate inflation desirable? 
B. 
By contrast, in an environment of stable and moderate inflation, for example, in a case where 
the CPI rises about 2 percent year-on-year, the mechanism that is a reversal of what I have 
just explained under deflation will work (Chart 4). 
Increase in aggregate demand due to rejuvenated spending 
Namely, if you can envisage that prices will rise, many of you might wish to purchase things 
that  you  can  buy  as  much  as  possible  before  the  prices  rise.  A  front-loaded  increase  in 
demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  next  month  has  often  been  referred  to  these 
days, and a similar mentality works in a consistent manner. 
Of  course,  like  perishables,  there  are  a  number  of  goods  that  cannot  be  purchased  in 
advance,  and  most  services  cannot  be  brought  forward.  Here,  I  am  just  talking  about  the 
trends as a whole. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Unlike a consumption tax hike, which is a one-off event that alters prices at a certain point of 
time, the price level will gradually rise. Therefore, the incentive to bring spending forward will 
not work as powerfully as in the case of a front-loaded increase in demand ahead of the tax 
hike, but rather slowly and constantly. 
As  spending  in  terms  of  consumption  and  investment  is  stimulated  due to  the future  price 
outlook,  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  will  increase.  Sales  of  goods  and 
services  will  rise  and  firms  will  expand  their  production  to  a  level  consistent  with  the 
increased sales. As corporate profits improve and employee income increases, consumption 
and  housing  investment,  as  well  as  firms’  activity  –  including  business  fixed  investment  – 
becomes  further  rejuvenated.  In  other  words,  aggregate  demand  will  further  increase  and 
prices  will  rise  accordingly.  A  virtuous  cycle  of  a  buoyant  economy  and  inflation  will  be 
generated (Chart 4). 
Costs of rapid inflation 
As  a  matter  of  course,  what  I  have  in  mind  here  is  stable  and  moderate  inflation,  not 
unexpected rapid inflation or so-called hyperinflation. 
As you are well aware of, hyperinflation is the last thing we want. 
If  a  rise  in  wages  and  pensions  cannot  keep  up  with  rapid  inflation,  your  real  income  will 
decline  and  the  real  value  of  cash  and  deposits  saved  will  also  decline  rapidly.  Through 
reducing the effective debt service burden of past debt, an unexpected income transfer, so to 
speak, from creditors to debtors will occur, in which creditors will lose and debtors will gain. 
By contrast, in case you wish to newly borrow money, the lender will require a high interest 
rate in preparation for future high inflation, making your fund-raising difficult. 
If  rapid  inflation  goes  on,  there  is  the  need  to  frequently  revise  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services. As it becomes ever more difficult to envisage future manufacturing costs and selling 
prices, firms will not be able to even prepare their production plans. The economy will tumble 
into turmoil. 
Therefore, what the Bank is aiming at is that stable and moderate inflation continues, and not 
by any means generating hyperinflation (Chart 4). 
Advantages of inflation targeting policy 
C. 
In order to achieve stable and moderate inflation, what kind of policy will be desirable? 
One  answer  is  a  policy  framework  called  inflation  targeting.  The  Bank  has  been  pursuing 
monetary easing under the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of  change  in  the  CPI.  That  can  be  understood  as  a  typical  example  of  inflation  targeting 
policy (Chart 5). 
Enhancing policy credibility and predictability 
Inflation targeting policy has a number of advantages. 
To begin with, as the policy contains a specific numerical target for the future inflation rate, it 
can be judged objectively whether the target has been met. Through enhanced transparency, 
a central bank’s obligation to be accountable with regard to policy judgment and the status of 
achieving  the  target  will  become  crucial.  That  will  create  a  situation  in  which  credibility  in 
monetary policy is likely to be enhanced. 
As  it  becomes  easier  to  forecast  price  levels,  various  economic  entities  can  conduct 
economic  activity  on  the  basis  of  such  forecasts.  The  predictability  of  future  prices  will  be 
further reinforced as credibility in monetary policy becomes enhanced (Chart 5). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Preventing hyperinflation 
About the Bank’s policy, some demonstrate concern that when the time comes for the Bank 
to stop monetary easing, it might be difficult to do so due to pressure from financial markets 
or  the  government,  and  that  eventually  leads  to  inducing  hyperinflation.  The  adoption  of 
inflation targeting also is effective against such concern. 
The reason for that is that the inflation targeting policy is a device to hold a specific numerical 
target  for  the  future  inflation  rate  and  make  a  commitment  to  achieving  a  situation  that 
generates neither inflation above the target rate nor deflation. 
Though  the  inflation  targeting  policy  has  often  been  discussed  in  Japan  as  a  measure  to 
overcome deflation, it was originally adopted in countries like New Zealand in the 1980s that 
suffered high inflation. 
I would like you to understand that, in case the economy should overheat and the inflation 
rate should rise well above the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank has already made a 
commitment to taking appropriate measures in line with the framework of inflation targeting 
policy. 
I should stress that, in line with the mission stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank will 
conduct  monetary  policy  based  on  its  judgment  and  responsibility  while  facilitating 
communication with the government (Chart 5). 
Aim of the QQE and the current situation of Japan’s economy 
II. 
So far, I have explained the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI; namely, the so-called inflation targeting policy and the thinking behind 
that. 
Now, I will talk about the contents and effects of the QQE, which was introduced as a policy 
to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, by also taking into account the current state of 
Japan’s economy. 
What is the QQE? 
A. 
The QQE consists of two pillars (Chart 6). 
The first pillar is the commitment under which the Bank will achieve the price stability target 
of  2  percent  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Bank  has  made  a  clear  commitment  that  it  “will 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon 
of about two years”. 
The second pillar is to engage in actions that embody the commitment specified in the first 
pillar.  As  exemplified  by  the  phrase  “quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing”,  those 
actions are to increase the “quantity” of the Bank’s balance sheet and change the “quality” of 
its asset purchases. 
An increase in quantity requires massively increasing the amount of money the Bank directly 
supplies to the financial system – this is called “the monetary base” – at an annual pace of 
about 60–70 trillion yen. 
Measures  to  increase  the  monetary  base  are  mainly  through  the  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs),  and  the  Bank  will  purchase  JGBs  so  that  their  outstanding 
amount will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. 
A change in quality requires purchasing assets with a higher risk profile. Among the JGBs, 
the Bank has started purchasing those with longer remaining maturities. In addition, it has 
increased the amounts of purchases in exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to reduce risk premiums on assets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
When we decided to introduce the QQE last April, we used the expression “a new phase of 
monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality”.  The  Bank  has  been  pursuing 
monetary easing in exactly that manner, at an unprecedented scale. 
Working on expected real interest rates 
B. 
While  the  QQE  consists  of  those  two  pillars,  as  far  as  its  transmission  channels  are 
concerned, the most important factor of all in terms of having an effect on the economy is 
lowering  expected  real  interest  rates.  The  following  explanations  will  become  somewhat 
complicated, but please bear with me (Chart 7). 
Expected real interest rates are obtained by subtracting the expected rates of inflation from 
the nominal interest rates actually observed in financial markets or over the counter. 
While  nominal  rates  –  that  is,  objective  interest  rates  –  are  visible,  expected  real  interest 
rates are those that people forecast subjectively, based on their respective price projections, 
and thus various rates exist on a person-by-person basis. 
Viewed from the borrowers’ side, real interest rates are equivalent to borrowers’ subjective 
expectations regarding their real costs of borrowing, taking into account price changes, when 
they borrow money at a certain nominal interest rate. Consequently, the lower the expected 
real interest rates of an economic entity, the more subdued the entity expects its real cost of 
borrowing to be. 
The  QQE  has  the  effect  of  reducing  nominal  interest  rates  and  the  effect  of  lifting  each 
economic entity’s inflation expectations, and both will exert downward pressure on expected 
real interest rates, which are derived from subtracting the expected rates of inflation from the 
nominal rates (Chart 8). 
Spillover effects on the real economy 
C. 
If many economic entities lower their expected real interest rates, that will stimulate demand 
in the real economy in a number of ways. 
For  example,  when  real  interest  rates  decline,  investment  in  cash,  deposits,  and  fixed-
income securities (excluding inflation-indexed bonds) becomes less attractive; thus, people 
will shift their portfolios from those financial assets to equities and tangible assets such as 
land and housing, or to foreign currency-denominated assets with higher returns. The rise in 
equity  prices  and  the  appreciation  of  foreign  currencies  will  stimulate  private  consumption 
through the wealth effect (Charts 9 and 10). 
In addition to the decline in expected real interest rates, other factors – including an increase in 
consumption and an improvement in export conditions due to the depreciation of the yen – will 
encourage firms to be more aggressive in their business fixed investment (Charts 11 and 12). 
According to the Business Outlook Survey, conducted jointly by the Cabinet Office and the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  the  index  of  business  conditions  for  large  enterprises  will  decline  to 
minus 9.8 in the April–June quarter but is expected to rise to plus 8.3 in the July–September 
quarter. That of small and medium-sized enterprises follows more or less the same pattern 
with that of large enterprises (Chart 13). 
While  that  may  be  partly  due  to  statistical  peculiarities,  it  suggests  that  firms  anticipate  a 
subsequent decline in spending after the consumption tax hike in April 2014 as a result of the 
front-loaded increase in spending to be relatively short-lived. 
If  a  shortage  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  is  eliminated  through  an 
increase in demand such as private consumption and investment, price levels will naturally 
rise. In fact, the recent developments in the CPI show that Japan’s economy is following a 
path toward overcoming deflation as expected (Chart 14). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Production  increases  as  demand  expands,  and  thus  employment  conditions  will  also 
improve. That does not suddenly result in a rise in wages and bonuses, but tends to first lead 
to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  employees,  mainly  non-regular  employees.  Nevertheless, 
due to an expansion in corporate profits and tightness in the labor market, the income each 
employee receives will gradually increase (Chart 15). 
If  employee  income  as  a  whole  increases  in  such  a  manner,  that  will  further  elevate  the 
consumption of households, including those that have not benefited from the wealth effect 
through  a  rise  in  stock  prices  or  the  appreciation  of  foreign  currencies.  An  increase  in 
corporate  profits  will  increase  business  fixed  investment.  Those  increases  in  demand  will 
again lead to an increase in income. 
An improvement in fiscal conditions due to an increase in tax revenue and an improvement in 
pension financing caused by a rise in asset prices will also alleviate people’s concern about 
the future as a whole, and thereby exert positive effects on the economy. 
In  such  a  manner,  by  overcoming  deflation  starting  with  the  QQE,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  the 
economy is expected to continue (Chart 16). 
Outlook up to fiscal 2015 
D. 
As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue with a moderate recovery as a 
trend,  supported  by  an  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  while  it  is 
expected to be affected by the front-loaded increase and the subsequent decline in demand 
prior to and after the consumption tax hike. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the 
consumption  tax  hike,  is  likely  to  be  around  1¼  percent  for  some  time.  After  that,  it  is 
expected to gradually return to the rising trend and is likely to reach around the 2 percent 
price stability target toward the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015 (Chart 17). 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude my remarks by touching on the economy of Kitakyushu (Chart 18). 
Kitakyushu’s economy was long stagnant after the Lehman shock, but it has gradually been 
improving  in  the  region’s  main  force  –  the  manufacturing  sector  –  partly  on  the  back  of  a 
correction  in  the  yen’s  appreciation.  Recently,  an  improvement  has  started  to  spread from 
large  to  medium-  and  small-sized  firms,  and  the  regional  economy  has  been  recovering 
moderately on the whole. 
Historically, Kitakyushu prospered since the Meiji Period, centering on the Chikuho coalfield 
and  Moji  Port,  and  by  utilizing  this  location  advantage,  a government-managed  steelworks 
started operation in Yahata in 1901. For reference, while the Kitakyushu branch of the Bank 
of Japan marked its 120th anniversary last year, the precursor of that branch – namely, the 
Saibu branch – was established around that time, in 1893. 
Kitakyushu  has  represented  Japan’s  modernization,  and  despite  a  number  of  difficulties,  it 
has thrived and subsequently has been improving and evolving. As a result of many years of 
tremendous efforts, Kitakyushu has established itself as one of the prominent industrial areas 
in  Japan  –  with  electrical  machinery  and  the  automobile  industry,  in  addition  to  the  steel 
industry – as well as a base for international trade with Asian and other countries. 
Other  than  on  the  industrial  front,  Kitakyushu  City  has  become  one  of  the  world’s 
environmental  cities,  and  recently  was  selected  as  a  “model  city  for  green  growth”  by  the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and as a “future city” by 
the  Japanese  government.  In  addition,  the  government  has  decided  to  recommend  “local 
industrial heritage sites of the Meiji period”, which include Yahata steelworks-related facilities 
in  Kitakyushu,  to  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific,  and  Cultural  Organization 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(UNESCO) as candidates for World Heritage sites this fiscal year. This region has started to 
grab the spotlight in industrial tourism. 
As global competition intensifies in the years ahead, the path Kitakyushu follows might not be 
a  smooth  one.  However,  this  region  has  a  strong  industrial  base,  including  manufacturing 
technology and human resources, which has been established over many years. This region 
also  has  well-developed  traffic  and  distribution  systems,  with  a  24-hour  airport  and  the 
starting  point  of  the  East  Kyushu  Highway  that  extends  to  Miyazaki  City  scheduled  to  be 
opened in fiscal 2014. While fully utilizing those strengths, I strongly believe that Kitakyushu’s 
economy will further grow and develop into the future. 
Thank you.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 