  Jon Cunliffe: Momentum in the housing market – affordability, 
indebtedness and risks 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the Worshipful Company of International Bankers dinner, London, 1 May 2014. 
 In 2007, the average house in the West Midlands cost around £170,0001 Transactions in that 
region were running at 10,000 a month. 
By 2009, the average price had fallen by around 15% to around £145,000 and transactions 
to around 5,000 a month. And, while prices and transactions bounced back in 2010, prices 
were subsequently pretty flat in the West Midlands until spring last year. 
Over the 12-months to March, prices grew by a little under 10% in the West Midlands. The 
average house in the region now costs around £160,000 – 7% off the peak. Transactions in 
the region look to have averaged around 7,000 a month in 2013. 
I mention the West Midlands because the level and growth rate of house prices in that region 
broadly matches the median for the country as a whole. The point is the rapid growth in the 
UK housing market is not just a London story. 
For the country as a whole, prices at the end of March were also up around 10% on their 
level a year ago, back to where they were in late 2006. For 10 out of the 12 regions of the UK 
prices grew by more than 5% in the year to 2014Q1. That puts the house-price-to-earnings 
ratio back to its level in 2003. Transactions are running at 2005 levels – a little over 110,000 
a month. 
Looking at the most recent data, there has been a slowing in the monthly pace of increase. In 
the  three  months  to  February  this  year,  prices  grew  at  an  annualized  rate  of  11%  and 
transactions  increased  at  an  annualized  rate  of  over  50%.  But  the  very  latest  figures  for 
March, however, could suggest a pause in the growth in prices and activity – prices were flat 
on the month and transactions actually fell by 5%. 
And the latest mortgage approvals numbers, which came out this morning and tend to lead 
transactions, fell again in March leaving the number of approvals for house purchase down 
12%  on  their  January  peak.  Discussions  with  the  lenders  suggest  that  the  checks  that 
lenders now need to do under the FCA’s new Mortgage Market Review rules, about which I 
will speak later, may be slowing the speed with which approvals can be processed. 
But  just  as  one  cuckoo  does  not  signal  spring,  it  is  far  too  early  to  say,  on  a  couple  of 
month’s figures, whether this is the beginning of a turning point in the market. 
Indeed it would be dangerous to ignore the momentum that has built up in the UK housing 
market since the spring of last year. Despite the recent pause, the forward looking indicators 
we have suggest that the period of rising prices is set to continue, with a number of survey 
indicators of housing market activity consistent with a double digit annualized rate of house 
price growth in the near term. 
Sustained momentum in house prices and transactions have in previous episodes in the UK 
led in turn to rapid growth in aggregate mortgage debt and overall household indebtedness. 
That  increase  in  indebtedness  proved  to  be  a  vulnerability  for  borrowers  and  lenders 
subsequently contributed towards economic and financial instability. During the house price 
correction  in  1989–92  and  2007–9,  a  number  of  lenders  were  dangerously  exposed  to  a 
                                                
1   Measured on the average of the lenders’ indices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  tightening in conditions in wholesale money markets and nursed large losses on their riskier 
property lending. 
We have yet to see a return to rapid growth in aggregate debt. Gross flows of new mortgage 
lending have grown pretty sharply, by over 40% over the past year. But a large part of that 
has been offset by higher gross repayments. The stock of mortgage debt has been growing 
at  a  rate  of  around  1.5%  a  year,  some  way  below  the  growth  rate  of  house  prices.  Past 
experience,  however,  suggests  that  growth  in  net  mortgage  lending  tends  lags  growth  in 
house prices and transactions. 
For the Bank of England and the Financial Policy Committee, we have to decide whether to 
address  the  momentum  in  the  housing  market  and  to  rates  of  growth  in  prices  and 
transactions which, in the past, have tended to lead to rapid growth in mortgage debt. 
What  has  been  driving  this  momentum  in  the  housing  market  and  is  it  a  risk  to  financial 
stability? And if it is, is it a faint yellow light blinking on the Financial Stability dashboard that 
requires  watching  but  may  well  go  away  by  itself?  Or  a  brighter  one  that  needs  some 
proportionate action? 
The sudden awakening of the housing market after the spring last year was probably due to 
economic  confidence  beginning  to  return  to  the  UK  and  to  mortgage  credit  beginning  to 
become more available. These factors, in turn, have likely released pent-up demand. Over 
the period 1997–2007, homeowners were moving on average every 10 years and housing 
transactions were running at around 1.5 million a year. In the years following the crisis, that 
slowed by over 50%. Homeowners moved on average every 17 years and transactions fell to 
around 900,000 per year. Compared to pre-crisis rates of housing transactions, over 3 million 
housing transactions have been “lost” between 2008 and 12. Many of those, of course, have 
almost certainly been truly “lost”. But housing transactions for most are strongly linked to life 
cycle  changes  and  many  have  probably  only  been  delayed  until  economic  and  credit 
conditions and confidence about the future improved. 
In  London,  an  additional  source  of  demand  has  come  from  foreign  investors  looking  for 
alternative  sources  of  return  amid  a  global  environment  of  low  interest  rates.  The 
government’s  help  to  buy  scheme  may  have  also  played  a  role  though  it  is  early  days. 
Transactions are still quite low. 
How  much  pent  up  demand  exists  and  how  quickly  it  will  come  through,  is  of  course 
unknowable. But it is not at all implausible that it could add significantly to pressure on the 
market  for  the  next  few  years.  Use  of  the  government’s  help-to-buy  scheme  continues  to 
expand.  All  of  this  paints  a  picture  of  further  pressure  on  transactions  that  could  take  us 
quickly to pre-crisis rates. Despite the dip in March, housing transactions are still up 30% on 
their level a year earlier. Were transactions to grow at that pace from here on, we would go 
past the 97–2007 average level of around 120,000 per month before the end of this year; 
and be back at 2007 levels by the first half of next year. 
Nor can we look to increased supply to help to quickly relieve some of this pressure. Housing 
starts,  insufficient  to  meet  demand  before  the  crisis,  dropped  from  around  230,000  to  an 
average  of  a  little  over 120,000  between  2008–12. They  have  begun to  recover  –  indeed, 
dwellings investment has been a major part of the recovery in economic growth over the past 
12  months.  But  the  increase  in  housing  starts  seen  over  the  past  few  years  has  lagged 
behind growth in transactions. 
The history of our housing market for the last 25 years is one in which the supply of housing 
in the place and of the type that people want has not kept up with demand. In 2004, Kate 
Barker – a former MPC member – concluded in her extensive report on the housing market 
that, if we wanted to reduce the trend in annual real house price growth to 1%, we needed to 
build an additional 120,000 private sector homes annually in England, an increase of almost 
100%  relative  to  the  2002–3  level.  In  the  end,  and  despite  a  credit  boom,  the  increase  in 
annual housing completions up to the crisis was only 25%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There are many reasons for the failure of the supply of housing to keep up with demand in 
the UK which go well beyond the remit of a central bank. But the effect is that when demand 
grows strongly house prices can keep rising quickly for a long time. This is a movie that has 
been seen more than once in the UK. 
So it is not surprising, given the history of our housing market that the recent sharp increase 
in  house  prices  and  transactions  appear  to  have  fuelled  growing  expectations  of  an  ever 
accelerating market. Contrary to the received wisdom in the rest of the world, the strength of 
housing market rather than the weather may be the dominant topic of conversation in the UK. 
With  the  possible  exception  of  Australia,  I  don’t  know  if  any  other  country  has  a  word  for 
“gazumping”. In April, over 500 newspaper headlines referenced house prices, around two 
thirds more than the total seen in that month last year. 
Central banks are very well aware of the impact that expectations about prices can have in 
the generation of inflationary pressures across the economy – the way in which expectations 
of future prices increases or decreases change people’s behaviour and actions. 
And while inflation expectations in the UK are generally well anchored around the MPC’s 2% 
inflation target, it is a very different story when it comes to expectations for house prices. 
Though expectations for sharply rising housing prices are not an issue of inflation pressure 
generally,  they  can  matter  a  lot  for  the  actions  of  people  and  the  choices  they  make. 
Expectations of a fast rising market put pressure on potential buyers to get into the market as 
quickly as possible for fear of being priced out. And on sellers to delay and ask for higher 
prices. And expectations of future increases in the value of homes can make people more 
willing to take on debt to get on the ladder or to reach for that next rung. 
It is difficult to know how much expectations are driving the current market. But there is good 
reason to believe that a mutually reinforcing combination of strong demand, weak supply and 
expectations  of  a  rising  market  could  lead  to  a  period  of  sustained  and  very  powerful 
pressure on house prices in the UK. 
The extent to which that will jeopardise financial stability depends on whether that pressure 
actually  results  in  more  transactions  at  higher  prices,  whether  that  in  turn  leads  to  an 
increase in household indebtedness and where that debt is concentrated. 
These are, of course, all linked. The laws of supply and demand must, in the end, apply also 
to housing even in the UK. House prices cannot grow faster than earnings indefinitely. While 
households  may  be  prepared  to  spend  an  increasing  amount  of  their  income  on  housing, 
there is a level at which house prices are simply not affordable. 
Ultimately – given purchases are in the main financed by long term mortgage lending – it is 
the price and availability of mortgage credit, including maximum loan-to-value and loan-to-
income ratios, offered by lenders that determines the point at which affordability constraints 
bite on house purchasers and so how far they can stretch to match rising prices. 
At present, affordability constraints do not seem to be having a braking effect on the rise in 
prices.  But  prices  are  still  below  their  2007  levels  in  most  regions  and  the  house-price-to-
earnings  ratios  a  multiple  below  its  pre-crisis  peak.  If  prices  continue  to  grow  faster  than 
earnings,  affordability  will  increasingly  be  an  issue  for  purchasers  and  for  lenders.  The 
proportion  of  loans  at  high  loan-to-income  multiples  has  already  gone  through  pre-crisis 
levels in London. 
When that has happened in previous episodes of a sharply rising housing market in the UK, 
lenders relaxed lending standards as house prices – and so the value of the asset they were 
lending against – rose. Expectations of future price increases also probably played a role in 
this. The  FSA’s  2009  Mortgage  Market  Review  sought to  reinforce  lenders’  standards  and 
the reforms recommended by the Review were brought into force this month. They should 
help  to  ensure  that  affordability  constraints  do  act  against  pressures  on  house  prices.  But 
they have not yet been tested. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  A  key  determinant  of  whether  a  loan  is  affordable  is  the  level  of  interest  rates  over  time, 
which  determine  the  cost  of  servicing  those  debts.  The  substantial  falls  in  mortgage  rates 
over the past twenty years – with the move to a lower inflation environment in the late 1990s 
and  later,  through  the  late  2000s,  as  Bank  Rate  was  cut  to  combat  weak  demand  –  have 
been associated with a large increase in both house prices relative to earnings and levels of 
mortgage debt relative to household income. 
The current exceptionally low level of interest rates will need to increase once the recovery is 
well established. So it is particularly important at present to ensure that the current low levels 
of interest rates do not mask the likely cost of mortgages and so create more headroom for 
prices to rise. 
It is possible that affordability constraints, reinforced by lenders’ underwriting standards, will 
increasingly act as a brake on the speed at which house prices are growing and as a brake 
on mortgage debt. In that case, having recovered much of their fall following the crisis, we 
will see house price growth slow to match the pace of earnings growth – a soft landing. 
This is not without precedent. In 2004, having risen at an average rate of almost 20% over 
the previous 2 years, house price growth began to slow with the annual growth rate falling to 
just  2%  by  the  middle  of  2005.  The  125bps  increase  in  Bank  Rate  in  the  13  months  to 
September  2004  was  no  doubt  part  of  the  story.  It  proved,  however,  to  be  short  lived 
episode. Amid a period of easing credit conditions, the pace of house price growth began to 
rise again through 2006, reaching double-digit rates by 2007. But it is probably an example of 
how affordability can brake the market. 
However, there is another way the story can play out – a major overshoot in prices and build 
up in debt followed by a sharp correction with negative equity and an overhang of debt for 
many households. The trigger for the correction can vary – in the early 89–92 episode it was 
a sharp rise in interest rates as the UK sought to remain in the Exchange Rate Mechanism; 
in 2007–9 it was a sharp tightening in credit conditions amid a collapse in confidence in an 
over-levered  banking  system  –  but,  unfortunately,  there  are  more  precedents  in  UK  for 
periods of a rapidly growing housing market to end in this way. 
The  question  for  the  Financial  Policy  Committee,  therefore,  is  whether  the  sustained 
momentum we are seeing in the housing market will continue and will lead to unsustainable 
growth in household indebtedness, undermining the resilience of the system. 
Our first thought must be to the direct exposure of the financial system to the housing market 
and its resilience to a major housing shock. Mortgage lending amounts to two-thirds of UK 
bank and building societies’ UK lending. 
Financial  institutions  are  better  placed  now  than  they  were  before  the  financial  crisis.  The 
reinforcement  of  underwriting  standards  that  I  mentioned  earlier,  protects  both  borrowers 
from taking on unaffordable mortgages and lenders from bad debts. Since 2008, the amount 
of  capital  in  the  system  has  increased  by  £150bn,  with  capital  requirements  against  UK 
residential mortgages broadly trebling. We now have, for the first time, a new international 
liquidity standard, which should help to prevent long-term mortgage debt being funded from 
unstable  short-term  wholesale  sources;  since  2008,  banks’  liquid  assets  have  broadly 
trebled. And, in aggregate, their lending has, for the moment, come back into line with the 
major banks’ deposit bases, implying a substantially reduced wholesale funding requirement. 
But we need to be sure that lenders have the resilience to withstand a major housing shock, 
particularly  if,  as  has  often  proved  to  be  the  case  in  the  UK,  it  is  accompanied  by  a 
substantial fall in spending as many households pull in their horns. 
On Tuesday, the Bank announced the details of the stress test of the major banks that will be 
carried this year in the UK, as part of the EU wide exercise. Its central feature will be a test of 
banks’ resilience to a severe drop in house prices in the context of pressure on borrowers’ 
ability to service their debts. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To be clear, this is a severe stress test, not what we expect to happen. We will test resilience 
against a so called “tail risk” series of events; a series of events that are very unlikely but 
could plausibly happen with housing at their center. The aim will be to assess whether the 
major banks could withstand and recover from such a stress without terminal damage to the 
critical functions they perform for the UK economy. 
The  self-reinforcing  link  between  property  prices,  the  financial  system  and  the  broader 
economy  that  operate  within  the  stress  test  have  been  key  to  dynamics  in  previous  UK 
downturns.  As  well  as  lowering  homeowners’  wealth,  falls  in  house  prices  reduce  their 
collateral and so their access to credit. This tends to drag on consumption. Preliminary Bank 
analysis  suggests  the  most  highly  mortgaged  households  have  tended  to  cut  their 
consumption very materially in times of economic stress.2 And investment in the construction 
of  homes  and  other  property  has  had  a  tendency  to  fall  sharply  in  downturns,  with  this 
component  of  spending  accounting for  around  half  of  the  peak  to  trough  variation  in  GDP 
growth across the 2008–9 recession. This combination of lower property prices and a fall in 
spending across the economy, can, through a rise in defaults, damage banks and contribute 
to a tightening in credit conditions, creating a further drag on economic activity. 
The distribution of indebtedness is also likely to matter. Given their sensitivity to a change in 
economic conditions, a long tail of highly indebted households could represent a vulnerability 
for both the banks and the economy. The data suggest that the size of this tail is increasing. 
Gross lending has increased and the share of new mortgages for house purchase at a loan-
to-income ratio above 4.5, at 8%, is back around its pre-crisis level. These households tend 
to have borrowed for long maturities and to carry higher levels of unsecured debts. 
These  factors  could,  therefore,  explain  why,  across  countries,  recessions  associated  with 
housing  busts  have  tended  to  be  over  twice  as  severe  as  those  without.  And  why,  for 
countries  where  there  have  been  larger  and  faster  increases  in  household  debt  levels, 
recessions have tended to be deeper still. 
The Financial Policy Committee has already acted in response to the growing momentum in 
the  housing  market.  As  well  as  the  general  strengthening  of  bank  capital,  the  FPC,  in 
conjunction  with  other  regulators  and  the  Treasury,  withdrew  both  the  cheap  funding  and 
favourable capital treatment of mortgage lending introduced after the crisis to help support 
the  housing  market.  And,  we  have  asked  the  FCA  that  when  lenders  test  whether 
prospective borrowers can afford, through time, the mortgages they seek they should bear in 
mind  future  Financial  Policy  Committee  recommendation  on  the  appropriate  interest  rate 
stress test to use in assessments of affordability. 
Whether  and  how  to  act  further  if,  following  the  pause  of  the  last  couple  of  months, 
momentum  continues  to  build  will  be  the  most  challenging  judgment  the  FPC  will  have  to 
take  in  the  coming  months. The  FPC’s  response  will  depend  on  the  nature  of the  risks to 
stability identified. The FPC’s powers of direction in relation to the capital banks and building 
societies bear most directly on mortgage lenders’ ability to weather a downturn and housing 
bust  once  it  has  emerged.  Others,  like  the  FPC’s  powers  to  make  comply  or  explain 
recommendations to the PRA and FCA could bear more directly on the crucial underwriting 
standards and affordability constraints like debt service to income, loan to income and loan to 
value. 
The  FPC  has  said  that  it  would  take  a  proportionate  and  graduated  response  to  evolving 
housing market risks. Experience suggests that momentum in the market, and an associated 
increase in indebtedness, can be hard to check, particularly if expectations of a rapidly rising 
market  become  deeply  entrenched.  A  number  of  countries  have  had  to  take  a  series  of 
actions over time to slow fast growth in housing market activity to more sustainable rates. 
                                                
2   See the Box on page 22 of the May 2013 inflation report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  To  return  to  where  I  started.  The  Financial  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England  is 
charged  with  looking  ahead  to  identify  and  to  counter  risks  to  financial  stability.  There  will 
always be a number of blinking warning lights – risks generated at home and risks coming 
from abroad – on our dashboard. 
The  growing  momentum  in  the  market  is  now  in  my  view  the  brightest  light  on  that 
dashboard.  It  has  not  yet  been  accompanied  by  a  substantial  increase  in  aggregate 
mortgage debt, though gross mortgage lending is growing and there are signs that debts are 
becoming  more  concentrated.  This  could  fade  as  affordability  and  lender  constraints  act 
increasingly  as  a  brake  on  momentum.  But  other  outcomes  are  very  possible  and  the 
Financial Policy Committee will need be both vigilant and ready to act. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
