  Haruhiko Kuroda: The practice and theory of unconventional monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 17th World Congress, 
hosted by the International Economic Association (IEA), Sweimeh, Jordan, 7 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have the opportunity to deliver a speech at the 17th World Congress 
of the International Economic Association. The topic of this session, “Monetary Policy in A 
Post-Crisis World,”  is  currently  one  of  the  most  critical  topics  for central  banks  around  the 
world. Following the global financial crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the 
Federal Reserve (Fed) and the Bank of England (BOE) introduced unconventional monetary 
policy measures such as quantitative easing and forward guidance, which in turn has given 
rise to a growing body of theoretical research on these measures. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  was  the  first  central  bank  ever  to  adopt  what  is  often  referred  to  as 
unconventional  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  the  Bank  started  pursuing  various  unprecedented 
monetary policies such as a zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing policy ahead of 
other central banks at the end of the 1990s, that is, prior to the global financial crisis. And 
although  this  is  not  widely  known,  it  was  the  Bank  that  first  introduced  forward  guidance. 
Therefore,  in  today’s  speech,  with  the  title  “The  Practice  and  Theory  of  Unconventional 
Monetary  Policy,”  I  would  like  to  offer  my  take  on  the  unconventional  monetary  policies 
pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Japan,  including  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing, 
dubbed  QQE,  introduced  in  spring  last  year,  as  well  as  the  relationship  between  actual 
policies  and  theory.  In  concluding,  I  will  touch  on  remaining  challenges  in  the  realm  of 
monetary theory concerning unconventional policy. 
Ongoing moderate deflation and the limits of conventional monetary policy 
I.  
In talking about the circumstances of why the Bank adopted unconventional monetary policy 
ahead  of  other  central  banks,  I  have  to  start  with  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and 
monetary policy in the 1990s. At the start of the 1990s, Japan experienced the collapse of its 
bubble economy and, associated with this, the deleveraging of financial institutions against 
the  backdrop  of  a  series  of  corporate  failures  and  the  impairment  of  financial  institutions’ 
balance  sheets.  During  this  adjustment  process,  a  vicious  cycle  took  hold,  with  worsening 
economic  conditions, 
increasing  nonperforming  assets,  declining  prices,  and  yen 
appreciation mutually reinforcing each other. As a result, both economic growth and inflation 
declined.  In  1997,  a  large-scale  financial  crisis  involving  the  failure  of  a  number  of  major 
Japanese  financial  institutions  erupted,  and,  in  the  summer  of  1998,  the  inflation  rate  fell 
below  0  percent.  In  this  situation,  the  Bank  consistently  lowered  its  policy  rate,  which  had 
stood  at  6  percent  in  August  1990,  to  close  to  zero  at  0.25  percent  in  September  1998. 
Hence,  deflation  and  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  no  longer  were  a 
theoretical possibility but became a reality. 
Early theory of unconventional monetary policy 
Taking  the  situation  in  Japan  as  a  cue,  Professor  Paul  Krugman  in  1998  constructed  a 
theoretical model of unconventional monetary policy offering a prescription of how to escape 
a liquidity trap.1 Specifically, he pointed out that Japan’s economy at the time was suffering 
                                                 
1   Paul  R.  Krugman,  “It’s  Baaack:  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, 1998, No.2: 137–205. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  from  a  shortage  of  demand  even  at  zero  interest  rates.  He  argued  that  the  only  way  to 
overcome  deflation  was  through  monetary  policy  by  substantially  increasing  the  money 
supply  and  raising  inflation  expectations,  thereby  making  real  interest  rates  sufficiently 
negative. 
It  appears 
the 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  eventually  adopted.  However,  given  that  in 
practice  it  is  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to  directly  control  the  money  supply  and  that, 
moreover, the Bank was not sufficiently sure about the mechanisms through which monetary 
policy  could  influence  expectations formation,  the  Bank  did  not  put  the  theory  straight  into 
practice. 
that  Professor  Krugman’s  model  already 
incorporated  elements  of 
II.  
Previous unconventional monetary policies – the Zero Interest Rate Policy 
(ZIRP), Quantitative Easing (QE), and Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME) 
Introduction of the ZIRP 
Given a situation in which economic activity and inflation did not improve even though the 
policy rate had been lowered to 0.25 percent, the Bank discussed a series of unconventional 
monetary policy measures and put them into practice in stages. 
As a first step, in February 1999, the Bank introduced the zero interest rate policy (ZIRP), 
which  guided  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  around  0  percent  by  providing  the 
market  with  more  funds  than  necessary  for  financial  institutions  to  meet  their  reserve 
requirements.  Moreover,  in  April  1999,  given  that  there  was  no  room  for  further  rate 
reductions,  the  Bank  introduced  qualitative  forward  guidance  in  order  to  flatten  the  yield 
curve by indicating the future expected path of the policy rate, stating that it would continue 
with the ZIRP until deflationary concern is dispelled. 
Then, in August 2000, judging that Japan’s economy was showing clear signs of recovery 
and  that  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  stemming  from  weak  demand  had  markedly 
receded,  the  Bank  deemed  that  the  economy  had  reached  the  stage  where  deflationary 
concern had been dispelled and hence lifted the ZIRP. However, toward the end of that year, 
Japan’s economy experienced a slowdown, mainly because of the effects of the burst of the 
dot-com bubble in the United States. 
Introduction of QE 
In  response  to  this  economic  situation,  the  Bank  in  March  2001  introduced  quantitative 
easing (QE), in which the operating target was the outstanding balance of current accounts 
at  the  Bank.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  introduced  the  forward  guidance  that  it  would 
continue  the  policy  until  the  annual  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI, 
excluding fresh food) registered zero percent or above in a stable manner. 
The  Bank’s  QE  consisted  of  two  features.  The  first  feature  is  that  it  set  the  outstanding 
balance of current accounts, that is, reserves, which represent liabilities on the central bank’s 
balance sheet, as the policy target. The provision of reserves was achieved mainly through 
the  expansion  of  short-term  funds-supplying  operations  instead  of  massive  purchases  of 
long-term government bonds as currently undertaken by some central banks in the advanced 
economies. In that sense, the policy could be labeled pure reserve targeting. The increase in 
reserves appears to have had the effect of dispelling anxiety about the financial system. With 
the  nonperforming  loan  problem  worsening,  the  deterioration  of  the  financial  system  from 
2001 through 2002, when measured in terms of the number of failed financial institutions and 
the amount  of disposed nonperforming assets, was comparable to that from 1997  through 
1998, when Japan experienced the most acute phase of its financial crisis. In this situation, 
the provision of liquidity under QE by the Bank appears to have alleviated anxiety about the 
financial system and played an important part in avoiding a significant economic slowdown. 
Moreover, it appears that the lesson learned then – that the provision of ample liquidity by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the central bank at a time of financial crisis can help to restore stability – has played a role in 
central banks’ response to the recent global financial crisis. 
The second feature of QE is that forward guidance was linked to the actual year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI. Given that the lifting of the ZIRP in the previous year had given rise to 
the  impression  that  the  Bank  had  a  deflationary  bias,  the  Bank,  in  order  to  counter  this 
impression, ventured to issue forward guidance with little room for discretion. As a result, the 
QE policy flattened the yield curve more than the ZIRP had done, and in this regard exerted 
substantial effects. 
In  pursuing  QE,  the  Bank  gradually  increased  its  target  for  current  account  balances  from 
initially about 5 trillion yen (about 1 percent of nominal GDP) to about 30 to 35 trillion yen 
(about  6  to  7  percent  of  nominal  GDP)  in  January  2004  while  consistently  taking  the 
economic situation into account. The economy subsequently recovered and the year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  turned  positive,  meeting  the  condition  set  out  in  the  forward 
guidance – that QE would be pursued until the annual rate of change in the CPI (excluding 
fresh food) registered zero percent or above in a stable manner. In this situation, the Bank 
ended QE in March 2006 and raised the policy rate to 0.25 percent in July the same year. 
Japan’s  economy  continued  to  recover  for  some  time  after  the  termination  of  QE,  but 
experienced a severe negative shock stemming from the global financial crisis in 2008 and 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI fell into negative territory again. 
Central banks’ responses to the global financial crisis and the Bank’s CME 
During  and  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  promptly  and  flexibly  addressed 
liquidity  shortages  in  financial  markets  by  providing  massive  liquidity  through  various 
measures. In addition, given that the malfunctioning of financial systems exerted significant 
adverse  effects  on  economic  activity,  a  number  of  central  banks  adopted  unconventional 
monetary policy measures as seen in the launch of massive purchases of government bonds 
by the Fed and the BOE. 
Against  this  background,  the  Bank  started  Comprehensive  Monetary  Easing  (CME)  in 
October 2010. As the name suggests, the Bank purchased a comprehensive range of assets 
–  not  only  government  bonds  but  also  credit  products  such  as  CP  and  corporate  bonds, 
equity  financial  products  such  as  Exchange-Traded  Funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  Real  Estate 
Investment Trusts (J-REITs) – with the aim of directly lowering part of the yield curve up to 
three  years  and  at  compressing  various  risk  premiums.  Furthermore,  in  February  2012, 
almost at the same time that the Fed adopted an official inflation goal, the Bank introduced 
“the price stability goal in the medium to long term” and announced that it would set a goal in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI of 1 percent for the time being. Although 
these policies supported the economy by providing accommodative financial conditions, they 
were unable to change entrenched deflationary expectations among households and firms. 
Theories on the ZIRP and QE 
Let  us  look  at  developments  in  monetary  policy  theory  at  the  time  that  the  Bank  was 
conducting  the  ZIRP  and  QE.  Specifically,  in  2003,  Professor  Michael  Woodford  and  then 
IMF  economist  Gauti  Eggertsson  further  developed  Professor  Paul  Krugman’s  theory  and 
formulated a theory for policy measures that would be effective under deflation and the zero 
lower bound on nominal interest rates.2 They argued that the most important aspect is the 
management of the expectations of private entities and that, to that end, it is critical for the 
central  bank  to  make  a  commitment  that  future  monetary  policy  will  be  sufficiently 
accommodative. In this context, simply increasing the target amount of quantitative easing or 
                                                 
2   Gauti  B.  Eggertsson  and  Michael  Woodford,  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, No.1: 139–233. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  diversifying the range of assets to be purchased would not bring about strong effects. They 
proposed that for the commitment to be effective it needs to be history dependent. To that 
end,  the  central  bank  should  adopt  a  policy  targeting  a  specific  price  level  –  price  level 
targeting  –  and  commit  itself  to  continuing  with  the  zero  interest  rate  until  the  target  is 
achieved. 
Based  on  this  review  of  developments  in  monetary  policy  theory  and  looking  back  at  the 
Bank’s policies in the past, I think two elements may have been lacking in those policies. 
The first element is a strong commitment to price stability. Forward guidance under the ZIRP 
was of a qualitative nature, stating that it would be continued until deflationary concern was 
dispelled. On the other hand, forward guidance under QE was quantitative in that it would be 
continued until the annual rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) registered zero 
percent  or  above  in  a  stable  manner.  In  hindsight,  however,  the  threshold  of  zero  percent 
was too low. Moreover, the decision to lift QE turned out to be somewhat premature, even 
though it was the result of in-depth discussions about the economic situation and inflation at 
the time. In my view, this turn of events is the reason why the Bank has been unable to gain 
full credibility as a deflation fighter. As for the subsequent “price stability goal in the medium 
to long term,” the figure set as the goal for the time being was also low at 1 percent. As a 
result of the weak commitment to price stability, expectation management was not sufficient, 
and the Bank could not dispel the deflationary sentiment that had taken hold among private 
entities. 
The second element lacking in the past policies was extensive downward pressure on the 
entire  yield  curve.  While  the  Bank  succeeded  in  flattening  the  yield  curve  to  some  extent 
through  forward  guidance  and  purchases  of  long-term  government  bonds  with  remaining 
maturities  of  up  to  three  years,  it  was  not  sufficiently  successful  in  exerting  downward 
pressure  to  lower  the  entire  yield  curve,  including  longer-term  yields.  Subsequent  studies 
have  shown  that  massive  purchases  of  long-term  government  bonds  by  the  Fed  and  the 
BOE  during  and  after  the  global  financial  crisis  have  been  effective  and  this  could  be 
considered as an example of central bank practice preceding theoretical developments. 
III.  
Introduction of a new phase of monetary policy – Quantitative and Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) 
Introduction of QQE 
In  April  last  year,  the  Bank  introduced  a  policy  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing, dubbed QQE, which incorporates these two elements. 
To  reinforce  the  commitment  to  price  stability,  QQE  includes  the  strong  and  clear 
commitment to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent within a time horizon of about 
two years and directly works on private entities’ inflation expectations. Moreover, to underpin 
the commitment, the Bank decided to pursue a new phase of bold monetary easing in both 
quantitative  and  qualitative  terms,  in  which  the  Bank  will  double  the  monetary  base  –  the 
money  it  directly  provides  –  in  two  years  and  purchase  massive  amounts  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs),  including  bonds  with  longer  remaining  maturities.  QQE  differs 
from past policies in that it seeks to actively influence private entities’ expectation formation. 
Under  QQE,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  long-term  government  bonds  with  various 
remaining maturities in order to put downward pressure on the yield curve as a whole. We 
believe that through this measure we can encourage a further decline in interest rates and 
thereby further stimulate private demand. 
More than one year has passed since the introduction of QQE and it has been having the 
intended effects, leading to an improvement in financial markets, the real economy, prices, 
and  expectations.  With  the  clear  commitment  to  promptly  achieve  the  price  stability  target 
and with large-scale monetary easing, people’s inflation expectations have been rising on the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  whole.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  JGBs  have  kept  10-year 
government bond yields at a low level of about 0.6 percent. As a result, real interest rates 
have been negative and continue to decline, thereby providing stimulus to the real economy. 
Japan’s  economy  has  been  growing  led  by  domestic  demand.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI excluding fresh food was minus 0.5 percent in March last year, but it has 
reached  to  plus  1.5  percent  in  April  this  year  after  eliminating  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike.  Hence,  QQE  has  put  into  practice  the  mechanism  common  to  the 
theories of Paul Krugman, Michael Woodford, and Gauti Eggertsson, which is to encourage a 
decline in real interest rates through raising inflation expectations and thereby stimulate the 
real economy. 
Concluding remarks – remaining challenges with regard to theory of unconventional 
monetary policy 
Let me conclude my speech by adding my own view concerning remaining challenges in the 
realm of monetary theory concerning unconventional policy. 
The experience of the global financial crisis has proven in practice that, even if central banks 
are faced with a large negative shock at the zero lower bound, they can support economic 
activity and maintain price stability through unconventional monetary policy. 
However,  there  remain  unresolved  issues  concerning  the  effects  and  transmission 
mechanisms of unconventional monetary policy. 
One reason why there remain unresolved issues is that, to date, no central bank has exited 
from the unconventional policies pursued after the global financial crisis, meaning that there 
is  no  practical  experience  that  would  allow  an  assessment  of  unconventional  policy  as  a 
whole. 
Another  reason  is  that  although  expectations  play  an  important  role  in  unconventional 
monetary  policy,  the  development  of  a  theoretical  underpinning  concerning  this  role  of 
expectations has been lagging. The importance of anchoring inflation expectations has been 
widely recognized and many central banks consider well-anchored inflation expectations as 
one measure to gauge the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, as yet there are no 
established theories on how inflation expectations should be brought back to the target once 
they have drifted downward. In particular, we do not have established theories that explain 
how inflation expectations can be raised at the zero lower bound and that suggest feasible 
policy  measures  to  achieve  this.  I  am  looking  forward  to  theoretical  developments  in  the 
future, and in this regard, the experience with QQE must be useful. 
A deeper understanding of the effects and transmission mechanisms of “Monetary Policy in 
A Post-Crisis World,” namely, unconventional monetary policy, is important for both central 
banks and academia. I wish you every success and productive discussions. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 300
250
200
150
100
50
Appendix: 
Monetary policy in Japan 
end of period, tril. yen
Monetary base
Call rate (overnight, uncollateralized, right scale)
monthly average, %
End-2014
270 tril. yen
End-2013
202 tril. yen
End-2012
138 tril. yen
Projected
 3.0 
2.5 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
Quantitative Easing 
(2001/3-2006/3) 
Comprehensive 
Monetary Easing 
(2010/10-2013/4) 
Quantitative and 
Qualitative 
Monetary Easing 
(2013/4-) 
0
CY
Zero Interest Rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
 
 
 
(1999/2-2000/8) 
Policy 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
