Andreas Dombret: The euro area, the German economy and the 
Pfandbrief 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Pfandbrief seminar, Tokyo, 18 February 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the Pfandbrief seminar here in Tokyo. It is a pleasure to 
be here today. 
When abroad you suddenly become aware of the cultural stereotypes that surround us. And 
then  you  realise  that  all  of  them  are  wrong  –  except  for  the  flattering  ones,  of  course. 
Regarding  Germans,  some  of  the  more  flattering  stereotypes  include  reliability,  punctuality 
and  exactitude.  Incidentally,  these are  also  some  of  the  characteristics  which  make  for  an 
extremely  good  debtor:  reliability  to  repay  your  debt,  punctuality  to  repay  it  on  time  and  
– maybe most important of all – exactitude to honour the debt and not accidentally forget all 
about it. 
In this respect, the Pfandbrief is indeed a typical German financial instrument. It combines all 
of the virtues I mentioned and its global success shows that it is well-regarded throughout the 
world. 
I will offer some thoughts on the Pfandbrief later on. But first, let us take a look at the big 
picture, as central bankers like to do. To gain an understanding of the Pfandbrief’s habitat, I 
will  discuss  the  current  state  of  the  economy  in  the  euro  area  and  in  Germany.  After  all, 
Pfandbrief cover pools mainly consist of public bonds and mortgages. Thus, the state of the 
sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the condition of the German real estate market play an 
important role for the Pfandbrief. 
The big picture – Germany and the euro area 
2. 
For nearly four years now the debt crisis has been the most relevant issue when debating 
financial stability in the euro area. And it remains a topic discussed with some concern. Thus, 
I am delighted that in early 2014 I can offer some good news. 
The euro area as a whole has finally left recession. By now, we have seen two consecutive 
quarters of economic growth, 0.1 % in the third quarter of last year and 0.3 % in the fourth 
quarter. Looking ahead, the outlook for 2014 is quite encouraging. Forecasts are projecting 
that euro-area GDP will grow by more than 1 %. And this recovery is not only driven by the 
so called “core countries” such as Germany. Some of the crisis-hit countries have also finally 
embarked on the path to recovery. And those which have not can at least see the light at the 
end of the tunnel. 
Take Greece for example, which has been at the centre of the crisis since May 2010. Here, 
significant progress has been made with regard to structural reforms: unit labour costs have 
decreased  markedly  and  price  competitiveness  has  improved.  Nevertheless,  Greece  must 
stay  on  the  path  of  agreed  reforms.  In  particular,  the  lag  in  privatisations  should  be 
addressed and the efficiency of public administration needs to be improved. 
Elsewhere,  it  also  seems  that  the  efforts  to  implement  structural  reforms  are  gradually 
bearing fruit. True, the high levels of unemployment in many countries paint a gloomy picture 
and  emphasise  what  a  social  catastrophe  the  crisis  has  been.  Nevertheless,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
unemployment figures at least appear to be levelling off, and they are already coming down 
in some countries such as Ireland, Portugal and Spain. 
In  addition,  competitiveness  has  improved  in  most  peripheral  countries  over  the  past  few 
years. Almost all of the countries have seen their national unit labour costs fall substantially. 
Improving  competitiveness  in  turn  drives  exports  higher.  All  peripheral  countries  –  except 
Cyprus  –  are  projected  to  see  some  export  growth  this  year.  These  achievements  are 
reflected in current accounts reverting more and more to positive balances. 
And Germany is part of the rebalancing equation. Since 2007, the intra-euro-area German 
current account surplus has continuously shrunk from 4½% of GDP to 2¼% of GDP. This 
adjustment  has  been  driven  by  shrinking  exports.  Furthermore,  business  investment  in 
Germany is projected to rebound in 2014 and 2015. Thus, the rebalancing should proceed. 
The progress that these abstract figures reflect is also visible in more concrete events. For 
example,  Ireland  and  Spain  have  exited  their  financial  support  programmes  without  any 
frictions. And Portugal is planning to leave its adjustment programme in the first half of 2014. 
All three countries have recently accessed the sovereign bond markets at low yields. 
It  seems  that  international  investors  increasingly  acknowledge  the  countries’  efforts  and 
achievements, which have boosted confidence overall. In the case of Ireland and Portugal, 
international investors have bought more than 80 % of the newly issued bonds. I would argue 
that these developments underscore the impressive progress that the peripheral euro-area 
countries have made in adjusting their economies. 
All  in  all,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  adjustment  process  is  underway,  with  some  countries 
making more progress than others. A leading group of countries is already within sight of the 
finishing line, while others still have some way to go. Nonetheless, the peripheral countries 
still face some challenges. Against this backdrop, it is essential to maintain the momentum 
and ensure that the necessary reforms are implemented. 
A country that can justifiably claim to have some experience with reforms is Germany. Not 
too many years ago, Germany was dubbed “the sick man of Europe”. But structural reforms 
have  brought  the  country  back  on  track.  The  medicine  which  was  decried  back  then  as 
“taking a wrecking ball to the welfare state” showed remarkable effect. 
Of course, reforms in Germany cannot serve as a blueprint for other countries. The structural 
features of the European economies differ markedly and every country needs a different set 
of  reforms.  Nevertheless,  the  German  experience  may  serve  as  evidence  that  reforms  do 
pay off in the end. 
The  reforms  also  helped  Germany  to  recover  rather  quickly  from  the  crisis.  Indeed,  the 
German economy regained momentum last year and according to all forecasts this upturn 
will continue. The Bundesbank’s economists expect the German economy to expand by 1.7 
% this year and by 2.0 % in 2015. 
Admittedly,  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  good  news  I  just  presented  are  the  extraordinary 
monetary policy measures the ECB has taken. And there are commentators who propose an 
even more expansionary monetary policy. 
They  often  cite  the  risk  of  a  Japanese  scenario,  warning  that  the  euro  area  faces  a  fate 
similar to that of the Japanese economy, which has suffered from the effects of a deflationary 
trend during the last two decades. But the situations differ greatly. 
First, the Japanese yen appreciated sharply at the beginning of the 1990s. The result was 
that  import  prices  receded,  acting  as  a  brake  on  the  general  price  trend.  The  euro 
experienced no such strong appreciation during the crisis. 
Second, deflation requires that nominal wages fall – or at least expand at a slower pace than 
productivity  –  over  a  protracted  period  of  time.  In  Japan,  labour  income  per  employee 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
dropped considerably over many years. In the euro area, no such broad-based development 
is to be seen. Only in Ireland and Greece has compensation per employee fallen markedly. 
Fears of a Japanese scenario are therefore misplaced. Moreover, the notion of Japan’s “lost 
decades”  needs  to  be  seen  in  perspective.  The  weakness  of  growth  in  Japan  is  partly  a 
natural  consequence  of  the  country’s  demographic  change,  as  the  working-age population 
has  been  shrinking  since  the  mid-1990s.  And  that,  by  the  way,  is  an  economic  policy 
challenge that awaits Germany in the years to come. 
In any case, there are two things we should bear in mind: first, monetary policy can buy time 
but  it  cannot  buy  a  solution  for  the  underlying  structural  problems.  Second,  a  prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates  and  high  liquidity  provision  might  sow  the  seed  for  new 
exaggerations and mispricing in some markets. 
For example, signs of a search for yield are becoming increasingly visible. In corporate debt 
markets, for instance, valuations already look rather stretched. And in the global low-interest 
rate  environment,  ambitious  valuations  may  well  spread  to  other  market  segments.  In  this 
regard, the strong recovery in some countries’ property markets should set us thinking. 
The German housing market is no exception. Between 2009 and 2013, prices in large cities 
rose by almost 36 %. And in 2013 they increased by another 8.9 %. Some indicators already 
point to overvaluations in urban areas. Nevertheless, when looking at the German market as 
a  whole,  the  situation  seems  less  dramatic.  According  to  data  from  the  “Association  of 
German  Pfandbrief  Banks”  –  the  host  of  today’s  seminar  –  prices  rose  by  around  3.5  % 
during the first three quarters of 2013 – a figure that does not appear too exciting. Overall, 
prices in Germany have not yet moved away from fundamentals. 
For me, warning bells would start ringing as soon as a rapid increase in housing prices would 
be accompanied by a significant rise in credit. And even more warning bells would be ringing 
if this rise in credit was accompanied by deteriorating loan standards. Having said this, I can 
assure you that at this point in time I am surrounded by silence. We think that macrofinancial 
risks in this area are rather low for now. 
The German Pfandbrief and the search for safe assets 
3. 
All  in  all,  the  big  picture  does  not  look  too  bleak.  And  this  is  certainly  good  news  for 
Pfandbrief  investors.  As  the  underlying  cover  pools  are  mainly  composed  of  government 
bonds and mortgages, developments in these markets are of fundamental importance to the 
Pfandbrief.  Sound  public  finances,  a  healthy  housing  market  and  a  stable  economic 
environment  are  the  pillars  that  underpin  the  reliability  of  the  Pfandbrief.  If  the  Pfandbrief 
today can boast of a reputation of reliability, it is to a great part because it rests on a solid 
German state and a sound economy. 
And it has been resting there for quite some time now. Originally, the German Pfandbrief was 
introduced over 200 years ago by the Prussian king Frederick II. Frederick’s intention was to 
ease  a  credit  crunch  after  the  Seven  Years’  War,  and  with  the  Pfandbrief  he  created  a 
financial product of extremely long standing. 
After more than 200 years of trading experience on the German bond market, the Pfandbrief 
has gained the trust of investors and a reputation as a secure and crisis-proof investment. In 
2012, the size of the Pfandbrief market was some Euro525 billion, which amounts to almost 
19 % of outstanding global covered bonds. 
The trust in the Pfandbrief also stems from the fact that since 1901, no German Pfandbrief 
bank  has  had  to  declare  bankruptcy.  But  as  Frederick  II  remarked:  “what  is  the  good  of 
experience  if  you  do  not  reflect  on  it?”  More  than  100  years  without  a  single  default  is 
certainly an impressive feat. However, we have to reflect on the question of how to continue 
this accomplishment in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We  have  to  acknowledge  that  during  the  crisis  some  Pfandbrief  banks  encountered 
difficulties. Hypo Real Estate, for instance, had to be saved with public money. And in the 
first half of 2009, the Pfandbrief market as a whole was affected to a certain degree when the 
broader  covered  bond  market  experienced  significant  stress.  The  intervention  of  the 
Eurosystem in the covered bond market certainly helped to ease that stress. 
In the wake of the financial crisis, though, many sovereigns and banks lost their top ratings. 
The  consequence  was  widespread  downgrades,  also  in  the  covered  bond  market.  Many 
Pfandbriefe were affected and lost their AAA-rating. Nonetheless, their spreads versus risk-
free securities did not significantly change, displaying unbroken investor interest and trust. 
Meanwhile banks have adjusted to the changing conditions. Regarding Mortgage Pfandbriefe 
cover pools, for instance, overcollateralisation more than doubled. In 2007, assets in these 
cover pools on average had a value of 116 % of issued Pfandbriefe. In the third quarter of 
2013, the value of cover pools rose to 133 %. 
Indeed, overcollateralisation has become all the more important. An obvious reason is that 
the  share  of  riskier  commercial  mortgage  loans  in  cover  pools  has  increased  steadily  to 
surpass  the  share  of  residential  mortgage  loans.  Only  recently  did  this  trend  appear  to 
reverse again. This reversal is probably linked to individual banks having reconsidered their 
commercial real estate lending activities outside Germany. 
All in all, it seems fair to say that the crisis lead to a renaissance of the Pfandbrief. In 2010, a 
German  newspaper  described  it  as  the  “comeback  of  a  bore”  while  Forbes  Magazine 
asserted “covered bonds can rebuild America”. It seems that the Pfandbrief is a winner of the 
crisis. 
Looking to the future, the Pfandbrief might benefit further from crisis-driven regulation. Basel 
III sees the introduction of global liquidity standards for banks for the first time ever. These 
new  standards  will  increase  the  need  for  secure  collateral  in  the  financial  system.  And 
Pfandbriefe  are  eligible  assets  for  the  envisaged  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  and  will  in  all 
likelihood count as “stable funding” for the Net Stable Funding Ratio. 
Likewise,  stricter  standards  for  margin  requirements  on  OTC  derivative  transactions  will 
probably increase collateral usage. Furthermore, the prevalent use of central bank lending 
against secure collateral underpins demand for collateral in the euro area – at least for the 
time  being.  As  a  consequence,  Pfandbriefe,  along  with  other  secure  collateral,  might  be 
increasingly sought after. 
For  participants  in  the  Pfandbrief  market,  these  are  certainly  positive  developments.  As  a 
central banker in charge of financial stability, however, I have to take them with a pinch of 
salt. This is mainly because an increasing amount of assets in banks’ balance sheets may 
get tied up as collateral – a development that has been coined “asset encumbrance”. 
Increasing  asset  encumbrance  tends  to  increase  expected  losses  for  unsecured  investors 
should a bank fail. Consequently, unsecured investors are inclined to demand compensation 
for their more junior position in the debt hierarchy – in effect driving a bigger wedge between 
secured and unsecured funding costs. As a result, some banks may find it more challenging 
to meet their overall refinancing needs. 
Potential problems could also arise in conjunction with policies aimed at bail-ins. If the ratio 
of encumbered assets rises, bail-in policies could be less effective, as losses would have to 
be distributed between fewer and fewer unsecured investors. 
Some  argue  that  to  combat  the  potential  effects  of  higher asset  encumbrance  we  need  to 
introduce widespread limits on covered bond issuance. The objective is to restrict the share 
of encumbered assets on banks’ balance sheets. 
Indeed,  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  need  to  monitor  the  matter  closely. 
Nevertheless, I would argue that we should not rush to implement heavy-handed measures, 
lest we throw the baby out with the bathwater. My argument rests on three pillars. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First, most observers agree that there is still an adequate general supply of collateral in the 
global  financial  system.  Any  potential  scarcity  of  collateral  may  vary  by  jurisdiction.  And 
different  levels  of  asset  encumbrance  may  well  be  justified  taking  into  account  specific 
business  models  of  banks.  In  Germany,  for  example,  there  are  currently  no  signs  of  an 
increase  in  asset  encumbrance  that  would  worry  us.  Against  this  background,  it  does  not 
seem  advisable  to  introduce  international  regulation  directly  aimed  at  limiting  asset 
encumbrance at the current juncture. 
Second, incoming regulation already addresses the potential problem of asset encumbrance, 
albeit  somewhat  implicitly.  Liquidity  regulation  within  Basel  III,  although  accepting  covered 
bonds to a certain extent, at the same time implements a “buffer” of unencumbered assets. 
And  minimum  requirements  for  “bail-inable”  debt,  as  foreseen  in  the  European  Bank 
Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  will  likely  tackle  the  issue  of  asset  encumbrance  from 
another angle. 
Third, collateral shortages could well be a temporary phenomenon. As regards Europe, once 
the banking system has recovered and bank funding markets have normalised, collateralised 
funding  through  the  Eurosystem  should  decrease  perceptibly.  As  a  result,  demand  for 
collateral would shrink. 
This last point also illustrates a more general thought: we should focus on the underlying root 
causes of any excessive encumbrance of assets. Soothing the symptoms alone will not take 
us forward. In this vein, the ECB’s comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets is 
an important step as is continued support for an orderly deleveraging process of European 
banks. Both steps should take us a long way towards addressing any adverse effects from 
asset encumbrance in the financial system. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  sum  up:  economic  conditions  in  the  euro  area  are 
beginning  to  improve.  We  finally  see  the  silver  lining  we  have  been  looking  for.  Germany, 
too, is in a good economic condition and will continue to provide a solid economic base for 
investors. 
This environment is certainly beneficial for the German Pfandbrief. And looking to the future, 
the Pfandbrief may further benefit from crisis-driven regulation, especially if safe assets and 
collateral  become  even  more  sought-after.  Participants 
the  Pfandbrief-market 
understandably welcome this. Central banks and supervisors, however, will closely monitor 
possible side-effects, such as asset encumbrance in banks’ balance sheets. In any case, we 
should not rush to introduce new legislation, but rather try to tackle the root of the problem. 
With some satisfaction I would now like to point out that I have finished my opening remarks 
in time. So, with regard to the virtues of reliability and punctuality, a German central banker 
and the Pfandbrief indeed seem to have a lot in common. 
Thank you very much. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
