  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Demystifying cyber risks – evolving regulatory 
expectations 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at 
the  SEACEN  Cyber  Security  Summit  2014 
“Demystifying  Cyber  Risks:  Evolving  Regulatory  Expectations”,  Kuala  Lumpur,  25  August 
2014. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to Sasana Kijang for the SEACEN Cyber Security Summit 
2014. The theme “Demystifying Cyber Risks: Evolving Regulatory Expectations” is apt given 
that the subject is not well understood by most and developments in this area tend to change 
at an exponential rate. I would therefore like to commend the SEACEN Centre for taking an 
important  step  to  strengthen  awareness  and  promote  collaboration  among  supervisors  on 
cyber security issues. 
Cyber security risk gives rise to new challenges 
Cyber  security  risks  are  inherently  complex.  These  threats  are  real  and  can  have  severe 
implications on financial institutions should the threat not properly managed. In 2013, more 
than 100 million customers had their credit card and personal information stolen as a result 
of a data breach at a major retail outlet in the US. The estimated cost of this incidence was 
close to $150 million. For a single cyber attack, this is a staggering amount. 
Increased  cyber  security  risk  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  more  digital  world  we  live  in, 
where computing devices, online networks and technology infrastructure are becoming more 
integral  to  our  daily  lives.  Modern  financial  systems  also  operate  and  depend  heavily  on 
these same networks and infrastructure. We can expect the management of cyber security 
risk to  be  even  more  relevant  and  challenging  in  the  financial  sector.  Financial  institutions 
operate  critical  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  maintain  sensitive  customer 
information. This makes the financial system an attractive target for cyber security attacks. 
The adoption of more sophisticated and digital technology for key systems such as trading 
platforms, data warehouses and internet banking introduces new sources of cyber security 
issues which could be more systemic. For example, a distributed denial of service (DDoS) 
attack on banks in the United States in 2013 caused serious disruptions in access to online 
services.  While  causing  no  major  losses,  the  increasing  sophistication  of  the  cyber  attack 
raises  concerns  over  critical functions  of the financial  system. This  offers  a glimpse  of the 
potential harm confronting us in the years ahead. 
No doubt, technological advancements are a force for good. They are crucial to the efficient 
operations of the financial system, such as through greater automation of processes, better 
risk management and the wider offering of products served through online platforms. This in 
turn benefits business and retail customers. However, the increasingly widespread adoption 
of  advanced  technology  also  exposes  financial  institutions to  new  cyber  security  risks that 
need to be better understood. For example, increased accessibility to a financial institution’s 
systems by employees and customers through the use of smartphones and tablets serve as 
entry points for cyber crime. Cloud computing and the use of third party services also have 
the potential to undermine firewalls. Putting a balance to the needs of various parties would 
be a challenging task. 
As information technology grows, so do the capabilities of cyber criminals. These criminals 
have a wide range of tools to execute cyber attacks, many of which are easily obtainable and 
relatively inexpensive to procure. For example, cyber criminals can now control networks of 
compromised  computers  through  “botnets”  that  enable  anonymity.  This  access  can  be 
bought  or  rented  online.  In  the  hands  of  criminal  or  organisations  that  are  determined  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  disrupt national stability, botnets could be used to steal sensitive data or disrupt access to 
critical national infrastructure. Industry players, security firms and financial supervisors may 
easily  find  themselves  in  a  cat  and  mouse  game,  where  the  ability  to  attack  constantly 
outpaces the ability to defend. 
These  challenges  demand  a  stronger  and  forceful  response  by  all  parties.  Recent  global 
regulatory reforms, such as the Basel III capital adequacy and liquidity rules, have tended to 
focus on financial risks. There has been much less focus on technology and cyber security 
risks despite the real systemic threats that they pose. So far, no financial institutions in this 
region  have  encountered  an  attack,  severe  enough  to  disrupt  its  critical  services  or  cause 
material  losses,  but  we  cannot  leave  this  to  chance.  The  regulatory  community  and  the 
industry  must  act  to  ensure  that  supervisory  practices  and  internal  controls  within  the 
financial  institution  remain  vigilant  and  install  the  necessary  safeguards  against  cyber 
security  threats.  There  is  a  need  to  intensify  our  efforts  in  this  regard  and  to  place  cyber 
security issues as a priority in our effort to make the financial system safe and sound.  
Driving the cyber security agenda forward in the industry 
In many countries, supervisors place significant emphasis on the oversight role of the boards 
of  financial  institutions  as  a  primary  line  of  defence.  However,  in  reality,  the  focus  on 
technology risk remains superficial in most board discussions. In 2012, a survey by Carnegie 
Mellon among senior executives and directors from among the world’s largest firms across 
various sectors indicated that, 57% of respondents viewed that boards are not reviewing the 
existing policies for cyber-related risks sufficiently. Faced with a multitude of issues, board 
members  are  likely  to  prioritise  headline  issues  that  are  more  pressing  or  more  directly 
related to the core business of the financial institution. More often than not, the cyber security 
agenda gets side-lined. 
Supervisors have an important role in encouraging boards to strengthen their oversight over 
cyber security risks. In fact, because of its importance, a mandatory requirement ought to be 
the norm. In the digital era, cyber security demands a more strategic and specific focus and 
should be properly understood at all levels within the financial institution. Supervisors need to 
ensure that cyber security becomes a permanent agenda in the board’s engagements with 
senior  management.  There  should  be  on-going  dialogue  about  emerging  trends  and 
vulnerabilities, and the measures in place to address them. This would raise awareness of 
security  concerns  and  ensure  that  existing  cyber  security  risk  management  practices  are 
effectively integrated with the firm’s wider business strategy and risk appetite. 
It  is  equally  important  to  ensure  that  the  board  of  directors’  of  the  financial  sector  invests 
adequately  in  cyber  security  infrastructure  systems  and  procedures.  The  amount  of  funds 
allocated  should  commensurate  with  the  nature  and  scale  of  an  institution’s  business 
activities,  and  its  strategic  direction.  65%  of  respondents  in  an  Ernst  and  Young survey  in 
2013 cited an insufficient budget as the primary challenge for information security functions 
to  meet  the  demands  of  the  business.  As  supervisors  of  the  financial  system,  we  should 
require  financial  institutions  to  continuously  benchmark  infrastructure  and  systems  against 
leading  best  practices  in  cyber  security.  This  includes  the  application  of  security  testing 
measures to identify key potential vulnerabilities in a financial institution’s information security 
system. Financial institution ought to take a long term view on this matter. Supervisors can 
do  more to  encourage financial  institutions  to  improve  the  response to  evolving  threats  by 
ensuring  continued  access  to  external  and  internal  expertise  necessary  to  rapidly  develop 
controls and defences that protect critical assets and operations. 
Today,  the  lack  of  skilled  resources  remains  a  key  barrier  to  value  creation  in  regard  to 
information security. Financial institutions must be convinced that there is a long term gain by 
hiring  cyber  risk  specialists,  including  in-house  specialists  that  can  develop  timely  and 
customised solutions based on a deep understanding of the institution’s operating systems, 
business needs and organisational culture. There is also substantial scope for the financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  industry to work more closely with telecommunications firms, internet service providers and 
other vendors to ensure that cyber criminals do not take advantage of external vulnerabilities 
to penetrate the security perimeter. In most countries, such initiatives lacked the coordination 
necessary  to  provide  an  effective  system-wide  defence  against  cyber  crimes.  Part  of  this 
change  will  be  influenced  by  the  attention  and  importance  that  supervisors  place  on  the 
management of security risks. 
The role of supervisors and the public sector 
In  the  face  of  further  digitisation  of  the  financial  sector,  the  responsibility  of  financial 
supervisors  in  ensuring  the  stability  and  integrity  of  the  financial  system  will  become 
increasingly  challenging.  Regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  need  to  be  updated  to 
acknowledge the significance of cyber security threats. It is necessary for us to establish a 
clear  expectation  on  the  management  of  such  risks  by  financial  institutions.  We  should 
outlined clearly in key areas that could cause threats such as outsourcing arrangements with 
third  party  service  providers,  stress  testing,  anti-money  laundering  requirements  and 
business continuity plans. To carry out our oversight responsibilities effectively, supervisors 
will  also  need  to  develop  the  capacity  to  assess  and  identify  key  vulnerabilities  in  the 
increasingly sophisticated web of information networks and systems upon which the financial 
sector depends. For one, supervisors need to arm themselves with the skills and knowledge 
to make assertive and rigorous assessments of a financial institution’s IT risks and be able to 
form  judgments  about  the  adequacy  of  control  systems.  Training  and  development 
programmes for supervisors should therefore give the same emphasis as other critical risks 
such  as  credit  and market  risk. The  establishment  of  specialist  supervisory  teams  or  units 
dedicated to IT risks also plays an important role in building a strong knowledge base within 
supervisory  authorities  to  support  effective  supervision  of  IT  risks.  Just  like  industry 
practitioners,  it  is  imperative  that  any  knowledge  and  skills  acquired  by  supervisors  are  in 
tandem with the latest developments in both cyber security and cyber threats. 
Beyond  efforts  to  build  technical  capabilities,  supervisors  and  other  law  enforcement 
agencies also need to be equipped with the legal powers to investigate and prosecute cyber 
criminals.  Given  the  borderless  nature  of  cyber  risk,  this  is  a  significant  challenge.  Cyber 
crimes  can  be  launched  from  anywhere  in  the  world,  with  targets  in  many  countries.  This 
underscores  the  need for  a more  coordinated global  response  that  should  involve  criminal 
law  enforcement  agencies  and  financial  regulatory  authorities.  In  this  regard,  cross  border 
collaboration  must  be  intensified  to  establish  information  sharing  arrangements  on  cyber 
risks  and  trends.  Looking  further  into  the  future,  a  more  comprehensive  legal  international 
framework, such as a treaty, may be useful to empower authorities to bring cyber criminals to 
justice. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me now conclude. The digitisation of the economy and the financial sector is a process 
that  cannot  be  stopped  and  we  need  to  embrace  it  to  our  benefit.  As  financial  institutions 
grow bigger and have greater international presence, the nature and extent of cyber risks will 
continue to expand. Events like this summit help propel the cyber security agenda forward. It 
is my hope that the sharing of knowledge and experiences here will generate new ideas to 
stem threats to cyber security. With that, I wish you all a productive and fruitful experience for 
the next two days. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
