  Sabine Lautenschläger: Making the comprehensive assessment a 
success 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 5th edition of the Expansion – KPMG Financial Forum, Madrid, 23 May 2014. 
 Ms Pereda, Mr Zambeletti and Mr Albarracin, 
Luis, (Governor Linde), 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When preparing today’s speech, I was confronted with quite a laundry list of topics I could 
talk  about.  Ranging  from  the  details  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  itself  to  what  will 
happen  once  we  know  the  outcome  of  this  exercise;  our  new  supervisory  approach;  the 
intricacies of some banking regulation and beyond. I would love to have time to address all of 
these issues today, but I will limit myself to two: 
• 
• 
first, how we can make the comprehensive assessment a success; 
second, some pertinent questions on the measures to deal with capital shortfalls. 
General background and goals of the exercise 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) will take over supervision of the significant euro 
area  banks  in  November.  In  advance,  we  are  conducting  a  rigorous  comprehensive 
assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets  that  will  ensure  that  our  Joint  Supervisory  Teams, 
comprising  supervisors  from  the  ECB  and  the  national  competent  authorities  (NCAs),  can 
start supervision with a clean slate. We can thus base supervision on a thorough evaluation 
of  the  condition  of  the  individual  institutions,  not  only  regarding  market  and  credit  risks  in 
individual  banks,  but  also  processes,  policies  and  accounting  specifications,  and  the 
sensitivities of core business fields – and all this with a higher degree of comparability thanks 
to the harmonisation of the methodologies and implementation of the assessment. 
But the importance of this exercise extends well beyond the supervisory realm – one could 
say  that  the  supervisory  aspects  are  only  a  positive  side  effect.  The  objective  of  the 
comprehensive assessment is to restore trust in the euro area banking system by creating 
transparency  on  the  condition  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  enforcing  repair  –  where 
necessary. This is crucial for the macroeconomic environment of the monetary union, since 
credit supply to the real economy in Europe is  strongly linked to banks’ financing services 
and thus dependent, too, on banks’ capital and funding conditions – although this is not the 
only prerequisite. 
At  the  current  juncture,  banks  in  the  euro  area  continue  to  suffer  from  general  distrust 
concerning  the quality  of their  assets.  Many  market  participants  believe  that  bank  balance 
sheets  may  still  carry  substantial  hidden  losses,  and  the  resulting  uncertainty  is  directly 
reflected  in  –  among  other  things  –  refinancing  costs  and  stock  market  valuations.  Even 
small deteriorations in a bank’s performance can sometimes suffice to provoke speculation 
and negative market reactions. 
This lack of confidence affects bank lending conditions, both local and cross-border, for firms 
in the real economy. Banks in the euro area need to respond to these market expectations 
and  uncertainties.  They  increase  their  capital  ratios  by  retaining  their  earnings,  holding  off 
lending and avoiding additional risks. Small and medium-sized firms in peripheral countries 
are particularly affected by the sustained shortage in credit supply. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Key factors for success 
The  comprehensive  assessment  should  contribute  substantially  to  breaking  this  negative 
causal chain. It is not the only factor needed for reviving the loan business, particularly in the 
peripheral  countries.  But  it  is  one  of  the  important  ones.  Restored  confidence  in  the  euro 
area banking sector should lead to lower funding costs for banks, which should be able to 
shift  their  focus  back  to  their  core  business:  lending  to  firms  and  households.  In  turn,  this 
should lead to improvements in credit conditions for the real economy. For these effects to 
materialise, two elements are absolutely crucial. 
First,  we  need  to  succeed  in  establishing  transparency.  In  order  to  positively  impact  on 
investors’  perceptions  of  euro  area  banks,  we  must  ensure that  the  exercise  is  sufficiently 
thorough  for  a  true  understanding  of  the  banks’  condition.  Any  remaining  uncertainty  and 
doubts would be counterproductive. 
Second,  any  weaknesses  identified  must  be  addressed  in  a  swift  and  decisive  manner. 
Findings such as a lack of provisioning or the mis-valuation of assets must lead to direct and 
effective  corrective  actions,  which  ensure  that  adequate  capital  levels  are  reached  or 
maintained. In this context, the exercise also offers an opportunity to highlight the balance 
sheet repair measures that have already been taken during the last months. The expectation 
of the forthcoming AQR has already had positive effects on the banks involved. We estimate, 
based on public information, that since July last year banks have strengthened their balance 
sheets by an amount of €104 billion, not only through capital increases, but also collateral 
revaluations and higher provisions. 
The realisation of these two objectives of transparency and repair should induce a significant 
change  in  the  markets’  perspective  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  The  comprehensive 
assessment thus offers a great opportunity, although seizing this opportunity may sometimes 
seem challenging – both for banks and for supervisors. 
For  the  comprehensive  assessment  to  be  a  success,  we  have  to  adhere  to  some  critical 
factors. 
Reasons for optimism 
First, our exercise needs to be more comprehensive than a standard stress test. In order for 
the comprehensive assessment to enjoy credibility, we must prove that we had deep insight 
into specific business areas, portfolios and individual credits as well as into processes and 
working guidelines. We must check whether accounting standards and workflows have been 
adhered to and ascertain whether the files of credit institutions faithfully reflect the contents 
of their systems. 
The  comprehensive  assessment  is  more  comprehensive  than  any  previous  exercise  –  in 
terms of its scope and of the number of banks covered. We will examine in detail no less 
than 760 banking book portfolios. To reach our objective – to improve market confidence in 
euro area banks – it was essential to select more than 50% of banks’ portfolio exposure. The 
exercise  would  not  have  been  seen  as  credible  if  a  smaller  set  of  portfolios  had  been 
selected.  We  will  review  some  135,000  credit  files.  A  total  number  of  more  than 
6,000 supervisors and auditors are currently conducting the review on the ground. For this 
review,  we  have  and  will  collect  vast  amounts  of  data.  I  am  aware  that  fulfilling  our  data 
requests  puts  quite  a  burden  on  banks,  particularly  the  smaller  institutions.  We  know  that 
some of those face tighter constraints on the number of staff they can dedicate to specific 
tasks relating to the asset quality review (AQR) and that they may generally be less used to 
regular supervisory exercises such as the stress tests conducted by the European Banking 
Authority (EBA). We did get some complaints which we take seriously. 
But even if we pare down our data requests to the essentials, we will still request tremendous 
amounts of data. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  By  the  way,  let’s  not  trick  ourselves  –  if  there  were  no  complaints  at  all,  I  would  wonder 
whether we were doing a good job! And we need the data to do this job correctly. We need to 
stretch banks’ and our own resources to the limit, not only to drill down to the detail, but also 
to allow for comparability. 
Second, the two parts of this assessment complement each other: the AQR will give us a 
point-in-time picture of the state of banks’ balance sheets. 
The AQR will ensure that the following stress test will be based on clean data, thus avoiding 
the  weakness  of  the  previous  stress  tests,  in  which  the  calculations  were  based  on 
exposures valued only by the bank concerned. The use of common valuation standards will 
improve  comparability,  and  the  examination  carried  out  by  supervisors  will  add  to  the 
credibility of the exercise. 
The  stress  test  adds  a  forward-looking  element.  It  will  focus  on  the  resilience  of  these 
balance sheets to certain shocks to the economic and financial system. Both elements will 
come together, as the results of the AQR will feed into the stress test. The comprehensive 
assessment is thus likely to be much more demanding than previous stress tests; this has 
the added advantage that those banks that pass deserve greater market confidence. 
The linking of the AQR and the stress test obviously constitutes a significant challenge, not 
least because it has not been done in this way before. We, the ECB and NCAs are close to 
finalising  the  actual  modalities  of  this  linking.  Before  finalising  and  publishing  the  relevant 
part of the methodology, we will seek the assessment of banks as well as auditors, using all 
available input to ensure a smooth and technically-sound process. 
The  set-up  of  quality  assurance  is  the  third  improvement  offered  by  the  comprehensive 
assessment. We have a strict quality assurance in place for the entire exercise. This is key 
for  ensuring  the  integrity  and  comparability  of  the  results  and  will  further  enhance  their 
credibility. 
Our  quality  assurance  framework  during  the  AQR  is  based  on  three  layers  or  “lines  of 
defence”:  NCA  bank  inspection  teams,  composed  of  supervisors  and  auditors,  are 
responsible  for  validating  the  quality  of  their  submissions.  NCAs’  technical  assistance  and 
quality  assurance  teams  then  conduct  further  checks  and  validations  across  banks  in  the 
respective  jurisdiction.  Finally,  the  ECB’s  central  project  management  office  and  the  ECB 
country teams review the quality of national submissions to the ECB, also carrying out cross-
country checks and analyses. 
The recent publication of the stress scenarios has focused attention on this final phase of the 
assessment. 
For the stress test, we will have a double layer of quality checks: we will first conduct data 
consistency  checks  for  the  bottom-up  stress  test,  checking  both  model  inputs  and 
assumptions,  and  then  carry  out  a  top-down  stress  test  to  cross-check  the  results  of  the 
bottom-up exercise. For effective quality assurance, we will need to request some additional 
data that is not captured in the mandatory EBA template. 
To be successful, we must not be content with simply identifying banks’ weaknesses. For the 
new  European  supervisor,  for  me,  it  will  be  of  utmost  importance  to  respond  quickly, 
stringently and consistently when significant shortfalls at banks are revealed. Any banks still 
facing a capital shortfall will be asked to submit capital plans shortly after we announce the 
results of the comprehensive assessment. But I have to admit I expect banks with relevant 
capital shortfalls to have their solution ready before we publish the results. It is the only way 
to avoid unnecessary market uncertainties. 
We will of course closely monitor the implementation of these plans. Any capital issuances to 
cover  shortfalls  will  need  to  be  carried  out  swiftly  and  will  need  to  focus  on  capital 
instruments of the highest quality. I will come back to these two aspects later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The execution of the AQR, its successful linking to the stress test, the quality assurance set-
up  and  the  stringent  and  swift  responses  of  banks  and  the  supervisor  to  identified  capital 
shortfalls will still require significant efforts between now and late October. 
Crucial aspects of the remaining process ahead of us – communication with banks 
and the public 
But there is another critical success factor – effective and efficient communication with the 
banks, the public and the markets. 
Let me explain briefly why I believe that, at this stage, it becomes increasingly important to 
have direct interaction between the supervisor and the banks. I am convinced that we need 
to verify the fact base used in our assessment. In my opinion, it would be difficult to conduct 
our  data  analyses  in  isolation  in  Frankfurt,  and  then  communicate  the  facts  to  the  banks 
when  the  results  of  the  assessment  are  disclosed  in  October,  without  ever  discussing 
matters at the technical level. This would fail to do justice to the complexity of the issues at 
stake,  and  would  not  be  proper  supervisory  practice.  For this  reason,  it  would  not  only  be 
appropriate,  but  also  necessary,  to  have  several  points  of  interaction  between  now  and 
October,  whereby  banks  will  be  contacted  by  supervisors  in  order  to  be  able  to  contradict 
partial and preliminary facts of the AQR and the stress test. 
Apart from verifying findings, another major reason why I find interaction crucial, are aspects 
within the work blocks that may require immediate action by the banks because they have an 
impact on other areas of the assessment. Let me take the first work blocks, the processes, 
policies and accounting review (PP&A review) and the data integrity validation as examples. 
A  possible  finding  in  the  PP&A  review  could  be  that  a  portfolio  of  held-to-maturity  bonds 
needs to be reclassified as available for sale. In this case, the bank would need to calculate 
the impact of the change in classification on the Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio. Some 
of the findings from the data integrity validation may indicate the need for the bank to make 
adjustments to the data sets used for stress testing purposes. 
A key aspect that should be mentioned here are market disclosure requirements. Of course, 
we are aware that they exist, and that in some cases, they could oblige a bank to publically 
disclose a certain finding right away. 
While this may not necessarily be the case, it could happen. Here, it is crucial to be aware 
that  issues  which  we  as  supervisors  would  highlight  in  such  technical  interactions  are 
generally prudential rather than accounting judgements, and that they will only be preliminary 
fact findings, which will still need to be examined and assessed during the national quality 
assurance process as well as during the cross-country checks and analyses. We ultimately 
need final decisions on supervisory assessments, before any such outcome of a prudential 
exercise becomes binding. As you know, this will not be done until the end of the process. 
This leads me to the broader issue of disclosure of the comprehensive assessment results. 
Since  the  initial  announcement  of  the  exercise,  we  have  expressed  our  preference  for  a 
single  communication  at  the  end  of  the  assessment,  in  which  the  final  results  will  be 
disclosed to the public. As confirmed by the feedback received so far, we think this is very 
much in the interest of the participating banks. 
That  being  said,  we  have  also  stated  very  clearly  that  in  some  individual  cases,  severe 
weaknesses may be discovered during the process – weaknesses for which corrective action 
cannot be postponed until October. Such cases could occur at any stage of an examination. 
The national supervisors, who are still the competent authorities for the relevant banks until 
the  beginning  of  November,  would  need  to  impose  the  required  action  in  liaison  with  the 
ECB. 
In  terms  of  public  communication,  our  common  goal  should  be  for  the  information  and 
messages  on  the  comprehensive  assessment  that  reach  the  markets  to  be  as  clear  and 
precise as possible, minimising any risk of misinterpretation and speculation. We need to be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  very  careful  in  designing  the  disclosure  templates,  as  these  will  form  the  basis  for 
transparency. 
Here, we have to strike a balance between the objective of the comprehensive assessment 
to restore confidence in the market and thus the desire to publish a wide range of data on the 
one hand, and on the other, the banks’ interest that they should not to be exposed in every 
detail  to  competitors.  I  am  also  convinced  that  we  should  publish  these  templates  well  in 
advance of the final disclosure. Market participants will then have time to digest the format, 
and will know exactly what type of information to expect on the day the results are released. 
Addressing capital shortfalls 
I would now like to turn to the issue of how to deal with any capital shortfalls identified in the 
comprehensive assessment. 
It  is  clear  that,  first  and  foremost,  banks  will  need  to  fill  potential  capital  gaps  via  market-
based  solutions.  In  line  with  our  previous  communications,  those  can  include  retained 
earnings, new issuances of common equity, suitably strong contingent capital, and sales of 
selected assets at market prices. 
As I see it, reductions in risk-weighted assets due to the validation and roll-out of appropriate 
internal  models  to  additional  portfolios  should  not  be  eligible  to  address  a  capital  shortfall, 
unless  these  changes  had  already  been  planned  and  are  under  consideration  by  the 
competent  authority  –  we  are  already  used  to  this  kind  of  constraint  from  the  last  EBA 
recapitalisation exercise. 
In our latest press release on the comprehensive assessment issued at the end of April, we 
further elaborated on two aspects that I consider absolutely crucial. 
First, new capital issued to cover shortfalls will need to be of the highest quality. This is key 
for  ensuring  that  a  solid  and  thorough  strengthening  of  capital  positions  takes  place  as  a 
result of the exercise. We thus put a strong focus on CET1 and limit the admissible use of 
convertible capital instruments. Any capital shortfall revealed by the AQR and the baseline 
scenario  of  the  stress  test  may  only  be  covered  by  CET1  capital.  Additional  Tier 1 
instruments may be used to cover shortfalls revealed by the adverse stress test scenario, but 
their use is limited to a maximum volume of 1% of RWA. We further differentiate between the 
levels  of  conversion  triggers  on  those  instruments  –  the  higher  the  trigger,  the  larger  the 
amount of the instrument that may be used to cover a shortfall. 
The  second  key  aspect 
timing.  The  relevant 
recapitalisation actions will only be considered credible and effective if they are carried out 
swiftly, after the publication of results. 
For this reason, we have also specified that the coverage of shortfalls is expected to take 
place  within  six  months  for  shortfalls  identified  in  the  AQR  or  the  baseline  stress  test 
scenario, and within nine months for those identified in the adverse stress test scenario. The 
six  and  nine-month  periods  will  start  from  the  release  of  the  comprehensive  assessment 
results  in  October  2014.  We  think  these  time  frames  strike  a  good  balance  between 
swiftness and feasibility. Of course we want to be ambitious, but after all, for a capital plan to 
be  credible,  its  time  frame  also  needs  to  remain  realistic,  and  we  definitely  took  this  into 
account. 
Today’s  last  question  is  how  we  want  to  enforce  the  results  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment. The SSM, the new European supervisor, will – in all likelihood – incorporate the 
outcome of the assessment into the yearly Pillar 2 decision. This will enable us to use the 
range of instruments related to Pillar 2. 
As you know, these include quantitative measures, including restrictions to the distribution of 
dividends, limitation or even prohibition of bonus payments, prohibition of credit lending and 
limitations  on  opening  up  new  business  areas.  In  addition,  Pillar  2  includes  a  number  of 
in  respect  of  covering  shortfalls 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  qualitative  measures  (addressing  management  and  reporting  issues  for  example),  internal 
controls  and  risk  management  practices. We  will  make  use  of  the  full  Pillar  2  tool  box  as 
appropriate to address the specific situation of each institution. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  briefly  summarizing  some  key  messages:  the  comprehensive 
assessment needs to be a success, and we have catered for the necessary critical factors. 
First, our assessment is much more comprehensive than previous stress test exercises – not 
only in name! 
Second, we have strict quality assurance in place for all phases of the assessment. Third, 
closely  monitored  corrective  actions  based  on  the  outcome  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment will make Europe’s banking sector stronger and more solid. 
I am aware that the process towards that goal may at times be challenging – both for banks 
and for supervisors. But I am sure that we can master that challenge to the benefit of all. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
