Peter Pang: Promoting the prudent development of m-payment in Hong 
Kong 
Speech by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  “Tapping  the  potential  of  mobile  commerce  with  innovation”  Conference,  Hong  Kong, 
18 September 2014. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
1. I would like to thank the South China Morning Post for inviting me to talk about the exciting 
topic of mobile commerce. 
I.  
Prelude – a quick recap of the technology evolution 
(a)   The past 
2.  Mobile  technology  has  come  a  long  way  over  the  past  two  decades.  I  recently  came 
across  an  article  that  indicates  that  in  an  upcoming  technology  exhibition  in  London,  a 
futuristic smartphone will be put on show. It offers a wide range of computing features, and 
has a stylish screen. If you carry it on the street today, I am quite sure it will have a “wow 
effect” no less than any other new model that is on offer right now. 
3. Don’t get me wrong – I am not talking about any latest phone models. I am talking about 
the first “smart-phone”  in  the  world,  the IBM  Simon,  which  went  on  sale  in  the  summer  of 
1994, and would be put on display in London’s Science Museum in October this year.1 
4. The model disappeared from the market around two years after its launch. With a limited 
battery life of an hour and weighing more than a pound, that might not be entirely surprising. 
But another key reason was probably this – there was no m-commerce at that time. 
(b)   The present – opportunities offered by m-commerce/m-payment 
5. Let’s fast-forward to 20 years later after the birth of the first smart-phone, and get back to 
the present. We are all witnessing the sea change in the landscape of e-commerce, and are 
enjoying its huge benefits. 
6.  Most  smartphones  are  much  lighter  now  and  have  much  longer  battery  life.  But  more 
importantly,  what  was  once  known  as  “e-commerce”  is  expanded  by  what  we  now  call 
“m-commerce”. It is the name of the game. 
7. People are no longer satisfied with buying or selling things online using their desktop or 
notebook computers. They want to do these in both the virtual and the real world anywhere, 
anytime, using their mobile devices like smartphones or tablet computers. 
8. Let’s face it: businesses can take place in the virtual marketplace, but people don’t live 
there. Books can be made digital, but coffee cannot. We still enjoy – and need – physical 
goods and services. That’s why “m-commerce” is becoming the “game changer”, as it fills the 
gaps  of “e-commerce”  by  making  it  portable  and  connecting the  virtual  world  with  the  real 
world. 
9. Furthermore, the penetration power of m-commerce has been significantly boosted by new 
marketing  tools  made  possible  by  combining  mobile  technology  with  Big  Data  analytics. 
Location-based “push” marketing and mobile coupons are helping companies to attract new 
                                                
1   BBC: World’s first “smartphone” turns 20, Aug 15, 2014 (http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-28802053). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
customers and encourage existing ones to spend more. And all sorts of creative “apps” are 
making  the  “matching”  process  between  buyers  and  sellers  much  more  fun  and  efficient. 
That  is  the  beauty  of  the  “online-to-offline”,  or  “O2O”  value  chain,  an  increasingly  vital 
element of m-commerce. 
The HKMA’s policy objectives towards electronic payments 
II.  
10.  The  benefits  of  m-commerce  are  not  confined  to  individual  companies.  From  a  macro 
perspective,  m-commerce  and  m-payment  will,  no  doubt,  help  to  enhance  economic 
efficiency  by  cutting  costs  of  businesses,  make  the  payment  process  safer,  facilitate  price 
discovery  of  goods  and  services,  and  contribute  directly  to  price  stability  and  increased 
competition. 
11.  A  study  conducted  by  Moody’s  Analytics  last  year  estimated  that  the  greater  use  of 
electronic  payments  added  nearly  US$1  trillion  in  global  economic growth  over  a  five-year 
span  between  2008  and  2012.  That  growth  in  GDP  was  equivalent  to  creating  1.9  million 
jobs. 
12. In view of the importance of electronic payment, the HKMA has carefully considered the 
approach that it should adopt in view of its dual role both as a regulator and a facilitator to 
promote a healthy development of electronic payments. 
13. In short, we are adopting a three-pronged approach. 
i)  
First,  we  have  made  it  a  priority  to  promote  the  further  adoption  of  electronic 
payment means. This is achieved through projects such as the e-bill platform, which 
was  launched  last  year,  and  the  e-cheque  initiative,  which  is  scheduled  to  be 
launched next year; 
Second, we will take proactive steps to facilitate the development of mobile payment 
services, and 
Third, we will put in place a robust legal and regulatory framework to manage the 
risks that may arise from these new technologies. 
ii)  
iii)  
Let me elaborate below on the second and third components of this strategy. 
Embracing the m-commerce opportunities in HK 
III.  
14. Talking about m-commerce, I believe that, if there is an “app” that would guide market 
players to search for a place to launch their m-payment business with any of these key words 
– “market readiness”, “policy support”, or “sound regulatory framework”, the choices to pop 
up on your app screen would likely include Hong Kong. Let me explain. 
(a)   Market readiness 
15.  In terms of market readiness,  the  relevant  statistics  clearly  indicate  that  Hong  Kong  is 
ready and willing to embrace m-commerce. According to some research, the market size of 
Hong  Kong’s  mobile  commerce  exceeded  HK$6  billion  in  2012,  and  is  expected  to  reach 
near HK$18 billion by 2015.2 
16.  These  online  shoppers  are  well-equipped  for  mobile  payment.  The  mobile  subscriber 
penetration rate in Hong Kong, which stood at 237% as of May 2014, is one of the highest in 
the world. Moreover, many of the new smartphones shipped to Hong Kong are NFC-enabled. 
17. Thanks to the promotional efforts of various payment service providers, people in Hong 
Kong are very used to making contactless payment. Some statistics show that among non-
                                                
2   Sources: PayPal Consumer Online and Mobile Shopping Insights 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cash transactions, the portion of contact-less transactions amounts to about 85%.3 With such 
a technology-savvy population, there is a huge market that m-commerce merchants can tap 
into. 
(b)   Policy support 
18.  Now,  let  me  turn  to  “policy  support”.  Development  of  the  policy  framework  for  mobile 
payment services started a few years back. In 2012, the HKMA commissioned a consultant 
to  examine  how  our  city  should  best  embrace  the  m-payment  technology,  and  promote 
creativity  through  competition,  while  ensuring  sufficient  protection  of  the  users  in  terms  of 
prepaid stored value and data security. The consultant made two recommendations. 
“Soft” infrastructure – best practices 
19.  The  first  one  focused  on  building  the  critical  “soft”  infrastructure.  The  consultant 
suggested  that  the  HKMA  should  work  with  the  industry  to  develop  a  set  of  standards  to 
ensure inter-operability and system security. We agreed on this point, and worked proactively 
with the banking industry to produce the Best Practices for the NFC Mobile Payment, which 
was released in 2013. 
20.  This  common  set  of  technical  standards  has  laid  the  foundation  for  achieving  security 
and interoperability among different m-payment services. In concrete terms: 
i)  
Consumers can use a smartphone to download not just one payment service, but 
different payment services of their choice; 
Consumers can switch to a new network or change to a new smartphone  without 
disrupting the continuity of the existing m-payment services; and 
All m-payment service providers are required to comply with common security and 
data protection measures that are in conformity with international standards. 
ii)  
iii)  
“Hard” infrastructure – market-driven approach 
21. The second recommendation of the consultant was about the “hard” infrastructure. The 
consultant recommended that the HKMA should, based on the agreed standards, encourage 
and facilitate the market to develop a robust infrastructure to drive its growth. 
22.  International  experience  indicates  that  the  hard  infrastructure  to  support  NFC  mobile 
payment can be achieved through a market-driven approach or a government-led approach. 
After  careful  consideration,  we  decided  to  adopt  a  market-driven  approach,  for  several 
compelling reasons. 
i)  
First, emerging payment technologies are fast-evolving. Payment service providers 
are closer to the market and are therefore able to make fast business decisions to 
develop  infrastructure  and  services  that  would  respond  to  the  market  needs  in  a 
timely manner. 
Second,  the  success  of  new  retail  payment  products  and  services  hinges  on 
personal experience of the individual user. Here, again, market players, who know 
better  than  anyone  else  the  tastes  of  their  customers,  are  in  a  good  position  to 
develop  payment  products  and  services  that  truly  fit  their  customers’  needs  and 
therefore have better chance of success. 
Third,  a  domestic  card  association  had  indicated  early  on  that  it  would  build  a 
shared NFC platform for its member banks, which is able to support over 20 banks 
ii)  
iii)  
                                                
3   Based on statistics from Octopus, HKICL, HKMA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to provide NFC payment services. The project would to a large extent achieve the 
objective of having a piece of interoperable infrastructure. 
23. So far, the market-driven approach has served us well. One stored value card company 
has  launched  such  services,  so  have four  other banks,  in  partnership  with  two  major  card 
associations. By the end of this year, the shared NFC payment platform I mentioned should 
be ready for operation. 
IV.   Sound regulatory framework 
24.  While  Hong  Kong  is  well-positioned  to  capture  business  opportunities  brought  by  m-
commerce, we need a legal and regulatory framework to address the related risks. With that 
in mind, the HKMA and the Financial Services and the Treasury Bureau are jointly proposing 
a regulatory regime for stored value facilities and retail payment systems in Hong Kong. 
25. Under the new framework, multi-purpose stored value facilities would need to be licenced 
and observe a set of regulatory requirements. For instance, it must have a physical presence 
in Hong Kong and must be a body corporate under Hong Kong law. The issuer must meet a 
minimum  ongoing  capital  requirement  of  HK$25  million.  There  are  also  “fit  and  proper” 
requirements on management and ownership. 
26.  Of  particular  importance  is  the  need for  adequate  consumer  protection. To  protect the 
money in the stored value facilities, we propose that such float must be kept separate from 
the  licensee’s  other  funds,  and  the  float  must  be  adequately  protected  by  safeguarding 
measures, such as a bank guarantee or a trust account. 
27.  The  proposed  legal  framework  will  also  empower  the  Monetary  Authority  to  designate 
major  retail  payment  systems,  such  as  global  credit  card  schemes,  to  be  put  under  its 
supervision.  The  designated  systems  would  be  subject  to  requirements  such  as  risk 
management and control procedures relating to their operations, and measures to ensure the 
safety and integrity of customer data held in the system. 
28. We believe the proposed legal and regulatory regime will foster the healthy development 
of  m-commerce  in  Hong  Kong.  Results  of  public  consultation  conducted  last  year  indicate 
that  there  is  general  support  of  the  proposed  regime  by  the  key  stakeholders.  We  aim  to 
introduce the relevant bill into the Legislative Council in the next legislative session. 
Conclusion 
V.  
29. As the theme of today’s event suggests, the potential of m-commerce is there for all to 
tap with innovation, and I am sure there is plenty to tap by users and service providers. 
30.  The  HKMA  will  continue  to  monitor  market  developments  and,  when  appropriate, 
facilitate the industry efforts in harmonising the technical and safety standards. We will also 
ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  is  effective  in  protecting  consumer  interests  and 
maintaining financial stability. 
31.  We  believe  that  these  efforts  will  help  maintain  and  booster  public  confidence  in  m-
commerce  and  provide  a  conducive  environment  to  attract  important  industry  players  to 
extend their m-commerce services in Hong Kong. 
32. It takes only 20 years to make the world’s first smart-phone look like something out of the 
Stone  Age.  So,  I  won’t  be  surprised  if  today’s  latest  models  would  also  end  up  in  some 
exhibition  cases,  to  be  surveyed  with  great  amusement,  in  a  not-so-distant  future.  In  the 
history  of  the  human  race,  mobile  commerce  will  certainly  form  one  of  those  exciting 
chapters which are about how we innovate to make our lives simpler yet merrier. With our 
concerted efforts, I believe that we will be able to contribute to this new chapter, and people 
who  have  read  it  will  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  for  mobile  payment  in  Hong  Kong, 
innovation and safety always move one way – forward. 
33. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
