  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Mr Werner Rätz and Mr Mischa Aschmoneit of 
Blockupy and published on 28 June 2014. 
 SZ: Mr Cœuré, have you ever taken part in a demonstration? 
Cœuré: Since I’ve been working at the ECB, no. I have taken to the streets in the 1990s, 
including to campaign against the French government’s anti-immigration laws. But that was 
long ago. 
SZ: For you, Mr Rätz, demonstrations are part of your job description. What is your mission? 
Rätz:  Mission  is  something  of  an  exaggeration, but  standing  up for  your  views  in  public  is 
part of democratic and civic action. Demonstrating is an important tool in this respect, and it 
should be used. 
SZ:  Mr  Aschmoneit,  you  define  the  right  to  demonstrate  very  broadly  and  propagate  civil 
disobedience. What justifies this right in your view? 
Aschmoneit: I came to this interview by train. On the way, a respectably dressed man in his 
early seventies came over and I moved over so that he could sit down. But he didn’t want to. 
He said that he wanted the deposit bottle that was in the bin in front of me. A poor, old man 
who has to collect bottles to get by. This reminded me once again that what we are doing is 
legitimate, moving from protest to resistance. We will interfere with and obstruct the opening 
of  the  ECB’s  new  premises  because  what  happens  at  the  ECB  is  immoral. We  want  it  to 
stop. 
SZ: So for you, social injustice is the issue? 
Aschmoneit: Yes, indeed. It’s not just about the loss of material things, but also about the 
loss  of  dignity.  When  an  old  man  has  to  beg,  it’s  degrading.  I  have  nothing  against  you 
personally, Mr Cœuré, but your system has to go. 
SZ: Mr Cœuré, do you understand the criticism? 
Cœuré:  Yes,  on  two  scores.  The  right  to  demonstrate  is  crucial  for  our  democracy. 
Everybody  has  the  right  to  campaign  against  the  ECB.  Second,  the  ECB  is  part  of  our 
European system which has an obligation to strengthen social cohesion and provide justice 
and  prosperity  for  all  citizens.  However,  the  ECB’s  role  in  that  system  is  very  narrowly 
defined by the EU Treaties. The ECB has the primary goal of ensuring price stability and, in 
so doing, it creates a precondition for prosperity. No more, but no less either. 
SZ: Mr Rätz, what irritates you the most about the ECB? 
Rätz:  For  us,  it  is  the  role  that  the  ECB  is  playing  within  the  Troika.  Together  with  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Commission, the ECB pursued a policy 
that  had  dramatic  –  in  some  cases  fatal  –  consequences  in  the  crisis  countries.  In  Spain, 
400,000  people  have  been  driven  out  of  their  homes;  in  Greece,  almost  one-third  of  the 
population no longer has access to the healthcare system and 40% of its people are poor. All 
of this is clearly linked to the Troika’s policy. It is therefore a bit ripe to say that the ECB only 
wants the best. I believe you, Mr Cœuré, as a person, but the ECB is contributing to division 
in Europe, and not to cohesion. 
Cœuré: Let us distinguish carefully between our core mission of conducting monetary policy 
and our role as part of the Troika. Since 2007, the ECB has taken a number of monetary 
policy decisions with the aim to foster economic growth in the euro area and, in so doing, to 
restore price stability. This has shielded a great number of European citizens from poverty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As  part  of  the  Troika,  we  did  not  decide  on  a  thing.  We  advised  the  Eurogroup  and  the 
European  Commission  on  matters  where  we  have  technical  competence,  namely  financial 
market stability, banking reform and macroeconomic imbalances. The decisions were taken 
by the individual countries that received the money, under their own democratic procedures, 
and by the Eurogroup that provided it. 
SZ: You are hiding behind your advisory role. You could have refused to take it on. 
Cœuré: Indeed, nobody forced us to take it on, since the ECB is independent. But we believe 
it was in the interests of everyone to recommend these measures, including to maximise the 
effect of our monetary policy decisions. We stand by that. 
Aschmoneit:  The  IMF,  which  is  not  known  for  its  left-wing  extremism,  says  that  saving  is 
wrong.  There  is  far  too  little  investment.  The  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  says 
that  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  euro  area  has  shot  up  and  that  one-quarter  of  the 
population is seriously threatened by poverty. The ECB is creating winners and losers from 
the crisis. Last year, the wealth of the rich in western Europe rose by 5.2%. The US investor 
Warren Buffett has said that there is class warfare and that it is his class, the rich class, that 
is  winning.  Your  policy,  Mr  Cœuré,  is  geared  towards  reducing  large  portions  of  the 
population to poverty and safeguarding the profits of a few. 
Cœuré: Our clients are not the rich, but the citizens of Europe. The ECB is accountable to 
the European Parliament for everything that it does, and the European Parliament is directly 
elected  by  the  people.  We  are  not  responsible  for  changing  the  distribution  of  income  in 
Europe. That is within the political domain, which is why we have political parties who argue 
about how income should be distributed. We would be in clear violation of our mandate if we 
were to aim at enforcing a certain wealth distribution. We should stay away from this. And by 
the way, we’re not afraid of discussing inequality: we have ourselves created the Household 
Finance and Consumption Survey, which has uncovered new and sometimes controversial 
facts on wealth inequality in Europe. 
Rätz: It’s not all about the citizens of Europe for the ECB – they’re not even being asked. 
Let’s take Greece, for example. Since 2010, its economy has shrunk by 25%. This year, it is 
expected to grow by 0.7%, which is extremely little. We’re not going to live to see Greece 
recover.  The  people  of  Greece  are  not  being  asked  about  the  Troika’s  recommendations, 
even though the measures have a profound impact on society: salaries and pensions have 
been  reduced,  unemployment  benefits  have  been  cut  and  hospital  care  has  deteriorated. 
That is not a policy for the people, it is a policy for the banks. 
Cœuré: We supported the Troika’s decisions, but for good reason, because we are talking 
about  countries  that  had  to  borrow  huge  amounts  of  money  from  the  financial  markets 
because their tax revenue did not suffice. Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Cyprus had spent 
too much. Then suddenly the market stopped lending them money. Without assistance from 
the EU and the IMF, the situation in these countries would have been a lot worse, especially 
for the poor, because, overnight, they would have had to bring their expenditure into line with 
their  income  –  in  2010,  for  example,  Greece  would  have  had  bring  its  primary  deficit  of 
10.5% into balance at once. The social losses would have been even higher than under the 
reform programmes. 
SZ: Mr Aschmoneit, what should the ECB have done instead? 
Aschmoneit:  It  isn’t  really  about  the  ECB.  The  system  has  failed.  Capitalism  is  unable  to 
distribute  the  collectively  generated  wealth  such  that  the  people’s  needs  are  fulfilled.  Not 
even those who work have enough. Some people have three jobs and are still poor. That is 
why  the  capitalist  system  needs  to  be  overthrown.  We  advocate  the  nationalisation  of 
production facilities. 
SZ: That has been tried before – without success. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Aschmoneit: The rich are getting richer, at the expense of the poor – thanks also to the ECB. 
The despair is driving some to suicide. The suicide rate in Greece has tripled. We remember 
the  letter  that  the  ECB  sent  to  the  Italian  government  in  2011,  in  which  it  threatened  to 
terminate its bond purchasing programme if the Italian government did not immediately start 
doing what it was told. That was attempted blackmail. 
Cœuré: The ECB does  not blackmail anyone. The case you have mentioned refers to the 
purchase of government bonds under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP). What the 
ECB wanted to make clear was that our monetary policy can only be effective if governments 
themselves carry out reforms that address the root causes of the crisis. No monetary policy 
measure can have the desired effect if that is not given. 
Rätz: Wheeling out instruments of torture – that’s what that is. 
Aschmoneit:  This  attempt  at  blackmail  is  only  part  of  the  mess.  In  essence,  we  want  to 
change the economic and social system. Nothing else will work. 
Rätz: Yes, it will work. Even under the existing economic system, the ECB could have acted 
differently. At times, the ECB has used its freedom through a creative interpretation of the 
Treaties,  as  with  the  OMT  bailout  measure.  When  it  comes  to  the  welfare  of  the  people, 
however, the ECB is inflexible. Mr Cœuré, don’t give the money to insolvent banks. It would 
be better if you set up investment programmes in the countries involved! 
Cœuré: Let me first answer Mr Rätz. The very narrowly defined primary objective of the ECB 
is to maintain price stability in the euro area. To achieve this goal, we have a great number of 
different instruments at our disposal, which we have used as the situation required. The ECB 
can  choose  its  instruments,  but  it  is  not  allowed  to  reinterpret  the  Treaty.  Turning  to  the 
subject of capitalism, I respect your views, Mr Aschmoneit, but the issue is outside the ECB’s 
area of responsibility. We operate in an environment that is framed by Treaties which have 
been  approved  by  the  citizens  of  Europe  and  which  provide  for  Europe  to  be  set  up  as  a 
social market economy. It is within this market economy that the ECB operates. 
SZ: What is your personal view on capitalism? 
Cœuré: My view on capitalism is similar to what the former British Prime Minister Winston 
Churchill said about democracy: It is the worst of all the systems, except for all the others 
that have already been tried. Capitalism can be extremely dangerous and cruel. The markets 
triggered the financial crisis, which is why we need strict rules. With those in place and being 
checked strictly, capitalism can function well. Over the past 40 years, the market economy 
system  has  enabled  hundreds  of millions  of  people  to  climb  out  of  poverty. In  Europe,  we 
have political institutions that can regulate the market, while that is not the case at the global 
level: despite having a global market economy, there are no global institutions. It is Europe’s 
biggest chance that we are able to control the market economy in this way, and we should 
make full use of it. 
Rätz: That’s not true. You are not controlling capitalism. You are giving capitalism ever more 
free reign. For example, the memorandum for Greece has interfered massively with the right 
to health care and the freedom of wage negotiations. I have never read any statement by the 
ECB in which it has said that Europe needs to do more to control capitalism. However, I do 
accept  that  the  ECB  is  in  a  difficult  contractual  situation.  With  the  focus  being  on  price 
stability,  its  mandate  is  too  narrowly  defined.  The  ECB  should  actually  be  able  to  finance 
governments.  Nevertheless,  the  ECB  is  independent  and  therefore  not  democratically 
accountable.  The  ECB  itself  might  propose  how  its  democratic  accountability  could  be 
improved. 
Cœuré: On monetary financing of governments, the answer is simple: the Treaties prohibit 
the ECB from taking on such a role. I personally believe that it is not a good idea to give 
governments the key to the printing press if you want to have a stable currency. This has 
been  proven  by  history.  Moreover,  public  expenditure  must  be  financed  with  tax  revenue, 
either today or tomorrow – and the decision as to who has to pay how much tax has to be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  taken by national parliaments. If monetary policy is used to finance governments, democratic 
control over this key issue is lost. . Second, the more independent an institution is, the more 
accountable it should be. We have already made significant progress in this regard. We have 
a hearing before the European Parliament every quarter, we are working towards publishing 
the minutes of the meetings of the Governing Council and we have an intense dialogue with 
various  stakeholders  in  all  euro  area  countries.  To  give  a  couple  of  examples,  I  have 
discussed the adjustment programme with the trade unions in Portugal and, more recently 
with the ECB President, I have met the Greek opposition leader, Mr. Tsipras, who does not 
exactly  share  our  views.  It  is  important  that  we  also  speak  to  those  people  who  think 
differently to us. 
Rätz: The debt levels of the countries in Europe are not sustainable. They have no way of 
growing  or  saving  their  way  out  of  it. Why  does  the  ECB  not  play  a  more  active  role  and 
propose debt cuts, as was done after the First and Second World Wars at the London debt 
conference in the 1950s? 
Cœuré: The ECB has never been in favour of debt cuts for governments, as doing so can 
generate  contagion  to  other  countries  and  can undermine  the  confidence  of  investors  in  a 
long  lasting  way,  and  we  are  talking  about  countries  that  need  to  keep  or  regain  market 
access. The situation with regard to haircuts for banks is different, however. I am very much 
in  favour  of  bank  creditors  having  to  forgo  their  money  where  necessary  to  protect  the 
taxpayer. 
Aschmoneit:  The  ECB  is  maintaining  price  stability  by  letting  the  population  of  southern 
Europe sink so far into poverty that they can hardly afford to buy anything. Neo-liberal policy 
has to stop. You should move towards a Marshall Plan, i.e. you need to support the crisis 
countries and invest in them, rather than making them save until they go under. Your policy 
is jeopardising European society, as shown by the outcome of the European parliamentary 
elections. Racist tendencies are on the rise in many EU countries. On this basis, you won’t 
be able to carry on doing what you’ve been doing thus far. You will have to end it – one way 
or another. 
Cœuré:  We  think  that  governments  need  to  undertake  structural  reforms  to  create 
sustainable  growth,  but  I  do  agree  with  you  on  one  point:  we  need  more  investment  in 
Europe. Investment has decreased too much in the crisis and it is needed for the future of 
the citizens. But that is the responsibility not only of governments, which should give priority 
to  investment  within  public  spending,  but  also  of  the  private  sector.  Governments  need  to 
create the right environment to stimulate private investment. 
SZ: What types of protest are you planning next? 
Aschmoneit: We are telling you quite openly what we intend to do: we want to stop your party 
to celebrate your move into the new premises and we intend to do so in a polite and friendly, 
but also full-on manner. Will you tell us when the party will take place? 
Cœuré: That hasn’t been decided yet, no date has been set. We will probably start to move 
in November, but celebrations will most definitely not take place in 2014, but rather next year. 
SZ: One final question for you all: What do you feel when you walk past the euro symbol in 
front of the ECB? 
Rätz: When I walk across the park, I think of how democratic protest is being stigmatised in 
Frankfurt. This is perhaps something that the ECB can do  very  little about, but the City of 
Frankfurt has tried, from the very outset, to suppress any democratic protest. I have been 
politically  active  for  many  years,  but  I  have  never  before  experienced  anything  like  it 
anywhere else. 
Aschmoneit:  In  my  case,  the  euro  symbol  makes  me  grin. When  we  first  demonstrated  in 
front  of  the  ECB,  the  police  cordoned  off  the  entire  area.  Nevertheless,  some  of  us  still 
managed  to  climb  up  the  euro  symbol  and  unfurl  our  protest  banners.  And  that  is  also  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  precursor to what I hope will happen: Your system, capitalism, is going to die out. I hope that 
whatever comes afterwards, will be a better world, a world of humanity, coexistence. 
Cœuré: I have mixed feelings when I walk past the euro symbol, as it is the first thing I see 
when  I  go  to  work  (laughs).  The  euro  symbol  is  one  of  the  most  visible  signs  in  Europe. 
When I see it, I think of how much there is to do to make Europe work, to ensure that people 
have jobs and that they can live a good life. That is why I am working hard at the ECB. It 
should be the purpose of everything that we do. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
