James McAndrews: Challenges and rewards associated with data in the 
New York Fed 
Remarks  by  Mr  James McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of  Research  of 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Fifth  Data  Management  Strategies  and 
Technologies  Workshop,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  New  York  City,  4  February 
2014. 
 Introduction  
Welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We are fortunate to have many central 
bankers  and  international  nongovernment  organizations  represented  here  today.  Because 
we are part of the Federal Reserve System, the central bank of the United States, we share 
many  of  the  same  data  obstacles  you  are  currently  facing.  As  the  head  of  Research  and 
Statistics  at  the  New  York  Fed,  I’d  like  to  share  with  you  the  challenges  and  rewards 
associated with data in our organization, particularly the data that we use to analyze policy 
questions. 
The New York Fed is uniquely positioned for several reasons. In addition to being the largest 
of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, it has the distinction of including a Markets Group that 
conducts  Open  Market  Operations  for  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Additionally,  the  New 
York  Fed  supervises  financial  institutions,  including  foreign  banks  doing  business  in  our 
district. These special responsibilities contribute to our tremendous reliance on data. 
Data is crucial to our core objectives and all aspects of our work.  
Data  is  the  foundation  for  developing  international  standards  in  bank  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements.  Data  is  an  integral  part  of  researching  economic  issues  and  the  labor  and 
financial markets. Data is also central to our jobs of forecasting and identifying trends. Our 
understanding of interest rates, reserves, and balance sheets is built on data. In our efforts to 
promote  financial  stability,  data  is  fundamental  to  stress  testing.  In  our  financial  services 
efforts,  payment  information  and  data  flows  figure  critically  in  our  payment  systems.  The 
scope  of  our  data  consumption  and  creation  spans  a  wide  range.  It  encompasses  local, 
regional,  national,  and  global  coverage  and  extends  from  the  micro  to  the  most  broadly 
aggregated levels. 
Consequently, as an organization we are increasingly dealing with a growing number of data 
challenges. They include the multitude of legal topics associated with contractual terms and 
conditions of data use, data sharing, and privacy restrictions. We are constantly challenged 
to  develop  and  maintain  clear  and  comprehensive  data  dictionaries  that  enable  us  to 
repurpose  data  appropriately.  Moreover,  as  we  continue  to  create  more  data,  we  are 
focusing on data governance. This entails oversight and measures to ensure that our own 
data  are  accurately  posted  (with  updated  revisions  and  associated  documentation)  by 
commercial  aggregators.  All  of  this  growth  requires  investments  in  both  technology  and 
personnel to support our ever-expanding data requirements. 
Challenges in the use of data  
I’ll focus my remarks on two important challenges that we face in using data effectively, as 
well as some models we may draw from to overcome those challenges. 
The  first  challenge  is  what  we  might  think  of  as  data  innovation,  and  the  second  is  data 
stewardship. 
With data innovation, the big challenge is to use our imagination and to think hard about what 
data may be able to say about a particular problem. This includes both novel uses of existing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
data as well as the collection of new data. To illustrate what I mean by this, let me describe 
one effort, among many, here at the New York Fed. 
Consumer Credit Panel 
I’ll  describe  our  Consumer  Credit  Panel,  which  we  created  in  2010.  At  the  onset  of  the 
financial  crisis,  it  became  apparent  that  our  knowledge  of  the  liability  side  of  household 
balance  sheets  was  inadequate.  At  that  time,  the  main  data  sources  on  consumer  debt 
consisted of loan-level data sets on specific categories of loans, such as mortgages, as well 
as aggregated data on household sector debt from the Board of Governors’ Flow of Funds 
statistical release. While providing a useful aggregate overview of household debt, the Flow 
of  Funds  release  defines  the  household  sector  as  a  residual  sector  that  also  includes 
nonprofit  organizations,  such  as  schools,  hospitals  and  churches,  as  well  as  hedge  funds 
and  private  equity  funds.  Furthermore,  the  overview  it  provides  is  limited  to  outstanding 
balances  and  lacks  important  information  on  the  origination,  repayment,  and  delinquency 
status of household debt. And both loan-level data and aggregates like the Flow of Funds 
miss  an  important  dimension  of  borrower  behavior  that  became  very  important  during  the 
crisis  and  recovery  –  the  relationship  between  different  kinds  of  credit  use  by  individual 
borrowers or households. 
The  creation  of  the  Consumer  Credit  Panel  is  an  example  of  the  use  of  pre-existing 
commercial  data  in  an  innovative  way  that  had  not  previously  been  pursued.  The panel  is 
based  on  credit  report  data  collected  by  Equifax  (one  of  the  three  credit  bureaus  in  the 
United  States)  and  it  contains  information  on  all  outstanding  loans  –  including  mortgages, 
auto and student loans, and credit card debt – at the individual consumer level. While credit 
records are primarily used by lenders to evaluate a potential borrower’s creditworthiness and 
ability to repay, they can also provide a comprehensive picture of outstanding balances and 
delinquencies and how they interact. Of course, all the data are completely anonymous – the 
dataset has been stripped of all personally identifiable information. 
The CCP was created by our research group using an innovative sampling procedure, based 
on  the  randomness  of  the  last  four  digits  of  social  security  numbers.  The  resulting  panel 
allows  one  to  track  individuals  over  time  and  across  different  locations  within  the  nation, 
starting  in  the  quarter  in  which  they  establish  their  credit  report  when  taking  out  their  first 
loan. The sampling approach generates the same entry and exit behavior as present in the 
population,  with  young  individuals  and  immigrants  entering  the  sample  and  deceased 
individuals and emigrants leaving the sample each quarter at the same rate as in the U.S. 
population.  As  a  result,  for  each  quarter  starting  in  1999,  the  panel  constitutes  a 
representative cross-section of the population of borrowers. 
Moreover,  once  the  random  sample  of  individuals  is  identified,  we  then  include  the  credit 
records of all individuals living at the same address, so the panel can be used to analyze 
new loan originations, balances, and delinquencies at the household level. Consumer debt 
traditionally has been measured at the individual level, but most economic decision making is 
done at the household level. In fact, consumer income and assets are commonly measured 
and  analyzed  at  the  household  level.  For  studying  household  economic  behavior,  and  in 
particular for understanding life-cycle household finance, it would similarly be more useful to 
examine  debt  and  credit  aggregated  at  the  household  level.  It  may  also  be  important  to 
consider the distribution of debt within households. 
Beyond the ability to link individual consumer and household-level loans over time, the panel 
improves  on  typical  loan-level  datasets  by  linking  multiple  loans  to  the  same  consumer. 
Thus, at each point in time, one can see whether the individual holds multiple first mortgages 
or a combination of first and second mortgages while at the same time holding various types 
of non-mortgage debt.  
As you can imagine, the panel has been a great resource, accessible by staff at all Federal 
Reserve banks through a fast and easy-to-use interface. It has already been used in several 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reports,  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
Federal  Reserve  Board  and  Treasury 
presentations, speeches, and congressional testimonies, and in about 100 research papers 
and policy analyses. It also has value for our community outreach, as we can profile specific 
geographical regions. 
Particularly impactful have been our releases of the Quarterly Report on Household Debt and 
Credit,  containing  a  comprehensive  summary  of  households’  access  to  and  use  of  credit. 
Several of our research findings have influenced policy debates. For example, an important 
question  regarding  recent  household  deleveraging  has  been  to  what  extent  the  decline  in 
aggregate  household  debt  was  attributable  to  delinquent  debt  charge-offs  as  opposed  to 
active debt paydowns by consumers. Our research found that while charge-offs played an 
important  role,  a  huge  change  in  consumer  behavior  had  taken  place.  While  consumers 
extracted home equity and took on more debt during 2007, they reverted to actively paying 
down debt during 2009, creating a remarkable $480 billion reversal in cash flow available for 
consumption in just two years. In our most recent report we are seeing signs suggesting that 
the deleveraging period has reached its end. The availability of borrower-level data has been 
key to our ability to analyze consumer behavior. 
Somewhat  unexpectedly,  it  has  also  turned  out  that  the  CCP  provides  a  comprehensive 
national  picture  of  total  outstanding  student  loan  balances  and  delinquency  rates  that 
heretofore did not exist. It was in a Quarterly Report, for example, that we first reported that 
student  loan  debt  exceeded  credit  card  debt,  in  early  2010.  Our  findings  helped  bring  the 
surge  in  student  debt  and  delinquencies  to  the  attention  of  the  public.  Our  research  also 
highlighted  its  potential  implications  for  consumption  growth,  showing  a  strong  association 
between  the  increase  in  student  loan  debt  and  the  decline  in  mortgage  and  auto  loan 
origination rates over the past few years. 
Coming  back  to  the  broader  issue  of  data  innovation,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  dataset 
merges  have  been  behind  a  growing  number  of  important  academic  studies  and  research 
findings in recent years. While showing how the value of datasets can be greatly enhanced 
by  linking  them,  these  studies  underscore  the  need  for  creative  thinking  to  maintain 
anonymity and representativeness of the matched sample. We are currently pursuing various 
ways to enhance the value of the Consumer Credit Panel further by linking to property deed 
records, employer payroll records, small business credit data, and student college records. 
The CCP shows how existing data – in this case credit reports – can be re-purposed to serve 
new public policy and research uses. But sometimes existing data sources just can’t provide 
the  answers  we  need,  and  in  those  cases  data  innovation  requires  creating  something 
completely new. 
Survey of Consumer Expectations 
So a second important example of  data innovation at the New York Fed is the Survey of 
Consumer  Expectations,  which  we  introduced  to  the  public  just  last  month.  Consumer 
expectations of future economic outcomes are crucial inputs to the policy process, but we felt 
that our standard measures of these expectations were quite limited. The primary goal of this 
new  national  survey  is  to  collect  timely,  rich,  and  high-quality  information  on  consumer 
expectations about a wide range of household-level and aggregate economic and financial 
conditions. The survey covers expectations about inflation, price changes for specific goods, 
home price changes, future wage growth, future quits and layoffs, and residential mobility, as 
well as expectations of household income, spending, taxes, and credit access.  
The SCE has two advantages over existing surveys of expectations: It collects information 
about consumers’ expectations and decisions on a broader range of economic and financial 
topics, and it does so in a way that captures respondents’ beliefs more fully. The objective is 
to measure an individual’s beliefs about the likelihood of future outcomes, thereby capturing 
how  certain  or  uncertain  the  person  is  about  future  events.  In  some  cases,  we  do  this  by 
eliciting  a  “density  forecast,”  where  respondents  are  asked  to  assign  a  percent  chance  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
different values (or intervals) for the outcome of interest. In addition to providing a measure 
of individual forecast uncertainty, these density forecasts yield richer information about how 
expectations  vary  across  people  and  over  time  than  do  single-value  forecasts,  or  “point 
predictions.” 
The SCE is the outcome of a five-year collaborative research project involving economists, 
psychologists, and survey design experts. During this period, we conducted a large number 
of experimental surveys to assess the information elicited with existing survey questions and 
to  develop  new  questions,  including  those  for  measuring  forecast  uncertainty.  This 
preliminary  work  and  the  probabilistic  format  of  the  new  survey  questions  represent  an 
important  innovation  that  builds  on  academic  work  over  the  past  20  years  by  economist 
Charles  Manski,  as  well  as  some  early  pioneering  survey  work  conducted  by  the  Bank  of 
Italy.  
Creating  the  CCP  and  SCE  has  yielded  some  important  lessons.  First,  data  innovation 
requires an ability to think outside the box, and it benefits from the collaboration of people 
with  diverse  skills  and  backgrounds  –  academic  economists,  but  also  representatives  of 
other academic disciplines and individuals with business and public policy experience. Skills 
in identifying valuable but underutilized data, the creation of data linkages, the development 
of  appropriate  sampling  procedures,  and  survey  methodology  and  questionnaire  design 
experience are all particularly valuable. In this respect, our experiences mirror those at the 
many  new  interdisciplinary  data  and  social  research  centers  and  numerous  “Big  Data” 
university centers being created across the country. A key impetus behind these centers is to 
bring  together  a  group  of  individuals  with  different  skills,  interests,  and  experiences  in  an 
environment  that  encourages  independent  and  innovative  thinking.  These  individuals  bring 
their unique questions and knowledge to the task of finding new ways of using the enormous 
amount of electronic data that exists today, as we did with the CCP. In addition, they can 
collaborate to identify efficient ways of creating new data, as we did with the SCE.  
A  second  lesson  is  that  it  is  important  to  offer  clear  incentives  for  data  innovation.  Giving 
researchers  the  flexibility  and  the  resources  to  use  new  unique  data  in  their  research  and 
policy analyses is a strong motivating factor. In fact, we have found the availability of unique 
data to be an important recruitment and retention tool for talent in research. 
A final lesson is that data innovation can be costly, both in terms of required staff hours and 
effort  and  in  direct  cost,  especially  when  it  involves  data  purchased  from  vendors  or  data 
collected  through  surveys.  The  gains  should  therefore  be  carefully  weighed  against  the 
overall costs. 
Data stewardship 
Data  innovation  as  I’ve  described  it  here  comes  with  some  costs.  In  an  environment  with 
rapidly growing numbers of large and complex datasets, efficient data utilization requires an 
ability to easily find, trust, use, and share the data. Without those prerequisites, there is a 
significant  risk  that  innovative  and  valuable  datasets  would  be  underutilized  because  their 
availability  is  not  widely  known,  their  reliability  is  inadequately  evaluated  and  documented, 
and their use proves too costly, requiring large time investments by each user. In my view, 
effective data utilization therefore cannot be achieved without adequate recognition, funding, 
and support of a data steward role.  
Subject  matter  experts  serving  as  data  stewards  have  a  number  of  important  data 
management responsibilities. A primary one is the production of detailed documentation of 
the  data  sources  and  content.  Such  documentation  is  vital  for  preserving  institutional 
memory, which can be lost when key personnel leave, and it needs to be updated regularly. 
This  documentation  also  includes  the  creation  of  higher-level  metadata  that  can  help 
potential  users  determine  the  applicability  of  the  dataset  to  their  specific  needs.  Data 
stewards play an important role not only in documenting the provenance of the data but also 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  efficient  allocation  of 
in  evaluating  the  quality  of  the  data,  to  determine  whether  it  can  be  trusted  for  different 
purposes.  
The availability of rich documentation on data lineage and usage, combined with high-quality 
user support, will reduce learning costs for users, lighten the question-and-answer workload 
for  data  providers,  and  promote 
resources.  Adequate 
documentation of data quality and the tracking of known data issues will help ensure that the 
data are properly used and will reduce the likelihood of user misunderstanding of the data, a 
risk that can lead to inappropriate data usage and erroneous results. 
Our limited experience to date with data stewards who have been explicitly hired or assigned 
to  this  role  has  been  very  positive.  This  investment  has  helped  accelerate  data  usage, 
ensure  analytical  quality,  and  maintain  vendor  contract  compliance.  Importantly,  it  has 
significantly reduced the burden on senior staff in responding to data questions and requests 
for data or analyses. 
Successful implementation of this model requires not only a formal recognition of the data 
steward  role,  but  an  appropriate  level  of  resources  to  support  data  stewardship,  including 
some  training  in  the  foundational  disciplines  of  data  management.  Incentives  may  be 
required  to  induce  subject  matter  experts  to  take  a  formal  data  steward  role.  To  provide 
these  incentives  requires  thinking  through  career  concerns  of  people,  and  may  require  a 
whole  new  career  track  for  data  stewardship,  one  that  provides  sufficient  autonomy  to 
provide  the  steward  time  and  incentives  to  conduct  data  analysis  and  research.  These 
investments  are  very  worthwhile,  because  they  unlock  the  potential  in  innovative  datasets 
and make progress possible in answering crucial policy questions. 
Learning from others 
Before I close, I’d like to note that data innovation is challenging, but there is an effective and 
widely available way to achieve it, and that is to learn from others.  
Over the past few years we at the New York Fed have hosted and visited colleagues at the 
Bank of England, Bank of Korea, Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Mexico to exchange ideas 
and  discuss  some  of  our  data  projects.  Much  can  be  learned  from  sharing  experiences  in 
creating  and  managing  new  data  products.  The  information  uncovered  in  some  countries’ 
well-designed  data  collections  can  help  other  countries  to  direct  their  own  data-gathering 
efforts. For example, other countries are very interested in what can be learned about the 
household  sector  from  credit  bureau  data  like  the  CCP.  We  have  taken  suggestions  for 
particular questions from other countries’ surveys. 
We  can  also  benefit  tremendously  from  learning  through  direct  collaboration.  In  a  new 
research project with the Dutch Central Bank, we are investigating how the interview mode 
affects the survey response rate and response accuracy when asking people about financial 
issues. More specifically, we are evaluating whether soliciting personal financial information 
through  the  Internet  elicits  more  accurate  and  complete  responses  than  securing  the 
information through face-to-face interviews – a pattern observed in the case of other types of 
sensitive information. Given the increasing prevalence and popularity of web-based surveys, 
which are considerably less costly and provide more flexibility, the results are likely to be of 
relevance to any central bank considering conducting or already implementing a survey on 
household finances. 
Of  course,  in  my  brief  tour,  I  have  not  even  touched  on  the  extensive  regulatory  data 
collections we undertake. An exciting development in that area has been the creation of the 
Financial  Stability  Board  Data  Hub  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  result  of 
extensive collaboration among central banks and banking supervisors in many countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Conclusion 
To conclude: I’ve focused on two challenges that we face in making the best use of data to 
address  pressing  policy  questions.  The  first  challenge  is  to  bring  innovative  ideas  to  data. 
Although progress has been made in this area, more imagination and thought are needed in 
identifying and creating useful data. Once a data product is imagined, the right investment is 
crucial to deliver good data to analysts and policymakers. The second challenge is to provide 
effective data stewardship. Good management of data is needed locally, often in the person 
of  data  stewards  who  make  information  accessible  in  a  world  of  imperfect  data, 
nonintegrated technology platforms, and statistical packages. Significantly, learning from one 
another in conferences such as this one is vital to meeting the innovation challenge and to 
improving data around the globe. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
