Luis M Linde: Exiting the economic crisis 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at a conference at the Colegio 
de  Ingenieros  de  Caminos,  Canales  y  Puertos,  (School  of  Civil  Engineers),  Madrid, 
18 February 2014. 
 Let me first thank the School of Civil Engineers, their Governing Board and its President for 
inviting me to participate in this conference. 
Civil engineers are one of the most prestigious professional groups in our country, and their 
contribution over many years to the development of our economy and society has been most 
important. Currently, they are moreover participating decisively in the expansion abroad of 
our construction and engineering companies, raising them to the ranks of the international 
first division. 
In my address today I shall discuss our view at the Banco de España of recent developments 
in the Spanish economy and the prospects open to us to emerge from the crisis that began 
seven years back. 
I shall begin by recalling the severity of this crisis, moving next to discussing the discernible 
signs  of  recovery.  Finally,  I  shall  refer  to  the  complexity  of  the  current  situation  and  the 
challenges ahead for us. 
The  crisis  has  been  of  a  depth  and  seriousness  unprecedented  in  our  economic  history. 
Since  2007,  the  level  of  Spanish  GDP  has  fallen  by  seven  percentage  points;  that  said, 
perhaps the most representative measure of the severity of the crisis has been the labour 
market, with unemployment falling by 19% and a major increase in the unemployment rate, 
which affected 26% of the labour force at the close of 2013. 
The crisis has moreover entailed a substantial readjustment in the composition of GDP, with 
a strong decline in national demand, broadly across all its different components, but a fall of 
even  greater  depth  in  investment  in  construction.  Late  last  year,  the  cumulative  decline  in 
investment in construction was 50% compared with its level in the pre-crisis years. Adding to 
the collapse in residential investment from 2010, following the onset of the public spending 
adjustment plans, was the decline in non-residential construction, where civil engineering is 
to be found. 
Naturally, the external environment has played a major role in the origins and unfolding of 
our crisis. 
The  contraction  in  world  trade  during  the  2009  recession  strongly  affected  our  exports. 
However,  as  from  2011,  net  external  demand  has  been  markedly  buoyant,  mitigating  the 
contractionary effect of the fall in domestic demand on activity, and it has provided for the 
correction of some of the macroeconomic imbalances I shall refer to. 
Further, the climate of uncertainty which took hold on international financial markets and the 
subsequent fall-off in financing flows had a more marked impact on those economies, such 
as Spain, which are more reliant on external saving. 
Nor  can  we  forget  that  the  2009  recession  also  disclosed  a  series  of  weaknesses  in  the 
institutional  arrangements  for  the  euro.  Membership  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
provides  for  extra  stability  and  resilience.  Unsurprisingly,  then,  at  the  height  of  the  crisis 
when  the  very  survival  of  the  monetary  union  and  the  euro  were  in  doubt,  the  wave  of 
mistrust affected us most forcefully. 
That said, strictly domestic factors played a substantial role in the source and development of 
the crisis in our economy. This was because unsustainable imbalances built up, even in the 
absence of an international crisis, and our vulnerability to external shocks thereby increased. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I shall now briefly review some of these imbalances. 
During  the  prolonged  expansionary  phase  before  the  crisis  broke,  heavy  losses  in 
competitiveness built up as a result of the growing divergence of our prices and costs relative 
to those of the euro area countries, with which the exchange rate had been set at the onset 
of monetary union. This was the outcome of the continuous pressure exerted by domestic 
spending  on  plant  capacity,  driven  by  very  loose  financial  conditions,  whose  expansionary 
effects were not countered by a more restrictive economic policy stance, most specifically in 
respect of budgetary policy or supply-side policies. 
The  financial  counterpart  of  this  excess  spending  was  the  accumulation  by  Spanish 
households  and 
firms  of  excessive  debt.  This  over-indebtedness  was  moreover 
accompanied by a strong bias towards the construction and real estate development sector 
and, inevitably in an economy as strongly banked as Spain, this also led to excessive growth 
in bank lending and excesses in banks’ risk concentration. 
The  relative  ease  with which  these  debts  built up  and  their  subsequent  effects  on activity, 
employment  and  financial  stability  were  not,  in  any  event,  an  exclusively  Spanish 
phenomenon. Indeed, these and other similar developments have given rise to widespread 
initiatives  at  the  international  level  to  strengthen  the  economic  policy  tool  box,  with  a  new 
instrument – namely macroprudential supervision – being incorporated to head off this type 
of situation. 
In  any  event,  the  losses  in  competitiveness  and  excessive  debt  led  to  a  large-scale 
imbalance in our foreign trade, resulting in a deficit of 10% of GDP in 2007 and requiring the 
resort to large volumes of external saving to ensure trade financing. 
But  other  elements  of  fragility  emerged  with  the  crisis.  The  worsening  macroeconomic 
scenario  and,  in  particular,  the  collapse  in  employment  had  a  most  adverse  influence  on 
public finances. The characteristics of labour market regulation meant that the effects of the 
adjustment  to  the  sudden  change  in  the  business  cycle  fell  basically  on  employment,  and 
hardly on wage conditions or on greater hiring flexibility. In turn, the marked deterioration in 
public  finances  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  institutional  workings  of  the  public  sector;  in 
particular, the insufficiency of the disciplinary framework in place to ensure compliance with 
budget targets. 
Overall,  the  high  dependence  of  the  Spanish  economy  on  financing  from  the  rest  of  the 
world, the duration and scale of job destruction and the size of the budgetary deterioration 
contributed  to  notably  compounding  the  intensity  of  the  effects  of  the  economic  crisis  in 
Spain. 
Fortunately, since the second half of 2013 our economy has initiated a phase of recovery, 
one no doubt very gradual but which has enabled it to emerge from the downturn that took 
hold in early 2011. In recent quarters, domestic demand has begun to rise, underpinned by 
some recovery in household consumption and investment in equipment, while the declines in 
investment  in  construction  continued  to  lessen.  Furthermore,  the  positive  contribution  of 
external  demand  began  to  lose  momentum,  marking  the  start  of  the  rebalancing  of  both 
expenditure components. 
The  labour  market  performance  has  also  been  a  pleasant  surprise  since  mid-2013,  with 
increasingly lower rates of decline in employment, which turned positive at the close of 2013 
for the first time since 2008. Wage moderation, stimulated by the effect of the labour reform, 
is  beginning  to  make  itself  felt  in  employment.  And  this  against  a  background  of  price 
stability, which contributes to easing the pressure on spending exerted by the slow recovery 
in household and corporate income. 
As at the very source of the crisis, it is possible in this incipient change in trend to identify 
certain impulses originating beyond our borders, while others are generated at home. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The former include most notably the pick-up in the world economy since last summer. The 
turnaround has chiefly been based on the better performance of the advanced economies, 
including  the  European  countries,  which  remain  our  main  trade  partners.  Conversely,  the 
emerging  economies  are  losing  some  of  their  momentum.  Indeed,  investors  and  analysts 
have shifted their chief concerns in recent months towards this group of economies. 
The  incipient  recovery  in  Spain  is  also  benefiting  from  the  easing  of  financial  tensions  in 
European markets. In particular, measures by the European Central Bank and the headway 
made in correcting the weaknesses detected in the governance of the euro, and in creating a 
banking union within the area, have contributed to improving the financing conditions of the 
Spanish  economy.  That  said,  the  cost  our  households  and  firms  still  have  to  pay  for  their 
credit remains overly high for the accommodative stance of monetary policy, revealing that it 
is  not  yet  appropriate  to  talk  about  the  full  normalisation  of  the  single  monetary  policy 
transmission process in the euro area. 
Undoubtedly,  however,  domestic  impulses  are  playing  a  decisive  role  in  improving 
perceptions of the Spanish economy, and in laying the foundations for a sustained path of 
recovery. These include most notably the progress in correcting imbalances and in adopting 
reforms in different areas. 
As regards imbalances, the most visible achievement has been in restoring competitiveness 
and  in  correcting  the  balance  of  payments  deficit.  The  adjustment  of  costs  and  relative 
prices, albeit with some delay compared with what would have been desirable, has ultimately 
placed  the  Spanish  economy  in  a  much  more  competitive  position.  The  reduction  in  unit 
labour costs has allowed virtually all of the losses in competitiveness that had built up in the 
first  ten  years  of  the  euro  to  be  absorbed.  The  process  has  not,  however,  been  free  from 
difficulties,  since  it  was  initially  based,  as  I  stated  earlier,  almost  exclusively  on  job 
destruction. From 2010, the contribution of the adjustment in wages progressively became 
more prominent, a trajectory which stepped up following the 2012 labour market reform. 
The gains in competitiveness and Spanish firms’ greater export-geared thrust are providing 
for  the  growing  penetration  of  our  products  in  foreign  markets,  against  a  background  of 
increased geographical diversification and higher goods and services exports. The marked 
decline in imports during these years also reflects the gains in competitiveness, although the 
weakness of domestic demand has likewise helped contain purchases from the rest of the 
world.  Set  against  these  developments,  the  least  favourable  aspect  of  our  foreign  trade 
continues to be the high dependence on imported energy. 
As a result of the foregoing, our economy posted – for the first time since 1997 – a balance 
of  payments  surplus,  i.e.  net  external  lending,  of  1.5%  of  GDP.  This  trajectory  will 
foreseeably continue over the coming years, meaning that Spain’s high level of foreign debt 
will be declining. 
On  the  fiscal  front,  there  has  been  an  intensive  drive  to  correct  the  budget  deficit,  as 
indicated by the significant reduction in the structural general government deficit since 2009. 
The  increased  transparency  and  the  strengthening  of  the  fiscal  framework  further  to  the 
approval  of  the  Law  on  Budgetary  Stability  and  Financial  Sustainability  in  2012  assist  the 
different tiers of government –central, regional and local – in meeting the budget targets. In 
turn, the reform of the pensions system is a necessary step for ensuring the sustainability of 
public  finances  in  the  medium  term.  Despite  these  achievements,  the  rising  course  of  the 
public  debt/GDP  ratio  has  not  yet  been  halted and  is  a  reminder  of  the  scale  of  the  fiscal 
effort still required. 
There has also been progress in private-sector deleveraging. The sluggishness of household 
and  corporate  income  is  slowing  the  process,  as  a  result  of  which  the  weight  of  the 
adjustment is falling on the contraction in lending extended to these sectors. 
That  said,  this  contraction  in  credit  may  be  and  indeed  is  proving  compatible  with  its 
appropriate restructuring. The analysis of the Banco de España suggests that, even in years 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
as difficult as the past two, the proportion of firms that have not seen a fall-off in their bank 
loans  has  been  significant,  around  30%.  And  more  significantly,  those  that  have  not  seen 
their  credit  decline  are,  precisely,  those  firms  which,  in  general,  were  departing  from  a 
sounder position of debt and profitability. 
As the recovery takes root, this positive restructuring of credit will foreseeably step up, and 
lending  at  the  aggregate  level  may  also  be  expected  to  normalise.  It  will  be  then  that  the 
process of clean-up, recapitalisation and restructuring of the Spanish banking system will be 
in a position to yield its full benefits. Once the problems of oversizing and risk concentration 
are  overcome,  our  banking  system  will  be  better  placed  to  meet  the  solvent  demand  for 
credit that will emerge with the economic recovery. 
So  far  I  have  talked  about  the  main  aspects  of  the  ongoing  re-balancing  of  the  Spanish 
economy and the factors underlying the path of recovery. Allow me to conclude with some 
thoughts on the complexity of the current economic juncture and the challenges that must be 
overcome to ensure that the incipient recovery leads to an increase in our long-term growth 
capacity. 
The  most  likely  outlook  for  recovery  in  the  coming  months  involves  relatively  moderate 
growth  in  activity.  Foreseeably,  domestic  demand  will  continue  to  gain  in  weight,  albeit 
moving on a very gradual course of recovery, in line with what is forecast for its attendant 
determinants. Investment in construction will join this recovery, albeit taking into account its 
somewhat  more  negative  position  at  the  start  of  this  year,  lagging  the  other  domestic 
demand components. External demand, meanwhile, will maintain its positive contribution to 
GDP, but with lower contributions than during the crisis years. 
Several risk factors cloud this central scenario of recovery. First, the growth outlook for the 
euro area continues to point to moderate increases in activity in the coming quarters, likewise 
subject to downside risks. 
Moreover,  further  headway  in  fiscal  consolidation  will  be  inevitable,  which  does  not  allow 
expansionary budgetary policies to be applied in the short term. In these circumstances, it is 
of great importance that any tax reform should prove conducive to economic efficiency and 
growth. 
With regard to private debt, credit may not be expected to recover at the aggregate level until 
economic growth has done so. Meanwhile, the necessary deleveraging should continue to be 
compatible with the positive restructuring of credit, as attested to by the latest developments. 
In conclusion, I would say that economists and, even more so, those of us who work in the 
monetary and financial field, tend to focus on the short or very short term. But I would like to 
close my address with a reflection on the medium and long term. 
The  twin  engines  of  economic  growth  are  demographic  growth  and  increased  productivity. 
Our worrying population trend responds to complex economic, social and cultural factors that 
cannot be rapidly changed. But that does not mean that action should not be taken, as far as 
possible, to improve this trend. 
Productivity  growth  is  directly  related  to  capital  formation,  which  is  in  turn  connected  to 
saving.  Accordingly,  any  policy  wishing  to  be  effective  in  enhancing  productivity  must  be 
underpinned  by  incentives  to  save  and  the  lifting  of  any  related  institutional  obstacles, 
something  which  is  also  connected  to  the  reforms  that  boost  competitiveness  and  legal 
certainty. Spain must persist with reform policy geared to these objectives. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
