  Nadine Baudot-Trajtenberg: Israel’s market developments and monetary 
policy objectives 
Remarks  by  Dr  Nadine  Baudot-Trajtenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the 
Globes Capital Market Conference, Tel Aviv, 2 June 2014. 
 This is my first public speech as Deputy Governor, and I am pleased to be back to speak to 
those active in the capital market. In my remarks, I would like to look back on the Monetary 
Committee meeting that took place a week ago, in which we decided to leave the interest 
rate at its current level, and I would like to speak about what we saw, and what we did not 
see, in the market’s developments. I would like to re-state that the Bank of Israel has three 
objectives  that  inform  our  policy  decisions.  The  first,  and  classic,  objective,  which  is  so 
relevant to the State of Israel from an historical standpoint, is obviously price stability. The 
second objective deals, among other things, with real developments, and the third is not a 
new issue, but it is one with new importance – financial stability. This means that when we 
look  at  the  data,  we  look,  obviously,  at  inflation,  and  perhaps  even  more  importantly,  at 
inflation  expectations.  Second,  we  assess  the  real  developments  in  the  economy  and 
interpret  the  new  data  that  has  become  available  in  the  past  month,  and  third,  we  track 
developments  in  the  assets  markets,  and  the  level  of  leverage  in  the  economy,  which  is 
obviously one of the most important indicators of financial stability. 
Let’s start with inflation. Inflation over the past 12 months is at the lower bound of the target 
range  of  1  to  3  percent.  In  contrast,  expectations  are  closer  to  the  midpoint  of  the  range, 
although they have recently declined slightly. We also look at inflation expectations over the 
long term, which are also within the target range. Right now, if we analyze the relatively low 
level  of  inflation  that  we  have,  we  can  try  to  understand  how  much  of  it  comes  from  low 
inflation in Israel and how much is imported from abroad. We can see that inflation abroad is 
also low, and the case of Switzerland is prominent, as they have been coping for some time 
with  low,  and  even  negative,  inflation,  which  is  obviously  not  the  situation  in  Israel.  If  we 
break  down  the  Consumer  Price  Index  and  look  separately  at  inflation  in  the  tradable 
components  and  inflation  in  the  nontradable  components,  we  can  see  a  significant  gap: 
Inflation of tradable goods has been negative for the past few months. In the past 12 months, 
prices  of  tradable  goods  declined  by  0.86  percent.  This  means  that  we  are  basically 
importing deflation from abroad, some of which can be attributed to the level of appreciation 
of the exchange rate, and some is simply the low inflation rates from abroad. In contrast, in 
nontradable goods, we are still seeing inflation at the mid-point of the target range – about 
2 percent.  As  such,  when  discussing  inflation,  we  find  that  both  the  expectations,  and  the 
inflation derived from domestic developments are not in the dangerous area of deflation, in 
contrast  with  many  countries  in  which  the  central  banks  must  take  into  consideration  the 
concern of entering deflation. 
Regarding developments in the real economy, we see that growth in the Israeli economy is 
very much in line with growth in the advanced economies that are our major trading partners. 
With that, the intensity of the waves of growth and moderation is very different. Just as in 
looking at inflation, here too we ask ourselves to what extent developments in Israel derive 
from what is happening abroad, and how much of it is derived from what is happening here. 
In 2013, GDP grew by 3.3 percent, but if we adjust for the effect of the start of natural gas 
production,  growth  was  about  2.5  percent.  The  Bank  of  Israel  Research  Department’s 
forecast for 2014 is for growth of 3.1 percent – this is the forecast from the end of March, and 
obviously we update the forecast on a regular basis every three months – and after adjusting 
for  the  effect  of  natural  gas  production,  the  forecast  is  for  growth  of  2.8  percent.  In  other 
words,  after  adjusting  for  the  effect  of  natural  gas  production,  the  forecast  is  for  some 
acceleration of growth in 2014, and not the opposite. With that, data for the first quarter of 
2014 were recently published, and were disappointing. GDP grew at a rate of 2.1 percent, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  including a decline in private consumption, not only in the consumption of durables, but also 
in current consumption, which is very rare. The last time we saw negative growth in private 
consumption was at the height of the global financial crisis. 
The  question  arises  as  to  whether  these  are  really  serious  signals  of  moderation  in  the 
growth of the economy. In this context, we must remember that first quarter data in the US 
and Europe were also disappointing, and some of that is related to the weather in both the 
US  and  Europe.  The  Americans  and  the  Europeans  did  not  see  this  as  a  sign  of  future 
moderation, but as a one-time development, and the update of the forecasts reflected only 
the  surprise  of  the  first  quarter,  and  not  expectations  of  moderation  later  on.  We  must 
assume that this development also had an impact on the Israeli economy. Beyond that, the 
first quarter data that were published are initial data, and we know well that these data go 
through significant revisions for the most part. We must therefore relate to them as part of a 
whole of other indicators that we look at, some of which were negative and some positive. 
The  Composite  State  of  the  Economy  Index  did  not  change  in  recent  months,  which  is 
certainly  an  indicator  that  points  to  a  slowdown  in  the  rate  of  growth.  Goods  exports 
(excluding ships, planes and diamonds, at current prices) have not grown for a number of 
quarters, and we see that in the first four months of the year, there is even a decline. Exports 
are certainly affected by the developments abroad that I outlined, and also, obviously, by the 
exchange rate. It should be emphasized that in this context, I am referring to the level of the 
exchange rate and not the change in it. Basically, since the beginning of the year, there has 
not  been  a  material  change  in  the  effective  exchange  rate,  following  the  appreciation  that 
took  place  mainly  in  the  first  half  of  2013.  However,  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  has  a 
delayed  effect  on  exports  to  a  certain  extent,  and  it  is  therefore  possible  that  exports  are 
currently reacting to the appreciation that took place earlier. 
Among  the  positive  indicators,  Bank  Hapoalim’s  Consumer  Confidence  Index  is  in  the 
positive area, and is even increasing. Services exports, which account for about one-third of 
exports,  are  growing  at  a  respectable  pace,  and  the  main  component  that  is  growing  is 
obviously  business  services,  and  within 
industries 
characteristically  better  absorb  the  strengthening  of  the  shekel,  and  developments  abroad 
also  apparently  have  less  of  an  impact  on  the  consumption  of  services  that  our  industries 
excel  at  producing.  Health  tax  receipts,  which  provide  an  indication  of  total  wages  in  the 
economy, are increasing. Basically, all of the data from the labor market indicate continued 
growth,  although  we  must  remember  that  they  are  provided  with  some  delay.  We  see 
continued increase in the participation rate, decline in the unemployment rate, and growth in 
the number of employed persons. All of these data indicate a relatively healthy labor market, 
which is quite different from what we see in both the US and Europe. This growth is taking 
place without any pressure on wages. In both the business sector and the public services 
sector, wages are quite stable, which says that the labor market has not yet exhausted its 
growth  potential,  and  is  thereby  not  leading  to  inflationary  pressure.  As  such,  overall, 
developments in the market do not provide a clear picture, and we can even say that they 
provide more of an Impressionist picture, and that anyone can interpret it any way he wishes. 
The data that we saw, in any case, did not lead to a clear conclusion that made it necessary 
to change policy in either direction. 
The third objective of the Bank of Israel is to support financial stability. In this context, it is of 
particular  importance  that  we  look  at  the  level  of  leverage  in  the  economy,  and  at  asset 
prices,  and  ask  ourselves  whether  we  see  any  risks  from  this  direction.  In  many  places, 
including at this conference, and certainly at many central banks, people deal with the very 
complex issue of the low interest rate environment, both in Israel and abroad, and with the 
distortions that may be created by such a low interest rate level. This is also an issue that we 
discuss. When looking at early indicators of financial instability, we need to look not only at 
the levels, but also at the growth rates – of both prices and of levels of leverage. And here, 
the picture that we have in Israel is quite different from almost every other economy that we 
know. The overall burden of debt in the economy – the total debt of the public sector, the 
business sector, and households, relative to GDP – has been declining very slowly over the 
that,  software  services.  These 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  past few years. The government is adopting a long-term policy of reducing the debt burden, 
and  we  can  see  that  between  2007  and  2013,  the  burden  of  debt  of  the  public  sector 
declined by 7.5 percentage points. In contrast, in most advanced economies, we saw very 
rapid growth in the public sector debt – 29 percentage points in Europe, and 40 percentage 
points  in  the  US.  In  terms  of  the  level,  Israel’s  debt-to-GDP  ratio  stands  at  67  percent,  a 
marked improvement compared to the past, even from the standpoint of relative position. If 
we look at the business sector during the same years, we can see that in Israel, there was a 
decline of 25 percentage points in the ratio of business sector debt to GDP, and this is also 
very different than any other place in the world. In the US, despite a number of years of credit 
crunch as a result of the crisis, there was growth of 11 percent, and growth of 14 percent in 
Europe. It should be noted that debt in some countries did not change a lot, and the growth 
in the ratio is a result of contraction of GDP. In terms of the level, we are at a relatively low 
level  of  business  debt  to  GDP,  73  percent,  compared  to  85  percent  in  the  US,  and 
110 percent in Europe. Among households as well, we see a very different picture than what 
we  see  in  other  countries.  In  some  countries,  the  crisis  was  a  result  of  surplus  household 
leverage, and they needed to undergo a deleveraging process. That is beginning to happen 
in the US, with a decline of 10 percent, and in Ireland, and Spain as well, but there are still a 
number of countries in which this process has still not taken place, and we must expect that it 
will take place. In Israel, on the other hand, total household debt as a percentage of GDP 
remained  quite  stable  during  this  period,  despite  the  very  rapid  growth  in  the  balance  of 
mortgages. The level is also relatively low, 39 percent compared to 71 percent in Europe. 
The Americans are known to take credit more lightly, and there, the ratio is 82 percent, as 
stated, following a decline of 10 percentage points in recent years. 
To sum up the picture of credit, credit to the business sector is in a virtual standstill, and the 
only  growth  we  have  seen  is  in  housing  credit,  which  has  not  led  to  an  increase  in  the 
household  debt  ratio,  which  is  still  at  a  relatively  low  level.  The  decline  in  credit  to  the 
business sector perhaps compensates somewhat for the relatively sharp growth we saw prior 
to  the  crisis,  but  to  some  extent,  it  is  still  a  mystery.  An  economy  that  continues  to  grow 
needs credit, and we have not seen an increase in credit, either from the banking system or 
from non-bank sources. The rate of bond issuances has slowed recently, of which issuances 
in  the  real  estate  sector  increased  significantly  this  year,  which  is  something  that  we  are 
obviously continuing to look at, although the quality of credit by rating has improved this year. 
As such, the issue that we need to think about is that the economy is growing while there is 
no increase in credit to the business sector. We will try to look at the price of credit, and for 
this purpose, we will assess the Tel Bond spreads. If the lack of growth in credit was a result 
of a lack of supply, we would expect to see an increase in the price of credit. In contrast, we 
see  a  decline  in  the  spreads,  which  points  to  a  situation  of  a  lack  of  demand  for  credit. 
Another interesting phenomenon is the spread between the short-term interest rate and the 
long-term interest rate, which is relatively high over time in Israel. In each period, there was 
apparently a different explanation for the relatively high spread in Israel. In 2000, the period 
was the beginning of large Shahar 10-year bond issuances, and there were still concerns of 
inflation,  which  could  have  led  to  higher  spreads.  Afterward,  in  2006–07,  there  was  an 
extraordinary  boom  period  abroad,  with  much  less  here,  so  the  spreads  were  perhaps 
greater in Israel. Even if the explanation is different for each period, it apparently reflects a 
higher long-term premium in Israel, meaning that despite the decline in the monetary interest 
rate, the long-term risk in Israel is apparently greater than in the rest of the world. There are 
price increases in the stock market, no different than what we see in other countries. 
In  summation,  when  we  look  at  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  three  objectives,  the  low  inflation  is 
apparently partly due to imported inflation from abroad. The picture of real economic activity 
is unclear, with some negative and some positive indicators, particularly in the first quarter. In 
terms of leverage, there are high levels of housing credit, but we don’t see very high levels of 
leverage  in  the  overall  economy  that  could  lead  to  a  dangerous  path.  Summing  up  all  of 
these  components,  the  Monetary  Committee  decided  to  leave  the  interest  rate  unchanged 
this month. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
