Andrew Bailey: City Week 2014 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at City Week 2014: The 
international financial services forum, London, 31 March 2014. 
 It is a great pleasure to be at City Week again. I am most grateful that you have timed it to 
coincide  with  our  first  birthday.  It  is  a  good  time  to  reflect  on  a  year  that  has  had  some 
moments. 
I have not tired of emphasising that our approach to regulation is necessarily forward-looking. 
I have been asked quite a few times over the last year what is my objective for the PRA. It is 
simple to describe but history would suggest less easy to achieve. I have been in the Bank of 
England for quite a while, and this new system is the fourth approach to financial regulation 
in the UK in my career. From that, I draw at least one conclusion, namely that we have a 
strong need to achieve a stable institutional structure of financial regulation in the UK. We 
are not alone in this challenge, but that does not change the objective, it just means we have 
company. That is my objective for the PRA, and for the new system of regulation as a whole, 
and I have been pleased to see the PRA Board and our staff working effectively to pursue 
that objective. 
There is another lesson that I draw from this history, namely that there must be some difficult 
impediments to achieving the goal of institutional stability in financial regulation. To start with, 
achieving consistency and clarity in identifying the objective of regulation has been a problem 
in  the  past.  The  new  approach  anchors  the  PRA’s  primary  objectives  of  the  safety  and 
soundness of firms and the protection of insurance policyholders in the broader goal of the 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  This  very  clearly  ties  together  micro  and  macro-prudential 
regulation, whose objectives are consistent. And, we now have a secondary objective around 
the competition implications of our actions, which I welcome. 
Just  under two  weeks  ago  we  announced  changes to  the  Bank  of  England’s  strategy  and 
structure.  In  doing  so,  we  adopted  a  single  mission,  namely  to  promote  the  public  good 
through  achieving  and  maintaining  financial  and  monetary  stability.  This  single  mission  is 
much more than just the speak of management, it is a clear change intended to promote the 
integration  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  objectives  of  monetary  and  financial  stability.  This 
integration of objectives into a single mission represents a very deliberate decision that the 
Bank  of  England  should  not  be  organised  as  a  series  of  silos  defined  by  our  different 
statutory  objectives  and  by  the  structure  of  policy  making  committees  given  to  us  in 
legislation. To be clear, this is not going against the wish of Parliament in establishing these 
structures;  rather,  it  is  designed  to  reinforce  that  wish  by  making  the  pieces  work  closely 
together. And, it also emphasises that the Bank of England is a public policy institution with 
the  overarching  objective  and  responsibility  of  serving  the  public  good.  Interestingly,  the 
language that we found to describe this public good comes from the Bank’s original Charter 
of 1694, though I should recognise that the detail of the description of what constituted the 
public good in 1694 is rather different from the one we have today. 
The  key  thing  about  a  public  good  is  that  no  individual  or  group  of  individuals  can  be 
excluded  from  using  or  consuming  it,  and  use  by  one  individual  does  not  reduce  the 
availability to others. Fresh air is a public good, and so is the stability of the economy. In our 
world, history shows that it takes a crisis to provide a decisive impetus to create and maintain 
the emphasis on the public good. Thus, stable low inflation – monetary stability – received its 
decisive  impetus  in  many  countries,  including  the  UK  from  the  painful  experience  of  high 
inflation, most notably in the 1970’s. Out of that came a broad consensus on a central idea  
– low inflation is a necessary condition for stable economic growth and its resulting benefits 
for well-being. And, the central idea came with a coalescing around a view on the institutional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
structure  of  monetary  policy,  that  an  independent  central  bank,  with  a  clear  objective  and 
target emanating from the public via Parliament was the best way to achieve and sustain the 
public good. I have absolutely no doubt that in the UK this change has been an outstanding 
success. Moreover, the benefits of the public good are not challenged – there is a difference 
between a healthy debate on what the setting of policy should be at any point in time and an 
unhealthy undermining of the fundamental public good. We have seen the former, and the 
record of the last nearly twenty years shows that this important distinction has been robustly 
maintained, all for the good. 
It is therefore easy to conclude that another crisis, the financial crisis, has made the same 
mark. Likewise, it is easy to conclude that a stable financial system is a necessary condition 
of  stable  economic  growth.  So  far,  so  good.  But  it  has  been  less  easy  to  describe  simply 
what  constitutes  financial  stability.  It  doesn’t  reduce  to  a  single  measure,  like  the  rate  of 
inflation.  It  has  many  heads.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  this  per  se,  but  it  may  help  to 
explain why it has taken longer to arrive at a stable institutional structure for achieving it. It is 
also  the  case,  I  think,  that  the  success  of  the  innovation  in  monetary  policy  obscured  the 
need  to  develop  complementary  tools  to  achieve  macro-economic  objectives  in  financial 
stability, what is today known as macro-prudential policy. That meant too much dependence 
was placed on monetary policy and too little was done to develop macro-prudential policy. 
I say this because you should interpret the changes to the Bank’s strategy and structure as 
very  intentionally  pushing  the  other  way,  to  ensure  that  we  are  One  Bank  integrating  our 
public policy objectives for one Public Good. 
I want to spend a bit more time on this whole issue, and in doing so reflect on the first year of 
the PRA, and then what lies ahead. My experience tells me that we have had to work harder, 
and  still  have  to  do  so,  to  embed  the  idea  that  a  stable  financial  system  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  economic  growth  and  other  economic  welfare  benefits.  Let  me  give  some 
examples. The most obvious one is that if we want a stronger recovery of bank lending, then 
we need a well capitalised banking system. If we want the banking system to be able to fund 
that lending, it needs to be well capitalised. I believe that the last year has seen good news 
on this front for the UK banking system. Yes, we have had one or two very highly publicised 
revelations on legacy problems – but none of that should take away from the fact that the UK 
system  is  stronger  today,  in  my  view  markedly  so.  But,  I  can  tell  you  that  achieving  such 
progress on this public good has not been as straightforward or uncontroversial as you might 
think. And that continues to concern me, because it conveys the message that acceptance of 
the benefit of the public good is not as entrenched as it needs to be – we have work to do to 
build the consensus around  what constitutes financial stability. I am firmly of the view that 
last  year’s  actions  on  capital  were  correct,  and  I  have  no  doubt  at  all  that  the  recovery  in 
bank  lending  to  support  economic  activity  requires  a  belief  and  an  expectation  that  the 
banking  system  is  and  will  remain  well  capitalised,  and  that  if  we  doubt  either  of  these 
positions, action will be taken. And that is why we, and other countries, are introducing, or 
have done introduced, regular stress tests. It is about regulation being forward-looking and 
using judgement. 
The  second  point  I  would  make  here  is  that  a  stable  financial  system  is  a  necessary  pre-
condition  of  realising  other  benefits.  Let  me  give  a  few  pertinent  examples.  The  first  one 
comes  from  the  insurance  industry,  in  which  I  also  have  a  very  strong  interest.  The 
Government announced some very major reforms in the Budget to the provision of pensions, 
notably in the annuities market. 
There are very clear public policy objectives behind this announcement, which are not about 
financial  stability  but  are  about  economic  welfare.  The  key  test  for  me  –  which  I  think  is 
passed – is that the industry for which the PRA is the prudential regulator is in a sufficiently 
robust financial position from the point of view of its prudential standards that meeting and 
maintaining those standards should not get in the  way of achieving the other public policy 
objective in terms of people’s welfare in old age. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A second important example on financial stability at work comes in the housing market in the 
UK.  In  the  statement  issued  last  week  following  its  Policy  Meeting,  the  Bank’s  Financial 
Policy Committee noted the continued evidence of increasing momentum in the UK housing 
market.  Although  a  number  of  indicators  remain  below  their  long-run  average  levels, 
including  mortgage  approvals,  there  has  been  a  marked  strengthening  in  activity.  House 
prices are not only rising on the national average, by around 10% in the year to February, but 
also in the second half of last year there were increases in all regions of the country, though 
of course the scale of these increases is not even. 
The share of mortgages at higher loan to income ratios is greater than at any time since the 
measurement began in 2005, though the share of high loan to value lending remains low by 
historical standards. But here, too, there are clear signs of an increase in high LTV mortgage 
products on offer. 
Towards  the  end  of  last  year,  the  FPC  announced  measures  to  reduce  the  stimulus 
previously provided, for instance from the Bank’s Funding for Lending Scheme, and outlined 
further  instruments  it  had  available  to  mitigate  potential  risks  to  financial  stability  from  the 
housing  market.  Given  the  increasing  momentum,  the  FPC  stated  its  clear  intention  to  be 
vigilant to emerging vulnerabilities and to take further proportionate and graduated action if 
warranted. Also, the FCA has undertaken, from next month, as part of the implementation of 
the  Mortgage  Market  Review  to  work  to  maintain  stronger  underwriting  standards  –  I  say 
“maintain”  deliberately  because  we  observe  evidence  of  a  welcome  strengthening  by  the 
industry of such standards. The FPC, for its part, has recommended that it should in future 
be  able  to  give  guidance  on  appropriate  interest  rates  to  be  used  by  banks  in  their 
affordability tests. The FCA is putting this new arrangement into effect. 
In its latest statement, the FPC made clear that it had discussed the appropriate scenario for 
this year’s bank stress testing exercise. Like all stress tests, this scenario will not represent 
the  FPC’s  central  expectation  of  what  is  likely  to  happen,  but  rather  act  as  a  coherent 
representation of risks in the tail of the distribution of possible future outcomes against which 
the resilience of banks can be tested. A key part of this test will be to examine the resilience 
of banks to a housing market shock and a snap back in interest rates. 
Let  me  therefore  finish  by  drawing  seven  important  messages  for  the  future  from  this 
example  of  UK  housing  conditions  and  how  the  new  system  of  financial  regulation  will 
operate: 
• 
first,  an  effective  macro-economic  framework  needs  the  credibility  to  influence 
people’s expectations of future conditions and how our policy actions will influence 
them. Our actions, and therefore the expectations of them, have to be credible and 
therefore consistent over time. The FPC has taken steps to lay out the future actions 
it would take if it judged the momentum of the housing market to be too strong; 
second, in doing this “laying-out” of future actions, we are signalling that we will act 
to  prevent  the  pro-cyclical  tendencies  of  the  past  –  whereby  lending  and 
underwriting standards weakened in the good times and then suffered a knee-jerk 
reaction back when conditions deteriorated; 
third, the FPC and PRA are going to be very explicit in their use of forward-looking 
judgemental  tools  of  prudential  supervision,  of  which  stress  tests  are  a  prime 
example; 
fourth, our policy-making tools in the Bank of England will be joined up, consistent 
with our single-mission directed at the public good. A clear example of this is that 
our three statutory bodies, the MPC, FPC and PRA Board will work together closely. 
And  likewise,  we  are  working  across  the  institution  to  maximise  our  very 
considerable international engagement; 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   fifth,  while  it  is  a  real  strength  of  the  new  system  that  conduct  and  prudential 
supervision have their own institutions that can provide the focus that is essential, 
where  we  should  work  together  we  do,  as  the  example  of  mortgage  underwriting 
standards illustrates; 
sixth, our approach is to use judgment to set the right incentives for the firms that we 
regulate to take the actions themselves rather than default to the regulators to do 
the work. I welcome the action taken by firms on mortgage underwriting standards 
as an example of that process, and more broadly I welcome the recommendations 
of the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards not least because they put 
the  whole  issue  of  incentivisation  of  the  right  behaviour  at  the  front  of  their 
recommendations; 
and  last,  returning  to  my  earlier  theme,  we  want  to  create  and  preserve  financial 
stability as a platform to enable choices to be made in other areas of public policy 
free of concerns that our objective might be put in jeopardy by doing so. A prime 
example  of  this  is  to  enable  conditions  to  exist  which  can  enable  people  to  buy 
homes. 
I hope this gives a good sense of what we are about. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
