Raghuram Rajan: Bold face of India’s economy speaks out 
Interview with Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in The Australian 
Financial Review published on 24 February 2014. 
 Emerging markets Jacob Greber and Greg Earl report on governor with an impeccable pedigree. 
Raghuram  Rajan  represents  the  bold  face  of  India’s  potential  new  economy  –  impeccably 
credentialed, upbeat and ready to force himself onto centre stage in the global debate about 
the reshaping of the world economy. 
Appointed as governor of the Reserve Bank of India in September, Rajan has taken no time 
to make himself heard in international financial markets. 
Last  month  he  took  the  United  States  Federal  Reserve  to  task  for  failing  to  recognise  the 
negative consequences to emerging markets from its tapering program, saying international 
monetary co-operation was breaking down. 
On  Saturday,  in  an  interview  with  The  Australian  Financial  Review,  he  warned  against 
allowing a world order to emerge in which “everybody is in their own boat and they sink or 
swim. We’re in it together.” 
The  former  International  Monetary  Fund  chief  economist  and  Harvard  economist  is  also 
leading  the  charge  against  the  US  Congress  for  stalling  reforms  to  the  fund  that  would 
increase the say of emerging economies. 
“There is only so long the world can wait for the US to get its act together [on IMF reform]”, 
he  said,  alluding  to  the  fact  that  countries  such  as  Brazil,  India,  Indonesia  and  China  are 
more likely to consider building alternative bodies to act as emergency lenders to troubled 
nations and as a global “truth teller” of economic realities. Above all, Rajan – a long-standing 
member of the global policymaking elite – wants to push emerging markets to the centre of 
agenda setting. 
Long  dominated  by  the  major  post-war  economies  of  the  North  Atlantic,  India,  alongside 
China, is part of a vanguard determined to be recognised for its ever-rising role in the global 
economy.  “We  emerging  markets  have  to  step  up  to  be  part  of  the  agenda  setting,  rather 
than [remain] passive when the agenda is set and then reacting to the agenda”, he said in a 
hotel conference room overlooking Sydney Harbour. 
“But I do think if the international fora are not responsive, both in terms of quotas but also in 
terms of hearing and allowing to the agenda to be set by more emerging markets, you will 
see a drift away towards more regional groupings, which would be unfortunate”, he said. 
Rajan abandoned a high-flying career as a global economist two years ago to return to India 
as the chief economic adviser to the Indian government. It was then facing a sharp downturn 
in growth and looking for a growth strategy before this year’s elections, which the Congress 
Party-led Coalition government is expected to lose. 
There  was  speculation  he  was  a  destined  for  an  even  bigger  job  and  that  came  with  his 
appointment as governor of the Reserve Bank of India. 
He has since pursued a more focused approach to monetary policy, with three rate rises. 
Capital  Economics  Asia  economist  Daniel  Martin  said  in  a  recent  report:  “Overall,  he  has 
made a good start. He has taken a tougher stand on inflation and is looking to push through 
a  broader  reform  agenda,  both  of  which  could  lay  the  foundation  for  stronger  long-term 
growth.” 
“But there are limits to what a central bank governor can achieve, which is why so much is 
riding on the make-up and performance of the next government.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Prescient forecaster 
Rajan  was  chief  economist  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  from  2003  to  2006.  While 
there, he came to the attention of global financial markets when he raised questions about 
the  health  of  the  global  financial  system  at  a  celebration  honouring  former  US  Federal 
Reserve Board chairman Alan Greenspan just before the global financial crisis broke out. 
He argued financial sector managers were encouraged to “take risks that generate severe 
adverse consequences with small probability but, in return, offer generous compensation the 
rest of the time”. This comment is now seen a prescient forecast of what happened after the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
One of the other participants in the weekend G20 meeting says: “To have a person of that 
pedigree  in  an  emerging  market  central  bank  is  quite  a  change.  He’s  the  first  star 
appointment to an emerging market central bank. No one has been appointed with this sort 
of profile.” 
“There’s  a  lot  of  interest  in  what  he  will  have  to  say  because  no  one  knows  just  what  he 
meant when he said what he said about tapering. He will be closely questioned”, the G20 
delegate said off the record. 
Not surprisingly, Rajan is a determined champion for the Indian economy. 
He  urges  Australian  companies  which  fear  perceived  corruption  and  heavy-handed  Indian 
bureaucracy  to  learn  from  the  experiences  of  Western  companies  that  have  stayed  the 
course. 
“With risk comes return, and people have learnt how to make money in India”, he says. 
While he admits there are the usual difficulties that come with an emerging market, many of 
India’s states are supportive to new businesses. 
“If you look at companies that have spent a few years trying to figure out how do things – and 
I don’t mean that in a negative sense – how the system works; you can survive without being 
corrupt, without having to pay bribes and actually make a ton of money.” 
He cites the example of Vodafone, the “poster child for companies with difficulties in India” 
after it was hit by a huge tax claim, which is now investing in more spectrum and buying out 
Indian minority holders of its local shares, a sign it sees the country as a good long-term bet. 
“You see that again and again: companies that have stayed the course in India are making 
money – more money than they are making elsewhere.” 
“Some of the foreign banks; foreign telecoms, across the board, if you go and spend some 
time trying to figure out how things work – and yes, it’s not a first world country, but there is 
rule of law, there is a supreme court which functions and gives reasonable decisions – and 
once you understand that things take a little time, there is money to be made.” 
“My banker friends tell me that multi-nationals are investing for the next five years. Credit to 
multinationals  is  picking  up  in  India,  even  while  Indian  companies  are  a  little  uncertain 
because  of  the  elections  and  of  course  new  entrants  are  perhaps  waiting  also  for  the 
elections.” 
Part  of  his  optimism  is  based  on  the  fact  India  is  one  of  the  world’s  fastest-growing 
economies,  with  major  infrastructure  and  energy  projects  slated  to  transform  the  nation  in 
coming years. 
“I’m  hopeful  as  that  comes,  we  will  start  seeing  a  slow  pickup  in  growth  away  from  the 
5 per cent [pace] it has been trundling over the past few quarters and back to the sixes and 
sevens.” 
He  argues  India  is  still  10  to  12  years  behind  China  when  it  comes  to  pursuing  growth 
boosting reforms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
“If  we  can  get  anywhere  near  China’s  rate  of  growth,  with  the  kind  of  controls  on  the 
environment that we have, we would be very lucky. But I think we can get near that.” 
“We need to do a few big things, and those include, for example, business regulation and 
infrastructure. We have some massive infrastructure projects on the way [such as] the Delhi-
Mumbai corridor.” 
“These ... will create an environment where logistics will be better, power will be better. I’m 
hopeful these will come on stream over the next three or four years.” 
“We must work harder on our human capital. We’ve got fantastic doctors and engineers and 
so on, but we need the mass [of people] to be better trained, better electricians, plumbers, 
factory  workers,  and  those  combined  with  the  factories  that  are  set  up  in  this  new 
infrastructure environment will be very helpful.” 
“And last, we need a financial sector which is first rate.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
