  Andreas Dombret: Deceptive tranquillity and the threat of reform fatigue 
– the need for international cooperation 
Opening remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  a  joint  seminar  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Istanbul, 4 July 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The Italian writer Edmondo de Amicis described Istanbul as “a universal beauty where poet 
and  archaeologist,  diplomat  and  merchant,  princess  and  sailor,  northerner  and  westerner 
screams with the same admiration”. As far as I am concerned, he could have added central 
bankers to the list of those who admire the city of Istanbul. 
Which is to say I am happy to be here today at the joint seminar of the Central Bank of the 
Republic  of  Turkey  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  I  would  like  to  thank  our  Turkish 
colleagues  for  their  hospitality,  and  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all  who  helped  make  this 
seminar possible. 
Turkey and Germany are closely connected. At the beginning of the 1960s, the first Turkish 
immigrants came to Germany, and today, more than 50 years later, around 3 million people 
of Turkish origin live within Germany’s borders. Our two countries are therefore connected 
not only at the political but also at a very personal level. 
Last year, the central banks of Turkey and Germany added a new level of partnership. Since 
November,  a  representative  of  the  Bundesbank  has  been  based  in  Istanbul  to  build 
networks,  to  share  information  and  ideas,  to  explain  the  Bundesbank’s  positions  and  to 
facilitate cooperation. This joint seminar on financial stability is the tangible outcome of these 
efforts. 
International cooperation in financial stability 
2. 
Today’s  and  tomorrow’s  seminar  covers  an  issue  in  which  international  cooperation  is 
certainly necessary: financial stability is a public good, and a global one at that. The past few 
years  have  taught  us  that  financial  crises  do  not  stop  at  national  borders.  We  live  in  an 
integrated world, and no country is able to insulate itself any more. 
That said, we need a global approach to secure financial stability, and the fundamentals of 
such an approach are personal contacts, open exchange and mutual understanding. For me, 
one of the main objectives of this seminar is to strengthen these fundamentals. 
Central banks in particular have a natural interest in financial stability, and in many instances 
they  are  involved  in  safeguarding  it.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  make  a  distinction 
between  the  different  roles  that  central  banks  have  to  play.  The  primary  goal  of  monetary 
policy is to safeguard price stability. To reach this objective, the independence of monetary 
policy  has  to  be  maintained  in  all  its  dimensions,  at  all  times  and  everywhere.  Thus,  to 
safeguard financial stability, a different set of tools is necessary, and these tools are usually 
referred to as macroprudential policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Current issues in financial stability 
3. 
Having  established  that,  let  us  take  a  brief  look  at  current  risks  for  financial  stability.  Not 
every  country  faces  the  same  risks,  of  course.  Turkey  most  certainly  faces  different 
challenges than Germany. Nevertheless, there is an underlying trend at the global level that 
influences financial stability in most countries. 
This  trend  has  four  elements:  very  low  inflation  and  very  low  interest  rates  in  major 
economies  as  well  as  abundant  liquidity  and  low  volatility  in  many  financial  markets. 
Together, these four ingredients make up a cocktail that may well result in a bad headache 
the morning after. 
One potential problem is the search for yield. Investors may eventually increase the risk of 
their  investments  to  make  up  for  the  shortfall  in  yields  caused  by  low  interest  rates.  And, 
indeed, it seems that investors have already begun their search for yield. 
In  its  latest  annual  report  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  states  that,  “Some 
asset valuations showed signs of decoupling from fundamentals”. One example can be found 
in  corporate  debt  markets.  Here,  valuations  indeed  look  somewhat  stretched.  The  BIS 
estimates that gross issuance in the high-yield bond market increased to US$90 billion per 
quarter in 2013 – three times the pre-crisis quarterly average of US$30 billion.1 
The strong recovery in the property markets of some euro-area countries should also set us 
thinking. Take the German housing market, for example. Between 2009 and 2012, prices in 
large cities rose by almost 25%. In 2013, they increased by another 8.9%, and Bundesbank 
calculations point to overvaluations in urban areas. Nevertheless, overall, prices in Germany 
have not yet moved away from fundamentals. Thus, at this point in time, we see some local 
exuberance but not a bubble. 
But  it  is  not  only  bond  markets  and  housing  markets  we  have  to  keep  our  eye  on.  Stock 
markets  are  an  important  issue  as  well.  In  2013,  there  was  only  one  way  for  most  stock 
markets to go, and that was up. The EuroStoxx 50 increased by 18%, the FTSE 100 by 14%, 
the Dow Jones by 28%, and the Nikkei skyrocketed by as much as 57%. The BIS notes that, 
“As  the  search  for  yield  expanded  to  equity  markets,  the  link  between  fundamentals  and 
prices weakened amid historically subdued volatility and low risk premia”. 
Market volatility indeed decreased, and reached historically low levels. However, as soon as 
monetary  policy  normalises,  volatility  is  likely  to  increase.  This  is  not  reflected  in  today’s 
volatility  levels  and  might  tempt  market  participants  to  neglect  the  necessity  of  hedging 
against changes in interest rates. Let me make it clear: low volatility does not stand for low 
risks, and interest rates will rise again at some point. 
So,  have  financial  markets  entered  a  new  phase  of  “irrational  exuberance”?  The  Bank  for 
International Settlement finds it “hard to avoid the sense of a puzzling disconnect between 
the markets’ buoyancy and underlying economic developments globally”. At the very least, it 
seems  that  financial  markets  are  anticipating  significant  further  improvements  in  economic 
fundamentals and prospects. And they are anticipating that governments around the world 
will continue to implement the necessary reforms. These expectations create vast scope for 
confidence shocks. 
This,  in  turn,  interacts  in  an  unfavourable  way  with  another  risk  arising  from  a  prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates.  A  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  could  set  the  wrong 
incentives: it could encourage banks to postpone necessary balance sheet adjustments, and 
it  could  encourage  governments  to  postpone  necessary  structural  reforms  and  the 
consolidation of public finances. 
                                                
1   Bank for International Settlements (2014), 84th Annual Report, Basel. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We must not let ourselves be deceived by the current tranquillity  in financial markets. The 
biggest threats to financial stability are complacency and reform fatigue. It is in the hands of 
governments around the world to eliminate this threat by keeping to the course of reform. 
I am now looking forward to discussing these and other issues during this seminar. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
