  Choongsoo Kim: A “World leading, global BOK” 
Farewell lecture by Dr Choongsoo Kim, Former Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank 
of Korea, Seoul, 31 March 2014. 
 “The issues are global and so interlocked that to consider the problems of one sector, 
oblivious to those of another, is but to court disaster for the whole. While Asia is commonly 
referred to as the gateway to Europe, it is no less true that Europe is the gateway to Asia. 
And the broad influence of the one cannot fail to have its impact upon the other.” 
Douglas MacArthur, Farewell Address to Congress, 19 April 1951 
It  feels  like  only  yesterday  that  I  was  completing  preparations  for  my  inaugural  speech 
expressing my vision and ambition on the airplane from Paris to Seoul after being appointed 
Governor of the Bank of Korea. However, four years have already passed. At that time Bank 
of Korea were about to wrap up one Chinese zodiac cycle, which holds a significant meaning 
in Eastern societies, and greet a new one beginning with the BOK’s 60th anniversary. I can 
still vividly remember promising you that I would upgrade our Bank’s status by adding global 
competitiveness to the Bank’s 60 years of tradition. It is no exaggeration to say that the goal 
of making a “global” and “world leading” central bank, which are so mutually interlocked, has 
not left my head for even a moment. This is because I have strongly believed that achieving 
the  goal  was  the  calling  of  the  time  for  me  to  become  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  at 
Bank’s 60th anniversary. 
I  had  a  firm  belief  that  the  reform  projects  that  I  planned  to  pursue  were  essential  for  the 
BOK’s development. The simple truth that, if one tries to satisfy everyone he/she will not only 
fail to satisfy anyone but also end up achieving nothing, was always in my mind. Thinking 
that  extending  the  front  lines  would  not  help  to  achieve  the  victory,  I  believe  I  began  my 
tenure by clarifying a clear but simple goal. With much to say to our employees and much 
energy,  I  have  left  more  than  1500  pages  of  writing  for  our  employees  so  far.  As  I  have 
written  most  of  this  late  at  night  or  early  in  the  morning,  and  not  in  the  office  or  during 
working  hours,  it  is  the  result  of  my  tension  and  passion  with  a  single-minded  resolve  to 
achieve a leap forward by the BOK. Instead of focusing on how many employees support my 
views, I have wanted to deliver what is right and to see people improve themselves, if only a 
few. I do not want to use this opportunity to recall my four years in office and list all of my 
achievements. Achievements will be judged in the future, by history. I would like to take this 
meaningful opportunity to think together with you all about the challenges that we now face, 
to ruminate on the motivations and principles for what we have done, and to learn lessons 
from them for our future.1 
                                                 
1   The reason why I have left so many writings to my fellow employees during my tenure is to allow them to go 
back  and check  whether  our  commitments  have been fulfilled,  by  documenting them. Although  it has  been 
burdensome, I have done this in order to shackle myself as well. However, deciding whether to maintain this 
practice until the moment when I leave office has been difficult. Although I am aware of the meaning of the 
saying  “silence  is  golden,”  having  closely  examined  the  practices  of  central  bank  governors  in  advanced 
economies, and recalling our emphases on the importance of information disclosure through communication, I 
have put my thoughts together in the belief that we also need to start a tradition of accurate recording. I have 
also considered that central bank governors’ deliberations are regarded as important historical records. In this 
regard, I would like to leave my deliberations in the archive in the form of this farewell lecture. I believe that 
this is the last contribution which I can make as Governor of the Bank of Korea. Today’s lecture reflects my 
own personal opinions, and does not represent the Bank’s future policy directions, and any errors in it are fully 
my own responsibility. I ask for the readers’ understanding about my use of colloquial language for the sake of 
convenience in giving this lecture, my use of foreign words without translating them into Korean, and my not 
providing a detailed list of references as in a research paper due to time constraints. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  I would like to take this opportunity to share directly with you the questions that I have been 
concerned with, in the form of a farewell lecture instead of the previous custom of a farewell 
speech. A farewell speech to recollect our memories would of course also be meaningful in 
itself,  in  line  with  the  natural  law  whereby  people  who  meet  must  part.  However,  for  an 
economist who has studied economic policy his entire life, and have a unique background of 
taking responsibility for managing diverse organizations, I thought that deliver my knowledge 
and experience to my fellow workers in a lecture would be both a personal privilege and a 
moral obligation. And this is why I have chosen the form of a lecture for this final opportunity 
to communicate with my colleagues as Governor. 
In this lecture, I would like to talk about five issues. First, I will explain the crisis management 
policies that we implemented during the global financial crisis over the past six years, and 
look  for  implications  for  dealing  with  possible after-shocks  in  the  process  of  normalization. 
Second,  I  will  discuss  the  developments  in  monetary  policy  stance  reflecting  the  changing 
role of central bank post-crisis, the importance of and problems with communication policies, 
and  the  harmonization  between  price  and  financial  stabilization  policies.  Third,  I  will  touch 
upon  the  internal  reforms  implemented  to  reform  the  Bank  of  Korea  into  a  world  leading 
central  bank  respected  by  the  people,  namely  the  projects  based  on  a  new  creative  spirit 
under the slogan of “Never Before.” The fourth issue will be on key principles and philosophy 
on changes in the Bank’s governance and its organization management during the past four 
years.  Lastly,  I  will  conclude  by  listing  some  of  our  unfinished  long-term  business  and 
suggesting some requests to all of my colleagues for further development of our Bank.2 
I. 
Globalization of financial crises, evolution of risk management measures and 
policy responses 
For  the  past  six  years,  the  focus  of  individual  countries  in  operating  their  economies  has 
been on crisis management to overcome the global financial crisis.3 As you know well, the 
usefulness  of  the  various  theories  discussed  in  the  existing  economics  textbooks  have 
become limited, and individual countries have come to face similar problems in a globalized 
environment  where  all  issues  are  mutually  intertwined.  During  crisis  times  normal  policy 
responses, particularly those based on past experience, lose their effectiveness. Advanced 
economies were not able to use their policy rates, the strongest traditional monetary policy 
                                                 
2  
In drafting this lecture I referred to farewell addresses by political leaders including Dwight Eisenhower (1961), 
Richard Nixon (1974), Tom Delay (2006) and Kofi Annan (2006), and also by other central bank governors 
including  Jean-Claude  Trichet  (2011)  and  Mervyn  King  (2013).  I  also  referred  to  the  unofficial  farewell 
speeches  delivered  by  Governor  Shirakawa  and  Chairman  Bernanke  at  the  BIS  Governors’  Meeting. 
Particularly, General MacArthur’s farewell address to the US Congress (1951), which was unprecedented at 
that time because it was before the both houses and was historical because it summed up life’s experiences, 
and  in  which  he  said  “the  issues  are  global  and  so  interlocked,”  was  a  very  useful  reference  to  me,  full  of 
insight and wisdom, emphasizing the importance of a global perspective in establishing strategies and making 
policy  decisions. It  was also what directly  motivated me to decide to deliver this farewell lecture. Chairman 
Bernanke  (2014),  in  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Economic  Association  few  weeks  before  his 
retirement,  delivered  a  farewell  lecture  on  “The  Federal  Reserve:  Looking  Back,  Looking  Forward,”  while 
Governors King (2013) and Subbarao (2013) delivered theirs on “A Governor Looks Back – and Forward,” and 
“Five Years of Leading the Reserve Bank: Looking Ahead by Looking Back,” respectively. As an economist, it 
seemed to me that delivering such speeches is a very desirable practice. This is another reason why I have 
decided to deliver a farewell lecture instead of just a speech, which has been the custom. Considering that in 
academia  it  is  a  general  practice  to  pass  on  one’s  experience  to  students  through  a  farewell  lecture  when 
retiring, I think that the central bank community also needs to build the same tradition. Part of this lecture is an 
excerpt  from  my  farewell  speech  delivered  at  the  BIS  Governors’  Meeting  as  the  BIS-ACC  Chair  on 
February 24, 2014, in Sydney, Australia. 
3   Since my views on the current economic circumstances and policy challenges have already been circulated in 
the  results  of  several  meetings,  including  with  Director  Generals  and  General  Managers,  those  on  my  four 
years at the BOK have been published in Bank of Korea News (March 2014 edition), and those on other policy 
reforms have been presented to BOK staff on many occasions, I will not repeat them here. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  instrument, and had to newly develop non-conventional instruments since their interest rates 
had already hit the zero lower bound. EMEs, with their original sin, i.e. their inability to borrow 
abroad  in  their  own  currencies,  have  had  to  put  priority  on  dealing  with  the  negative 
spillovers  from  AEs’  QE  policies.  While  trying  to  explore  new  ways  of  responding  to 
unpredictable economic changes, they have at the same time had to overcome the difficulty 
of  needing  to  avoid  simply  applying  their  experiences  acquired  under  the  unsuited  past 
economic  environment.  AEs  and  EMEs  are  under  a  global  economy  where  they  are 
interconnected  with  each  other  but  have  had  to  remain  different  in  terms  of  their  policy 
instruments. 
Past  financial  crises  that  have  impacted  the  overall  global  economy  include  the  Latin 
American economic crisis in the 1980s, which was the symbol of a sovereign debt crisis; the 
Scandinavian financial crisis of the late 1980s and early 1990s, resulting from accelerated 
financial liberalization; second Latin American crisis in the 1990s, which stemmed from sharp 
interest rate hikes in the U.S. while facing distortions in relative prices between tradable and 
non-tradable goods; the Asian currency crisis in the late 1990s, owing to excessive corporate 
debt,  rigid  exchange  rate  regimes  and  inadequate  supervisory  systems;  Japan’s  long-term 
recession; and the US savings and loan crisis.4 Experience tells us that we cannot dismiss as 
a  coincidence  the  fact  that  AEs  and  EMEs  have  taken  turns  in  causing  crises,  while  the 
economic  boom  and  bust  cycle  is  an  unavoidable  natural  attribute  in  the  real  market 
economy system. We have learned some important lessons from these past crises – that, 
since  constraints  which  cannot  be  perfectly  overcome,  including  information  asymmetries 
and market imperfections, always exist, we need to watch them closely, prevent the resulting 
imbalances from going beyond a certain level, and pay attention especially to the impacts of 
global shocks on our domestic economies.5 
There is a broad consensus that the recent global financial crisis was caused by systemic 
risk, and as pro-cyclicality and inter-connectedness are the key parts constituting risk, it is 
widely  known  that  the  talks  on  global  financial  regulatory  reforms  including  Basel  III  have 
focused on these issues. However, even though EMEs agree with the consensus, they have 
especially faced a dilemma in choosing between preventing financial crisis recurrence and 
enhancing  the  competitiveness  of  their  own  financial  sectors.  While  in  order  to  restrain 
regulatory arbitrage the same principles must be applied to all economies, application of the 
same rules would result in the irony of EMEs, with less developed financial sectors, having to 
bear larger costs than AEs, which caused the crisis. In this regard, we will need to gradually 
explore  more  harmonious  ways.  Judging  from  past  crises,  the  recent  crisis  can  be 
                                                 
4   When I became Dean of the Graduate School of Pan-Pacific International Studies at Kyung Hee University in 
1998, I created a course called “Economic Crisis Management” in a government-funded Master’s program for 
EME public officials. I believe this was the first course on crisis management ever established in Korea. There 
were requests from foreign universities for the course syllabus, and other governments showed great interest 
in  the  course  as  Korea  had  just  experienced  the  currency  crisis  of  1997,  and  the  world  was  paying  close 
attention  to  how  Korea  will  implement  the  IMF  bailout  program.  At  the  request  of  the  government,  I  visited 
numerous cities with many businesses with Korea including Los Angeles, San Francisco, Tokyo, Osaka, Hong 
Kong,  Singapore  and  Canberra,  and  explained  to  their  opinion  leaders  including  policy  makers,  academics 
and journalists about the IMF program and the Korean government’s efforts to overcome the crisis, and led 
discussions on this. I believe this experience help me greatly to understand economic crisis. A case analysis 
of  economic  crisis  management  is  included  in  the  lecture  on  “Financial  Crises  and  Policy  Responses:  A 
Korean  Perspective”  that  I  delivered  to  Policy  Board  members  and  executives  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  the 
Tripartite Governors’ Meeting on August 3, 2010. 
It  would  not be far from truth to say that the creation  of  the US Federal Reserve is the empirical evidence 
showing that responding to financial crises is the original duty of the central bank. The Fed  was created in 
1913,  after  long  consultation,  to  address  the  financial  crisis  that  had  caused  bank  runs  in  1907,  and  its 
functions  were  settled  on  in  going  through  the  Great  Depression  (Bernanke,  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Financial Crisis, Princeton University, 2013). 
5  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
characterized as a comprehensive one6 which has had all of the characteristics of the various 
other crises I have listed above. 
Greatly affected by changes in the external environment, we have had limited policy choices 
in this kind of situation, and making decisions contingent upon changes in the global financial 
markets  has  been  regarded  as  desirable.  The  most  difficult  part  of  this  strategy,  however, 
was having to bear the burden of making accurate judgments concerning variable external 
conditions.  Policy  makers  in  Korea  tend  to  make  their  decisions  by  focusing  on  domestic-
specific  factors  from  a  domestic-oriented  point  of  view,  without  devoting  much  attention  to 
external factors. And in this case they fall into a dilemma. Their failure to recognize changes 
in the external environment usually means that they fail to fully take the crisis situation into 
account,  and  that  past  experiences  applicable  only  to  peacetime  dominate  their  decision-
making.7 If the central bank is given just a single mandate of price stability, it can come up 
with  a  consistent  policy  mix.  However,  when  it  has  the  additional  mandate  of  financial 
stability,  it  would  be  best  to  pursue  appropriate  harmony  while  reducing  the  possibility  of 
policy  conflicts.  In  other  words,  it  would  be  desirable  to  choose  the  so-called  second  best 
option, where the achievement of either one of its two mandates is neither satisfactory nor 
unsatisfactory. 
Let me add a few more words about the policy authorities’ concerns. If limits on the role of 
fiscal  policy  in  overcoming  an  economic  crisis  appear,  then  it  is  natural  to  expect  a  more 
active  role  for  monetary  policy,  but  there  are  constant  controversies  at  home  and  abroad 
about what extent of such a role is appropriate. In terms of monetary policy there may be 
differences in  perception  of  what  is  an  “accommodative  stance”,  however  the  fundamental 
issue is to determine whether more accommodative policy will lead to desirable results. This 
is  because  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  that  any  policy  entails  costs.  Rather  than  looking 
whether a policy is Keynesian or not, from the economic philosophy point of view, we need to 
see  the  issue  as  being  whether  we  have  experience  based  on  empirical  analysis.  For 
example,  some  European  countries  including  the  UK  have  implemented  fiscal  tightening 
policies to stick to the EU agreement that fiscal deficits should be maintained at within 3% of 
GDP, and these attempts have even at times been criticized. Recently, however, there have 
been signs of economic recovery as a result of the conduct of such policies to ensure fiscal 
soundness. Monetary and fiscal policies are fundamentally for operating the macroeconomy, 
and,  to  increase  productivity  for  the  purpose  of  enhancing  the  economic  growth  potential, 
restructuring efforts should be made at the same time. During times of crises we tend to be 
blinded  by  short-term  views,  however,  and  this  distinction  becomes  vague.  Looking  at  it 
dispassionately, anyone should recognize that costs continue to be accumulated structurally. 
Nevertheless,  in  a  situation  in  which  short-sightedness  dominates  as  if  there  were  no 
tomorrow, we face difficulties in not straying from basic principles even while satisfying this to 
some  extent.  I  think  that  conducting  monetary  policy  while  being  skeptical  about  financial 
stability is a fundamental concern.8 
                                                 
6   The  development  of  financial  engineering  including  derivatives,  and  the  consequent  rapid  extreme 
advancement  of  financial  liberalization,  sharp  increases  in  public  debt,  contagion  effects  of  QE  policies  on 
neighboring economies including negative spillovers from QE policies, rigid exchange rate regimes, harm to 
innocent bystanders from increased global financial market volatility as a result of increased global liquidity 
brought about by QE policies, and the lack of financial regulatory and supervisory regimes 
7   For instance, Taylor rule can be considered in research but even US Federal Reserve depends more on the 
optimal control rule and regards the Taylor rule as ineffective during crisis times. It does not seem appropriate 
for policy makers in Korea, in analyzing their policy directions, to use the estimates of the Taylor rule, with its 
time series also including normal times. 
8   Concerns similar to these have recently been raised at the FOMC meeting. These debates are expected to 
continue  in  the  processes  of  QE  tapering  and  interest  rate  normalization.  Please  refer  to  Jeremy  Stein, 
“Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy Framework”, March 21, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  To be more specific about policy concerns by looking at an example, the biggest challenge in 
crisis  management  is  that  while  it  is  difficult  to  find  measures  minimizing  type  I  errors  in 
policy implementation, this process unintentionally create type II errors frequently. Since the 
costs of a type 1 error of not foreseeing a crisis coming could be politically lethal, particularly 
in  an  environment  of  deepening  globalization,  we  cannot  help  but  be  conscious  about  the 
probability  of  tail  risks  evolving  into  systemic  risk.  We  can  therefore  easily  make  a  type  II 
error,  of  sending  the  wrong  signals,  by  talking  about  the  issue  of  tail  risk  even  when  the 
chance of a crisis arising is not so high. And if such errors accumulate, the subsequent social 
costs  cannot  be  ignored.  Further,  given  the  self-fulfilling  psychological  effects  of  a  type  II 
error, the adverse effects cannot be downplayed. Although the cost may not be very evident 
right  now,  as  a  policy  decision-maker  and  an  economic  expert  this  is  an  issue  that  one 
cannot but feel considerable intellectual burden. 
The most outstanding phenomenon of the global financial crisis has been the surge in global 
liquidity, which is an aftereffect of quantitative easing. It is very natural that abundant liquidity 
brings about changes in prices and amplifies the degree of market volatility. In carrying out 
policies in an open economy system, especially for a small open economy, low volatility in 
foreign exchange rates play a very important role. As trend of globalization progresses, the 
importance  of  foreign  exchange  rates  is  becoming  ever  greater.9  Judging  from  our 
experience,  foreign  exchange  rates  have  been  proven  to  over-shoot,  markets  to  over-
respond  and  therefore  policy  authorities  are  often  observed  to  have  the  tendency  to  over-
react. This means that there is an immanent risk of maximization of type II errors. A case in 
point is implementing a policy without considering how much the potential growth rate has 
declined. I do not think that I need to emphasize the importance of the GDP gap again here, 
as it is the economic variable that has received the most attention and been discussed the 
most  recently.  If  the  potential  growth  rate  declines  and  policies  are  implemented  without 
considering  this,  there  is  the  danger  of  overestimating  the  negative  GDP  gap  in  absolute 
terms in a time of crisis, and this could lead to excessive policy responses. The expression 
“excess”  itself  already  means  that  there  are  social  costs  entailed.  It  has  taken  courage  to 
make the efforts to escape this trap over the past several years, and so it is very regrettable 
that the importance of these efforts has not been well recognized. Looking back in the future, 
this may come to be seen as an additional social cost that we have had to pay to overcome 
the  global  financial  crisis.  QE  has  been  assessed  as  an  appropriate  choice,  compared  to 
what  would  have  otherwise  been  the  case  (i.e.  counterfactual  analysis).  Of  course,  we 
should  end  QE  and  carry  out  exit  strategies  in  an  appropriate  manner  now,  while  the  net 
marginal contribution, which considers QE’s advantages and disadvantages, is still positive. I 
think this is a policy issue that national policy makers should keep in mind.10 
Even  though  signs  of  our  having  overcome  the  crisis  are  now  detected  in  every  corner  of 
society, we should not ignore the fact that crises in many cases cause aftereffects. And these 
                                                 
9   The  importance  of  exchange  rates  in  managing  Korean  economy  has  long  been  stressed.  Although  the 
importance of a weak won was emphasized for promoting and supporting exports during the development era, 
it is time to break from this old view in order to maximize public welfare through economic advancement, and 
exchange rates should be determined based upon market fundamentals and macroeconomic conditions. If the 
degree of exchange rate volatility widens owing to international financial market unrest, however, there is a 
need for controlling the subsequent uncertainty to some extent by taking macroprudential policy actions, and 
this need seems to be globally recognized. 
10   It is very tricky to judge this in reality. For instance, it is hard for central banks not to consider criticisms that 
they will drive their economies into recessions when trying to normalize interest rates, and in this case they 
tend to make risk-averse decisions in order to escape social criticism. In particular, if they make more rosy 
forecasts for their economies than other institutions, they will face criticism of not predicting risk properly and 
being complacent. Of course, central banks need to overcome such groundless arguments made for the sake 
of criticism only. It is not that central banks tend to cry wolf intentionally, but it is safe to say that they have the 
intention  of  heightening  the  sense  of  vigilance  by  releasing  pessimistic  forecasts  in  a  situation  of  prevalent 
uncertainties, if they are not up to delivering accurate economic analyses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  aftereffects  are  highly  likely  to  amplify  volatility,  as  the  special  conditions  of  EMEs  could 
create contagion effects in the international financial markets in the process of interest rate 
normalization.11 Although understanding the external environment requires experience, and 
is  not  easy,  it  is  essential  to  remain  vigilant  while  equipping  ourselves  with  international 
viewpoints, in consideration of our economic situation in which we are vulnerable to external 
shocks.12 It is safe to say that the time is over when we need to tiptoe on thin ice; we should 
not  forget  that  knowledge  and  wisdom  are  continuously  needed  to  keep  balance while  we 
walk on the border line. 
II. 
Changes in monetary policy in line with the greater role of central banks since 
the global financial crisis, bright and dark sides of communication policy, and 
balance between price and financial stability 
There is no area that has experienced greater change in the process of our overcoming the 
financial  crisis  than  monetary  policy.  As  suggested  in  the  rhetorical  expression  “the  worst 
crisis in 100 years,” the usefulness of theories and experiences formulated in the past has 
been considerably constrained, and as the borders among countries have disappeared due 
to  globalization,  the  lines  between  economic  policies  have  been  blurred  and  policies  have 
become  interdependent.  Since  the  government’s  policy  measures  have  shown  their  limits, 
the  economy  has  begun  to  rely  on  the  role  of  the  central  bank,  and  this  has  been  well 
demonstrated 
the  cases  of  advanced  economies  where  various  unconventional 
instruments have been employed due to the constraints imposed by the ZLB. The expression 
“unconventional  tools”  itself  implies  active  central  bank  activities,  even  though  the 
instruments are an inevitable choice given the ZLB. And, in consequence, the introduction of 
similar policies was expected in EMEs as well. In the political context, there was a view that 
EMEs had reached their effective lower bounds and therefore it was difficult for them to lower 
their  interest  rates  further.  And  so  there  was  no  wide  range  of  practical  policy  choices 
available.13  Many  academic  issues  have  been  raised  including  revisiting  the  role  of  the 
in 
                                                 
11   After Chairman Bernanke’s May and June 2013 press conferences concerning the possibility of QE tapering, 
the international financial markets fluctuated greatly, and this was called the Bernanke Shock. Right after the 
FOMC meeting on March 19, 2014, Fed Chair Yellen said that it will take “a considerable time” for interest 
rates to be normalized after the end of QE tapering. Following her explanation that this period could be about 
six months, stock markets in Asia including Korea declined dramatically in a case of market overreaction. I do 
not think it is right to regard these as an unintended and inappropriate show of intent, but think it should be 
viewed rather as evidence that the FRB has always thought of the need to attempt to test the markets and 
reduce future shocks. However, it is important for us to note the possibility that certain EMEs may not be able 
to be endure interest rate hikes in the process of interest rate normalization, just as in Mexico in 1994, and 
that the negative effects could spill over to other nations. 
12   This does not indicate that domestic views are right or wrong. Bernanke (2013) says that a “central bank is not 
a  regular  bank,  it  is  a  government  agency”.  However,  my  expression  that  the  Bank  of  Korea  is  also  a 
government agency from a broad perspective has been regarded very negatively in our nation. Although there 
is a unique historical legacy in Korea, this means that Korea is still stuck in past ideology rather than moving 
toward the future. 
13   There was a view on the one hand that there was room for changes in interest rates in EMEs, since they were 
not facing the ZLB, while on the other hand there was a view that, given that their currencies were not key 
reserve  currencies,  there  was  in  reality  no  room  for  further  cuts  in  their  policy  rates.  For  example,  it  is 
interesting  that  when  Korea’s  Base  Rate  was  2.5%  the  policy  rates  of  a  number  of  other  EMEs  including 
Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and Poland remained at similar levels. Despite the differences among them 
in many macroeconomic variables including potential growth rate, inflation expectation, employment rates, that 
should  be  considered  in  deciding  policy  rates,  their  base  rates  were  similar.  This  therefore  could  be  the 
subject of not only theoretical but also empirical analysis, and I raised this issue officially at the Jackson Hole 
Meeting in 2013. Just as the US and Japan  were facing ZLB under the different economic environments, I 
raised the point that those EMEs were also in the same situation of facing effective lower bounds. Recently, 
Thailand  cut  its  base  rate  and  New  Zealand  revised  its  rate  upward,  in  accordance  with  their  domestic 
conditions. Of course, exchange rates are not said to be the direct target of monetary policy, except in the 
case of a currency board system like that of Hong Kong, but we should in reality carefully observe the linkage 
between exchange rates and interest rates. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  central  bank.  However,  the  most  important  task  is  to  discuss  the  objectives  of  monetary 
policy,  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  terms  of  asset  price  stability,  which  is  the  key  to 
harmonization of price stability with financial stability, and the usefulness of communication 
as a monetary policy instrument. 
First of all, over the last 20 years of the so-called Great Moderation, it was believed that low 
inflation and growth could coexist, and the argument is already also widely known that this 
confidence  in  fact  sowed  the  seeds  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Ultimately,  this  argument 
raises  the  question  of whether  it  is  appropriate  for  central  banks  with  a  single  mandate  of 
price stability, like the Bank of Korea, to maintain so-called (flexible) inflation targeting. In a 
situation where inflationary pressures from the demand side are low as GDP gaps have been 
negative  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  worldwide,  this  debate  has  been  raised  with 
central banks with a dual mandate of price stability and maximization of employment like that 
of  the  US  FOMC  in  mind.14  An  argument  that  it  is  desirable  to  move  toward  price  level 
targeting  has  been  raised,  and  at  the  same  time  an  argument  for  adopting  nominal  GDP 
targeting has also strongly emerged.15 Realistically, inflation targeting was suggested in the 
early 1990s,16 and not a single country that has adopted this regime has ever given it up. 
Although a specific policy cannot bring about results that satisfy everyone, we cannot say for 
now that the shortcomings of inflation targeting outweigh its strongpoints. This is especially 
true in Korea, where an inflationary bias has been prevalent for so long.17 
Next,  since  the  mandate  of  financial  stability  has  been  given  to  central  banks,  very  active 
debate has developed concerning what measures that central banks should implement and 
what roles that they should play in regard to asset prices. As the real-financial linkages have 
been pointed to as the main culprit behind the global financial crisis, the debate on so-called 
                                                 
14   We  need  to  understand  that  the  mandates  of  different  central  banks  vary.  For  instance,  the  FRB  has  two 
mandates of macroeconomic stability and financial stability, and the FOMC, which decides monetary policy, 
has a role in maintaining price stability and maximum employment as stated in the text above. The Bank of 
Korea Act defines the role of the central bank as ensuring price stability. And with the revision of the Act in 
2011, the narrower range of the Bank of Korea’s mandate has been specifically stated as price stability, with 
consideration also to be given to financial stability. 
15   In  early  2013  I  published  a  paper  titled  “Monetary  Policy  after  the  Global  Financial  Crisis”  (The  Korean 
Economic Forum, No. 1, Vol. 6, pp 23–55). It was the first such attempt by a BOK governor, and I was trying 
to use it as an opportunity to explain the monetary policy issues that were being raised internationally at that 
time and to seek academic opinions on a new definition of central bank roles. It was part of my effort to create 
a chance to broaden the horizon for discussions that had in the past been limited only to the narrow definition 
of central bank functions. Please refer to this paper for discussions of various monetary policy regimes. 
16   Last year I changed the name of the Price Report that the Bank of Korea has long issued, to the “Inflation 
Report.” The price level and inflation are two different concepts. Although Korea does temporarily experience 
low inflation, since this does not mean low consumer price levels basically it is inappropriate to use the price 
level and inflation interchangeably. The policy target is inflation, and not the price level. And so I thought it was 
right  to  distinguish  the  two,  especially  in  a  situation  where  price  level  targeting  was  being  discussed,  and 
therefore renamed the report. Considering that inflation targeting had been used as price stability targeting for 
so long, however, I did not change this  wording. I think that it will be desirable to change this term as well 
when the time is opportune. 
17   Of  course,  as  inflation  has  remained  low  recently,  issues  are  being  raised  as  the  effectiveness  of  BOK’s 
inflation targeting. This comes from concerns about deflation. As I explained in the press conference right after 
the March MPC meeting,  however, it  is not practical to  worry about  deflation, considering that international 
commodity prices including those of oil and grains are low, and that even  though inflation is low it is not a 
broad-based phenomenon (core inflation is at over the mid-1% range), and that our economic actors’ inflation 
expectations  have  been  well  anchored  at  around  2.9%  for  a  long  time.  Nevertheless,  when  deciding  the 
inflation target for the 2013 to 2015 period, we lowered the upper bound from 4.0% to 3.5%. I believe that this 
was appropriate in terms of managing economic agents’ inflation expectations, but it is very regrettable that 
we  could  not  reduce  the  lower  bound  to  below  2.5%.  This  also  reflects  our  inability  to  break  from  our 
inflationary  bias. This  could  also  of  course  reflect  the  fact  that  central  banks  have  been  more  interested  in 
inflation than in dealing with deflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
cleaning  vs.  leaning  against  has  emerged18,  i.e.  whether  central  banks  should  place  more 
emphasis  on  crisis  resolution,  as  the  usual  lender  of  last  resort,  or  on  ex  ante  crisis 
prevention.  Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  of  course,  nothing  could  being  about 
conclusion  that  satisfied  everyone.  Before  the  crisis  broke  out,  a  general  view  was  that 
central  banks  are  responsible  for  price  stability  through  their  monetary  policies,  and  the 
regulatory or supervisory authorities for the duties related to financial stability. And papers 
placing emphasis on the importance of financial stability had been released only by the BIS 
and  some  other  organizations.  Needless  to  say,  however,  numerous  central  banks  have 
focused on the importance of “leaning” since the financial crisis, and it is a matter of common 
knowledge  that  they  have  generally  come  to  have  more  financial  stability-related  duties 
compared to in the past. In reflection of this trend, the Basel III global standards have been 
enacted over the past several years, while the Volcker Rule was created in the US.19 
However, with Eugene Fama and Robert Shiller having become co-recipients of the Nobel 
Prize  in  Economics  in  2013,  together  with  Lars  Hansen,  we  can  see  that  academic 
economists have  in  actuality  faced  a  psychological  shock.  The  fact  that  two  scholars,  well 
aware that their individual theories are antipodes to each other and thus incompatible, were 
jointly  awarded  the  prize  can  only  be  understood  as  proof  that  the  actual  states  of  the 
financial markets are in great chaos. This implies that both views were recognized, although 
the theory claiming the efficiency and rationality of the financial markets and that there was 
no  bubble,  and  the  analysis  that  there  was  a  bubble  in  asset  prices  due  to  irrational  and 
inefficient behaviors based on the behavioral economics of human beings, conflict with each 
other.20 This can be seen as reflecting the truth that, after all, the markets operate based on a 
mixture  of  rational  calculation  and  irrational  emotional  behavior.  This  dispute  has  caused 
great  difficulties  for  defining  the  central  bank’s  duty  regarding  financial  stability.  This  is 
because  especially  the  argument  that  markets  move  in  a  rational  and  efficient  manner 
supports financial regulatory easing, while in contrast the assumption that the markets are 
irrational  encourages  tighter  regulation.  This  even  raises  the  fundamental  question  as  to 
whether  interest  rates,  the  key  monetary  policy  instrument,  can  be  utilized  as  a  macro-
prudential tool for financial stability.21 
Third, communication has emerged as an important monetary policy instrument. Most of us 
understand that, for advanced economies under the ZLB condition, communication with the 
markets concerning the process of changes in interest rates, through forward guidance, is 
inevitable. Firstly, even if the US Federal Reserve exits QE before the end of this year, the 
key question would be the duration of the QE of the ECB and the Bank of Japan, and in the 
changes in their sizes. And afterwards attention will be paid to the implementation date of 
                                                 
18   Please  refer  to  “Should  Monetary  Policy  ‘Lean  or  Clean’?”  August  2009,  William  White,  FRB-Dallas,  for  a 
discussion of the policy issues related to this. Since the voices for ‘clean’ have been relatively smaller since 
the  global  financial  crisis,  Stein  (2013),  “Lean,  Clean,  and  In-Between,  the  NBER  Conference”  discuss 
practical issues related to implementing ‘lean’ policy, which was of real interest. 
19   It  is  not  included  among  the  topics  of  this  lecture,  but  concerning  the  discussion  as  to  whether  massive 
regulations like Basel III will be effective please refer to Haldane, BOE, “The Dog and the Frisbee,” Jackson 
Hole Conference, 2012. 
20   At the time the foreign press used the expression “Rational Irrationality”, and the Nobel Committee issued a 
comment that “The Nobel Laureates have laid the foundation for the current understanding of asset prices.” 
This can be seen as an interpretation that both sides have some grasp of reality, because it is significant to 
observe  the  rational  analysis  capacities  of  economic  agents  on  risk,  while  considering  the  impacts  of  the 
behavioral biases based on mass psychology and of market imperfections are also needed. This can be the 
most difficult problem facing today’s economy. 
21   For this reason, “When Capital Adequacy and Interest Rate Policy Are Substitutes”, BIS Working Paper 379, 
Cechetti  and  Kohler  (2012),  emphasizes  the  importance  of  coordination  between  monetary  and  macro-
prudential policies. Korea is assessed as having carried out macro-prudential policies relatively well. For the 
findings of empirical analysis please refer to “Macroprudential Policies: Korea’s Experiences,” IMF Conference 
on Rethinking on Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early Responses, April 16–17, 2013, IMF, Choongsoo Kim. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  their  exit  strategies  which  would  be  a  part  of  a  sequence  to  normalize  interest  rates.  The 
Bank of Japan has been implementing forward guidance for a long time, and the US Fed has 
been  managing  market  sentiment  by  continuously  changing  its  criteria  –  “for  an  extended 
period”,  calendar-based  criteria,  a  threshold-based  criteria  for  major  state-dependent 
indicators such as the unemployment rate and inflation, and a data-dependent criteria. It is 
important  to  understand  the  fact  that  communication  and  forward  guidance  are  economic 
policy instruments, not general communication. Since some play up only the communication 
aspect,  it  is  sometimes  even  understood  to  mean  disclosure  by  the  central  bank  of  its 
monetary policy direction for the following month. A good example of this is the controversy 
related to the timing – why next month, and not this month? We should not think that it is the 
role of the central bank to conclusively indicate that short-term interest rates will move the 
following month. And since monetary policy has an effect only after a considerable period of 
time, it is the level at which the policy rate is maintained from the medium-term perspective 
that is actually important, and it cannot be normal to conduct monetary policy focusing on a 
short-term timing issue.22 Of course, forward guidance also has its own weaknesses. If there 
are errors in the forecasts for the variables used as indicators, such as the unemployment 
rate, it is natural that this will negatively influence confidence in the central bank. That is why 
the importance of the central bank’s forecasting capacities is being emphasized more. 
A good example guaranteeing the effectiveness of Forward Guidance, with the aim to keep 
long-term  market  interest  rates  stable  and  low  by  maintaining  QE  and  postponing  interest 
rate normalization, is the use of Optimal Control Rule by the US Federal Reserve to allow 
public  anticipation  of  the  interest  rate  channel.23  However,  the  effects  and  significance  of 
communications may vary depending upon whether there is room for policy instruments or 
not. This is because various issues – such as whether policy has a clear goal, whether the 
policy  transmission  power  is  sufficient,  and  the  degree  of  understanding  of  policy  by  the 
economic agents regardless of their interests – are intertwined in a multi-faceted way. The 
policy  content  can  be  damaged  by  indicating  the  content  that  one  does  not  agree  with  as 
inappropriate communications even though one actually understands the content. Of course, 
if  one  regards  all  of  these  things  as  no  problem  as  long  as  there  is  confidence  in  the 
monetary authorities, then all burdens will fall on the policy authorities after all.24 
                                                 
22   It  is  unprecedented  even  for  some  scholars  to  argue  for  short-term  timing  of  the  Base  Rate  decision. 
Especially since the results of the voting on the Base Rate decision began to be released, excessive interest 
is being given to whether individual members voted for or against the decisions. What happened to the US 
Federal Reserve in December of last year is a good case in contrast. QE tapering had been at the center of 
attention,  and  the  decision  against  tapering  was  made  by  a  9:1  vote  in  September  2013,  after  which  the 
decision then changed to a 9:1 vote in favor of tapering in December. It is interesting that this change in the 
decision  was  understood  as  a  matter  of  choosing  the  right  time  since  early  this  year,  and  there  was  no 
discussion concerning what kinds of changes in economic conditions between September and December had 
caused a shift in the policy decision from 1:9 to 9:1. Especially given that the one member who voted against 
tapering in September, and the one who voted against it in December were not the same person, all members 
are seen to have made decisions different from in the past. 
23   It is necessary to understand the process of development in communication policy, considering the fact that, 
after  Yellen  (2012)  noted  the  optimal  control  rule,  a  theoretical  background  for  forward  guidance,  in  “The 
Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy,”  New  York,  English  et  al.  (2013),  in  “The  Federal  Reserve’s 
Framework for Monetary Policy – Recent Changes and New Questions,” FRB, and Reifschneider et al. (2013), 
in “Aggregate Supply in the US: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” 
IMF, presented alternatives to the Taylor Rule since  it cannot  be applied under ZLB conditions, and  at the 
same time provided theoretical and empirical ground for the role of monetary policy in a situation where US 
potential growth is declining. 
24   The fact that the quantity of information is large is not necessarily directly proportional to its being clear. This is 
because  economic  policy  is  fundamentally  the  consequences  of  choices,  and  economic  phenomena  are 
complicated  as  I  mentioned  before,  and  if  various  conflicting  information  is  not  properly  divided  up  it  can 
actually cause confusion in decision-making. That is why some say that one-handed economists are needed. I 
think  that  the  content  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting  statements  became  richer  and  their 
sentences clearer during the past four years. A paragraph on judgement of the international financial markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  
 
Which  indicators  to  develop  that  would  allow  reaching  of  consensus25,  and  whether  the 
MPC‘s  understanding  of  the  changes  in  economic  conditions  will  be  consistent  with  the 
experts’  views,  will  be  keys  to  the  whether  Forward  Guidance  could  be  implemented  in 
Korea.26  There  should  be  a  premise  of  rational  acceptance  in  areas  where  interests  are 
intertwined. If Forward Guidance is attempted in a situation where these foundations have 
not been built, then the efforts to create noise will actually be greater and it is expected to be 
very  difficult  to  achieve  the  expected  results.  From  now  on  efforts  should  be  focused  on 
raising  the  awareness  of  economic  agents,  by  for  example  strengthening  education  on 
finance.  And  it  is  of  course  important  to  guarantee  the  central  bank’s  decision-making 
independence  from  politics,  the  government  and  the  markets.  This  independence  should 
however not impede a sound venue for information exchange27, and communication policy 
should  act  to  supplement  this  and  strive  to  create  such  conditions.  Furthermore,  we  have 
now reached a turning point where we have to some extent overcome the Global Financial 
Crisis  that  lasted  the  past  five  to  six  years,  and  are  pursuing  a  new  normalization.  Which 
policies will be chosen at this critical moment is expected to be an important cornerstone for 
determining the future directions for development. 
                                                                                                                                                      
has  been  newly  added,  and the GDP  gap, inflation expectations,  and decisions made  over a medium-term 
horizon are newly added concepts. The release dates for the minutes of the MPC meetings have been moved 
forward  to  two  weeks  after  the  meetings,  from  six  weeks,  and  discussion  of  many  issues  has  been  taking 
place in the press conferences after MPC meeting. Yet issues of communication still come up all the time. I 
think  that  this  seems  to  be  largely  because,  although  the  monetary  authorities  give  information  in  order  to 
facilitate anticipations of long-term interest rate trends over the medium-term horizon, there seems to be some 
misunderstanding that the information is intended to provide notification of the directions and times of changes 
in short-term rates, as I mentioned in the previous footnote. 
25   When fluctuations in the economy are based on external factors, rather than domestic ones, the indicators to 
be  utilized  for  Forward  Guidance  will  be  limited.  Neither  the  GDP  gap  nor  the  unemployment  rate  can  be 
useful  indicators.  In  addition,  the  GDP  gap  results  can  vary  depending  upon  the  method  of  its  estimation. 
Therefore, differences of opinion may appear when it comes to using the GDP gap as an economic indicator. 
26   Concern  has  recently  been  raised  over  the  effectiveness  or  negative  side-effects  of  Forward  Guidance  in 
advanced  economies.  Chris  Giles  asserted,  in  “Four  Problems  that  Question  the  Efficacy  of  Forward 
Guidance,”  Financial  Times  (Nov  14,  2013),  and  Charles  Plosser  (2014),  in  his  “Perspectives  on  the  US 
Economy and Monetary Policy” speech at the Banque de France, that if it is unclear how Forward Guidance 
will  end,  it  may  head  somewhere  different  than  initially  expected.  Filardo  and  Hofmann  (2014)  noted,  in 
“Forward Guidance at the Zero Lower Bound,” BIS Quarterly Review, that qualitative FG was preferred over 
quantitative FG, based on the concern that confidence in the central bank might be damaged if its predictions 
turned out to be wrong, and presented an analysis that attention should be paid to the fact that giving a signal 
that low rates will persist for a long time might consequently cause a risk of financial instability. Meanwhile, 
given  that  in  the  March  FOMC  meeting  the  unemployment  rate  indicator  was  removed  from  F,G  and  a 
quantitative method  was changed to a qualitative method, when economic conditions change over time FG 
also cannot help but be changed accordingly. 
27   It  is  natural  that  there  are  various  opinions  and  interpretations  when  it  comes  to  understanding  economic 
phenomena. However, raising an argument without any logical basis can only be seen as noise, rather than a 
signal. It is very odd that there has been no dispute as to whether the tapering decision came too late or not, 
even though the US Federal Reserve, after hinting in May last year of possible tapering, actually tapered in 
December rather than in September as expected by many in the markets. Except for Korea, it is very difficult 
to find cased on the global stage where the numbers of times when policy rates have been kept frozen are 
debated. We have experienced Base Rate hikes and cuts on a total of eight occasions, and I would like to 
know  why the Korean financial markets should have changed more frequently than the economies of other 
countries, given that changes in their  policy rates have been made seven times  in the  same period  by the 
ECB,  Russia,  China  and  Turkey,  and  six  times  or  less  by  the  Philippines,  Taiwan,  Mexico  and  Malaysia 
(setting aside the US, the UK and Japan where no policy rate changes have been made). If one expects the 
Bank to move rates frequently, like Brazil or India where there is inflation risk and where domestic financial 
markets are instable because they  are influenced  largely by the international financial markets, it  would be 
inappropriate given the Korean market conditions. If we implement Forward Guidance in the future, we should 
look into ways of dealing with these noise-inducing, albeit unintended, phenomena. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Pioneering a new creative spirit of “never before” 
III. 
The achievements that I have accomplished with you all over the past four years are reform 
tasks that can be symbolized by the expression “Never Before”.28 The expression “The first 
time since the Establishment of the Bank of Korea” carries doubts as to whether such new 
tasks can always turn out to succeed. Why have they not been tried before? I believe that 
perhaps these new tasks were begun just now because a clear vision had been set. In other 
words,  concepts  such  as  “World  Leading”  and  “Global”  can  be  seen  as  guidelines  for 
creating new ideas. If there is no clear sense of purpose, people tend to repeat what they did 
in  the  past.  If  you  guarantee  those  who  have  ideas  and  take  the  initiative  become  their 
owners, it would be difficult for anyone to stop continuation of these trends. 
By grouping achievements of the past four year into several categories and highlighting their 
characteristics,  we  would  find  following  suggestions  for  making  the  BOK’s  reform  more 
distinguished and effective, i.e., for making the BOK a capable organization. Internally, first, 
we  can  list  efforts  for  intellectual  accumulation,  in  order  to  make  a  leap  forward  to  a 
knowledge  institution,  and  efforts  to  reorganize  our  institution  in  terms  of  organizational 
management.  Externally,  we  can  list  efforts  to  actively  protect  our  national  interests,  and 
efforts to cultivate the supremacy of our BOK staff. Let me briefly look into these four sets of 
efforts now. 
First,  concerning  our  efforts  for  internal  intellectual  accumulation,  it  is  important  above  all 
else to make employees realize the importance of intellectual property rights, and I think that 
this has contributed to active promotion of our Issue Note and Discussion Paper publications, 
and of joint research activities with external organizations. The number of research papers 
increased  sharply  from  42  in  2010  to  105  in  2013,  and  starting  from  five  cases  of 
international joint research in 2011 that number increased to 20 in 2014. This revolutionary 
change,  to  an  extent  that  makes  any  comparison  to  past  figures  meaningless,  has  been 
possible thanks to the excellent potential of our BOK staff. In fact, the greatest achievement 
of all is that we have found and confirmed our potentials. The building of our  「Archives」 
are laying a foundation for a World Leading BOK, and our first publication of the「Golden 
Book」can be a sample of the expression of new ideas.29 Given that the institutions already 
equipped with Archives and surveys of regional economic conditions are those in countries 
more advanced than Korea, while countries less advanced than ours do not have them, we 
can realize that we are moving in a desirable direction. 
Next, concerning the efforts to reorganize our institution internally, priority should be placed 
on strengthening intellectual capacities and a focus should be given to fostering employees’ 
potentials  and  maintaining  their  expertise  as  Bank’s  staff  members.  The  establishments  of 
the Bank of Korea Academy and the Communications Department were expressions of my 
interest  in  departments  that  create  externalities,  which  can  easily  be  neglected  in  public 
organizations.  The  giving  of  appropriate  consideration  to  those  who  work  for  such 
departments  reflects  the  degree  of  maturity  of  an  organization.  An  immature  organization 
tends to focus on issues of individuals more than on those of the organization. It also must 
                                                 
28   This is a quote from “Never was so much owed by so many to so few”, one of the most eloquent speeches of 
Winston Churchill, and is used as a rhetorical expression meaning “the first time since the establishment of the 
Bank of Korea”. I think that the expression “never before” has a plain meaning of a first trial, and, hoping that 
such  a  spirit  would  last  going  forward,  I  chose  this  expression  from  the  perspective  of  establishing  new 
concepts, as exemplified by the “Seven Major Reports of the Bank of Korea“. 
29   The basis of the first publication of the “Golden Book” lay in a fundamental question as to the central bank’s 
functions.  This  was  whether  the  central  bank  should  carry  out  its  business  based  only  on  the  situation  or 
opinion of the central government. This should be seen as an attempt by the Bank of Korea to understand not 
only the local economic situations but also various economic issues, and to cope with them with interest as 
needed, since we think that all people in our country should be objectives of the central bank’s business and 
since the Bank has 16 regional representative offices in operation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  not stay in its place, but evolve. The decision to make our Reserve Management Group a 
semi-autonomous body was made in order to improve efficiency. A reward system should be 
developed  for  those  creating  externalities,  and  only  in  this  case  will  the  organization  be 
operated as it should. We sometimes forget the fact that some people need to pave the road 
for those wishing to drive. Underdeveloped countries suffer from heavy traffic jams since they 
have not paid attention to this fact. The same can be said for organizations: those neglecting 
manpower  restructuring  might  experience  difficulties  in  personnel  management  including 
promotions. We developed the CDP system, which allows our staff to determine their own 
areas of expertise based on a wide range of experience, to help them decide on their future 
paths. 
Looking outside, it is no exaggeration to say that over the past few years the entire world has 
been struggling to carry out a thorough international financial reform in an effort to prevent 
another financial crisis.30 Unlike in the past, experts at the BOK have joined actively in these 
efforts  to  set  international  norms.  For  instance,  while  the  details  of  Basel  III  were  being 
shaped  we  attended  international  forums  to  represent  Korea’s  interests,  and  at  the  same 
time kept the parties concerned in Korea regularly informed of how things were progressing, 
so  that  they  could  prepare  themselves.  We  have  made  substantial  contributions  both 
externally and internally, and this has been an opportunity for us to demonstrate our potential 
to  join  the  ranks  of  advanced  central  banks.  Moreover,  our  staff  working  in  international 
organizations  such  as  the  BIS  and  leading  foreign  central  banks  have  not  only  achieved 
personal development but also disseminated the global standards to their colleagues at the 
BOK, helping them to have clearer understanding of these standards.31 We will try to utilize 
our  local  currency  swaps,  centering  around  trade  settlement,  particularly  with  countries  on 
which we depend heavily for imports of raw materials and have established real economic 
exchanges  such  as  FTAs.  We  will  strive  particularly  to  expand  our  areas  of  exchange  to 
include Islamic banking with countries having abundant crude oil and other natural resources 
and massive volumes of sovereign wealth funds, as well as with Australia. I believe that such 
efforts will provide a turning point for our bank to expand our fields of business. 
Based on the combination of all of these factors, the Bank of Korea is establishing its status 
as Korea’s top knowledge institution, and our staff are able to make active contributions to 
producing reports of high standard. Just like in advanced country central banks, we should 
manage  Bank  of  Korea  so  as  to  encourage  more  staff  to  write,  and  to  reward  those 
producing  valuable  writing  for  their  contributions  to  our  organization.  This  means  that  an 
organization  can  move  on  to  the  next  level  when  led  by  people  with  original  ideas.  In 
conclusion, “Never Before” cannot be achieved by complacency and daily routines. I would 
like to stress that “Never Before” takes pain and patience to achieve. 
                                                 
30   The Bank of Korea has participated in various international fora, which would have been unimaginable in the 
past,  in  an  effort  to  present  logical  explanations  of  our  position  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  contribute  to  the 
setting of international norms for the development of global economy on the other. I am confident that we have 
performed  remarkable  activities.  Although  the  Bank  of  Korea  is  neither  a  supervisory  nor  a  regulatory 
authority, I have served as Co-Chair of the FSB-RCG for Asia, and other of our executives and department 
heads  have  also  performed  various  activities.  Particularly,  we  have  promoted  a  clearer  understanding  of 
phenomena  particular  to  Korea  in  the  setting  of  the  global  financial  regulations,  thereby  contributing  to  our 
nation’s interests. At the BCBS, the Bank of Korea contributed to the inclusion of financial debentures issued 
by domestic specialized banks in high-quality liquid assets, and to the acceptance of Monetary Stabilization 
Account deposits as cash inflows. Our bank also contributed to representing the national interest by having 
domestic conditions considered appropriately in the application of credit conversion factors. Meanwhile, in this 
global era it is decisively important to participate in international agenda setting. Since it is extremely difficult to 
represent the national interests in agendas determined by others, we must not miss the chance to participate 
in agenda setting. I think it is now time for the Bank of Korea to achieve such a position in every aspect. 
31   For the first time in the history of the Bank of Korea, its governor was invited to participate in discussions at 
renowned  international  forums  including  those  of  the  G30,  the  Bretton  Woods  Committee,  Davos,  the 
Economic Club of New York and the IMF Special Conference during my term. And it is now naturally expected 
that our bank will participate in these forums. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  While  we  have  sought  “Never  Before”  as  part  of  our  efforts  to  pursue  becoming  a  World 
Leading  Global  BOK,  our  philosophy  in  organizational  management  has  been  to  remain 
competitive. It is important to create a system for internal competition, but ultimately we have 
sought  international  competitiveness  to  contribute  to  the  national  economy.  We  are  well 
aware of the hardships that our ancestors endured during the so-called the Enlightenment 
Period  of  Joseon  Dynasty  in  the  late  19th  and  early  20th  centuries.  They  were  totally 
uncompetitive, without any new weapons to protect themselves from those of the West.32 Our 
efforts can be said to be similar to the reforms brought to the Korean soccer field by Guus 
Hiddink, in the sense that he stressed the importance of taking a global view. Although we 
know that global competition is fierce and painful, we cannot return to the past when we were 
free from such competition.33 
IV. 
Strategy and organizational management philosophy for becoming a world 
leading central bank 
The basic principles governing the operation of the Bank of Korea over the past four years 
can  be  summarized  as  involving  our  asking  ourselves  three  questions:  “Why  a  Global 
BOK?”; “What is the Bank of Korea for me, and what am I for the Bank of Korea?”; and “Why 
should  such  expressions  as  ‘core  department’  and  ‘policy  department’  no  longer  be  used, 
and innovation take place from the periphery and not at the center?” You should keep these 
questions in mind and try to resolve them through your entire lives. It is interesting to find that 
the  recently  released  details  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  reforms  are  similar  to  what  we 
attempted four years ago.34 Our efforts to return the Bank of Korea to the public are aimed 
eventually  at  helping  our  staff  to  integrate  into  society.  BOE  Governor  Carney  also  asks 
“What is the Bank of England for?”, saying that the BOE’s goal is to promote the welfare of 
                                                 
32   This is cited from 「Korea and Her Neighbors」, written by Isabella Bird Bishop in 1898 and translated into 
Korean by Lee Inhwa in 1994. I have mentioned this book frequently in meetings with department/team heads. 
It is an internationally sensational narrative describing the miserable situation of Korea, which was an isolated 
society  with  wide  spread  corrupt  and  late  to  globalization,  forced  to  open  up  its  ports  following  foreign 
invasions during the so-called Enlightenment Period of Joseon Dynasty. Some of the latter part of the writing 
is  about  Koreans  realizing  their  potential  in  a  foreign  country  with  well-arranged  systems,  and  the  writer 
predicted that Korea would emerge in Asia once the country could arrange its systems successfully, a forecast 
that  has  turned  out  to  be  true.  The  book  includes  dramatic  descriptions  through  a  foreigner’s  eye  of  the 
importance of systems. 
33   Even Hiddink was not successful in the beginning. He was not free from the general principle of reform that it 
worsens the conditions first and then achieves the effect of improving them over time. It takes time to break 
down old systems and set up new ones. Hiddink’s team kept losing 5 to 0 for some time, which earned him the 
nickname “5 to 0.” Conflicts involving the selection  of players  – between outstanding  players under  the old 
paradigm and rising stars of a new system – were also drawing attention. 
34   The Bank of England announced its restructuring on March 18, 2014 (Mark Carney, “One Mission. One Bank. 
Promoting the Good of the People of the United Kingdom,” March 18, 2014). The BOE’s removal of silos is 
similar to our abolition of the occupational group system, and its giving the Chief Economist responsibility for 
coordinated  research  across  departments  is  comparable  to  the  BOK’s  setup  of  a  research  committee 
dedicated  to  comprehensive  research.  The  BOE’s  appointment  of  new  figures,  including  the  second 
appointment  of  a  female  deputy  governor  in  its  300-year  history,  has  revitalized  the  atmosphere  within  the 
bank. These efforts to modernize the organization demonstrate a desire to make it competent. The BOE has 
begun to reconsider its longstanding practice of secrecy of information. The BOE’s advocacy of “One Bank” 
can  be  understood  as  an  effort  to  remove  the  concept  of  so-called  core  departments  and  to  create  an 
atmosphere in which every member can compete on an equal footing and work in cooperation. It is interesting 
that, in short, the characteristics of BOE’s reforms mentioned above have many things in common with the 
purpose  of  our  BOK’s  reform.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  Bank  of  England,  a  representative  leading 
central bank established in 1694, with the objective “to promote the public Good and Benefit of Our People,” 
also  mentions  “silos”  and  “secrecy.”  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that,  if  there  is  an  information  gap  leading  to 
information  asymmetry,  herd  behavior  naturally  occurs,  and  moral  hazard  and  adverse  selection  become 
wide-spread. Both advanced and emerging market central banks should place their priorities on dealing with 
these issues, even if the degrees may differ. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  the people. Governor Carney has been able to take a fresh approach to internal issues, since 
he is an outsider with a variety of experience in both the government and the private sectors. 
In reality it was not easy for me to convince why we need “a Global BOK” This question may 
now  seem  to  be  beyond  doubt,  but  four  years  ago  the  accelerated  innovation  in  financial 
engineering including derivatives was being pointed to as the cause of the global financial 
crisis  that  had  started  in  Wall  Street,  and  globalization  was  therefore  said  to  be  the  main 
culprit  behind  the  crisis.  However,  we  all  know  now  the  irony  that  globalization  has 
progressed further during the course of our overcoming the crisis. Considering this situation, 
we  have  had  no  choice  but  to  pursue  globalization  vigorously.  It  goes without  saying  that, 
looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  long-term  national  economic  development,  this  trend  is 
inevitable. Therefore I believe this is not a matter of choice and should be pursued. The most 
crucial  point  is  that,  since  the  sectors  that  are  already  open  will  fall  behind  if  they  do  not 
maintain competitiveness, therefore, it is the competitiveness of sectors that are not yet open 
that will determine the national competitiveness. I have often mentioned this view, through 
various channels. It cannot be stressed strongly enough how important a balanced system is 
in  a  country  or  an  organization.  A  system  comprehensively  means  incentives,  including 
rewards and punishments. Internal competition is important, but can easily be evaluated from 
domestic  political  or  ideological  perspectives.  And  so  as  an  alternative  we  thought  it 
appropriate  to  use  global  standards.  While  comparing  and  analyzing  the  systems  of 
advanced  economies,  including  their  central  banking  systems,  during  the  two  years  from 
early  1995  when  I  served  as  chief negotiator  for  Korea’s  OECD  membership,  I  came  to  a 
clear  understanding  of  the  importance  of  globalization.  And  since  taking  the  position  of 
Governor of Korea’s central bank, this understanding was the reason why I have never once 
hesitated in the pursuit of “a Global BOK”. 
I believe moreover that to keep asking ourselves the philosophical and introspective question 
of “What is the Bank of Korea for me, and what am I for the Bank of Korea?” will serve as a 
catalyst for our self-development. We can easily find that, in a new organization, its members 
think  that  they  should  work  together  to  build  it up.  But  people  who  have  spent  their  entire 
careers in an organization with a long history, they are soaked in its culture and do not place 
much  importance  on  nurturing  their  organization  further.  This  might  be  because,  while 
interests among individuals can be easily identified, the interests of an organization are hard 
to identify. It might also be because we have not paid much attention to this issue. In a word, 
it is not easy to look at yourself. This is the same as If you do not tighten self-discipline by 
yourself, you cannot develop. Particularly when the external environment is changing rapidly, 
you have to be able to identify these developments. To build up such a capacity, I think you 
need to keep asking yourself the question. Leadership that presents a vision is of course also 
important. 
It has also not been easy to convince our staff of the reasons why such expressions as ‘core 
policy department’ should no longer be used, and why peripheral departments should lead 
innovation.  It  is  understandable  that  successful  people  in  an  organization  are  not  very 
motivated  to  change  it.  Moreover,  at  an  organization  in  which  a  majority  of  its  members 
spend most of their careers, they will not be happy to leave the easy, routine paths that they 
are  used  to  following,  making  it  even  more  difficult  to  attempt  to  reform  the  organization 
based  upon  the  support  of  its  members.  However,  we  cannot  expect  our  organization  to 
develop  if  we  keep  doing  the  same  things.35  This  is  why  it  is  rare  for  once-great  private 
                                                 
35   Einstein  emphasized  the  importance  of  making  changes,  and  even  said  that  the  definition  of  insanity  was 
“doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.” Of course if a reform is initiated 
from  the  top  down,  without  voluntary  cooperation  from  the  organization  members,  and  if  they  do  not 
sympathize  with  the  reform  effort,  the  reform  cannot  be  expected  to  be  successful  in  the  long  term.  If 
expectations  are  formed  that  the  organizational  governance  will  not  last  long,  and  that  the  reform-leading 
group  will change hands, this may encourage members not to join the reform. This may be highly likely to 
occur particularly in public institutions that are free from external competition, and whose heads have limited 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  organizations last for a very long time. Public institutions exist by law, but this does not mean 
that they do not also need to change, as organizations are required to evolve in line with their 
changing societies. Meanwhile, we all know well that a level playing field is important for the 
competitive development of an organization. Ensuring that everyone has a fair opportunity is 
the  fastest  way  to  maximize  the  organization’s  capabilities.  For  instance,  if  we  understand 
that a central bank is founded to fulfill its functions of currency issuance and settlement, and 
that these roles act as major monetary policy instruments and monetary policy can work only 
when  the  central  bank  carries  them  out  successfully,  we  can  easily  come  to  the 
understanding  that  there  should  not  be  any  discrimination  among  departments  in  terms  of 
importance.  I  would  like  to  emphasize  in  particular  that  it  is  inappropriate  to  place  on  the 
periphery our regional branches and overseas offices, in which about one-third of our staff 
are working. This is true not only for the Bank of Korea alone, but also for our nation as a 
whole. 
Leaving the Bank of Korea: unfinished business and requests 
V. 
Finally, I would like to talk about some unfinished business. I hope that you will take time in 
dealing  with  them,  reflecting  on  them  earnestly  and  not  avoid  taking  pains  to  lay a  further 
stepping stone for the development of our bank. We should never forget that if we do not try 
to change ourselves, we will be forced by others. I also hope consider this based on the pride 
that you placed the development of the bank before your own personal interests. 
It takes a great deal of time and effort to understand a central bank precisely. As a central 
bank is the sole institution in any country, it is essential to know the workings of other foreign 
central  banks  in  order  to  understand  it  correctly.  This  means  that  even  though  internal 
experiences  are  necessary,  to  recognize  central  bank’s  weight  in  the  national  economy, 
understanding  of  other  central  bank’s  experiences  is  also  required.36  We  should  also  be 
aware that there are hedging, speculative and Ponzi finance activities in the market, which 
the central bank deals with.37 As globalization progresses, the markets have rapidly grown 
                                                                                                                                                      
tenures. One point introduced in the biography of Steve Jobs draws much attention in this regard. It is that 
Apple does not conduct consumer demand surveys, since it believes that consumers cannot think of anything 
new.  Talking  about  Ford,  Jobs  said  that  if  consumers  in  the  early  1900s  had  been  asked  what  more  they 
wanted, their answer would have been horses that could run faster and longer. In contrast to this, however, 
Ford  created  cars,  putting  an  end  to  the  age  of  carriages.  Jobs’  message  is  that  it  is  a  producer’s  role  to 
present a whole new thing, for example a car, to consumers. And I think this is something that the leaders of 
organizations must bear in mind. 
36   There can be diverse opinions as to the necessary qualifications and experiences of central bank governors. 
However, I do not think there can be any disagreement that central bank governors need experience with the 
overall economy. Former Fed chair Bernanke and current chair Yellen both served as Chairs of the Council of 
Economic Advisors, and there are many Fed directors who have worked in the White House. In the case of 
the most independent of central banks, Bundesbank, former governor Weber and current governor Weidmann 
have both served as economic advisors to Prime Minister Merkel. This testifies to the importance of governors 
gaining experience on the overall economy and on politics by working with political leaders. The thought that it 
is not desirable for prospective governors to build relationships with political leaders, for the sake of central 
bank independence, is out of line with the global trend. The cases in advanced economies are good examples 
showing us that central bank independence and experience in politics are independent issues. 
37  Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  Minsky’s  Financial  Instability  Hypothesis  has  been  rediscovered.  The 
hypothesis define hedge as financial activity of paying back the principle and interest, speculative as rolling 
over of the principle and paying back only the interest, and Ponzi as paying back interest through sale of asset 
or debt issuance. In capitalism, business cycles can be caused by such endogenous activities without outside 
shock and these are analyzed as causing financial unrest. It is fair to say that there are always speculative 
capitals seeking to make profits through directional investment (including for speculation purpose) amid the 
increased liquidity stemming from the QE policies in advanced economies. One example which generated a 
lot of attention: when the BOK Base Rate was 2.75%, three-year treasury yields declined to 2.44% in April 
2013, and this inversion of long- and short-term interest rates continued for a long time, disturbing our markets 
as a result. It is evaluated that there might be some forces that have tried to influence the market under the 
name  of  communication.  Blinder  (2004)  said  in  his  book  「The  Quiet  Revolution」  that  the  central  bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  complex.  I  cannot  help  but  emphasize  that,  without  constantly  checking  the  validity  of  our 
past  experience,  we  cannot  achieve  our  goals.  Of  course,  it  is  not  necessary  to  react 
sensitively to every directional investment in the market, but we need to keep an eye on what 
drives  market  movements,  and  we  should  not  be  afraid  of  being  criticized  by  the  market. 
Needless to say, we cannot allow ourselves to be looked down on for being unable to notice 
or understand changes in the markets domestically or abroad. We should also be aware that, 
when  economic  agents  make  decisions  dynamically  and  in  real  time,  it  is  very  difficult  to 
detect such changes. In particular, the relationship between the central bank and the market 
should  not  fall  into  the  so-called  “chase  your  own  tail”  situation  under  the  name  of 
communication. 
Of course, there will be no disagreement that the central bank policy directions must be kept 
predicable in  the  medium-  to  long-term,  through  clear  exchanges  of  information.  However, 
when a “Minsky Moment” occurs the central bank and the market cannot move in the same 
directions. When market stability is a concern, it is desirable that the central bank lead the 
market. It is not desirable for the central bank to be led by the market. In times of uncertainty 
and instability, market tries to continuously test the central bank. Central bank should not be 
misguided by efforts to undermine the central bank under the name of communication when 
there  is  only  difference  of  opinion.38, 39  The  central  bank  should  conduct  its  policy 
harmoniously,  by  exchanging  information  with  the  market  on  the  one  hand,  while 
accumulating enough experiences and knowledge to maintain market discipline on the other. 
Although they are not easily compatible in reality, they are the ways of becoming a leading 
central bank. 
Over the last four years I have worked without rest to carry out over 100 reform tasks. The 
expression  “reform  fatigue”  might  be  heard  in  this  regard,  but  I  think  it  would  be  more 
appropriate to express this as the institutionalization of reform. Tasks should be carried out 
while  keeping  always  mind  the  need  to  change.  Fatigue  comes  when  one  is  passive  not 
when one is active in carrying out their tasks. Please remember that reform is like education: 
it is a journey, not a final destination. Here are some unfinished tasks: 
First, in order to establish the Bank of Korea as a world leading knowledge institution, our 
educational  and  training  program  should  be  put  securely  in  place.  In  the  world’s  leading 
                                                                                                                                                      
should be independent from the market in order to maintain the term structure of interest rates. And I think that 
we should keep his argument in mind. 
38   Communication is an effective policy instrument under conditions of a zero lower bound, but whether it can be 
used as a monetary policy tool in emerging economies needs to be reviewed more. During the period of the 
Great  Moderation,  constructive  ambiguity  was  for  a  long  time  regarded  as  a  central  bank  communication 
virtue.  This  seems  to  aim  at  reducing  risk  of  unnecessary  noise  from  errors  of  interpreting  central  bank 
communication meant to clearly explain complex financial conditions, and at preventing herd behavior given 
market propensity to overreact. Many Fed reports have emphasized that guidance is a threshold, not a trigger. 
This emphasis is to ask the market not to understand it as commitment by the central bank. Please refer to 
Yellen (April 2013), “Communication in Monetary Policy,” Society of American Business Editors and Writers, 
and Bernanke (Nov. 2013), “Communication and Monetary Policy,” National Economists Club Annual Dinner. 
It  is  of  course  natural  for  the  markets  to  be  suspicious  of  a  central  bank,  which  has  the  power  to  set  the 
interest rate, not following its original interest rate projections. Needless to say, good communication depends 
upon the degree of understanding of the economy. It is very difficult to interpret complex financial conditions, 
but oversimplifying the situation in order to communicate with the market can only result in the provision of 
inaccurate information from the long-term perspective. And so I think it is desirable to work to enhance the 
understandings of economic agents on financial economy, just as is done by advanced central banks. 
39   Whether a central bank is seen as a leader or a follower of market depends in some part on theoretical and 
empirical  perspective  regarding  the  market.  Those  who  advocate  the  efficient  market  hypothesis  (e.g.  the 
Chicago school of economics) may argue that the central bank should follow the market, while those who think 
that the market is imperfect and its signals can be distorting (e.g. the Keynesian school) would say that the 
central bank should be independent from the market. Blinder called a central bank operating under the former 
belief a “coward central bank”, and used expressions such as “don’t fight the Fed” and “dogs chasing their 
tails”. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  I 
think  central  bank  should  actively  pursue 
businesses 10% of their staffs are said to be in training all the time, and we should at least 
target a rate one-half of that. To be effective, our educational programs should refrain from 
covering general content, and need to be specific to central bank tasks. I would like to remind 
you  once  again  that  leading  central  banks  have  sought  and  presented  solutions  to 
addressing the global financial crisis by becoming more academic than academia itself.40 
Second  is  the  issue  of  strengthening  the  links  between  our  policies  and  the  market.  To 
become a leading central bank, the practices in which those in charge of policies only carry 
out  theoretical  research  and  those  in  charge  of  market  carry  out  observation  without  any 
logical  analysis  should  be  avoided.  Central  banks  should  develop  their  capabilities  of 
analyzing and studying market changes. Without a strong theoretical foundation there can be 
a  lack  of  consistency  in  analysis.  The  Bank  of  Korea’s  analytical  capacity  has  progressed 
remarkably  over  the  last  few  years,  and  if  analysis  is  made  from  a  comprehensive 
perspective,  with  close  cooperation  among  the  departments  concerned  with  the  markets, 
with policy and with research, and if the research committee promotes this cooperation, I am 
confident  that  the  Bank  of  Korea  will  develop  into  one  of  the  leading  central  banks  in  the 
world. 
Third, 
including 
globalization  of  the  Korean  won.  Whether  or  not  Korea  will  join  the  leading  economies 
depends upon the advancements in finance and globalization is the key. But looking at the 
recent trends, I wonder whether we may not have lagged behind other emerging economies 
like  China  in  this  respect.  Over  the  last  few  years,  we  have  actively  signed  local currency 
swaps  with  resource-trading  countries,  and  have  expanded  the  scope  of  our  tasks  in  this 
way. It is now necessary to increase the effectiveness of these measures, and if we succeed 
it could also provide great implications to countries without reserve currencies.41 I sincerely 
hope  that  we  reassert  our  commitment  to  establishing  a  financial  hub  in  Northeast  Asia, 
through  the  pursuit  of  bold  measures  compatible  with  market  rules  in  foreign  exchange 
markets. 
Fourth  is  the  reestablishment  of  an  internal  evaluation  system.  The  weight  of  our  peer 
reviews  is  still  very  low.  The  relationships  with  superiors  or  subordinates  are  of  course 
important  in  the  office  but  many  analyses  indicate  that  peer  reviews  are  the  most  precise 
evaluations,  which  is  why  many  businesses  value  peer  reviews.  As  no  system  can  be 
introduced perfectly, it will be desirable to devote efforts to continually develop the system 
after its introduction. 
Lastly, I would like to talk about the Bank of Korea Act, which should be handled cautiously 
from a long-term perspective. I think that endowing the Bank of Korea with a greater financial 
stability mandate is more in line with global trends. More theoretical research should be done 
on  the  compatibility  of  price  and  financial  stability,  but  if  the  financial  stability  function  is 
financial  globalization, 
                                                 
40   Through my emphasis of the expression “more academic than academia”, I am not trying to look down on the 
academia, but I am trying to convey that central banks have presented theoretical and empirical materials and 
developed instruments necessary for overcoming the financial crisis. Academia in advanced economies has 
gained  a  reputation  as  a  group  pursuing  high  competitiveness,  as  represented  by  the  “publish  or  perish” 
paradigm. It is expected that an era in which strict criteria are also applied to central banks will come in the 
future. 
41   It  would  be  very  difficult  to  know  the  effects  of  using  local  currency  swaps  in  trade  settlement  through  the 
experiences  of  reserve  currency  countries.  This  is  a  question  in  which  the  choice  depends  on  whether  US 
dollar or local currency is economically more advantageous. This also has the advantage of hedging against 
the  risk  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  stemming  from  global  financial  market  unrest,  and  in  this  sense  also 
serves as a partial financial safety net. As the global economy grows, this is also one way of responding to the 
Triffin Dilemma. I think countries without reserve currencies should find the initiative in researching this issue. 
The  use  of  local  currencies  in  trade  settlement  can  only  become  established  after  efforts  to  eliminate  the 
hurdles due to differences between systems theoretically and empirically. China is expressing great interest 
and this will the first step toward globalization of the won. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
  expanded, the need will arise for reviewing separate operations of the MPC and an FPC, just 
like UK. And until the conditions for this have been built up we should organize and operate a 
consultative body like the US FSOC to actually expand our financial stability mandate further. 
I would like to wrap up my lecture now. As I mentioned earlier, it is fortunate for me to finish 
my  tenure  at  a  time  when  the  global  financial  crisis  has  come  almost  to  an  end.  This  is 
because  I  believe  that  all  of  the  measures  that  we  have  taken  so  far  have  had  positive 
impacts.  Now  it  is  time  to  continuously  sow  the  seeds  for  the  next  few  years.  The 
G20 meeting last month agreed to include in the communique that G20 countries will aim to 
increase their growth rates by 2%p over the next five years, and this marks a drastic turning 
point. There do remain structural problems in the Korean economy, including household debt 
and an aging population, which would have to be resolved mid- to long-term. But the growth 
rate at the end of 2013 was around the mid-3% level compared to end of 2012, approaching 
almost the potential growth rate, and the domestic and global financial markets, as indicated 
by  variables  including  stocks,  bonds,  current  accounts  and  exchange  rates,  are  the  most 
stable in the world. It is not only due to the Bank of Korea and I do not want to self-praise, but 
I  am  very  proud  that  the  Korean  economy  has  developed  to  the  point  where  it  is  now 
differentiated from other emerging economies. Korea’s sovereign credit rating was upgraded 
by global credit rating agencies during the financial crisis, a unique case in the world, and 
your contributions in achieving these accomplishments during the last four years should be 
highly appreciated. 
The title of my farewell lecture is a “World Leading Global BOK”. One cannot pause even for 
a  moment  to  achieve  this  high  goal.  Without  exception,  all  of  our  staff  needs  to  devote 
continuous  efforts  to  becoming  world  number  ones  in  their  own  positions.  One  cannot 
become a leading organization by work of others. We should be at least as good as other 
central banks. In a leading organization those in the higher ranks are very busy, while in an 
organization that lags behind the opposite is true. I would like to stress once again that only 
when we are equipped with the latest weapons can we protect the national interests in an 
environment  of  global  competition.  As  one  of  a  central  organization  of  our  nation,  please 
remember  that  there  is  no  greater  purpose  of  our  foundation  than  contributing  to  the 
development  of  our  national  economy.  It  is  our  pride  to  bring  central  bank  closer  to  the 
citizens. Only the determination to walk to less traveled road would ensure success. 
The last four years can be expressed as having been tumultuous. I hope that the fire that I 
have  lit  inside  you  keeps  flaring  on,  and  I  believe  that  competent  executives,  director 
generals, and team heads will lead this organization well with their experiences accumulated 
so  far.  I  also  look  forward  to  your  initiatives  so  that  the  Bank  of  Korea  can  take  off  even 
further. 
I  began  my  farewell  address  by  citing  a  line  from  General  MacArthur,  and  I  would  like  to 
conclude  by  citing  again  some  other  words  that  he  said: “Old  soldiers  never  die,  they  just 
fade  away.”  I  would  like  to  just  fade  away  now  as  a  regular  citizen,  keeping  in  mind  the 
precious connections that I have made with all of you. Thank you. 
 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
