  Ravi Menon: MAS’ Annual Report 2013/14 – economic overview and 
challenges 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
MAS’ Annual Report 2013/14 Press Conference, Singapore, 24 July 2014. 
 1 Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ annual report press conference. 
2 I will touch on four broad areas today. First, growth and inflation, including asset prices; 
second,  our  regulatory  measures  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  consumers  of  financial 
products; third, the growth of the financial sector and fourth, an overview of MAS’ financial 
results. 
3 Let me start with the economy. 
Momentum slows but economy on track to meet 2–4% growth forecast 
4 The economy grew an average of 0.4% on q-o-q seasonally adjusted, annualised (SAAR) 
basis over the first two quarters. Export-oriented sectors were sluggish in the first quarter due 
to  the  slippage  of  final  demand  in  the  US  and  China.  In  the  second  quarter,  there  was 
modest improvement in trade-related services – wholesale trade and transport and storage 
sectors. But electronics production remained weak. 
5 Looking ahead for the year, the economy remains on track to grow at 2–4%. The economy 
has already averaged 3.4% growth in the first half on a year-on-year basis. More importantly, 
sequential quarter-on-quarter growth should see a modest pick-up in the second half even if 
there is some drag to year-o-year growth due to the high base in the second half of last year. 
6 There are several key factors to the improved prospects for the rest of the year. 
7 First, the external environment remains generally favourable, with both major engines of 
global growth intact. 
• 
In the US, recent data indicate continued economic expansion. Both manufacturing 
and services PMIs are up. The labour market continues to improve. There is also a 
modest rise in business spending, which is a key driver of growth in the US. 
In  China,  growth  should  come  within  the  consensus  range  of  7–7.5%.  There  are 
some headwinds from ongoing structural reforms but targeted policy measures will 
provide support to the economy. 
 8  Second,  sectors  dependent  on  regional  demand  –  such  as  financial  intermediation 
services, business services, and chemicals – should do  well. They will benefit from higher 
regional incomes as the pick up in exports bolsters domestic demand in Asia. 
9  Third,  domestic  oriented  sectors  should  stay  resilient.  The  construction  industry  is 
supported  by  a  pipeline  of  infrastructure  projects  while  domestic  corporate  and  consumer 
spending will lend support to the info-communications and other essential services such as 
healthcare and education. 
10 However, there are downside risks to the growth outlook. This year, geopolitical risks are 
larger than macroeconomic risks. The MAS is closely monitoring the ongoing conflicts in the 
Middle  East  and  Ukraine.  Should  the  conflicts  intensify  or  drag  on,  they  could  adversely 
impact confidence, generate financial market volatility, and increase global oil prices. These 
would, in turn, affect Singapore’s growth, particularly in trade-related sectors and sentiment-
sensitive segments in the financial services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  11  Having  said  that,  barring  significant  escalation,  moderate  spillovers  to  Singapore  from 
these geopolitical developments should be accommodated within current forecast range of 
2–4% growth. 
Overall inflation has moderated but underlying price pressures persist 
12 Let me move on to inflation. 
13  In  assessing  inflation  in  Singapore,  we  look  at  two  main  indicators.  First,  All-Items  or 
headline inflation, which is the most comprehensive measure. Second, core Inflation, which 
excludes  the  volatile  components  of  car  and  housing  costs  and  is  a  better  measure  of 
underlying inflation. 
14 Core or underlying inflation in turn has two sources: imported and domestic. 
15 I will start with imported inflation, which has been flat. On average, imported inflation has 
been  zero  so  far  this  year,  compared  to  same  period  last  year.  The  appreciation  of  the 
Singapore Dollar has neutralised the impact of foreign prices on domestic prices. 
16 However, the prices of non-cooked food items – although imported – have been volatile 
and generally higher. Papaya prices went up by 16% (y-o-y) in first half of this year, while 
banana prices went up by 18%. This was due to the effects of adverse weather in Thailand 
and Malaysia. At the same time, the prices of oranges went down by 7% and tomatoes by 
10%. Looking beyond fruits, sugar prices were down, wheat prices were up, while the price 
of Thai white rice was broadly stable. 
17 Taking all non-cooked food items together, prices went up by 2.8% in H1 2014. This is 
higher than overall inflation. The greater volatility reflects the periodic shocks in global food 
prices that have become more frequent in recent years. 
18 Domestic inflationary pressures, however, remain firm. These stem mainly from the pass-
through of higher costs, particularly wages, to consumer prices. The cost of services most 
affected,  given  their  high  labour  content.  As  a  result,  the  cost  of  eating  out,  education, 
healthcare, and recreation rose at a faster rate compared to overall inflation in the first half of 
2014. 
19 Taking together imported and domestic sources of inflation, Core Inflation was higher than 
the  historical  average  but  well  contained  –  the  forecast  for  Core  Inflation  is  unchanged  at 
2-3%. Core Inflation was 1.8% in the second half of 2013, rose to 2.1% in first half of 2014, 
and is likely to increase slightly over the rest of the year. 
20 But overall or CPI-All Items inflation is on a different trend. All-Items inflation was 1.9% in 
the  second  half  of  2013,  came  down  to  1.7%  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  and  is  likely  to 
continue  easing  through  the  rest  of  the  year.  The  MAS  is  therefore  narrowing  the  2014 
forecast  range  for  All-Items  inflation  to  1.5–2.0%  from  1.5–2.5%.  Overall  inflation  is  falling 
due  to the  moderation  in  housing  costs  and  car  prices. Government measures to  cool  the 
property market have helped stabilise prices and rent and higher COE supply has lowered 
premiums. 
21 Therefore the focus of MAS’ monetary policy, as before, is on Core Inflation. Just as we 
were  not  unduly  alarmed  when  All-Items  inflation  was  running  at  5%,  we  should  not  be 
complacent now just because All-Items inflation is running below 2%. Our focus remains on 
Core  Inflation,  which  has  persisted  at  2–3%  for  the  last  few  years.  Monetary  policy  has 
therefore been steady and consistent during this period – a gradual and modest appreciation 
path  for  S$NEER  since  April  2010.  This  was  reaffirmed  most  recently  in  April  2014.  This 
policy stance will ensure that Core Inflation stays within 2–3% this year. 
22  We  expect  Core  Inflation  to  be  higher  than  historical  average  of  2%,  during  period  of 
economic  restructuring  next  few  years.  The  aim  of  our  monetary  policy  is  to  keep  core 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation expectations anchored at around 2.5%. Inflation may exceed this level from time to 
time but we aim to ensure that it does not do so on sustained basis. 
Property cooling measures working but too early to ease 
23 Next, I will touch on to the property market. 
24 The MAS has also been focused on asset price inflation in recent years, especially in the 
property market. The MAS, working with other government agencies, has introduced several 
rounds of measures to cool an overheated property market. 
25 There were three motivations behind MAS policy measures. 
• 
Anchor inflation expectations. High and rising asset prices could fuel expectations of 
still higher general prices. 
Support financial stability. Unsustainably high property prices could create risks of 
financial stability given the banking system’s loan exposure to property. 
Encourage greater financial prudence. The combination of global low interest rates 
and  high  asset  prices  could  lead  to  some  households  over-extending  themselves 
financially. 
  26 How far have these policy objectives been met? 
• 
There are some indications that property market is stabilising. The private property 
price index has moderated by cumulative 3.3% over the last three quarters. This has 
alleviated the pressure on headline inflation, as I have explained earlier. 
The banking system is resilient to property market shocks. Stress tests of our banks 
during last year’s Financial Sector Assessment Programme by the IMF showed they 
were  resilient  against  various  stress  scenarios.  These  stresses  included  a 
combination  of:  domestic  interest  rates  increasing  by  more  than  200  bps; 
unemployment rate rising above 10%; cumulative decline in equity prices up to 70% 
over  three  years;  and  cumulative  decline  in  residential  property  prices  up  to  50% 
over three years. MAS’ own stress test this year – assuming disorderly unwinding of 
quantitative easing in US and higher level of USD funding squeeze – shows similar 
results. 
Household  balance  sheets  are  in  better  shape.  Last  year  I  highlighted  MAS’ 
concerns over rising household leverage. Property-related measures have helped to 
strengthen overall household balance sheets in two ways. First, they have tempered 
the  growth  of  household  debt.  Year-on-year  growth  of  household  debt  has 
moderated from nearly 13% in the third quarter of 2011 to 5.5% in the first quarter of 
2014. Second, the risk profile of new housing loan borrowers has improved. Almost 
all  new  housing  loans  granted  since  introduction  of Total  Debt  Servicing  Ratio, or 
TDSR, were within the 60% threshold. 
  27 But it is too early to ease property-related measures 
28 The measures can be broadly categorised into structural and cyclical measures. 
• 
Structural  measures  include  the  TDSR  and  caps  on  loan  tenures.  They  aim  to 
ensure that households do not take on financial obligations beyond their repayment 
capacity. Structural measures are therefore meant for the long-term. 
Cyclical  measures  include  MAS’  LTV  limits  and  MOF’s  stamp  duties.  They  are 
designed  to  prevent  households  from  over-extending  themselves  in  purchasing 
property  during  periods  of  rapid  price  increases  or  elevated  prices.  Cyclical 
measures can be recalibrated according to market conditions. 
 29 It is too early to unwind cyclical measures as the risk factors have not changed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     Property prices remain at elevated levels. Prices went up 60% over last four years 
but have declined by just 3.3% over the last three quarters. 
Global  interest rates  are  still  at  historical  lows. Relaxing property measures in the 
current easy liquidity environment may set off another spiral of price increases. 
The level of debt among highly leveraged households remains high. For these highly 
leveraged households, reducing the level of leverage will take time. They need to 
work with their banks and commit to debt repayment plans. 
30 Hence on the  whole,  MAS’ assessment is that it is premature to ease property cooling 
measures  now.  It  is  important  that  we  secure  the  gains  we  have  made  in  stabilising  the 
market and restoring financial prudence. 
Comprehensive measures to safeguard interests of consumers of financial products 
31 On the financial regulatory and supervisory front, I will focus on measures being taken to 
safeguard the interests of consumers of financial products. 
32 Several measures were announced recently and some will be announced soon. Let me 
set  the  context  for  these  measures  –  motivating  factors,  overall  approach,  and  how  the 
various pieces fit together. 
33 Three trends are shaping market for financial products. 
• 
• 
Low interest rates globally have spurred investors to seek better returns. 
Growing  affluence  and  financial  awareness  have  generated  greater  demand  for  a 
broader range of retail investment products. 
There has been an increased sophistication and variety in financial products offered 
to retail public. 
 34 Against this backdrop, MAS is taking a multi-pronged approach to safeguard consumer 
interests. First, we are enhancing regulatory safeguards for retail investors in unconventional 
investment schemes. Second, we will facilitate retail access to simple, lower cost products. 
Third,  MAS  will  help  to  empower  consumers  with  enhanced  disclosure  and  information 
access. Fourth, we are raising standards of financial advice to consumers. 
35 MAS issued a consultation paper earlier this week with proposals on the safeguards for 
retail investors in unconventional investment schemes. Let me elaborate here on our thinking 
and rationale. 
36  Many  retail  consumers  have  ventured  into  unconventional  and  unregulated  financial 
products promising higher yields. But these products may also entail risks that are not well 
understood by retail investors. MAS has therefore decided to extend to these unconventional 
products regulatory safeguards that apply to capital markets. 
37 In extending boundaries of regulation, we are guided by the need to balance costs and 
benefits. 
• 
If we take too broad-brush an approach, we could end up regulating all commercial 
arrangements involving some form of investment return. For example, buying gold 
jewellery or piece of art that could appreciate in value over time. This will only add to 
costs without advancing consumer interests. 
But if we craft the regulatory framework too narrowly, products may be deliberately 
structured to fall outside the regulatory perimeter. For example, restricting regulation 
to land-banking arrangements will fail to capture other schemes operating on similar 
premises, such as investments in ostrich farms or in plantations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   38  Therefore,  taking  into  account  market  developments  in  Singapore,  MAS  will  selectively 
enhance  regulatory  safeguards  for  retail  investors  in  buy-back  arrangements  involving 
precious  metals,  which  has  the  same  economic  effect  as  borrowing  cash  from  customers; 
and collectively managed investment schemes. The latter includes land-banking and forestry 
schemes. These are in substance collective investments for which rules on public offerings 
and disclosure should apply. 
39 One reason why consumers venture into unconventional and often risky products is that 
simple, lower cost products not easily available. MAS working to address this. 
40  Following  FAIR  recommendation,  MAS  will  introduce  a  direct  channel  through  which 
consumers can purchase insurance products that focus on meeting their protection needs. 
Such products will be cheaper as consumers do not need to pay for distribution costs. The 
features  of  these  products  will  also  be  largely  standardised,  making  them  easier  to 
understand and compare across products. 
41  By  early  next  year,  consumers  who  do  not  require  financial  advice  will  be  able  to 
purchase  term  and  whole  life  insurance  products,  directly  from  insurers.  MAS  will  be 
announcing details on this by the end of the month. 
42 MAS is also working to facilitate better access to fixed income products. We are seeing 
growing retail investor interest in fixed income products, e.g. plain vanilla corporate bonds. 
While the risk-return profiles of such fixed income products are easier to understand they are 
not readily available to retail investors. 
43  MAS  reviewing  how  retail  access  to  fixed  income  products  can  be  improved.  We  are 
looking  at  how  disclosure  requirements  can  be  streamlined  for  issuers  satisfying  certain 
criteria  such  as  issuances  of  a  certain  size  or  with  a  track  record.  The  idea  is  to  make  it 
easier  for  issuers  to  offer  bonds  to  retail  investors  while  maintaining  sufficient  safeguards. 
MAS will be putting out proposals for consultation next month. 
44 Financial products have become more innovative and complex to cater to investors along 
a  wider  spectrum  of  financial  sophistication  and  risk  appetites.  While  this  is  good,  it  does 
mean  we  need  to  empower  consumers  to  navigate  this  complexity,  understand  the  risk-
return  trade-offs,  and  compare  and  choose  products  most  suitable  to  their  financial 
objectives. 
45 I will highlight three initiatives in this direction. 
• 
Complexity-risk framework. MAS proposes to introduce a new tool to aid consumers 
in comparing inherent complexities and risks of investment products. 
Product  highlight sheet (PHS).  PHS  requirements  were  first  introduced  in  2010  to 
govern sale and marketing of more complex investment products like asset-backed 
securities and structured notes. MAS is proposing to extend requirements for PHS 
to offers of equities, bonds, and hybrid securities. MAS has gathered feedback on 
the proposals and will announce our final decision soon. 
Web  aggregator.  MAS  working  closely  with  the  industry  and  consumer  groups  to 
develop a  web aggregator so consumers can compare term insurance, whole life, 
and endowment products. The online portal is targeted for roll-out in early 2015. 
  46  There  are  also  initiatives  to  improve  the  quality  of  financial  advice  to  consumers.  The 
majority  of  retail  investors  obtain  financial  advice  from  and  purchase  investment  products 
through financial advisory (FA) firms. Thus, it is critical that FA firms and their representatives 
offer quality financial advice to help consumers make appropriate financial decisions. 
47 MAS is enhancing standards for FA industry in a few ways. 
• 
We  are  raising  admission  and  ongoing  requirements  for  FA  firms.  These 
requirements will be in place in 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   We  have  also  set  higher  minimum  academic  entry  requirements 
for  FA 
representatives with effect from 1 February 2014 and will mandate minimum hours 
of continuing professional development training for them in 2015. 
MAS will also implement in 2015 a balanced scorecard remuneration framework that 
will  recognise  FA  representatives  and  their  supervisors  for  providing  good  quality 
advice. 
 48 Ultimately, consumers must take responsibility for their financial decisions. But MAS will 
continue  to  work  with  the  industry  and  other  government  agencies  to  enhance  financial 
literacy among Singaporeans so that they can take sound financial decisions. MoneySENSE, 
the  national  financial  education  programme,  is  the  centrepiece  of  this  effort.  We  seek  the 
media’s support and partnership in this effort so that we can reach out to all Singaporeans. 
Another good year for Singapore’s financial centre 
49 Moving on to our financial sector, Singapore’s financial centre continues to perform well. 
Financial  and  insurance  services  grew  by  10.8%  last  year.  Four  segments  are  worth 
highlighting. 
50  Asset  management.  Assets  under  management  (AUM)  grew  close  to  12%  to  reach 
S$1.82  trillion  in  2013.  Growth  was  broad-based  –  both  traditional  as  well  as  alternative 
managers like hedge funds and private equity players registered good increases in AUM. 
51 Foreign exchange and derivatives. Singapore is now third largest FX centre globally after 
London and New York. Two trends augur well for Singapore as FX and derivatives centre. 
• 
One, regulatory reforms to promote greater transparency in markets will spur growth 
of  exchange-traded  instruments  globally.  This  “futurisation”  trend  plays  to  SGX’s 
strength in derivatives and it has seen strong growth in equity index futures trading. 
Two, investors in Asian time zone will need a comprehensive suite of pan-Asian risk 
management products. SGX is well-placed to fill this need. SGX launched six Asian 
FX  futures  contracts  in  2013  and  plans  to  launch  RMB  futures  in  H2  this  year 
alongside other currencies. 
 52 Insurance. Singapore is Asia’s leading insurance centre. Offshore insurance business in 
both  direct  and  reinsurance  markets  is  growing  strongly.  The  offshore  non-life  insurance 
business has grown by average 11% per annum in the last 3 years. Singapore has also built 
up  significant  capacity  and  expertise  for  large,  complex  and  specialty  risks.  Most  large 
reinsurance and specialty Asian risks can now be fully placed in Singapore. 
53 RMB business. There has been strong growth in RMB activities since the launch of RMB 
clearing  services  in  Singapore  in  2013.  Growth  is  broad-based  across  various  activities  – 
deposits, trade finance, cash management and FX trading. Banks have expanded their RMB 
capabilities to serve needs of corporates based in Singapore and region. Based on SWIFT’s 
recent data, Singapore is currently the top RMB offshore clearing centre outside China/HK. 
54 Looking ahead, MAS will focus on two areas to further develop the RMB market. 
• 
First,  deepen  range  of  RMB  products  and  services,  in  particular,  in  fund 
management and capital markets. The award of RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional 
Investor  (RQFII)  quota  to  Singapore  financial  institutions  to  invest  RMB  funds  in 
China  is  a  significant  step.  It  will  help  expand  the  range  of  RMB  investment 
products, given growing investor interest in China. We have had seven successful 
Lion City bond issuances worth RMB10.5 billion to-date, and we will look to promote 
greater bond issuance activity on a sustained basis. 
Second,  enhance  market  infrastructure  to  facilitate  growth  of  RMB  activities.  In 
response to market demand, MAS has recently introduced RMB Overnight Liquidity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
   Facility to meet end-of-day RMB liquidity needs in the market. We will work with the 
industry to develop a RMB Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System to raise the 
efficiency of RMB payment settlements in Singapore. 
Investment gains stable but profits higher due to translation effects 
55 Finally, I shall touch on MAS’ financial results. 
56 MAS recorded overall profit of S$15.8 billion for FY2013/14. In FY2012/13, we recorded a 
loss of S$10.6 billion. However, focusing on these numbers misses larger point about how 
MAS’ investments have performed. 
57  As  I  had  explained  on  previous  occasions,  MAS’  overall  profit  position  is  strongly 
influenced by currency translation effects – these are the effects of converting value of our 
reserves in foreign currency to Singapore Dollars (SGD). 
• 
A  weaker  SGD  means  a  positive  translation  effect,  i.e.  investment  gains  on  our 
foreign assets are amplified when reported in SGD. 
Conversely,  a  stronger  SGD  means  a  negative  translation  effect,  i.e.  investment 
gains are smaller or even negative  when measured in SGD. But these translation 
effects have no bearing on the international purchasing power of MAS’ reserves. 
 58  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  look  at  the  underlying  investment  gains  holding  the  SGD 
exchange  rate  constant  to  strip  out  currency  translation  effects.  When  we  do  this,  for 
FY2013/14,  MAS  posted  foreign  investment  gains  of  S$10.6  billion,  comparable  to 
investment gains of S$9.4 billion for FY 2012/13. 
59 For this financial year, we recorded positive translation effects as SGD weakened against 
the  USD,  EURO  and  GBP.  In  the  last  financial  year,  we  had  negative  translation  effects 
because the SGD appreciated against these three currencies as well as the JPY. 
60  To  help  make  sense  of  MAS’  underlying  investment  performance,  we  have  provided  a 
write-up on page 27 of annual report, showing the overall profit position, currency translation 
effects, and investment gains. 
61 As shown in the chart on page 27, MAS’  investment gains have been relatively stable. 
This reflects our conservative investment strategy, which balances the need to hold sufficient 
liquidity to support the conduct of monetary policy with the aim to preserve the international 
purchasing power of the foreign reserves. MAS’ portfolio is well-diversified with a risk profile 
that is commensurate with our role as a central bank. 
62 I will stop here, and will be happy to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
