  Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in a prolonged period of low inflation 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Forum on 
Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, 26 May 2014. 
 Summary 
In  the  context  of  a  certain  disconnect  between  economic  performance  and  inflation  the 
monetary policy response has to be carefully considered and precisely designed. We are not 
resigned to allowing inflation to remain too low for too long. But to understand “what is too 
low for too long”, we need to answer two questions. 
First, why is inflation so low? 
Second, once we have a decomposition of inflation, we can ask: how likely is it that it persists 
over  the  medium-term?  Falling  commodity  prices  have  accounted  for  around  80%  of  the 
decline in euro area inflation since late 2011. But there two factors specific to the euro area 
that contribute to low inflation: the rise in the euro exchange rate and the process of relative 
price adjustments in certain euro area countries. 
At present, our expectation is that low inflation will be prolonged but gradually return to 2%. 
Our responsibility is nonetheless to be alert to the risks to this scenario that might emerge 
and  prepared  for  action  if  they  do.  What  we  need  to  be  particularly  watchful  for  at  the 
moment  is  the  potential  for  a  negative  spiral  to  take  hold  between  low  inflation,  falling 
inflation expectations and credit, in particular in stressed countries. 
There is a risk that disinflationary expectations take hold. This may then cause households 
and  firms  to  defer  expenditure  in  a  classic  deflationary  cycle  –  especially  when  monetary 
policy  is  at  the  effective  lower  bound  and  so  cannot  steer  the  nominal  rate  down  to 
compensate. 
On  aggregate,  euro  area  firms  and  households  do  not  seem  to  be  particularly  exposed  to 
debt deflation dynamics. But this picture masks the heterogeneity within the euro area. Debt 
service-to-income ratios tend to be higher in stressed countries. Credit weakness appears to 
be contributing to economic weakness in these countries. Our analysis suggests that credit 
constraints  are  putting  a  brake  on  the  recovery  in  stressed  countries,  which  adds  to  the 
disinflationary  pressures.  And  heterogeneity  becomes  a factor  in  assessing  low  inflation  in 
the euro area. 
In terms of the monetary policy response, the key issue is timing. We have to be mindful of 
mismatches  between  the  various  trends:  the  rise  in  demand  for  credit;  the  repair  of  bank 
balance sheets; and the development of capital markets as a complement to bank lending. At 
this  point  of  the  cycle,  these  considerations  feature  prominently  in  the  discussions  of  the 
Governing Council members. There is no debate about our goal, which is to return inflation 
towards 2% in the medium-term, in line with our mandate. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
When we first thought about launching this forum in the spring of last year, we saw a clear 
value  in  setting  aside  time  to  withdraw  from  the  pressure  of  our  daily  routines  and  the 
immediacy of decisions. The idea was to devote time to in-depth reflection on how to address 
the fundamental challenges facing central banks. 
In the event, the opportunity for in-depth reflection has proven as valuable as we expected – 
but our ability to detach from the pressures of the moment has been less than we thought. 
We  are  meeting  against  the  backdrop  of  a  complex  economic  situation:  a  slowly 
consolidating  recovery,  but  one  which  has  been  accompanied  by  a  gradual  fall  in  inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  rates.  Cyclical  developments  are  also  interacting  with  structural  developments,  notably  the 
structural deleveraging of the banking system. All this warrants discussion. 
To some extent, a disconnect between economic performance and inflation is to be expected 
in  the  very  early  stages  of  the  economic  upturn.  As  households  and  firms  resume  their 
spending plans in the aftermath of a long period of restraint, they tend initially to use existing 
resources  more  intensively.  This  raises  measured  productivity,  but  causes  employment  to 
return more slowly towards its potential, which reduces price pressures. 
In this  context, the monetary  policy  response  has  to  be  carefully  considered  and  precisely 
designed. We do not want to be too reactive to those parts of the disinflationary process that 
are expected to self-correct. We neither want to be too forbearing towards those factors that, 
if  left  unchecked,  can  lastingly  undermine  price  stability.  We  are  not  resigned  to  allowing 
inflation to remain too low for too long. But to understand “what is too low for too long”, we 
need to answer two questions. 
First, why is inflation so low? This is essentially a question about the anatomy of inflation, 
meaning the nature of the shocks that are causing inflation to deviate from its intended level. 
Second, once we have a decomposition of inflation, we can ask: how likely is it that it persists 
over the medium-term? This is a question related to the physiology of inflation, meaning how 
current  low  inflation  influences  economic  behaviour  and  impacts  the  economy,  notably 
through the formation of expectations. 
Through  the  filter  of  these  two  questions,  I  would  like  to  use  my  remarks  this  morning  to 
discuss the forthcoming decisions facing the Governing Council. 
The anatomy of disinflation 
Low inflation is not particular to the euro area. Inflation is low across advanced economies, 
mainly  due  to  the  diminishing  effect  of  oil  prices  on  consumer  prices.  But  looking  at  the 
anatomy  of  inflation,  there  are  two  factors  specific  to  the  euro  area  that  contribute  to 
especially low inflation here. 
The first is a common factor: the rise in the euro exchange rate and its effect on the price of 
internationally traded commodities. The second is a local factor: the process of relative price 
adjustment in certain euro area countries that pulls down aggregate inflation. 
Let me explain each of these in turn. 
Common factors 
Falling  commodity  prices  explain  the  lion’s  share  of  the  disinflation  the  euro  area  has 
experienced since the end of 2011. Brent crude oil prices were down by around 7% in euro 
terms in the first quarter of this year, compared with a year earlier. Food prices were sharply 
down as well. In fact, these two components have together accounted for around 80% of the 
decline in euro area HICP inflation since late 2011. 
The bulk of the imported downside pressures on euro area consumer prices are explained by 
the strengthening of the effective euro exchange rate, in particular vis-à-vis the dollar. In the 
past year or so, oil prices in US dollars have fluctuated – by historical standards – over a 
relatively narrow range. And they have exhibited no clear downward or upward trend. 
This  creates  a  balance  of  forces  that  might  affect  future  inflation.  On  the  one  hand,  lower 
commodity  prices  driven  by  euro  appreciation  help  compensate  for  the  generally  weak 
developments  in  disposable  income  in  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  real  disposable  income 
declined at slower pace throughout 2013, and turned slightly positive in the fourth quarter, 
increasing by 0.6% year-on-year. To the extent that this supports domestic demand in the 
euro area it will also create upward pressure on inflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  On  the  other  hand,  exchange  rate  appreciation  affects  external  demand  and  reduces  the 
competitiveness gains of price and cost adjustment in some euro area countries. This has a 
countervailing effect on real disposable incomes, while also making disinflation more broad-
based. Indeed, if we look at prices of non-energy industrial goods, which are mainly tradable, 
we see a downward trend across all euro area countries. 
Local factors 
To  add  to  this,  aggregate  inflation  has  been  dragged  down  by  local  factors  linked  to  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  process  of  relative  price  adjustment  in  stressed  countries. 
Several  euro  area  countries  are  currently  undergoing  internal  devaluation  to  regain  price 
competitiveness, both internationally and within the currency union. The crucial adjustments 
vis-à-vis other euro area countries have to take place irrespective of changes in the external 
value of the euro. 
This process began hesitantly in the early years of the crisis, largely due to nominal rigidities 
in wages and prices. The result was that adjustment took place more through quantities – i.e. 
unemployment  –  than  through  prices.  Stressed  countries  thus  experienced  a  protracted 
period of declining disposable incomes and long-drawn-out price adjustment. In this context, 
several  have  seen  domestic  core  inflation  –  that  is,  excluding  the  energy  and  food  price 
effects  I  just  described  –  fall  well  below  the  euro  area  average.  For  example,  the  recent 
overall fall in services price inflation for the euro area is almost entirely accounted for by price 
declines in these components in stressed countries. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  last  few  years  relative  price  adjustment  has  accelerated  in  stressed 
countries. While this may also have initially weighed on disposable incomes, by creating a 
closer alignment between relative wage and productivity developments, it should increasingly 
support  future  incomes  through  the  competitiveness  channel.  Export  growth  has  been 
impressive  in  several  stressed  countries.  And  indeed,  nominal  income  growth  in  stressed 
countries turned positive in the fourth quarter of 2013. 
The physiology of disinflation 
So  to  sum  up:  falling  energy  and  food  prices,  coupled  with  the  effects  of  relative  price 
adjustment  in  stressed  countries,  explain  almost  fully  the  disinflation  we  have  seen  in  the 
euro area. We also see that disinflation produces counterveiling forces, which may in time 
cause  it  to  self-correct.  To  what  extent  should  monetary  policy  therefore  react  to  these 
developments? 
The answer relates to the physiology of inflation: whether or not these factors are likely to 
persist into the medium-term and therefore enter the horizon of monetary policy. Temporary 
movements in the exchange rate or relative price adjustments would not normally warrant a 
monetary  policy  response.  Given  the  lag  in  monetary  policy  transmission,  a  monetary 
impulse  would  hit  the  economy  just  when  the  effect  on  inflation  has  faded  out  and  the 
impulse is no longer necessary. 
That  said,  shocks  can  change:  in  certain  circumstances  temporary  shocks  can morph  into 
persistent shocks via second-round effects. In particular, a prolonged period of low or even 
negative  inflation  rates  might  destabilise  inflation  expectations.  And  we  know  from 
international experience this change can happen quite quickly, especially if the objective of 
monetary policy is not clear. Thus, we have to judge carefully how an apparently temporary 
shock is spreading through the economy and affecting expectations. 
Moreover,  the  situation  is  more  complex  if  there  are  impairments  in  monetary  policy 
transmission that extend the lag between our decisions and their impact on prices, as we see 
in the euro area today. In these circumstances, there is a risk that, if a temporary shock turns 
more  persistent,  any  monetary  policy  response  might  arrive  too  late  to  prevent  a  more 
serious downward shift in expectations. Thus, more pre-emptive action may be warranted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  At present, our expectation is that low inflation will be prolonged but gradually return to close 
to  2%. Our responsibility  is  nonetheless  to  be  alert  to  the risks  to this  scenario  that might 
emerge and prepared for action if they do. What we need to be particularly watchful for at the 
moment is, in my view, the potential for a negative spiral to take hold between low inflation, 
falling inflation expectations and credit, in particular in stressed countries. 
Let me explain. 
Low inflation, expectations and credit 
Remember that countries undertaking relative price adjustments have to adjust relative to the 
average rate of euro area inflation. Low inflation therefore lowers the “nominal bar” around 
which such adjustments across countries have to happen. In these circumstances, stressed 
countries will likely experience a temporary period of very low or negative inflation rates. This 
is what we see in the euro area at the moment. 
But here the common and local sources of disinflation I mentioned earlier interact. The effect 
of an appreciating exchange rate is to hold down overall euro area inflation. The nominal bar 
around which adjustment takes place is lower: In particular, we see a rise in inflation in non-
stressed  countries  that  is  insufficient  to  raise  the  euro  area  average  back  to  2%.  And  the 
downward  adjustment  in  the  stressed  countries  becomes  probably  harder  and  certainly 
longer, especially if nominal rigidities imply that prices and costs cannot adjust quickly. 
In  this  situation,  there  is  a  risk  that  disinflationary  expectations  take  hold.  This  may  then 
cause households and firms to defer expenditure in a classic deflationary cycle – especially 
when monetary policy is at the effective lower bound and so cannot steer the nominal rate 
down to compensate. 
In addition, an unexpected period of low inflation and low nominal income results in a higher 
actual  and  expected  future  real  debt  burden.  Unless  compensated  for  by  expectations  of 
higher  future  income,  firms  may  reduce  investment  and  households  consumption.  Banks 
may  in  turn  respond  to  this  situation  with  stricter  credit  standards,  which  reinforces 
disinflationary  pressure  and  hence  worsens  debt  burdens.  This  is  fertile  ground  for  a 
pernicious negative spiral, which then also affects expectations. 
Propagation through the euro area 
So do we see any signs that low inflation might propagate through the euro area in this way? 
On  aggregate,  euro  area  firms  and  households  do  not  seem  to  be  particularly  exposed  to 
debt deflation dynamics. The interest payment burden of euro area firms – the ratio of their 
gross interest payments to gross operating surplus – has actually fallen from 22% in 2008 to 
less than 12% at the end of 2013, which suggests that firms are in a stronger position today 
to withstand a period of low inflation. For euro area households debt service-to-income ratios 
are similar – around 14% – while the median household holds the equivalent of around two 
months’ income in liquid assets to cushion nominal income shocks. 
But  importantly,  this  picture  masks  the  heterogeneity  mentioned  previously.  For  firms  in 
some  countries  the  interest  payment  burden  has  in  fact  risen  since  2008,  in  particular  for 
firms  based  in  stressed  countries.  Debt  service-to-income  ratios  also  tend  to  be  higher  in 
stressed  countries,  implying  greater  vulnerabilities  in  these  jurisdictions  if  low  inflation 
persists. 
Bank  lending  also  presents  a  mixed  picture.  Surveys  of  bank  behaviour  show  a  gradually 
improving aggregate situation. According to the latest Bank Lending Survey credit conditions 
generally stabilised at the start of this year, and even improved in some stressed countries. 
The incremental tightening process that banks reported throughout the crisis seems to have 
come to a halt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That  said,  credit  conditions  remain  very  heterogeneous  across  countries  and  sectors. 
According to the latest ECB survey on credit access by small- and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs),  supply  constraints  remain  especially  strong  for  SMEs  in  stressed  countries.  The 
percentage of financially constrained but viable SMEs – i.e. those with positive turnover in 
the  last  six  months  seeking  a  bank  loan  –  varies from  a  minimum  of  1%  in  Germany  and 
Austria to a quarter of the total population in Spain and as much as a third in Portugal. 
Importantly, credit weakness appears to be contributing to economic weakness in stressed 
countries.  To  show  this,  one  can  undertake  a  quantitative  exercise  to  compute  “normal 
credit”, similar to the notion of potential output. The difference between the actual volume of 
credit and normal credit offers a measure of the “credit gap”, analogous to the output gap. 
Not surprisingly, this exercise reveals that in non-stressed economies the credit gap is either 
insignificant or making a very small contribution to economic slack. In stressed economies, 
the same measure contributes to up to a third of economic slack. 
This analysis suggests that credit constraints are putting a brake on the recovery in stressed 
countries, which adds to disinflationary pressures. You can also see why the heterogeneity 
becomes a factor in assessing low inflation in the euro area. 
Calibrating the policy response 
What is the right policy response to these developments? 
Essentially,  we  are  confronting  three  issues  that  might  warrant  a  response.  First,  the 
common  effect  of  exogenous  factors,  including  the  exchange  rate,  on  euro  area  inflation. 
Second, the asymmetric effect of endogenous developments, such as tight access to credit 
for  parts  and  sectors  of  the  euro  area.  And  third,  the  risk  that  those  effects  combine  to 
generate a more persistent regime of excessively low inflation. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  those  three  issues.  First,  to  the  extent  that  developments  in  the 
exchange rate, money or capital markets result in an unwarranted tightening of monetary and 
financial conditions, this would require adjustment of our conventional instruments, so as to 
secure the degree of monetary accommodation intended by the Governing Council. 
At the other end of the spectrum would be a too prolonged downward departure of inflation 
and/or  inflation  expectations  from  our  projected  baseline  scenario,  for  example  due  to  the 
interaction between exchange rate developments and medium-term inflation expectations as 
I  explained  earlier.  This  would  call  for  a  more  expansionary  stance,  which  would  be  the 
context for a broad-based asset purchase programme. 
An  intermediate  situation  is  one  where  credit  supply  constraints  interfere  with  the 
transmission of monetary policy and impair the effects of our intended monetary stance. This 
would  require  targeted  measures  to  help  alleviate  credit  constraints.  I  would  like  to  dwell 
shortly  on  this  contingency  because  it  relates  to  the  important  question  of  whether  weak 
credit growth results from low credit demand or supply constraints. 
Weak  credit  demand  in  the  early  stages  of  an  economic  recovery  is  not  unusual.  Credit 
growth typically lags the recovery by three to four quarters as firms draw down internal funds. 
But a recovery eventually results in growing credit demand. And at this point, for monetary 
policy  to  produce  its  full  effects,  there  must  be  no  binding  constraints  on  credit  supply 
through the banking system. The more the recovery progresses, the more important it is that 
supply constraints ease so that the recovery can gather steam. Given where we are in the 
cycle  today,  it  is  highly  desirable  that  banks  advance  the  structural  adjustment  of  their 
balance sheets, so that they can meet demand for credit as it emerges. 
It  is  in  part  for  this  reason  that  we  early  on  placed  a  great  deal  of  emphasis  on  a  timely 
comprehensive  assessment  of  bank  balance  sheets,  in  the  context  of  the  creation  of  the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  Frontloading  bank  balance  sheet  adjustment  addresses 
capital constraints on credit supply. Only banks that have fully accounted for legacy losses 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  and hold sufficient equity can take on risk again and therefore originate and price loans in 
normal  conditions. The  comprehensive  assessment,  while  still  ongoing, has  already  had  a 
catalytic effect on asset revaluation and provisioning and on capital raising. We expect it also 
to feed through into new credit as it reaches completion. 
Meeting credit demand is likewise why we have publicly supported measures to revive high 
quality  securitisation  in  Europe.  This  complements  the  comprehensive  assessment  by 
helping  remove  capital  constraints  to  loan  origination.  And  it  supports  the  development  of 
capital  markets,  which  will  be  essential  to  sustain  credit  supply  while  the  banking  system 
transitions towards a less leveraged, less risky model. 
The  key  issue  today,  however,  is  timing.  We  have  to  be  mindful  of  mismatches  between 
these various trends: the rise in demand for credit; the repair of bank balance sheets; and the 
development of capital markets as a complement to bank lending. Credit demand may pick 
up more quickly than the other trends gain traction. 
If,  in  this  context,  availability  of  term  funding  is  a  limiting  factor  on  loan  origination,  then 
monetary policy can play a bridging role. Term-funding of loans, be it on-balance sheet – that 
is,  through  refinancing  operations  –  or  off-balance  sheet  –  that  is,  through  purchases  of 
asset-backed  securities  –  could  help  reduce  any  drag  on  the  recovery  coming  from 
temporary credit supply constraints. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have laid out today is a decomposition of the factors behind low inflation in the euro 
area,  and  how  they  interact,  percolate  through  the  real  economy  and  may  affect  medium-
term price stability. 
At this point of the cycle, all three contingencies I have discussed remain topical and feature 
prominently in the discussions of the Governing Council members. 
Certainly, any policy response requires a careful assessment of the costs and benefits of the 
various  tools  at  hand.  But  there  is  no  debate  about  our  goal,  which  is  to  return  inflation 
towards 2% in the medium-term, in line with our mandate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
