Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking union – any national interests? 
Key talking points by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
working luncheon of the Bank of Finland – OMFIF Economists Meeting, Helsinki, 6 February 
2014. 
 We have experienced a series of different types of crises since 2008. Each of them has had 
devastating effects on the real economy. What have we learnt? 
The crises have made it very clear at least that international, highly interconnected financial 
markets require a stronger institutional framework than what we have had in recent years. 
A  problem  in  one  bank  can  quickly  spread  to  others  both  at  home  and  beyond  national 
borders with damaging effects on the real economy and taxpayers. We saw a sudden stop of 
capital  flows  within  Europe,  as  banks  withdrew  from  foreign  operations.  The  financial 
integration took serious setbacks. 
The key lesson we have learnt is that economic dislocations without proper arrangements to 
tackle  troubled  banks  have  devastating  effects  on  the  real  economy,  taxpayers  and  the 
whole society. And coming back to “normal” proves to be painfully slow and long-lasting. 
Financial market flaws 
All in all, the mismatch between the scope of international bank operations and the national 
supervisory framework made the situation extremely challenging. 
What to do? In principle, we can envisage three solutions. First of all, we could re-nationalize 
the financial markets. In such a solution, the single market would be lost. We would turn the 
clock  back,  lose  benefits  of  integrated  markets.  Second,  we  could  just  accept  the  risk  of 
financial  instability  and  periodically  pay  the  price.  Or,  finally,  we  could  work  to  create  a 
banking  union,  with  better  suited  institutions  and  systems  for  single  supervision  and 
resolution. 
Only  the  last  one  of  these  is  acceptable.  Institutional  arrangements  for  supervision  and 
resolution need to match the integrated structures of banking business in the real world. 
Banking union 
As a part of the economic and monetary union and as a remedy for the crisis, the EU leaders 
agreed in June 2012 on creating a true Banking Union. 
The Single Rulebook provides a foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of 
identical  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  capital  adequacy  rules  for  banks.  These  are 
achieved through European legislation and lower-level provisions, such as binding standards 
being developed. 
One  of  the  main  pillars  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  I  will 
come back to the recent developments in its construction later on. 
Another important pillar is the Single Resolution Mechanism. As you know, intensive talks in 
the  form  of  EU  trilogue  are  currently  going  on  the  issue.  In  addition,  deposit  insurance 
schemes will be strengthened and harmonised as part of the banking union in the long run. 
The  Banking  Union  may  also  be  complemented  by  structural  reforms.  The  European 
Commission has made a legislative proposal based on the Liikanen report and the European 
Parliament will handle it in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the future, the Banking Union, when properly implemented, will help us resolve banking 
problems while avoiding using taxpayers’ money for bail-outs. This in turn means also better 
incentives in banking and hence a more stable financial system. 
Preparations for single supervisory mechanism 
Let me now share with you some recent developments in the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM). The EU Regulation assigning supervisory tasks to the ECB became effective in early 
November 2013. Already well ahead of this time, the ECB and national supervisors started 
practical preparations to ensure timely adoption of supervisory responsibilities by the SSM. 
Thus we have got a “flying start” for the whole project. 
As a concrete step, the ECB Governing Council nominated Ms Danièle Nouy for Chair of the 
Supervisory  Board  of  the  new  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  The  Heads  of  Directorates, 
four  Director  Generals  have  been  appointed  as  well.  A  broader  recruitment  process  of 
supervisors is under way. 
The Supervisory Board had its historical first meeting last week, accepting and confirming a 
lot of issues prepared by the High-Level Group. Now there is an on-going transition period, 
during  which  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  significant  banks  is  carried  out.  During  the 
same period other preparations for the SSM are to be completed. 
Comprehensive assessment 
The  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  European  banks  is  an  essential  element  of  the 
preparations for the SSM. It should be noted that the SSM Regulation also enables the ECB 
not  only  to  obtain  all  the  relevant  information  from  the  national  authorities  necessary  for 
making  the  assessment  but  also  to  take  over  direct  supervision  of  any  credit  institution  it 
wants. This is important to guarantee consistent application of high supervisory standards. 
The Comprehensive Assessment has three main goals. First of all, the assessment aims at 
transparency  through  enhancing  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the  condition  of 
banks. Its second goal is to repair banks’ condition by identifying and having the necessary 
corrective  actions  implemented  where  necessary.  Finally,  the  Comprehensive  assessment 
builds confidence by assuring all relevant stakeholders that banks are fundamentally sound 
and trustworthy. 
The  ECB  will  conduct  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  in  close  cooperation  with  national 
authorities, and also with ESRB and EBA. The ECB will detail the design and strategy of the 
assessment exercise, monitor its execution, perform quality assurance as well as collect and 
consolidate  the  results  and  finalise  and  disclose  the  overall  assessment.  National 
supervisors execute the exercise at the national level, benefitting from local knowledge, but 
following common data requirements and methodology. 
The Comprehensive Assessment is indeed comprehensive. First we do a Risk Assessment 
addressing key risks in the banks’ balance sheets, including liquidity, leverage and funding. 
After that an Asset Quality Review is carried out examining banks’ balance sheets based on 
information at the end of 2013. And finally, a Stress Test, done in collaboration with the EBA, 
complements  the  asset  quality  review  by  providing  a  forward-looking  view  of  banks’  risk-
absorption capacity under stress. 
The structure of the Comprehensive Assessment also clarifies the frequently asked question, 
how  this  assessment  differs  from  previously  conducted  EU  level  stress  tests?  The  key 
differences to my mind are as follows: 
• 
Banks’  risks  and  asset  quality  are  assessed  in  a  comprehensive  manner  at  the 
Banking  Union  level.  Assessments  are  made  applying  common  definitions, 
abolishing - or at least showing explicitly – any diverging national interpretations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Sufficient corrective measures can be guaranteed as the ECB in its supervisory role 
will have all the necessary supervisory powers. 
Quality  of  assessments  is  ensured  not  only  by  the  ECB’s  strict  procedure  for  on-
going quality assurance, but also by the involvement of third party evaluators. 
The  results  of  the  assessment  will  be  published  in  a  single  disclosure,  including  all  three 
parts of the exercise. 
The  results  of  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  will  be  followed  by  corrective  measures 
where necessary. Such measures could include, for instance, recapitalisation, also through 
profit  retention,  equity  issuance,  re-orientation  of  funding  sources,  asset  separation  and 
sales. 
Other preparatory work for SSM 
Alongside the Comprehensive Assessment, a lot of other preparatory work is going on. 
The  SSM  Supervisory  Model  is  constructed  so  that  the  decision-making  on  supervisory 
matters and other related procedures are kept separate from the monetary policy. As regards 
supervisory matters, the new Supervisory Board will have a predominant role; in most of the 
cases, it will be the final decision maker. 
At  the  practical  level  in  the  supervisory  model, the  joint  supervisory  teams  are key  actors. 
Such  teams  are  created  for  each  significant  bank  or  banking  group  that  will  be  directly 
supervised by the ECB. Joint supervisory teams are responsible for day-to-day supervision 
of significant banks. Each team will be composed of staff from both the ECB and national 
supervisors. 
For the legal dimension of the SSM, preparations include the development of the so called 
Framework Regulation on covering cooperation within the SSM, among other things. In this 
respect, a public consultation is expected to take place during first half of 2014. 
Banking  supervision  requires  a  smooth  flow  of  information  between  banks  and  their 
supervisors.  To  this  end,  a  high-standard  data  reporting  framework  and  the  associated 
infrastructures for the SSM are being developed. 
Banks’ perspective on SSM 
Are there any benefits for banks? From the banks’ perspective, the introduction of the SSM 
means numerous changes. I will mention here only a few of them. 
For a cross-border bank, operating in multiple countries within the Banking Union, the single 
supervision effectively simplifies its contacts with the authorities. It will need to work with a 
single  supervisor  and  operate  following  a  single  rulebook.  This  implies  lower  costs  for  the 
bank in complying with the regulatory requirements. 
Common  rules  and  methods  of  supervision  also  have  a  broader  impact  on  competition 
among banks, not only for international but also domestically oriented banks. The banks are 
treated equally in supervision and regulatory capture can be fully avoided, thereby ensuring a 
level playing field. 
In general, I believe that the SSM will become one of the leading banking supervisors in the 
world, applying the best possible tools for supervision – and developing such tools also for 
the benefit of other supervisors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Macroprudential policy 
Finally, I would like to point out that alongside the preparations for the SSM, a new systemic 
angle is being added to supervision. Also through the new EU capital requirement legislation, 
macroprudential policy is becoming effective in the EU. 
Macroprudential policy is about identifying, preventing and mitigating systemic risks through 
the  application  of  macroprudential  instruments.  A  key  macroprudential  instrument  to  be 
included  in  the  toolbox  of  authorities  in  the  EU  is  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer.  The 
relevant  authorities  may  require  banks  to  hold  an  extra  buffer  of  capital  in  addition  to 
minimum  requirements,  for  instance  if  credit  growth  in  the  financial  system  is  deemed 
excessive. 
Macroprudential policy responsibilities lie  in the first place with the national authorities, but 
the SSM Regulation assigns some macroprudential tasks also to the ECB. In particular, the 
ECB  may  decide  on  stricter  measures  than  national  authorities,  using  the  counter-cyclical 
buffer or other macro-prudential tools provided for by the EU legislation. 
As  a  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  end  my  presentation  on  a  positive  note;  not  only  central 
bankers but also other public authorities are showing great determination in developing the 
Banking Union and a lot of progress has been made to correct basic flaws we have had in 
our  internationally  integrated  financial  markets.  And  in  doing  that,  national  interests,  and  I 
argue  that  banks'  interests  as  well,  are  aligned  with  the  general  objectives  of the  Banking 
Union. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
