Grant Spencer: Update on the New Zealand housing market 
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to Admirals’ Breakfast Club, Auckland, 9 May 2014. 
Accompanying charts and a table can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Housing is a key sector of the New Zealand economy, and an important factor influencing the 
Reserve Bank’s monetary and financial policies. And of course housing is never far from the 
front pages. 
Since 2012 we have seen rapid rates of house price inflation, reflecting a demand – supply 
imbalance. There has been a physical shortage of houses, particularly in Christchurch and 
Auckland. On the demand side there has been strengthening economic growth and inward 
migration  as  well  as  easy  credit  conditions,  in  terms  of  both  the  price  and  availability  of 
mortgage finance. His combination of supply and demand factors has contributed to the price 
pressures we have seen. 
The  Reserve  Bank  introduced  Loan  to  Value  Ratio  restrictions  (LVRs)  in  October  with  the 
aim  of  reducing  the  systemic  risk  arising  from  increasingly  overvalued  house  prices.  More 
recently, the Official Cash Rate (OCR) has been increased from 2.5 percent to 3 percent with 
the aim of forestalling general inflation pressures in the broader economy. Housing supply 
conditions have also started to improve with a recovery in residential construction, centred in 
Christchurch  and  Auckland.  These  factors  are  all  working  to  reduce  the  housing  market 
imbalance. The one factor that is not helping at present is the strong inward migration flow. 
Our overall view is that housing market pressures are easing gradually. Today I will review 
the  progress  being made  towards  a  better  balance  in  the  housing market  and  discuss  the 
potential implications for Reserve Bank policies. 
Housing market activity is weakening 
2. 
After gathering momentum from mid-2012, the housing market looks to have slowed in the 
six months since LVR restrictions were introduced. The volume of nationwide house sales 
has dropped considerably (figure 2.1), with the number of sales in March 11 percent lower 
than in September last year. 
The decline in sales volumes has been reasonably widespread across the country, with the 
exception of Canterbury where sales were down only 1 percent over the same period. The 
recent  uptrend  in  Auckland’s  share  of  national  house  sales  appears  to  be  flattening  out. 
Comparing market segments, we are seeing a smaller proportion of sales below $400,000. 
Some of this represents the reduced presence of first home buyers. BNZ-REINZ survey data 
(Figure 2.2) indicate that first home buyers accounted for 16 percent of sales in Q1 2014, 
compared to 24 percent a year earlier. The share of existing owner-occupiers has gone up 
by a similar amount, while the share of sales to investors has remained stable at 19 percent. 
The  overall  slowdown  in  housing  market  activity  has  also  been  reflected  in  house  prices. 
After  increasing  steadily  over  2012  and  2013,  house  price  inflation  has  slowed  since  the 
introduction of LVR restrictions, despite the large increase in inward migration (figure 2.3). 
According  to  REINZ  data,  New  Zealand  house  prices  increased  at  an  annual  rate  of 
8.4 percent in the three months to March 2014, down from a peak of 9.8 percent in the three 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
months to  November  20131. The  slowing  in  national  house  price  inflation  is  largely  due  to 
easing  house  price  inflation  in  Auckland,  although  this  remains  at  a  high  annual  rate  of 
15 percent  (figure  2.3).  Annual  house  price  inflation  is  at  9  percent  for  Canterbury,  and 
around  4  percent  for  the  rest  of  New  Zealand.  House  price  inflation  is  not  confined  to 
Auckland and Christchurch. Outside the main centres, some of the stronger regions include 
Waikato/Bay of Plenty, Nelson/Marlborough and Otago. 
Slower credit has contributed to the easing 
3. 
Data indicates that all banks have complied with the requirement to keep high LVR lending at 
no  more  than  10  percent  of  total  lending  over  the  six  month  period  from  October.  For the 
system overall, the share of high LVR lending over the six months was 5.6 percent. 
This  compares  with  a  30  percent  high  LVR  share  in  early  2013.  There  has  been  some 
compensating  increase  in  sub-80  percent  LVR  lending  over  the  six  months  as  the  banks 
have  intensified  competition  in  this  segment.  However,  the  overall  effect  has  been  a 
reduction in the rate of growth in new mortgages. (figure 3.1). 
LVR impact has been close to expectations 
4. 
The moderation in housing market indicators is broadly in line with the expected impact of 
the LVR restrictions. Table 4.1 shows actual reductions in national sales, price inflation and 
credit  relative  to  our  initial  expectations.  On  a  counterfactual  basis,  modelling  work 
undertaken by the Bank suggests that, had banks continued to maintain 30 percent of their 
lending at high LVRs, annual house price inflation might be running some 2.5 percent higher 
than at present. 
We  are  comfortable  that  the  restrictions  are  so  far  meeting  their  objective  of  helping  to 
restrain the demand for housing while supply gradually catches up. In so doing, we believe 
the restrictions are mitigating the systemic risk of a housing market downturn that becomes 
more likely as house prices and debt levels become more stretched. We also believe that the 
LVR restrictions have helped to make banks’ balance sheets more resilient to any adverse 
housing market shock. I will come back to the LVRs shortly. 
The supply gap remains large 
5. 
Demand is only one side of the story. Supply conditions are a very important influence on 
housing market outcomes. In its report on housing affordability, the Productivity Commission 
(2012)  identified  a  number  of  supply  factors  –including  restrictive  urban  planning,  and  the 
time and costs associated with development and construction – as factors constraining new 
housing supply in New Zealand. An important constraining factor has been the availability of 
land, particularly in Auckland. Section prices more than doubled in Auckland between 2000 
and 2012 and, for sections within 25 kilometres of inner city Auckland, land prices tripled.2 As 
a consequence, land costs now comprise 60 percent of the cost of building a new dwelling in 
Auckland, compared with 40 percent in the rest of the country. 
Low  rates  of  building  in  Auckland  since  2005,  combined  with  ongoing  population  growth, 
have led to a physical shortage of houses. Population-per-dwelling is estimated to have risen 
considerably in Auckland over the past few years (figure 5.1). While the size of the current 
housing  shortage  is  uncertain,  based  on  data  from  the  2013  Census  of  Population  and 
                                                
1   The house price data from Property IQ gives a more lagged picture, but has slowed down even more than the 
REINZ  data, suggesting  the change in sales composition may  have  caused  the  REINZ  index  to  somewhat 
understate the slowing in house prices. 
2   Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (2013), “Residential land available in Auckland”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Dwellings, it is now estimated to be between 5000 and 10,000 dwellings. This is lower than 
earlier estimates, but still material. 
In Christchurch, a significant shortage of accommodation also exists following the Canterbury 
earthquakes.  Around  10,000  homes  need 
further 
12,000 require  major  repairs  (greater  than  $100,000  in  value).3  The  physical  shortage  of 
housing in Christchurch has been exacerbated by the extra demand for accommodation by 
construction  workers.  This  has  resulted  in  annual  rent  inflation  of  about  11  percent  in 
Christchurch, compared to 3.5 percent in the rest of New Zealand. 
to  be  completely  rebuilt  and  a 
The Auckland Accord is helping 
6. 
Auckland’s population is expected to grow markedly over the next 30 years. The Auckland 
Council  estimates  that  10,000  new  dwellings  will  be  required  per  year  to  meet  future 
population  increases.  This  expected  future  demand  for  accommodation means  it  will  likely 
take some time to eliminate the current supply shortage. However, the Housing Accord being 
implemented  by  the  Government  and  the  Auckland  Council  is  an  important  step  towards 
achieving  a  better  balance.  Under  the  Accord,  consent  processes  are  fast  tracked  for 
housing  developments  within  defined  Special  Housing  Areas,  consistent  with  the  rules 
outlined  in  Auckland’s  Unitary  Plan.  The  Unitary  Plan,  developed  under  the  Resource 
Management  Act,  sets  out  the  Council’s  vision  for  housing  development  over  the  next 
30 years,  but  does  not  come  into  effect  until  2016.  The  Accord  is  essentially  an  interim 
measure designed to accelerate development ahead of the Unitary Plan coming in to effect. 
The Accord aims for 39,000 new building and section consents to be issued over the three 
years to September 2016, with actual building likely to occur over a somewhat longer period. 
So  far,  63  Special  Housing  Areas  in  a  mixture  of  urban  and  rural  locations  have  been 
created,  with  an  estimated  capacity  for  33,500  new  dwellings.  Over  the  past  year, 
“greenfield”land  in  the  pipeline  for  housing  development  (i.e.  zoned  and  with  utilities 
connected)  has  increased  to  a  level  sufficient  for  about  25,000  dwellings,  up  10,000  on  a 
year ago.4 This is good progress, but acceleration in development activity is needed to meet 
the Accord and longer-term supply targets. 
Construction is up but further boost required 
7. 
New building in Auckland has increased over the past year, with 6500 new dwelling consents 
issued  in  the  year  to  March  2014,  compared  to  4900  in  the  previous  year.  New  building 
activity  still  remains  relatively  low  and  a  substantial  further  ramp  up  will  be  required  to 
eliminate the supply shortage while accommodating future population growth. 
In Canterbury, residential reconstruction work is now picking up – after a very slow start. To 
date,  most  of  the  earthquake-related  residential  reconstruction  work  has  related  to  The 
Earthquake  Commission  (EQC)  repair  program,  with  around  53,000  residential  repairs 
completed  as  of  April.5  The  required  22,000  larger  scale  residential  repairs  and  rebuilds 
(mostly  managed  by  insurers)  are  now  underway  but  only  a  small  portion  has  been 
completed.  Dwelling  consents  in  Canterbury  reached  6200  in  the  year  to  March  and  we 
expect  to  see  significant  further  growth  over  the  coming  year.  Most  of  the  outstanding 
shortage should be eliminated over the next three years. 
With  our  two  largest  cities  both  seeking  to  boost  housing  construction  over  the  next  three 
years, there will be significant pressures placed on building resources nationally. We expect 
                                                
3   CERA (2014), “Greater Christchurch Recovery Update – Issue 30”. 
4   Ministry of Business, innovation and employment (2014), “Auckland Housing Accord monitoring report #1”. 
5   Fletcher EQR: http://www.eqr.co.nz/repairs/completed-repairs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
total  residential  construction  to  increase  by  30  percent  over  the  next  three  years,  well 
surpassing the historical peak of 2004. 
Key risks going forward 
8. 
There  are  clearly  many  moving  parts  to  the  overall  supply  shortage  equation–  and  many 
risks around the prospects for reducing the imbalance. Probably the major risk at present is 
the  outlook  for  immigration.  After  increasing  substantially  over  the  past  18  months,  net 
immigration  rose  to  32,000  in  the  year  to  March,  in  part  due  to  fewer  departures  of  New 
Zealand citizens. The Reserve Bank forecasts this pattern to reduce gradually as economic 
conditions  improve  in  Australia,  which  is  the  main  destination  for  New  Zealanders  shifting 
offshore. However, cyclical turning points are hard to predict and there is a risk that the net 
migration inflow remains greater for longer, which would underpin the demand for housing. 
On the other side of the equation, there is the risk of a continuing slow supply response due 
to bureaucratic and/or logistical constraints in Auckland and Christchurch. In Auckland more 
land is being made available but developments need to be approved and implemented, and 
construction needs to be consented and undertaken in scale. In Christchurch it is apparent 
that the consenting process has been improved, but risks remain around the slow pace of 
insurance settlements, particularly in the areas where land damage has been sustained. 
A  third  risk  arises  from  the  increasing  pressure  that  will  come  to  bear  on  construction 
resources, potentially resulting in further price and wage pressures in the construction sector. 
As seen in figure 8.1, construction cost inflation in Canterbury is running at around 8 percent 
per  annum  and,  at  a  national  level,  reached  5  percent  in  the  March  2014  quarter.  Annual 
construction cost inflation in Auckland, which was running at below 2 percent a year ago, has 
accelerated to 6 percent. Rising construction cost inflation is a threat to housing affordability 
as well as to the overall rate of CPI inflation. 
Monetary policy perspective 
9. 
From a monetary policy perspective, the Bank has two concerns: first that construction cost 
pressures could feed into generalised price inflation; and second that house price increases 
could cause households to increase their spending, reducing savings and putting additional 
pressure  on  overall  domestic  demand.  The  OCR  increases  that  commenced  in  March  are 
aimed at countering emerging inflation pressures in general, but their success, or otherwise, 
in moderating housing related pressures will be key. 
Based  on  current  market  interest  rate  expectations,  adjusted  for  an  average  mortgage 
interest margin, floating mortgage rates could be 7 to 8 percent in two years’ time, up from 
current  levels  of  around  5  to  6  percent.  While  this  would  be  a  significant  move,  figure 
9.1 indicates that it would take mortgage rates back to their average of the past 20 years. 
That is, the outlook is towards a normalisation of mortgage rates which are currently near to 
50 year lows. We should not expect to see historically low interest rates at a time when the 
New Zealand economy is growing strongly. 
Having said that, the timing and extent of interest rate increases required over the coming 
period will depend on a number of uncertain variables. A big uncertainty is the future path of 
the exchange rate, which has a major bearing on traded goods prices and overall economic 
activity. The more downward pressure that the exchange rate exerts on prices and activity, 
the less pressure will need to be exerted by interest rates. 
The  other  big  area  of  uncertainty  is  around  housing.  Will  inward  migration  continue  to 
underpin  housing  demand?  Will  the  dampening  impact  of  the  LVR  restrictions  be  long 
lasting? Will the supply response soon start to have a moderating effect on house prices? 
Will home owners increase their spending out of capital gains? And how will rising mortgage 
rates affect spending by borrowers? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With regard to this last question, we expect that interest sensitivity will be greater now than 
during  the  last  tightening  phase  in  2003–2007.  First,  most  New  Zealand  mortgages  are 
currently on either floating or relatively short-term fixed rates whereas in 2003–2007 the bulk 
of mortgage borrowers were on 2-to-4 year fixed rates. This means that OCR increases will 
be felt more immediately by existing as well as new mortgage borrowers. Second, a higher 
starting  level  of  mortgage  debt  relative  to  incomes  means  that  any  given  interest  rate 
increase  will  have  a  larger  impact  on  monthly  debt  service  payments,  relative  to  incomes, 
than  in  the  previous  cycle.  This  latter  point  is  shown  in  Figure  9.2  where  the  debt  service 
ratio for a typical new borrower (with a 20 percent deposit) is projected to rise more sharply, 
relative to the interest rate track, than in the previous cycle. 
Financial policy perspective 
10. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  concerns  expressed  through  last  year,  and  motivating  the  LVR 
restrictions introduced in October, related to financial stability risks arising from highly geared 
house  purchases  at  potentially  unsustainable  prices.  The  high  LVR  lending  through  that 
period  was  increasing  the  likelihood  of  a  house  price  correction  by  pushing  house  prices 
higher, and also increasing the vulnerability of banks to such a correction. 
As  discussed  earlier,  the  LVR  restrictions  have  had  a  moderating  effect  on  the  housing 
market  as  well  as  reducing  the  proportion  of  high  LVR  loans  in  bank  balance  sheets. We 
believe that the LVR policy is achieving its purpose of improving the safety of the financial 
system.  The  market  overall  is  less  vulnerable  to  the  effects  of  an  adverse  shock  –  from 
international  financial  markets  for  example.  And  banks  are  now  less  exposed  to  potential 
credit losses as the interest rate cycle turns upwards. 
Nevertheless, there remain a significant volume of high LVR loans on bank balance sheets – 
in  the  order  of  20  percent  –  and,  as  seen  in  figure  9.2,  debt  service  ratios  are  likely  to 
increase  substantially  over  the  coming  two  years.  This  could  put  some  stress  on  highly-
leveraged borrowers and their lending institutions. 
We  have  stated  clearly  that  the  LVRs  are  temporary  restrictions  and  will  be  eased  or 
removed  when  housing  market  pressures  have  abated  and  when  we  are  confident  that  a 
resurgence of high LVR lending will not occur following removal. The LVRs are supporting 
monetary policy but they  will have a reduced effect over time. Also, the efficiency costs of 
such restrictions will tend to increase the longer they are kept in place. Before removing the 
LVRs, however, we will want to be confident that the housing market is responding to interest 
rate increases; and that immigration pressures are not causing a resurgence of house price 
pressures. It will take some time to gain this assurance. At this stage we consider the earliest 
date for beginning to remove LVRs is likely to be late in the year. 
Conclusion 
11. 
Housing market and credit cycles are part of the economic landscape and, although they can 
be  moderated  through  sound  policy,  they  cannot  be  eliminated.  When  pressures  become 
excessive the cycle can be damaging for the financial system and for the broader economy. 
This  is  why  we  monitor  housing  closely  and  why  housing  is  a  key  factor  influencing  our 
monetary and financial policies. 
House  price  pressures  in  New  Zealand  since  late  2012  have  been  driven  by  supply 
shortages and by strong demand supported by easy credit. 
On the  supply  side,  progress  is  being made  with  national  dwelling  consents  now  up  to  an 
annual  rate  of  22,000.  In  Auckland,  progress  is  being  made  in  freeing  up  the  supply  of 
buildable land and improving the consenting process. And in Canterbury, the replacement of 
severely damaged homes is well in train after a slow start. However, the shortage remains 
large – with around 50,000 new homes targeted in Christchurch and Auckland over the next 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
three  years.  This  is  a  task  that  is  likely  to  take  considerably  longer  than  three  years  to 
complete. 
On  the  demand  side,  pressure  has  been  moderated  by  the  LVR  restrictions  and  will  be 
further  restrained  as  monetary  policy  brings  interest  rates  back  to  a  level  more  consistent 
with  a  strongly  growing  economy.  Interest  rate  increases  are  expected  to  have  a  greater 
effect than in the previous cycle due to the high levels of existing debt and a high proportion 
of floating rate mortgages. However, many uncertainties remain around the housing market 
outlook, particularly regarding the future impact of the increasing net migration inflow. 
Over their first six months, the LVR restrictions have had a dampening effect on housing that 
is broadly in line with expectations. The easing or removal of the LVR restrictions will depend 
importantly  on  the  restraining  impact  of  interest  rate  increases  and  any  renewed  pressure 
arising from the net immigration. 
Achieving  greater  stability  in  the  housing  market  will  contribute  greatly  to  maintaining 
financial and price stability, and to achieving sustainable economic growth. 
(EQR), 
Recovery 
Earthquake 
“Completed 
Issue  30”,  March, 
References 
Canterbury  Earthquake  Recovery  Authority  (CERA)  (2014)”Greater  Christchurch  Recovery 
Update  – 
cera.govt.nz/sites/cera.govt.nz/files/common/greater-
christchurch-recovery-update-issue-30-march-2014.pdf, accessed 28 April 2014. 
Fletcher 
www.eqr.co.nz/repairs/completed-repairs, accessed 28 April 2014. 
Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and  Employment  (2013)”Residential  land  available  in 
Auckland”, 
March, 
www.dbh.govt.nz/UserFiles/File/Publications/Sector/pdf/residential-land-available-in-
auckland-report.pdf, accessed 14 April 2014. 
Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and  Employment  (2014)  “Auckland  Housing  Accord, 
Monitoring 
March, 
www.beehive.govt.nz/sites/all/files/Auckland_Housing_Accord_Monitoring_Report_1.pdf, 
accessed 14 April 2014. 
Productivity  Commission  (2012),  “The  housing  affordability  enquiry”,  New  Zealand 
Productivity Commission Final Report, March 2012. 
 
Research 
repairs”, 
Report, 
Report 
#1”, 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
