Benoît Cœuré: The known unknowns of central clearing 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the meeting on global economy and financial system, hosted by the University of Chicago 
Booth School of Business Initiative on Global Markets, Coral Gables, 29 March 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the European Central Bank’s website 
I would like to thank Andreas Schönenberger for his contributions. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today, I want to share some thoughts with you on central clearing. 
[slide 1] 
At  the  Pittsburgh  Summit  in  2009,  G20  leaders  committed  to  have  all  standardised  OTC 
derivatives contracts cleared through central counterparties (CCPs). The mandatory use of 
central  clearing  as  a  regulatory  tool  for  mitigating  systemic  risk  is  a  fairly  new  feature  in 
financial market regulation. Central clearing definitely has the capacity to promote financial 
stability, provided it is appropriately used and any potential side effects are well understood 
and effectively mitigated. 
In that context, there are still a number of questions that we need to look at. Let me call them 
the “known unknowns” of central clearing. 
[slide 2] 
I want to touch upon the following issues: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Systemic effects of mandatory clearing 
Recovery versus resolution of central counterparties 
Optimal design of loss allocation tools 
Evolution of global clearing structures 
Systemic effects of mandatory clearing 
[slide 3] 
Let me start with the systemic effects of mandatory central clearing. Clearing houses have 
done their job very well in the crisis, contrary to other financial institutions, and successfully 
faced the challenges of a rapidly growing volume of transactions. We want to make sure that 
the same holds true in the new world of mandatory clearing. 
[slide 4] 
The systemic effects of central clearing are numerous and, although the overall balance is 
undoubtedly positive, some of them are ambiguous and should be addressed carefully. 
On the one hand, mandatory clearing reduces systemic risk very significantly as it 
• 
leads  to  the  collateralisation  of  trades  that  might  have  remained  uncollateralised 
otherwise, 
enhances risk management by means of sophisticated margining methods, 
allows  for  mutualisation  of  risk,  which  promotes  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system, especially in the event of catastrophic scenarios, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 offers multilateral netting so that less collateral is needed to manage risks, and 
facilitates  risk  management  as  it  helps  to  overcome  information  asymmetries  that 
participants in non-centrally cleared markets face. 
On the other hand, some consequences of central clearing may increase systemic risk: 
• 
as a result of growing risk concentration in CCPs and in a limited number of large 
global  dealers,  which  act  as  general  clearing  members  as  a  gateway  for  other 
financial institutions to CCPs, 
as  a  consequence  of  mutualisation,  risks  may  spread  among  participants  and 
markets more widely and the distribution of losses is more difficult to predict, 
in order to avoid mandatory clearing, we might see migration of risk outside of the 
regulated  universe  through  the  artificial  creation  of  bespoke  (and  hence  risky) 
products that are not suitable for central clearing. 
  Moreover, the systemic effect of clearing depends on whether risk is redistributed to those 
who are more able to deal with it, which is difficult to determine. Finally, the overall systemic 
effect  depends  on  the  incentives  for  risk-taking  and  central  clearing  that  accompany  risk 
redistribution. 
[slide 5] 
To promote central clearing and avoid regulatory arbitrage, a number of reforms have been 
adopted including: (i) mandatory clearing, (ii) margin requirements for non-centrally cleared 
trades, and (iii) higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared trades. This highlights 
the crucial complementarity between the regulation of banks and the regulation of financial 
market infrastructures (FMIs), with the overall objective that regulation reduces overall risk, 
and  does  not  shift  it  around  the  financial  system.  Cooperation  between  the  Committee  on 
Payments  and  Settlement  Systems  and  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities 
Commissions  (CPSS-IOSCO)  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS) on the other hand, is key in this respect. 
A macroeconomic impact assessment led by the BIS focused on the effects of these reforms 
and  found  net  benefits  of  0.12%  of  GDP  per  year.  These  are  estimates  of  the  long-run 
consequences of the reforms and are expected to apply once those reforms have been fully 
implemented and produced their full economic effects. 
However, central clearing also involves risk redistribution and potentially the creation of new 
risks. The overall impact is therefore less certain: there are significant benefits which need to 
be balanced against potential new risks and uncertain risk redistribution effects. 
Ultimately,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  success  of  central  clearing  as  a  tool  for  promoting 
financial stability critically depends on two factors: (i) the ability of CCPs to handle the risks 
they are concentrating and thus the design of their corporate governance, risk management 
and recovery frameworks and (ii) the ability of the official sector to address effectively any 
unintended side effects and “new” risks that may result from the push towards more central 
clearing. 
Recovery versus resolution of CCPs 
[slide 6] 
A  second  issue  that  I  should  like  to  highlight  today  concerns  the  relationship  between 
recovery and resolution of CCPs. As central clearing involves risk concentration in what we 
may  see  as “super  systemically  relevant”  institutions,  it  is  crucial  that  such  institutions  can 
recover from severe shocks or be resolved if necessary. 
Now there are several questions that are typically raised in this context: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At what point in time does a CCP need to be resolved because it cannot recover? 
Given that CCPs provide critical services and are required to cover any losses or 
liquidity shortfalls that may arise, is resolution of a CCP a realistic concept at all? Is 
it ever needed or appropriate? 
What makes CCPs different from other financial institutions? Do these differences 
require different rules for their recovery and resolution? 
[slide 7] 
The  CPSS-IOSCO  Principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures  (PFMIs)  require  CCPs  to 
have a plan for allocating any losses and liquidity shortfalls that the regular “waterfall” – that 
is,  a  sequence  of  prefunded  financial  resources  –  does  not  cover.  Alternatively,  the 
respective  CCP  might  have  to  be  resolved.  The  CPSS-IOSCO  and  the  Financial  Stability 
Board  (FSB)  will  provide  guidance  on  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  CCPs  by  mid-2014.1 
The  question  is:  should  resolution  only  be  performed  if  and  when  recovery  has  failed?  Or 
could there be circumstances in which the resolution of a CCP is preferable to its recovery, 
even if recovery was still feasible? 
Let me first explore some features that make financial market infrastructures different from 
other financial institutions: 
• 
Service continuation (“critical services”) is more important in the case of FMIs. They 
are utilities at the heart of the financial system. Their smooth operation is essential 
for all other types of financial service. 
In most cases, there are only a few, if any, substitutes or alternative providers. 
Unlike banks, FMIs have ex ante loss allocation rules that they can draw on for the 
purpose of recovery. 
Not all FMIs are exposed to credit risk (but they are still systemically important). 
The  size  and  composition  of  their  balance  sheets  (e.g.  rarely  subordinated  debt 
instruments) is different, which makes bail-in as a recovery or resolution tool difficult. 
To the extent that the use of a CCP is mandatory, it is absolutely essential that the 
relevant clearing services are preserved regardless of the circumstances. 
   In conclusion, the recovery of CCPs in order to maintain service continuation is much more 
important for CCPs than for other financial institutions. That’s why the PFMIs require CCPs 
to be able to allocate any losses that are not already covered by regular risk management. 
[slide 8] 
So if the recovery of CCPs is so vital, is there any scope for resolution at all? I think there is, 
for a number of reasons: 
First  of  all,  the  attempt  to  recover  may  simply  fail:  the  ex-ante  recovery  plans  may  prove 
inadequate ex post. Recovery plans have fortunately not yet been tested, and it remains to 
be seen how they work in practice. 
Most importantly, however, recovery is not an end in itself, but a means to preserve financial 
stability. Entry into resolution should be possible if the recovery plan has failed to return the 
FMI  to  viability  or  if  its  implementation  would  otherwise  compromise  financial  stability,  for 
                                                
1  See  Financial  Stability  Board.  “Consultation  Document:  Application  of  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective 
Resolution  Regimes  to  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions”,  12  August  2013,  and  CPSS-IOSCO.  “Consultative 
Report:  Recovery  of  Financial  Market  Infrastructures”,  12  August  2013.  See  also  P.  Tucker.  “Central 
counterparties  in  evolving  capital  markets:  Safety,  recovery  and  resolution”.  Banque  de  France  Financial 
Stability Review, No. 17, April 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
example if the application of a particular loss allocation tool turns out to overexpose certain 
(groups of) participants. 
Moreover, resolution may also become necessary if participants do not want to use the CCP 
any longer and prefer to wind it down. 
In conclusion, the resolution authorities have the responsibility (and are in a better position 
than  CCPs)  to  do  what  is  systemically  needed  in  a  crisis  situation,  which  may  mean  in 
extreme cases that the application of resolution procedures is preferable to the activation of a 
recovery plan. 
Of course, much will depend on authorities doing the right thing at the time of the crisis. This 
in turn assumes that authorities have enough information at any point in time to “connect the 
dots”  of  a  complex  network  of  CCPs  and  global  dealers.  Hence  the  critical  importance  of 
enforcing the new reporting requirements to trade repositories (TRs), and further to this, of 
being able to aggregate data collected by TRs across products, institutions, and jurisdictions, 
and conduct analytical work based on this data.2 
Optimal design of loss allocation tools 
[slide 9] 
Let me now turn to the third known unknown, which is the subject of much debate: what is 
the optimal design and composition of a CCP’s recovery tools? 
[slide 10] 
In  the  field  of  recovery,  we  are  entering  new  territory,  which  is  why  the  authorities  have 
wisely  taken  a  very  cautious  approach  to  giving  guidance  to  FMIs  on  the  design  of  their 
recovery plans. 
Ideally,  recovery  tools  should  be  comprehensive,  effective  and  controllable;  they  should 
create  appropriate  incentives  for  risk  management  and  minimise  any  negative  impacts. 
However,  the  challenge  is  that  no  individual  tool  can  equally  meet  all  of  these  criteria 
because of trade-offs, for example: 
• 
Uncapped  cash  calls  are  comprehensive,  but  may  create  disincentives  for  central 
clearing. 
Variation margin haircutting can be comprehensive and effective (as it reduces pay-
outs rather than requiring additional pay-ins), but the loss allocation and hence the 
systemic effect is uncertain. 
Initial  margin  haircutting  may  help  achieve  comprehensiveness,  but  increases  the 
potential for contagion risk. 
  The optimal choice of recovery tools is still evolving and remains a controversial issue. The 
regulatory  approach  by  CPSS-IOSCO  is  therefore  non-prescriptive  and  aims  to  provide 
guidance  that  should  help  FMIs  to  choose  the  appropriate  (mix  of)  recovery  tools.  This 
approach, however, might need to be adapted over time. 
Evolution of global clearing structures 
[slide 11] 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  fourth  known  unknown,  which  is  the  optimal  design  of  the  global 
clearing structure. 
                                                
2  See  Financial  Stability  Board.  “Consultation  Paper:  Feasibility  Study  on  Approaches  to  Aggregate  OTC 
Derivatives Data”, 4 February 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
[slide 12] 
Such a design depends on numerous factors and questions: 
• 
• 
• 
How many CCPs do we need at global level? 
How many markets should a CCP serve? 
What  are  the  implications  of  competitive  clearing  where  there  are  several  CCPs 
serving the same trading venue? 
Should CCPs be linked and how? Should links be limited to cash-market CCPs or 
also apply to derivatives and commodities CCPs? 
What degree of tiering is optimal and how should participants get access to CCPs 
when needed? This question has gained in importance with the establishment of the 
clearing obligation. 
  [slide 13] 
What  we  see  today  is  a  globalisation  process  that  has  triggered  a  trend  towards  global 
clearing with increasingly  large global CCPs.  Moreover, it appears that many banks prefer 
indirect  access  to  clearing  services  so  as  to  comply  with  the  clearing  obligation.  Client 
clearing seems thus to be dominated by a few large global intermediaries. This concentration 
creates a higher degree of dependency on this small group of firms. 
The  trend  towards  the  globalisation  of  clearing  has  benefits  and  risks.  On  the  one  hand, 
there is greater scope for netting that allows for collateral savings, the lower cost of direct 
access and using CCPs, and an increase in transparency for both regulators and CCPs. On 
the other hand, there is a potential for systemic risks as CCPs may become too big to fail. 
Also,  market  power  may  push  up  clearing  fees  and  restrict  entry.  This  could  create 
disincentives for central clearing and could undermine the efficiency gains reaped in the first 
place  by  eroding  the  pricing  power  of  global  dealers.  There  could  also  be  cross-border 
regulatory frictions in the case of multiple (and inconsistent) national regulations, and last but 
not least the cross-border liquidity provision in several currencies becomes more complex. 
This  leads  me  to  the  last  and  maybe  most  challenging  “unknown”.  Given  CCPs’  role  as 
financial market utilities that has been reinforced by mandatory clearing requirements, and 
their  increasing  systemic  relevance,  would  the  world  be  a  safer  place,  if  CCPs  had  been 
established  as  non-for-profit  institutions?  My  tentative  answer  is  no.  I  have  outlined  the 
importance of good risk management in CCPs, and the ability to adapt to a changing market 
environment in terms of counterparties, products, and technologies. I am convinced that this 
will be better done in a market environment. But this certainly requires strong supervision, 
effective cooperative oversight arrangements, and setting up the right incentive structure so 
that  CCPs  don’t  lose  sight  of  public  interest,  starting  with  the  interest  of  their  indirect 
members. 
Let  me  conclude.  Central  clearing  will  make  the  global  financial  system  safer.  However,  it 
also has the potential to redistribute risk. Its overall systemic effect will thus depend on the 
incentives for risk-taking and central clearing that accompany risk redistribution. Hence the 
need for the official sector to provide the right incentive framework ex-ante, produce data that 
can  help  understand  the  distribution  of  risk,  and  tightly  supervise  CCPs  in  a  spirit  of 
cooperation across jurisdictions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
