Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders in Miyazaki, 6 February 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  speak  before  the  people  of  Miyazaki  Prefecture.  I  would  like  to 
express  my  sincere gratitude  to  you for  your cooperation  with  the  activities  of the  Bank of 
Japan, especially of our Kagoshima Branch and Miyazaki Office. 
Let me start with a personal note. When I was a high school student, a long time ago, I came 
to Miyazaki in early spring during a trip around Kyushu. Today, it is my great pleasure to be 
back here after a long while. I recall fond memories of my youth, such as the brightness of 
the Nichinan coast and the beautiful fields of mustard flowers. 
Over the years, I have consistently emphasized from an academic viewpoint that the biggest 
challenge for Japan’s economy is to overcome deflation at the earliest possible time and that 
the role of monetary policy is crucial. 
It is for this reason that I accepted the post of deputy governor last March. I have a strong 
desire  and  willingness  to  meet  this  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  that  has  entrenched 
Japan’s economy for decades, and want to make my best effort to eliminate it once and for 
all. 
This  desire  is  embodied  in  a  new  policy  framework  called  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE), which was introduced on April 4 last year. 
Under the QQE, the Bank aims to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  and  continue  with  the 
QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. Based on this, 
it has been steadily increasing the monetary base, mainly through the purchase of long-term 
Japanese government securities. 
Looking at recent economic and financial developments, Japan’s economy has steadily been 
pursuing  its  course  toward  overcoming  deflation.  In  my  view,  however,  the  impact  of 
monetary easing will be full scale from now on, and it is particularly important for the Bank to 
facilitate a deeper understanding of monetary policy within the public by explaining our aim 
and commitment under the QQE in order to ensure that its expected effects will be realized. 
Today, before exchanging views  with you, I  will first explain the Bank’s assessment of the 
current  and  future  developments  in  economic  activity  in  Japan  and  overseas.  Next,  I  will 
explain the background and underlying thinking behind the QQE. 
I. 
Current and future developments in economic activity in Japan and abroad 
Current and future developments in Japan’s economy 
A. 
First  are  the  current  and  future  developments  in  economic  activity  in  Japan.  Japan’s 
economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately,  underpinned  by  a  virtuous  cycle  among 
production, income, and spending. This cycle is currently at work both in the corporate sector 
and  the  household  sector. On the  price front, the  year-on-year rate  of increase  in  the  CPI 
excluding  fresh  food  has  been  widening  across  an  increasing  number  of  items,  having 
registered 1.3 percent in December 2013. The CPI excluding food and energy has also been 
improving, with its rate of increase having registered 0.7 percent in December 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Looking  ahead,  while  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  maintain  firmness,  external  demand  is 
expected to increase, albeit moderately, and the virtuous cycle among production, income, 
and  spending  is  likely  to  be  maintained.  Against  this  backdrop,  while  the  economy  will  be 
affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after 
the consumption tax hike, it is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential, as 
a trend. At the monetary policy meeting held last month, the Bank reviewed its outlook for 
economic activity and prices through fiscal 2015. The medians of the Policy Board members’ 
forecasts for the real GDP growth rates are 2.7 percent in fiscal 2013, 1.4 percent in fiscal 
2014, and 1.5 percent in fiscal 2015, respectively. 
As  for  prices,  the  Bank  expects  moderate  inflation  –  accompanying  a  rise  in  wages  –  to 
continue in light of improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance on the back of 
this  economic  development,  and  of  rising  inflation  expectations.  Looking  at  the  outlook  for 
prices in more detail, the inflation rate – on the basis of figures excluding the direct effects of 
the  consumption  tax  hikes  –  is  likely  to  be  around  1¼  percent  until  this  summer  as  the 
positive contribution stemming from the rise in energy prices such as petroleum prices will 
gradually  decline  while  the  underlying  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  likely  to  strengthen. 
Subsequently,  however,  against  the  background  of  further  improvement  in  the  aggregate 
supply and demand balance and the rise in the medium- to long-term inflation expectations, 
the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  pick  up  and  is  likely  to  reach  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent  toward  the  latter  half  of  the  projection  period.  Again,  citing  the  medians  of  the 
Policy  Board  members’  forecasts,  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  register  0.7  percent  in 
fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent in fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent in fiscal 2015. 
Looking to the future 
B. 
Let me now elaborate on several points that deserve particular attention in terms of realizing 
the outlook for economic activity and prices that I just mentioned. I will first touch on issues 
related to domestic demand, followed by those concerning external demand. 
Effects of consumption tax hike 
As far as domestic demand is concerned, the first is the effects of the consumption tax hike. 
From this April, the consumption tax will be raised from the current 5 percent to 8 percent. 
The tax hike will affect the economy through two channels. First, it will  generate the front-
loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the hike. Second, it will 
lead to a decline in disposable income. 
As  for  the  first  channel,  while  the  front-loaded  increase  in  spending  has  already  been 
observed  in  the  areas  of  housing  investment  and  spending  on  durable  goods  such  as 
automobiles, the growth rates of the October–December quarter in 2013 and the January–
March quarter in 2014 are expected to be quite high on the back of the front-loaded increase 
in consumer spending. By contrast, the growth rate for the April–June quarter in 2014 is likely 
to  decline  due  to  the  subsequent  drop  in  spending.  That  said,  after  entering  the  July–
September quarter in 2014, the economy will likely return to a growth path above its potential 
without losing momentum toward economic recovery as the effects of the subsequent decline 
in spending will gradually ebb away, public investment will remain at a high level, and exports 
and business fixed investment are expected to increase moderately. 
Having said all this, some people may be more cautious about the outlook for the economy 
because the tax hike will impose a negative impact on households’ disposable incomes. In 
my view, such a negative effect will be mitigated due to the following reasons. First, various 
economic measures are being taken by the government. Second, the tax hikes seem to have 
already  been  factored  in  substantially  among  households.  And  third,  the  rate  hikes  are 
expected  to  have  the  effect  of  alleviating  households’  future  concerns  over  the  fiscal 
condition and the social security system. 
In sum, the consumption tax hike will temporarily generate a swing in the economy’s growth 
rates  and  negatively  affect  disposable  income.  Despite  such  developments,  the  virtuous 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cycle that has already been working in Japan’s economy will continue and the economy is 
likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, as a trend. 
Employment and income situation 
The  second  issue  related  to  domestic  demand  concerns  the  employment  and  income 
situation.  The  current  economic  recovery  is  characterized  as  being  driven  by  domestic 
demand  such  as  private  consumption  and  public  investment.  Going  forward,  in  order  to 
maintain  the  firmness  in  domestic  demand,  it  is  important  that  the  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation continue to sustain private consumption. In particular, in 
the context of rising prices, wages have to rise in a balanced manner to ensure sustainable 
growth in the economy. 
Looking  at  the  current  developments  in  employment  and  income,  the  supply  and  demand 
balance in the labor market continues to improve moderately. The unemployment rate is in 
the  range  of  3.5–4.0  percent  and  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants ratio  stands  at just 
over  1.0.  That  is,  they  have  reached  the  levels  seen  prior  to  the  Lehman  crisis.  Likewise, 
according  to  the  December  2013  Tankan  survey  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan), the employment conditions DI shows that insufficiency in employment 
was  aggravated,  particularly  within  the  nonmanufacturing  sector.  In  these  situations,  the 
year-on-year rate of change in total cash earnings of full-time employees per employee has 
registered an increase, albeit marginally, against the backdrop of increases in non-scheduled 
cash earnings (i.e., overtime payment) and special cash earnings (i.e., bonuses). Moreover, 
hourly cash earnings of part-time employees have continued to increase moderately year-on-
year. 
Looking  ahead,  from  somewhat  of  a  longer-term  perspective,  an  uptrend  in  total  cash 
earnings is expected to gradually become evident, accompanied by a pick-up in scheduled 
cash earnings, including base pay, on the back of the improvement in corporate profits and 
the  rise  in  inflation  expectations,  in  addition to  tighter  labor  supply  and demand  conditions 
brought  about  by  economic  recovery.  Cooperation  among  the  government,  workers,  and 
employers in order to realize the virtuous cycle is also expected to contribute to a pick-up in 
wages.  Against  the  background  of  continued  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation,  private  consumption  will  likely  remain  resilient  as  a  trend  despite  downward 
pressure on disposable income stemming from the tax hike. 
Business fixed investment 
The  last  issue  related  to  domestic  demand  concerns  the  outlook  for  business  fixed 
investment.  Corporate  profits  have  improved,  and  business  fixed  investment  has  been 
picking  up  against  this  backdrop.  As  machinery  orders  –  a  leading  indicator  of  machinery 
investment  –  clearly  show  signs  of  picking  up,  the  improving  trend  in  investment  in  the 
manufacturing  sector,  which  was  somewhat  lagging,  has  become  more  evident.  Going 
forward,  on  the  back  of  continued  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  as  the  effects  of 
monetary easing – particularly through the decline in expected real rates – will materialize at 
full scale, business fixed investment is likely to follow an increasing trend. Investment in the 
manufacturing sector is also likely to gain momentum as exports are expected to increase 
moderately during the course of the recovery in overseas economies. This is an issue that I 
will now talk about. 
Overseas economies and exports 
Next, I would like to explain external demand. While Japan’s exports have been picking up 
as  a  trend,  they  still  lack  momentum.  Looking  ahead,  whether  an  increase  in  exports  will 
become evident is critical for Japan’s economy. 
While  some  emerging  economies  still  face  lackluster  performance,  overseas  economies  
– particularly advanced economies such as the U.S. and European economies – are starting 
to  recover.  As  for  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  continue  recovering 
moderately,  mainly  driven  by  advanced  economies.  According  to  the  global  outlook  report 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
released  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  last  month,  the  growth  rate  of  the  global 
economy is expected to rise gradually at a projected pace of 3.0 percent in 2013, 3.7 percent 
in 2014, and 3.9 percent in 2015. 
On a regional basis, the downside risk of the U.S. economy has declined, reflecting progress 
in the fiscal situation. The economy is likely to grow at a faster pace as downside pressure 
from the fiscal side will ebb away. As for the European economy, while further developments 
regarding  the  European  debt  problem  still  require  attention,  financial  markets  have  shown 
stable performance, as exemplified by the decline in interest rates of sovereign bonds issued 
by peripheral countries. The economy as a whole has become increasingly resilient. 
In  China,  the  authorities  have  positioned  themselves  to  address  structural  problems  while 
paying due regard to economic growth, and the Chinese economy is expected to grow at a 
pace  similar  to  where  it  is  now.  By  contrast,  some  emerging  economies  –  including  the 
ASEAN  economies  –  continue  to  show  lackluster  performance.  They  are  expected  to  lack 
momentum in terms of growth for some time while they are faced with structural problems 
such as fiscal deficits and current account deficits. In the medium- to long-term, however, as 
the  economic  recovery  in  the  United  States,  Europe,  and  China  starts  to  spread,  they  will 
gradually gain growth momentum. 
In light of these developments, exports from Japan are picking up but are lacking momentum 
somewhat. There are several reasons behind this. While a structural factor such as a shifting 
of  production  sites  to  overseas  by  the  manufacturing  companies  may  have  a  role  to  play, 
there  is  a  more  fundamental  issue  of  the  effects  stemming  from  moderate  growth  in  the 
ASEAN economies that are closely tied  with Japan, possibly having a large impact on the 
exports’ performance. Indeed, analyzing exports to different regions, while exports – mainly 
of automobiles – to the United States have been on an increasing trend and those to Europe 
and  China  are  picking  up  as  a  trend,  those  to  the  ASEAN  economies  continue  to  show 
somewhat weak performance. 
Down the road, exports to the United States, Europe, and China will continue to pick up and 
those to the emerging economies including the ASEAN economies, where somewhat weak 
performance  has  been  observed,  are  expected  to  start  picking  up  as  growth  in  these 
economies gathers momentum. Thus, exports on the whole will likely increase moderately as 
overseas economies recover. 
II. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Details of the QQE and its transmission mechanism 
A. 
Next, I would like to explain the thinking behind the QQE. 
The QQE consists of two pillars. The first pillar is the commitment under which the Bank will 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent as soon as possible. In its statement, the Bank 
said that it “will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent” at the earliest possible time, 
“with a time horizon of about two years.” This is a strong and clear commitment by the Bank. 
The second pillar is to engage in actions that embody the commitment specified in the first 
pillar.  As  exemplified  by  the  words  comprising  the  name  “quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing,” these actions are to increase the “quantity” of the Bank’s balance sheet 
and change the “quality” of its asset purchases. 
An  increase  in  quantity  requires  massively  increasing  the  monetary  base  –  that  is,  the 
amount of money the Bank supplies to the financial system – by purchasing different assets, 
mainly Japanese government bonds (JGBs). 
A change in quality requires purchasing assets with a higher risk profile. Among JGBs, the 
Bank started purchasing those with longer remaining maturities. In addition, it increased the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
amounts  of  purchases  in  exchange-traded funds  (ETFs)  and Japan  real  estate  investment 
trusts (J-REITs) in order to reduce risk premiums. 
While  the  QQE  consists  of  these  two  pillars,  as  far  as  its  transmission  channels  are 
concerned,  the  most  important  factor  of  all  in  terms  of  affecting  the  economy  is  lowering 
expected real interest rates. 
The effect the QQE has of reducing nominal interest rates, coupled with the effect of lifting 
inflation expectations, will exert powerful downward pressure on expected real interest rates, 
which are derived from subtracting expected rates of inflation from nominal rates in financial 
markets. 
While nominal rates are visible, expected real rates are based on the public’s expectations, 
taking account of changes in prices. These expectations are akin to asking “how much would 
my effective purchasing power go up if I buy JGBs?” 
They also can be viewed as equivalent to borrowers’ expectations regarding their real costs 
of  borrowing,  taking  into  account  price  changes,  when  they  borrow  money  at  a  certain 
nominal  interest  rate.  Consequently,  the  lower  the  expected  real  rates,  the  more  subdued 
their real cost of borrowing. 
The decline in expected real rates will stimulate demand in economic activity in a number of 
ways. For example, by encouraging the decline in those rates, investment in cash, deposits, 
and  fixed-income  securities  becomes  less  attractive;  thus,  people  will  shift  their  portfolios 
from those financial assets to equities and tangible assets such as land and houses, or to 
foreign-denominated  assets  with  higher  returns.  The  rise  in  equity  prices  and  the 
appreciation  of  foreign  currencies  will  stimulate  private  consumption  through  the  wealth 
effect. 
In  addition  to  the  decline  in  expected  real  rates,  other  factors  –  including  an  increase  in 
consumption and the depreciation of the yen – will encourage firms to be more aggressive in 
their  business  fixed  investment.  Furthermore,  exports  will  be  expected  to  increase  on  the 
back of the yen’s depreciation. 
Through  an  increase  in  a  range  of  demand  components  such  as  private  consumption, 
business fixed  investment,  exports,  and  public  investment,  the  output gap  of the  economy 
will improve by closing its negative gap, and Japan will then find its way out of deflation. 
The economy is also expected to maintain the virtuous cycle in which the household sector 
will further increase its spending on the back of a better labor supply and demand condition 
and  higher  employee  income,  and  the  corporate  sector  will  increase  its  business  fixed 
investment, supported by higher corporate profits, as an increase in demand will trigger more 
production. 
Working on expectations: What does it mean? 
B. 
As I explained earlier, one of the Bank’s challenges under the QQE is to change the way the 
public forms its view on inflation for the future. To work on the public’s expectations sounds 
somewhat  ambiguous  and  may  leave  an  impression  with  you  that  monetary  policy  is  not 
entirely reliable. 
In fact, it is not only monetary policy but also other economic policies that influence the way 
people form their expectations. This is because human beings decide their current behavior 
by forming expectations for the future. As a result, it is very important to conduct policy by 
taking account of their expectations. 
Likewise, concerning expectations about economic phenomena, it is important to understand 
that expectations can be self-fulfilling. A simple example is as follows. If many investors buy 
stocks of a company based on a belief that these stocks will go up, the actual price will rise. 
Self-fulfilling expectations have a big impact on the actual economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Up  until  recently,  many  people  shared  the  view  that  deflation  or  declining  prices  would 
continue, and based on such expectations they refrained from spending and investment. This 
may have aggravated the deflationary environment. Put differently, deflationary expectations 
have generated actual deflation; hence, the situation of persistent self-fulfilling deflation. 
In  order  to  overcome  deflation  and  achieve  price  stability  in  a  stable  manner,  it  is  vital  to 
change the public’s mindset from having “deflationary expectations” to adopting “inflationary 
expectations.” This is why the Bank has been aggressively pursuing the QQE in order to shift 
their expectations. 
Changing  the  public’s  expectations  as  a  main  challenge  on  monetary  policy  is  surely 
unprecedented in the history of central banking. It is for this reason that the Bank is pursuing 
this policy with a strong determination to cultivate the frontier of monetary policy making. 
The QQE and increase in lending 
C. 
So  far,  I  have  explained  that  the  main  challenge  of  the  QQE  is  to  generate  aggregate 
demand  by  reducing  the  expected  real  interest rates,  which  will  lead  to  the  overcoming of 
deflation. 
Related to this, we sometimes hear people say that lending by financial institutions has not 
increased no matter how much money the Bank provides by expanding the monetary base. 
They further point out that this may be a sign that monetary easing is not working. Let me 
offer my thoughts on these views. 
Faced  with  prolonged  deflation,  many  firms  including  SMEs  have  hoarded  cash  and 
deposits; as a result, the corporate sector has registered a financial surplus. Indeed, during 
the deflation that lasted for some 15 years, firms restrained their business fixed investment 
and  accumulated  cash  and  deposits.  Consequently,  the  total  amount  outstanding  of  cash 
and deposits held by the corporate sector reached as high as about 230 trillion yen. This is 
nearly half of Japan’s GDP. At the initial phase of getting out of deflation, firms finance their 
credit  demand  for  working  capital  and  business  fixed  investment  with  their  cash  at  hand. 
Moreover,  increasing  cash flow  will  be  used  to  repay  debts;  thus,  none of  these  lead  to a 
situation  where  lending  by  financial  institutions  simply  increases.  A  pick-up  in  lending  will 
only  start  once  firms  are  no  longer  able  to  finance  their  credit  demand  for  inventory 
investment or business fixed investment with their cash at hand. 
Moreover, during the process of overcoming deflation, stock prices will rise significantly and 
the  markets’  expectations  regarding  future  interest  rates  will  also  go  up.  Under  such 
circumstances,  more  firms  will  decide  to  raise  long-term  funds  from  the  capital  market  by 
issuing  new  stocks  and  bonds  rather  than  borrowing  short-term  funds  from  banks.  This  is 
another reason for the lackluster performance in lending that exists for some time during the 
initial stages of overcoming deflation. 
More recently, a typical situation was seen during the recovery phase at the beginning of the 
2000s. At that time, bank lending decreased rather than increased for some time after the 
economic  recovery  gradually  gathered  steam,  although  one  needs  to  take  note  that  the 
disposal  of  non-performing  loans  was  well  under  way  and  this  led  to  a  decline  in  bank 
lending. 
Recent developments since end-2013 show that lending by commercial banks has increased 
year-on-year and the pace of increase has picked up. Compared with the economic recovery 
phase of the early 2000s, the pick-up in lending during the current economic recovery phase 
is actually stronger than originally anticipated. 
Time horizon of the QQE and further easing 
D. 
Next, I will explain the time horizon of the QQE and then touch on the issue of the possibility 
of further easing. This is a question that has received considerable attention quite recently. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
After exchanging views with a range of people, I was left with an impression that there is a 
misunderstanding that the  Bank  will  start  tightening  monetary  policy  soon  after  it  achieves 
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  This  might  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  message  to 
“achieve 2 percent in two years” was forceful. 
On this point, the Bank has made it clear since last April, when it introduced the QQE, that it 
aims to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent and continue with the QQE as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. Based on this commitment, the 
Bank promised to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years. 
This  commitment  might  not  have  been  so  clear  to  the  public.  The  point  I  would  like  to 
emphasize is the part of commitment that reads “as long as it is necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner.” In other words, even if the CPI reached 2 percent year-on-
year, unless the Bank projects that inflation is likely to remain at around 2 percent in a stable 
manner, it will not simply end monetary easing. This is the commitment the Bank has made 
under the QQE. 
If  the  Bank  judges  that  achieving  the  2  percent  target  will  become  difficult  due  to  some 
unforeseeable risk factors, then it will make adjustments in the conduct of monetary policy as 
appropriate. Referring to the policy statement, this has been written as follows: the Bank “will 
examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
adjustments as appropriate.” 
According to the Bank’s outlook, Japan’s economy is on track to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent and the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to reach around 
2 percent toward the latter half of the projection period through fiscal 2015. 
Taking  the  above  outlook  into  account,  what  is  most  important  at  this  juncture  is  that  the 
Bank steadily make progress under the current policy framework of the QQE. 
Pace of JGB purchases 
E. 
In the last part of my explanation about monetary policy, let me elaborate on somewhat of a 
technical issue. 
Under the QQE, the Bank has been purchasing JGBs so that their amount outstanding will 
increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. 
This  50  trillion  yen  is  equivalent  to  a  net  purchase  –  i.e.,  subtracting  the  amount  of 
redemption from that of new purchases. As JGBs that had already been purchased by the 
Bank  in  the  past  come  to  maturity,  it  is  necessary  to  offset  such  reduction  in  the  amount 
outstanding held by the Bank, through additional purchases of (i.e., reinvestment in) JGBs. 
Therefore, on a gross basis, the amount of purchases should far exceeded 50 trillion yen, 
and  naturally  the  amount  of  purchases  on  a  gross  basis  will  change  depending  on  the 
amount of redemption (i.e., the amount of reinvestment). 
Nevertheless, there is a view  in the market that an increase or decrease in the amount of 
purchases on a gross basis reflects changes in the Bank’s monetary easing stance. Let me 
emphasize  that  the  amount  of  purchases  on  a  gross  basis  may  increase  or  decrease 
depending on the amount of redemption; thus, it is by no means a tapering of the pace of 
JGB  purchases  nor  a  reduction  of  quantitative  easing  as  long  as  the  annual  pace  of 
purchases on a net basis remains about 50 trillion yen. 
Furthermore, the JGB purchases are carried out in a flexible manner from the perspective of 
putting downward pressure on interest rates across the yield curve while taking account of 
financial  market  conditions.  Owing  to  these  reasons,  monthly  purchases  can  change 
depending on developments in the financial markets. Indeed, when we look back at the track 
record  since  last  April,  monthly  purchases  have  fluctuated  in  the  range  of  about  
6–8 trillion yen from one month to the next. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Concluding remarks 
Let me finish my remarks by touching on the economy of Miyazaki Prefecture. 
Miyazaki’s  economy  was  hit  harshly  by  a  number  of  natural  disasters  from  2010  to  2011  
– namely, foot-and-mouth disease, avian flu, and the eruption of the Shinmoedake volcano. 
After  that,  the  economy  started  to  pick  up  gradually,  as  seen  in  the  improvement  in  the 
tourism  sector. I  would  like  to  extend  my  great respect for  the  efforts made  by  those  who 
have confronted and overcome such difficulties during those years. 
From somewhat of a medium- to long-term perspective, Miyazaki produces a variety of foods 
and there are many items – such as livestock and vegetables – for which production is at the 
top in Japan. Some of them are so renowned that they are named after Miyazaki, such as 
“Miyazaki mango” and “Miyazaki beef.” There are many picturesque places that are deeply 
rooted in Japan’s historical record of ancient matters, such as Kojiki and Chronicles of Japan, 
as well as attractive touristic places set in the exotic locale of a southern land. Furthermore, 
Miyazaki is famous as a spring training base for professional baseball teams and has hosted 
major golf tournaments. 
By  taking  full  advantage  of  its  abundant  resources  and  environment  and  capturing  the 
potential demand of consumers, Miyazaki can further reinvigorate its economy. There are a 
number of achievements that have highlighted your dedicated efforts over the years. One is 
that Miyazaki beef was awarded the gold medal in 2012 at a contest, held once every five 
years, to select the best Wagyu beef in Japan. This was the first time the same brand of beef 
had received this award on a consecutive basis. Another is that production of Miyazaki caviar 
started at end-2013 after almost 30 years of R&D activity. 
Going forward, construction of the East Kyushu Highway will be accelerated, extending from 
Miyazaki City to Kita-Kyushu City in fiscal 2014. In addition, the number of scheduled flights 
connecting Miyazaki and Taipei will go up next month. All these factors show that the social 
infrastructure in transportation will be built at an accelerated pace and this will further extend 
the chance for Miyazaki’s economy to take a major step forward. 
I  sincerely  hope  that  all  the  endeavors  people  in  Miyazaki  are  making  will  bear  fruit  and 
contribute to the further growth and prosperity of your esteemed prefecture. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
