Benoît Coeuré: The “fourth stage” of EMU – laying the foundations for a 
sustained recovery 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Interparliamentary Conference on “Economic governance of the European Union”, in 
the context of the European Parliamentary Week, Brussels, 21 January 2014. 
 I would like to thank Jean-Francois Jamet and Marion Salines for their contributions. I remain solely responsible 
for the opinions contained herein. 
Mr President, 
Mr Meimarakis, 
Honourable Members, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This month, we celebrate the 15th anniversary of the introduction of the euro, marking the 
start of the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). We now know that this was 
not the final stage. 
The  crisis  and  subsequent  adjustment  have  created  considerable  uncertainty  and  social 
hardship. Yet, there are encouraging signs that the situation is changing and that Europe is 
gradually  moving  towards  recovery.  Fragmentation  has  significantly  receded  in  euro  area 
financial markets. What we need now is to create the conditions for a sustained recovery. 
And we all have a role to play. 
First, in nurturing a still weak and uneven recovery. The ECB has a key role to play in this 
respect. 
Second, in creating conditions for sustainable long-term growth. 
And  finally,  in  enhancing  democratic  accountability  and  developing  a  shared  vision  of  the 
future of European integration. 
The contribution of monetary policy and banking union 
Improving the financing of the economy will play a vital part in the recovery. 
The ECB had an essential key role in this respect throughout the crisis. 
The  ECB  was  faced  with  interrelated  key  challenges,  namely  deleveraging,  fragmentation 
and a weak economic environment. 
Like other central banks around the globe, we have taken decisive measures to ensure the 
proper transmission of our monetary policy. 
We have reduced the key interest rate to a historic low. We have stated that, in view of the 
subdued outlook for inflation, we expect interest rates to remain at current or lower levels for 
an  extended  period  of  time. We  are  fully  committed  to  maintaining  price  stability  over  the 
medium term, that is, inflation below, but close to, 2%, and we have been absolutely clear 
that our inflation objective is symmetric: low inflation is as bad as high inflation. 
There  are  already  indications  that  we  are  making  significant  progress  in  reintegrating 
financial markets. . 
It is true that the improvement in financial conditions is not reflected to the same extent in all 
euro area economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The ECB is committed to fighting financial fragmentation. But there are clear limits to what 
monetary policy alone can achieve. 
For banks to pass on to their clients the favourable financing conditions, trust needs to be re-
established in the European banking sector and its capacity to finance the economy. 
Here, the banking union with its first two main pillars, single supervision and resolution, will 
play a key role. 
The creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is a very big step in the European 
integration process – probably the biggest since the introduction of the euro. 
At the ECB, we are very conscious of this huge responsibility that we have been asked to 
shoulder.  Intensive  preparations  are  under  way  in  close  cooperation  with  the  national 
supervisors in order to have the SSM fully operational in November 2014. 
As an essential part of that work, we will conduct – together with European Banking Authority 
– a comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets to create greater transparency in 
respect of the risks. I trust that the conditions set in the comprehensive assessment will be 
challenging and will contribute to the strong credibility of the exercise. 
Yet, integrating supervision is not sufficient. An appropriate resolution framework is essential 
to deal with banks that are failing or likely to fail. 
The agreement reached by the European Parliament and the Council on the Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive (BRRD) is an important step in this direction. 
We now need to have an agreement between the Council and the European Parliament on 
an effective Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) and a Single Resolution Fund (SRF). 
Let  me  first  say  a  few  words  on  the  institutional  method  chosen  to  set  up  the  SRF.  As  a 
Union institution, the ECB supports, as a matter of principle, recourse to the Union method 
and thus to Union law. The recourse to an intergovernmental agreement should only be seen 
as a temporary solution. 
As  regards  the  main  features  of  a  functioning  SRM,  we  need  lean  decision-making, 
particularly in emergency situations. This should allow for taking decisions over a weekend, if 
needed.  Robust  and  common  resolution  financing  arrangements  are  also  required:  in  this 
regard, the period of ten years for moving towards a genuinely common SRF is too long and 
should be shortened, possibly to five years. Also, adequate common backstop arrangements 
need to be established, both for the transition period and the steady state, to guarantee the 
credibility of the SRF and avoid a persistent or re-emergent sovereign-bank nexus. Finally, 
the assessment whether a bank is failing or likely to fail should solely be in the hands of the 
supervisor. 
The role of national policies and European economic governance 
Further  steps  are  indeed  needed  to  create  a  favourable  and  stable  environment  for 
investment and job creation, notably structural reforms to make euro area economies fairer 
and more competitive, and stabilising public finances. 
These steps have both a national and a European dimension. They are of relevance for the 
Union as whole but particularly pressing for the euro area, where the fates of economies are 
even more closely interrelated. Each Member State has to act in the knowledge that what 
happens  domestically  has  direct  implications  for  the  rest  of  the  monetary  union,  while 
recognising that what happens in the rest of the union will also impact on its own situation. 
This is the only way we can create the basis for shared responsibility and solidarity in EMU. 
In spring 2010 the ECB was asked by Member States to join the troika. The finance ministers 
of the euro area decided to grant financial assistance to stressed countries, which in return 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
committed  to  rebalancing  their  economy.  The  ECB  accepted  to  act  in  liaison  with  the 
Commission and to provide advice and expertise in areas related to our mandate. 
I am aware that the work of the troika has met with criticism, in particular from the European 
Parliament.  It  is fully  legitimate to  have  an  open  debate  on the matter, not  least given  the 
huge implications for the everyday lives of citizens in programme countries. It is part of the 
learning  process  to  assess  the  European  crisis  response  and  to  identify  what  has  worked 
and what could be improved in the future. 
When  doing  this,  one  should  bear  in  mind  the  immensely  challenging  situation  which 
European  institutions  and  national  governments  had  to  cope  with.  Of  course,  it  is  always 
possible  to  say  that  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  things  could  have  been  done  better  or 
differently,  and  this  contributes  to  the  learning  process.  But  advice  is  provided  in  a  given 
context, based on given information and under given constraints. Let us also not forget that 
the  adjustment  would  have  had  to  take  place  in  any  case,  with  or  without  the  troika.  The 
economic  and  social  costs  would  have  certainly  been  much  higher  without  the  emergency 
assistance. 
Finally, let us acknowledge what the EU/IMF programmes have achieved. The integrity of the 
euro  area  has  been  preserved  and  financial  conditions  are  improving  for  programme 
countries, notably for Ireland, which has safely exited its programme. Spain too has exited its 
banking  sector  programme.  Progress  on  fiscal  and  external  rebalancing  and  on  structural 
reforms has also been very significant. 
Looking ahead, we need to prevent any return to the complacency of the past. This means 
that  we  must  make  fuller  use  of  the  tools  at  our  disposal  in  the  economic  governance 
framework, at the EU and the EMU level. 
The European Parliament and national parliaments have a key role to play in this respect, in 
the context of the 2014 European Semester. Let me reassert here that the Excessive Deficit 
Procedure (EDP) and the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) are equally important 
and should be strictly enforced. The lesson of this crisis is that the cost of not intervening 
where imbalances are identified would be a more brutal adjustment later. 
The role of parliaments in the “fourth stage” of EMU 
The crisis revealed that national policies need to be a matter of common concern. Therefore, 
national policies need to be discussed at the European level and the European dimension 
needs  to  be  brought  into  national  debates.  National  parliaments  and  the  European 
Parliament are the natural fora for such exchanges. 
There  is  clearly  a  demand  for  this.  The  most  recent  Eurobarometer  data  (autumn  2013) 
indicates  that  an  overwhelming  majority  of  euro  area  citizens  (79%)  support  a  stronger 
coordination of economic policies among euro area countries and 63% support the EMU and 
the euro. At the same time, two-thirds of Europeans consider that their voice does not count 
in the EU. 
At  the  ECB,  we  attach  great  importance  to  our  accountability,  as  reflected  in  our  close 
dialogue with the European Parliament and most recently in the Inter-institutional Agreement 
with the European Parliament on the accountability of the SSM. As regards monetary policy, 
the Governing Council of the ECB is examining how it can enhance the transparency of its 
decision-making  processes  by  publishing  an  account  of  its  discussions.  I  am  personally 
convinced that this would help the public understand our decisions better. 
At the same time, the European Parliament and national parliaments have a responsibility to 
engage with the public on the political and economic implications of Economic and Monetary 
Union. Above all, only in a truly European public space can common solutions emerge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let me now conclude. 15 years ago the third stage of EMU started. It was believed to be the 
“final” stage. The crisis made clear that we needed to embark on what I would call the “fourth 
stage” of EMU, as described in particular in the Four Presidents’ report1. 
In this process we should always ask ourselves: in 15 years from now, what will the people of 
Europe say  when they  look back at what we have done? Will they regard it as a decisive 
moment in paving the way for a stable European economy and sustainable growth? 
I believe this long-term outlook should be our benchmark. And in this process, it is clear that 
further sharing of sovereignty has to go hand in hand with enhanced democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. I trust this year’s European elections will be the occasion for an important 
debate in this regard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
1   Towards  a  Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  report  by  Herman  Van  Rompuy,  President  of  the 
European Council, in close collaboration with José Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission, 
Jean-Claude Juncker, President of the Eurogroup, and Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, 
5 December 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
