  Hugo Frey Jensen: Creating relations in a digital new (banking) world 
Speech  by  Mr  Hugo  Frey  Jensen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the 
Director’s Conference of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 8 September 2014. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
The heading of today’s conference – “Creating relations in a digital new (banking) world” – 
shows that the banks now have the strength and resources to look forward after a few years 
in the shadow of the financial crisis. This is positive and on the whole tallies with Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  and  the  general  condition  of  the 
banking sector. 
The  Danish  economy  is  recovering  after  some  difficult  years.  Admittedly,  the  most  recent 
figures  show  a  small  decline  in  GDP  in  the  2nd  quarter,  but  viewed  in  a  larger  context, 
activity has grown since the end of 2012. It is important to stay focused on the underlying 
trend and not to become hypnotised by quarter-on-quarter fluctuations. 
Decreasing North Sea oil output is reducing overall production these years. If this factor is 
disregarded, value added in the Danish economy is now 2 per cent higher than in 2012 – and 
rising. 
The increase in activity has also been reflected in the labour market, where employment has 
been picking up over the last year or so. Employment is developing at a steadier pace than 
production. As a result, productivity development is a little jerky, which is quite normal for the 
Danish economy. 
As the economy has improved, pressures on the Danish banks have gradually eased. But a 
few  banks  are  suffering  from  the  repercussions  of  the  crisis  and  several  banks  are  still 
struggling with low return on equity. 
The sector has ample excess liquidity cover, and for this reason Danmarks Nationalbank has 
phased out the temporary measures introduced to boost the banks’ liquidity. These included 
the  option  to  raise  6-month  loans  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank  and  to  pledge  sector 
company shares and credit claims as collateral. 
The  financial  crisis  is  over,  but  it  has  left  its  mark.  Above  all,  the  crisis  has  reduced  the 
number  of  banks  in  Denmark.  As  the  chart  shows,  it  has  amplified  a  trend  that  has  been 
evident for many years. 
In  our  Monetary  Review  from  the  4th  quarter  of  2013,  we  examined  productivity  and  cost 
efficiency  in  the  financial  sector.  In  terms  of  the  cost-to-income  ratio,  Denmark  seems  to 
differ from comparable countries. The figures indicate that resource consumption within the 
sector has not yet been fully adjusted. 
In addition, the future slope of the graph showing the number of banks in Denmark could well 
depend  on  how  the  banks  manage  to  tackle  the  challenges  posed  by  today’s  theme  – 
increased digitalisation. 
 Competition  and  cooperation  in  the  new  world  of  banking that  awaits  you  and  us  will  also 
affect  the  role  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank.  A  case  in  point  is  the  future  participation  by 
Danmarks Nationalbank in jointly owned infrastructure companies. 
I  could  also  mention  the  issue  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  oversight  of  the  financial 
infrastructure  –  including  in  an  area that  is  at the  heart of today’s  conference: competition 
from non-banks in the field of payments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In Denmark, we have a long tradition of shared solutions for leveraging economies of scale 
and  network  effects.  This  is  reflected  in  e.g.  joint  ownership  of  core  companies  within  the 
financial  sector,  often  with  Danmarks  Nationalbank  as  a  co-  owner.  This  means  that  the 
users – or customers – have also been owners, and the general operation of the company 
has  been  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  board  of  directors  representing  the  owners  –  typically 
people like you and me. 
When these companies were set up, this was a natural way of doing things. It ensured that 
the  various  stakeholders  had  a  say,  which  was  a  precondition  for  their  full  support.  In 
addition,  the  companies  were  focused  primarily  on  servicing  their  Danish  owners,  which 
meant that business and competition issues were limited in scope. 
But over time this form of ownership has come under mounting pressure. The reasons differ 
from  company  to  company,  but  frequent  explanations  include  increased  competition  as  a 
result of international regulation, technological advances, undesirable tying-up of capital and 
a need to achieve economies of scale. On balance, there can be no doubt that it has become 
more  complex  to  operate  such  companies.  This  has  increased  the  need  for  strong 
managerial skills, including the ability to secure the commercial interests of the company. 
An  early  example  of  a  jointly  owned  company  where  it  was  necessary  to  change  the 
ownership structure many years ago is the Copenhagen Stock Exchange. Some of you have 
been  part  of  the  process  right  back  from  Stock  Exchange  Reform  II,  when  the  CSE  was 
converted into a limited liability company, to the merger with OMX and later with NASDAQ. 
I  will  not  go  into  detail,  but  simply  conclude  that  no-one  has  questioned  the  need  for  a 
modern,  efficient  stock  exchange,  even  at  a  time  when  the  possible  existence  of  a  credit 
crunch has been discussed. Foreign ownership without the participation of all customers and 
stakeholders has not prevented the Stock Exchange from raising capital – on the contrary. 
More recently and amid much media attention, Danish and Norwegian banks and Danmarks 
Nationalbank have sold their shares in Nets. This has done away with a structure in which 
banks were both owners and customers of and in some cases also competitors to Nets. It 
has eliminated a number of rather obvious opposing interests among the company’s owners 
and provided a more suitable framework for operating Nets on commercial terms – which will 
ultimately benefit the end users of payment services: citizens and firms. 
VP  Securities  is  another  jointly  owned  company  that  has  undergone  a  transition  from  its 
establishment as an independent institution in 1980 over its conversion into a limited liability 
company in 2000 to now operating in a market where the framework conditions are changing 
radically. The single most important change in this area is the establishment of TARGET2 
Securities – T2S – the future trans- European securities settlement platform. 
At  the  same  time,  the  securities  sector  is  being  thoroughly  harmonised.  So  these  years 
European  central  securities  depositories  are  changing  from  being  national  monopolies  to 
operating on competitive terms. VP has decided to join T2S and will soon have to make a 
number of strategic choices as regards its position in a competitive environment. 
As I mentioned earlier, Danmarks Nationalbank is or has been a co-owner of several jointly 
owned companies. Each shareholding has its own history. However, I would like to take this 
opportunity to emphasise that Danmarks Nationalbank’s role is that of an authority, including 
in  relation  to  oversight  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  Our  role  is  not  to  be  a  co-owner  of 
competitive  companies  operating  on  commercial  terms.  For  this reason  we  have  gradually 
begun to withdraw from such companies. 
The first  step  was  taken  when  we  sold  our  shares  in  Nets.  Since  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
had  acquired  those  shares,  PBS/Nets  had  developed  into  an  international  enterprise 
competing with other companies offering advanced payment solutions in multiple countries. It 
was clearly no longer a company in which a central bank should have a stake. Furthermore, 
we wanted to be beyond reproach in relation to performance of our oversight tasks, which 
also comprise Nets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Another jointly owned company in which Danmarks Nationalbank should at some point divest 
its shares is BKS Cash Service. Danmarks Nationalbank and the banks established BKS in 
order to support a secure supply of cash. We did so in response to several serious robberies 
which had disclosed a need to raise the level of security in relation to cash handling. At the 
same time, a number of security standards were laid down, which must be observed by all 
cash-in-transit companies. 
Together we have come a long way in terms of meeting the new standards – and we will get 
there.  When  we  do  that,  the  main  objective  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  co-ownership  of 
BKS  will  have  been  fulfilled.  We  will  still  consider  security  aspects  and  lay  down 
requirements, but Danmarks Nationalbank will no longer be a natural co-owner of a company 
like BKS. But as with the other jointly owned companies we  will not simply abandon BKS. 
There is still plenty of work to be done. In due course, Danmarks Nationalbank will retire from 
the group of owners in an orderly manner. 
 Now let me turn to the potentially increased role of non- banks in the field of payments in the 
coming years. 
There is a clear trend. Danmarks Nationalbank’s payment instrument – cash – is becoming 
less and less important. Cash as a share of retail turnover has dived sharply over the years, 
and this trend is set to continue. 
Banks  still  account for the  vast  majority  of  payments,  and  when  it  comes  to  new  payment 
solutions, the banks’ products – such as MobilePay and Swipp – get all the attention. But the 
widespread  popularity  of  these  solutions  shows  that  this  is  a  dynamic  area  which  could 
rapidly undergo significant changes. 
A recent report from the Danish Payments Council makes a broad distinction between two 
categories of non-banks that could become significant players in the field of payments. One 
is firms receiving payments, who see an advantage in offering customers their own solutions. 
There can be several reasons why a firm chooses to launch its own payment solution, but in 
most cases it is a desire to provide optimum customer service, thereby boosting turnover. 
The other category comprises a wide range of non-bank providers of payment services. Their 
payment  services  vary  considerably,  but  a  common  feature  is  that  these  services  do  not 
include deposit accounts. The providers often rely on existing account structures or payment 
solutions,  are  not  in  possession  of  the  customers’  funds  at  any  point  during  the  payment 
process  and  primarily  want  to  collect  data  –  not  to  make  a  profit from the  actual  payment 
transactions. 
Non-banks offering payment services are currently regulated by the E-Money and Payment 
Services  Directives.  These  two  Directives  lay  down  rules  for  e-money  and  payment 
institutions,  respectively.  A  major  objective  for  both  types  of  institution  is  to  increase 
competition in this area. Some years after the Directives came into force we can conclude 
that there are still very few payment and e-money institutions in Denmark – so you are still 
strongly positioned in the field of payments. 
Another – potentially more extensive – legislative initiative is a proposal from the European 
Commission  to  allow  third-  party  access  to  execute  payments  via  bank  accounts  with  the 
approval of the customers. This proposal was presented last year and has been analysed by 
the  Payments  Council.  The  analysis  resulted  in  a  number  of  recommendations  for  Danish 
views,  especially  in  relation  to  security  aspects  of  giving  third  parties  access  to  bank 
accounts. 
Precisely  the  issue  of  security  and  hence  of  user  trust  may  be  a  decisive  factor  in 
determining  the  success  of  non-bank  solutions.  And  we  should  not  underestimate  the 
competitive value of trust for the banks. Users typically have strong trust in the banks and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  their solutions – believing that their funds are secure and protected, that the solutions work 
and that data will not be misused. 
A survey conducted by Danmarks Nationalbank last year, in which 1,300 Danes were asked 
about  their  views  on  various  payment  methods,  etc.,  confirms  this.  One  question  was  the 
extent  to  which  respondents  trusted  public  authorities,  banks  and  others  to  treat  their 
personal data with discretion. As you can see, the Danes seem to have greater faith in the 
data security of banks than of other firms. 
Other  surveys  that  we  and  others  have  performed  show  that  trust  –  along  with  price  and 
convenience  –  actually  determines  customers’  choice  of  payment  solution  and  provider  of 
payment services. Experience also shows that trust can rapidly evaporate. 
One unfortunate experience – funds that are lost, a solution that does not work, or a breach 
of data security – could undermine it. Trust is one of the banks’ major assets and it must be 
cultivated – also when it comes to payments. This should be a key element of your efforts to 
provide competitive payment solutions that generate value for firms and consumers. 
 Undoubtedly, the higher trust in banks is to some extent due to regulation and oversight of 
the sector by public authorities. Danmarks Nationalbank’s role in relation to oversight of the 
financial infrastructure is enshrined in the Danmarks Nationalbank Act, which states that its 
objectives are to “maintain a safe and secure currency system and to facilitate and regulate 
the traffic in money and the extension of credit”. Although the Act dates back to 1936 it is 
actually  future-proof:  it  does  not  distinguish  between  cash  payments  and  electronic 
payments, and the objective of today’s oversight is clearly defined. 
The objective of Danmarks Nationalbank oversight is to ensure safe and efficient settlement 
of  payments  in  Denmark.  In  terms  of  audit  and  supervision,  oversight  may  seem  to  be 
somewhat  elastic,  but  that  is  because  yesterday’s  safe  and  efficient  solutions  are  not 
necessarily safe and efficient today. It is important that the infrastructure – the “tracks” – is 
always prepared for the needs of citizens and firms for convenient, fast and safe payments. 
Examples of this are the Intradagclearing and the forthcoming Straksclearing. In my opinion, 
the  banks  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank  have  shown  due  diligence  by  “straightening  the 
tracks”  so  that  the trains  can  run faster.  On top  of that,  the  new,  automated  liquidity  tools 
provide  enhanced  security.  This  supports  new  payment  options,  such  as  Swipp  and 
MobilePay.  Without  the  new  systems,  I  think  it  would  have  been  increasingly  difficult  to 
explain to users why it may take several days to settle payments. 
For  retailers,  the  Straksclearing  offers  settlement  finality  for  credit  transfers,  unlike  e.g. 
Dankort payments, for which retailers only have a guarantee that they will receive the first 
4,000  kr.  So  the  Straksclearing  paves  the  way  for  digital  development  in  the  field  of 
payments. 
For the economy it is extremely important that electronic payments can be effected in a safe 
and efficient manner, and that people have faith in them. Like other central banks, including 
the ECB, Danmarks Nationalbank intends to strengthen its oversight of payment solutions. 
Oversight will be targeted at systemically important payment solutions in Denmark, currently 
the  Dankort,  Betalingsservice  and  credit  transfers.  This  will  support  safe  and  efficient 
payments – in shops, online and when transferring funds between accounts. Since Nets and 
the  Danish  Bankers  Association  are  responsible  for  the  payment  solutions,  you  will  be 
receiving a letter about the enhanced oversight. As usual, it will be based on good and close 
cooperation. 
Although oversight is resource-intensive for all parties, including Danmarks Nationalbank, I 
am convinced that Danmarks Nationalbank’s oversight of the payments infrastructure boosts 
one of your key assets when it comes to payments – trust. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But  how  about  the  “third  parties”?  Can they fly  below  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  radar  and 
simply get a free ride on the safe and efficient payments infrastructure? No. If these payment 
services acquire a certain size, they will be subject to oversight by Danmarks Nationalbank. 
That also applies if the services are offered from other countries, as central banks have a 
long tradition of cooperation when it comes to oversight. 
 Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  decided  to  set  up  a  credit  register  in  cooperation  with  the 
Danish Financial Supervisory Authority. A register of individual credits with information about 
the  debtor,  collateral,  etc.  will  improve  the  basis  for  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  oversight of 
financial  stability  and  for  the  supervisory  activities  of  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority. 
We  are  aware  that  the  credit  register  will  involve  a  lot  of  work  for  the  sector  in  terms  of 
establishing the reporting system and regularly reporting information. But not only do we see 
the credit register as a prerequisite for Danmarks Nationalbank’s and the Danish Financial 
Supervisory Authority’s work to ensure financial stability, the establishment of the register will 
also  help  to  ensure  that  Denmark’s  supervisory  and  oversight  instruments  are  at  least  as 
good as those applied elsewhere in Europe. The euro area has decided to establish a similar 
register from the end of 2016. 
Obviously,  the  credit  register  will  not  relieve  the  individual  bank  of  its  responsibility  for 
pursuing prudent credit policies, and in a market economy banks will differ – also in terms of 
credit policies. However, we would like to engage in a dialogue with you about the design of 
the  standardised  reporting,  so  that  you  have  a  useful  tool  for  comparing  your  credits  with 
those of the financial sector as a whole. We hope you will support this work. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
