Andreas Dombret: Regulatory reform – unresolved issues and the need 
for international cooperation 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Harvard  Law  School  Symposium  on “Building  the Financial  System of 
the  21st  Century  –  An  Agenda  for  Europe  and  the  United  States”,  Armonk,  New  York, 
28 March 2014. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  today  at  the  Harvard  Law  School  Symposium  on 
Building the Financial System of the 21st Century – An Agenda for Europe and the United 
States. It is a great pleasure to be here. 
In November 2008, just a few weeks after Lehman Brothers failed, the leaders of the G20 
met  in  Washington  D.C.  In  their  meeting  they  took  far-reaching  decisions  –  not  only  to 
combat  the  current  crisis  but  also  to  prevent  future  crises.  A  central  passage  of  their 
declaration  was  as  follows:  “We  pledge  to  strengthen  our  regulatory  regimes,  prudential 
oversight,  and  risk  management,  and  ensure  that  all  financial  markets,  products  and 
participants are regulated or subject to oversight, as appropriate to their circumstances.”  
Today, more than five years later, we have made good progress. Nevertheless, we must be 
aware of what Mark Roe from Harvard University calls the “regulatory confidence cycle”. He 
writes: “Regulators react to an explosion by creating new rules. The economy recovers; the 
regulators  conclude  that  they  did  their  job  well,  and  the  regulated  then  resist  further 
tightening. […] As the recovery continues and the memory of the financial crisis grows faint, 
the appetite for regulatory change dissipates. Why fix something that is no longer broken?”. 
On a superficial level it appears that the financial system has been mended. However, we 
have  to  ensure  that  it  will  not  break  again  –  and  this  is  an  objective  we  have  not  yet 
achieved.  There  are  still  issues  we  need  to  address  in  order  to  create  a  stable  financial 
system. In my speech today, I would like to highlight three of these issues: the too-big-to-fail 
problem which has already been discussed this morning, the shadow banking system, and 
the market for OTC derivatives. Let us begin with the too-big-to-fail problem. 
Taming the beast – the too-big-to-fail problem 
2 
Leaving aside all the nitty gritty, there is one thing we have to do to resolve the too-big-to-fail 
problem: we need to introduce more “market” to the financial markets – that is, we have to 
restore the fundamental principles of a market economy. 
The most important of these principles is the principle of liability. Everywhere it is common 
sense that people should be held responsible for their actions. Everywhere but in the world of 
banking, it would appear. During the crisis, governments around the world spent billions of 
dollars  out  of  taxpayers’  pockets  to  save  the  banks.  This  indicates  that  the  too-big-to-fail 
banks, at least, play by a different set of rules. They are woven so deeply into the fabric of 
the financial system that their failure might tear everything apart. 
The consequence is this: whenever a too-big-to-fail bank runs into trouble, the government 
might be compelled to bail it out in order to prevent a full-blown financial crisis. This means 
that these banks are implicitly insured. Whatever happens, the government is likely to stand 
ready to help. 
And this has consequences for the nature of the game. First, according to a recent study by 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  “too-big-to-fail”  banks  have  a  funding  advantage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
over  smaller  banks.  Second,  the  implicit  insurance  provides  incentives  to  engage  in  risky 
business that promises high returns. If things turn out well, the bank wins. If things go wrong, 
the taxpayers lose. 
The principle of liability has obviously been violated. The crucial question at this juncture is 
the following: what do we need to do to restore it? Well, the decisive point is that banks must 
be able to fail without dragging the entire financial system down with them. What we need 
are  effective  resolution  mechanisms  for  banks.  This  is  common  sense  at  the  conceptual 
level. However, when it comes to implementation, things turn out to be a little more complex. 
Putting practicable resolution procedures in place is a difficult endeavour, especially  in the 
international context. Systemically important banks have large numbers of entities in many 
countries, each of which has its own procedures and supervisory traditions. In the absence of 
a  sound  legal  basis  and  close  cooperation,  resolution  measures  executed  in  one  country 
might not always be recognised by other countries. 
Thus a well-coordinated approach between authorities is needed. The purpose is to maintain 
systemically  important  activities  while  resolution  procedures  are  applied.  Coordination  and 
advanced  planning  of  resolution  measures  enable  authorities  to  consider  financial  stability 
from an international point of view, not merely from a national perspective. To this end, a new 
international  standard  on  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  systemically  important  institutions 
has been developed by the Financial Stability Board. Having this new standard is a big step 
forward. 
At the European level, a central pillar of the envisaged banking union is the Single Resolution 
Mechanism.  This  instrument  will  allow  authorities  to  restructure  or  resolve  banks  without 
putting taxpayers’ money at stake. In the future, whenever a bank fails, resolution costs must 
be borne first by shareholders and creditors. After that, a bank-financed resolution fund is to 
come into play, and only as a last resort are public funds to be used and the taxpayers made 
to pay. 
Bringing light to the shadows – the shadow banking system 
3 
We have made good progress at the global and the European level in addressing the too-
big-to-fail problem. However, discussions have mainly centred around the banking system. 
Yet there are other parts of the financial system that might become a source of systemic risk. 
One of them is the shadow banking system. 
According  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  shadow  banking  system  comprises  “credit 
intermediation  involving  entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”. What  I 
think is relevant from a financial stability perspective is that such entities create bank-like risk 
without being subject to bank regulation. 
The  overall  effects  of  the  shadow  banking  system  on  financial  stability  are  ambiguous. 
Theoretically,  non-banking 
that  perform  bank-like  activities  are 
associated  with  diversification  and  specialisation  benefits.  Therefore,  it  could  be  assumed 
that they contribute to making the financial system more efficient and more resilient. 
However,  developments  in  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis  revealed  something  else: 
activities and entities in the shadow banking system can pose a threat to financial stability. 
These  potential  threats  are  mostly  the  result  of  maturity  and  liquidity  transformation,  the 
build-up  of  leverage  and  credit  risk  transfer  conducted  outside  the  perimeters  of  bank 
regulation. 
All these activities are not evil per se, but the ensuing systemic risk needs to be contained. 
All  activities  must  be  made  transparent,  in  particular  vis-à-vis  supervisory  authorities,  and 
they  need  to  be  adequately  regulated.  In  that  regard,  I  welcome  the  global  regulatory 
initiative on shadow banking – again under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. 
institutions 
financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And  here  too,  international  cooperation  is  essential  for  establishing  effective  regulation.  A 
central  feature  of  the  shadow  banking  system  is  regulatory  arbitrage:  activities  are  shifted 
from  the  banking  system  to  the  shadow  banking  system  in  order  to  evade  regulation.  A 
geographically  fragmented  approach  to  regulation  would  not  curb  regulatory  arbitrage  but 
just take it to another level. Against this backdrop, it is to be welcomed that the G20 have 
placed the shadow banking system high up on their agenda. 
Structuring the market – OTC derivatives and CCPs 
4 
The third issue I would like to raise relates to the structure of the market – the derivatives 
market,  to  be  precise.  Trading  in  derivatives  certainly  has  the  potential  to  cause  massive 
losses, to disrupt markets and to threaten financial stability. 
But  it  is  not  just  during  trading  that  financial  stability  can  be  put  at  risk;  it  can  also  be 
jeopardised at the back office level when transactions are cleared and settled. And this might 
pose a problem for all market participants, be they part of the banking system or the shadow 
banking system. 
The  G20’s  decision  to  require  OTC  derivatives  to  be  cleared  centrally  was  an  important 
cornerstone in regulating OTC derivatives markets. 
Central counterparties, or CCPs in short, are able to mitigate systemic risk and act as risk 
buffers in global financial markets. This appears particularly striking when we consider two 
sources  of  potentially  huge  losses:  first,  extremely  one-sided  derivatives  positions  and, 
second,  the  high  degree  of  opacity  surrounding  the  interconnectedness  of  global  financial 
players. In this regard, CCPs will help to better solve another problem I already mentioned: 
the too-big-to-fail issue. 
However,  CCPs  themselves  are  becoming  more  systemically  important.  This  harbours 
potential  side  effects  which  need  to  be  monitored.  Furthermore,  effective  recovery  and 
resolution  regimes  need  to  be  in  place  for  CCPs.  To  shield  taxpayers’  money,  potential 
losses  have  to  be  distributed  among  clearing  participants,  which  are  often  globally  active 
banks. This gives rise to potential contagion risks and domino effects. Therefore, a careful 
calibration of recovery and resolution regimes is crucial. 
Against  this  backdrop,  international  coordination  is  again  essential.  The  regulation  of OTC 
derivatives markets should be the same across all jurisdictions – in spirit, in wording, and in 
terms of its outcome. This would allow the corresponding national regulators to defer to each 
other’s rules when cross-border transactions occur. Otherwise, regulatory arbitrage, market 
fragmentation and liquidity disruptions might be the consequences. 
Some  progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  year  towards  resolving  these  cross-border 
issues. One example is the ‘Path Forward’, a joint statement which was agreed upon by the 
European Commission and the CFTC in July 2013. This statement is a necessary foundation 
for  further  cooperation.  However,  some  cross-border  matters  are  still  unresolved  and 
urgently need to be addressed. 
Major  differences  between  the  US  and  EU  regulations  can  be  found,  for  instance,  in  the 
methods used to compute the initial margin coverage of CCPs. And they can also be found in 
the scope of reporting requirements to trade repositories. Let us take a brief look at these two 
examples. 
First, the rules used for calculating the minimum initial margins of CCPs differ between the 
US  and  the  EU.  Generally  speaking,  CCPs  ask  for  initial  margins  in  order  to  hedge  the 
market risk of a derivatives position during the liquidation period in case a clearing member 
defaults. Under the existing EU and US regulation, risk managers at CCPs have to take into 
account  different  minimum  liquidation  periods  and  confidence  intervals  when  calculating 
adequate  initial  margins.  As  a  result,  the  initial  margins  requested  by  CCPs  may  vary 
considerably,  depending  on  the  location  of  a  CCP.  This  might  eventually  drive  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
towards those CCPs with less strict initial margin calculation requirements. To prevent such 
regulatory arbitrage from happening, it might make sense to agree on consistent and strict 
international standards in detail and thus reduce national leeway. 
Second, the mandatory reporting rules differ significantly in terms of timing and scope. In the 
US,  only  CFTC-registered  “Swap  Dealers”  and  “Major  Swap  Participants”  are  required  to 
report their transactions to trade repositories in real time. In the EU, meanwhile, transactions 
have  to  be  reported  by  the  end  of  the  next  business  day  by  both  contracting  parties. 
Furthermore,  exchange  traded  derivatives,  market  prices  and  collateral  levels  have  to  be 
reported in the EU, but not in the US. It remains to be seen whether these differing reporting 
rules can be recognised as being equivalent. And – more importantly – it also remains to be 
seen  how  a  meaningful  and  accurate  global  aggregation  of  trade  repository  data  can  be 
brought about. 
Laying the groundwork – cooperation and harmonisation 
5 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  briefly  discussed  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  the  shadow 
banking  system  and  the  market  for  OTC  derivatives.  Each  of  these  issues  highlights  the 
need  for  international  cooperation.  If  we  do  not  coordinate  our  approaches  towards 
regulation  we  will  create  a  fragmented  financial  system.  A  financial  system  with  vast 
opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and ample sources of systemic risk. 
Against  this  backdrop,  recent  regulatory  initiatives  in  the  US  worry  me.  They  seem  to 
contradict  the  need for  international  cooperation.  A  “Balkanisation”  of the  regulatory  space 
represents  a  genuine  risk,  and  any  regulatory  decision  should  be  taken  with  that 
consideration in mind – in Europe as well as in the United States. 
And  this  not  only  applies  to  regulation  itself  but  also  to  the  foundation  on  which  it  rests. 
Regulating and supervising financial institutions requires information. And to satisfy the need 
for  international  cooperation,  this  information  has  to  be  internationally  comparable. 
Unfortunately, this is not always the case. 
It  is  not  an  entirely  new  insight  that  differences  in  accounting  standards  across  countries 
hamper  the  international  comparability  of  balance  sheet  data.  This  in  turn  can  potentially 
impede financial regulation. A prominent example is the treatment of derivatives and how this 
affects balance sheet ratios which are subject to regulation. 
Derivatives  netting  rules  under  US  GAAP  allow  US  financial  institutions  to  net  their 
derivatives  positions  to  a  large  extent.  In  Europe,  the  IFRS  accounting  rules  are  far  more 
restrictive  in  this  regard.  That  is  why  derivatives  volumes  appear  to  be  much  larger  at 
European banks than at their US counterparts. 
Going  one  step  further,  regulatory  balance  sheet  ratios  which  relate  to  total  assets  differ 
between US and European banks. The leverage ratios of US banks, for instance, generally 
appear much lower than those of European banks. Hence, in this particular case, distortions 
arising from different accounting rules may make it easier for banks in the US to comply with 
a given regulatory leverage ratio than for their European peers. 
So far, standard setters have only agreed to harmonise the information disclosed in the notes 
of  financial  statements.  Nevertheless,  global  harmonisation  of  accounting  standards  is 
needed in order to create a regulatory level playing field and avoid regulatory arbitrage. In my 
view,  this  is  certainly  something  that  has  to  be  moved  higher  up  the  agenda  of  global 
regulation. 
Conclusion 
6 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  made  good  progress  in  adjusting  financial  regulation. 
Nevertheless, we have not reached our destination; regulatory reform has to continue. I have 
discussed  some  of  the  outstanding  issues  in  my  speech:  too-big-to-fail  banks,  shadow 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banking,  OTC  derivatives  and  accounting  standards.  I  also  highlighted  the  need  for 
international cooperation. 
At the beginning of my speech I cited a passage from the G20’s Washington declaration. Let 
me close my speech by quoting another passage: “Our financial markets are global in scope, 
therefore,  intensified  international  cooperation  among  regulators  and  strengthening  of 
international standards, where necessary, and their consistent implementation is necessary 
to  protect  against  adverse  cross-border,  regional  and  global  developments  affecting 
international financial stability.” 
That is the spirit, ladies and gentlemen. To reach our destination – a stable financial system 
– we will have to walk together. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
