  Jon Cunliffe: The role of the leverage ratio and the need to monitor risks 
outside the regulated banking sector 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the Financial Reporting Council annual conference, London, 17 July 2014. 
 In early 2009, around the height of the financial crisis, the market valued the combined equity 
of  the  major  UK  banks  at  less  than  2%  of  their  total  assets.  In  other  words,  the  market 
thought these banks were, on average, over 50 times levered. Measured by their regulatory 
returns, average leverage was “only” 30 times or so. And on a risk weighted basis, the banks 
had 6.7% common equity capital – well above the 2% minimum. Tier 1 capital ratios were 
almost 9%. 
This  was  of  course  the  time  when  fear  in  the  market  was  at  its  peak.  The  message  was 
crystal clear. When it mattered most, the market did not at all believe the published numbers 
for bank capital adequacy. And the market reacted accordingly bringing funding markets to a 
halt. 
This episode tells us two things. The first is that financial reporting matters. It matters at all 
times.  But  it  matters  most  in  times  of  stress.  As  an  illustration  here,  I  can  recall  heated 
discussions between European leaders about mark to market rules and about the transfer of 
assets  from  banks’  trading  to  their  banking  books  in  2008  and  2009.  I  could  never  have 
imagined,  pre-crisis, that  Europe’s  Presidents  and  Prime  Ministers  could  ever  argue  about 
such arcane issues. But arcane or otherwise, they were crucial to the survival of a number of 
systemic banks. 
The  second  thing  this  episode  shows  us  is  that,  when  push  came  to  shove,  how  little 
confidence  investors  had  in  the  regulatory  capital  framework.  In  essence,  markets 
discounted all types of capital except pure equity. And as they distrusted the risk-weighted 
numbers, they wrote down the value of the equity to reach the numbers I mentioned earlier. 
And, in many cases, they were right to do so. Capital adequacy turned out to be an illusion. 
I  want  to  talk  today  about  the  action  taken  and  the  steps  we  still  need  to  take  to  avoid  a 
similar illusion in the future. How should we measure and set bank capital requirements? And 
in particular, the role the leverage ratio can play. 
And I also want to talk a little about the non-bank financial sector. Because as we strengthen 
the capital and liquidity rules for banks, there is a danger that the risks migrate from banks 
into  the  non-bank  sector.  And  here  I  want  to  touch  upon  another  pre-crisis  illusion  –  the 
liquidity illusion. 
Reforming the capital framework 
The market in 2008 and 2009 clearly did not believe either the numbers for bank capital or 
for  bank  assets.  Capital  was  not  just  pure  equity.  Tier  1  capital  also  included  so-called 
“hybrid” capital instruments – debt that was supposed to convert to equity to absorb losses. 
However, the ability of these instruments to absorb losses proved to be illusory. 
Moreover equity itself was distorted by factors such as the inclusion of deferred tax assets – 
tax credits that could only be realised when a profit was made and so of no use in a crisis. 
And banks were slow to recognise losses – leading capital ratios to be overstated. 
And, as to banks’ assets, the major banks were, by 2008, using their own models to assess 
the riskiness of much of their portfolios for regulatory capital purposes. From their origin in 
the  late  1980s,  the  international  capital  adequacy  standards  –  the  Basel  standards  –  had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  focussed on risk adjusted capital. This was based on the sensible principle that the level of a 
bank’s capital should reflect the riskiness of its assets. 
As the Basel standards developed, banks were increasingly, first for the trading book in 1996 
and later, through the move to Basel 2 in 2008, for the banking book as well, able to use their 
own  modelling  to  assess  the  riskiness  of  their  assets.  Again,  there  was  logic  in  this.  It 
replicated for regulatory purposes the way the banks themselves managed risks. 
However, as the banking system became more and more levered, as banks’ balance sheets 
grew and grew, the measured riskiness of banks’ assets – measured in large part by their 
own models – declined. 
In the ten years to 2007, the size of banks’ balance sheets in the UK had doubled relative to 
the size of the economy. 
But over the same 10 years, the average risk-weight for the assets of the major UK banks 
had fallen to almost 40% – down by around a fifth from its level a decade earlier. 
As  a  result,  the  increase  in  banks’  balance  sheets  was  not  matched  by  anything  like  a 
commensurate increase in capital. 
When the crisis struck, not only did a significant portion of the assets turn out to be far riskier 
than  estimated.  Market  confidence  in  the  risk-weighted  capital  adequacy  framework  as  a 
whole pretty much evaporated. 
We have taken steps, through the new international capital standard, “Basel 3”, to address 
the main failings in the risk-weighted framework. 
We  have  tightened  up  on  the  required  quality  of  regulatory  capital.  The  “hybrid”  debt 
instruments that  proved not  to  be  loss-absorbing  no  longer  count  as Tier  1  capital.  Efforts 
have been made to ensure losses are recognised at an earlier point. Material deferred tax 
assets are now deducted from the regulatory definition of capital. 
The minimum amount of common equity capital banks are now required to hold has been 
increased to 4.5% of their risk-weighted assets. 
And we have put in capital buffers. It is often too late to take recovery action when a firm 
drops below minimum standards. And because firms approaching the minimum often have to 
deleverage sharply which can have a very adverse impact on the real economy. 
So we have created incentives for firms to run with a substantial buffer of capital above the 
hard minimum. Where common equity capital is less than 7% of risk-weighted assets, firms 
now  face  restrictions  on  bonuses  and  dividends.  For  systemically  important  banks,  the 
required buffers are higher still. 
These buffers should give banks more room to use their capital to absorb losses rather than 
hitting the brakes on lending. 
On the other side of the equation, some action has been taken to tighten up the calculation of 
firms’ risk-weighted assets. And work is also underway to examine whether we can improve 
the  “standardised  approach”  to  risk-weighting  –  an  approach  in  which  banks  use  a  risk-
weight prescribed by the regulators. 
As  a  result,  the  amount  of  capital  in  the  system  has  increased  substantially.  Globally,  the 
large banks now hold some $500bn of additional equity capital. Major UK banks have raised 
their equity capital by £150bn. Their leverage has broadly halved. 
On average, the Major UK banks are now running with an end-point Basel 3 common equity 
capital  ratio  of  10%.  Roughly  speaking,  that  is  more  than  double  the  equivalent  pre-crisis 
ratio. 
However,  while  the  risk-weighted  approach  has  been  through  wholesale  reform,  it  still 
depends on mathematical models – and for the largest firms, their own models to determine 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  riskiness. So the risk-weighted approach is itself subject to what in the trade is called “model 
risk”. 
This may sound like some arcane technical curiosity. It is not. It is a fundamental weakness 
of the risk based approach. 
Mathematical modelling is a hugely useful tool. Models are probably the best way we have of 
forecasting what will happen. But in the end, a model – as the Bank of England economic 
forecasters will tell you with a wry smile – is only a crude and simplified representation of the 
real world. Models have to be built and calibrated on past experience. 
When  events  occur  that  have  no  clear  historical  precedent  –  such  as  large  falls  in  house 
prices across US states – models based on past data will struggle to accurately predict what 
may follow. 
In the early days of the crisis, an investment bank CFO is reported to have said, following 
hitherto  unprecedented  moves  in  market  prices:  “We  were  seeing  things  that  were 
25 standard deviation moves, several days in a row”. 
Well, a 25 standard deviation event would not be expected to occur more than once in the 
history of the universe let alone several days in a row – the lesson was that the models that 
the bank was using were simply wrong. 
And even if it is possible to model credit risk for, say, a bank’s mortgage book, it is much 
more  difficult  to  model  the  complex  and  often  obscure  relationships  between  parts  of  the 
financial sector – the interconnectedness – that give rise to risk in periods of stress. 
Moreover, allowing banks to use their own models to calculate the riskiness of their portfolio 
for regulatory capital requirements opens the door to the risk of gaming. 
Deliberately or otherwise, banks opt for less conservative modelling assumptions that lead to 
less onerous capital requirements. Though the supervisory model review process provides 
some  protection  against  this  risk,  in  practice,  it  can  be  difficult  to  keep  track  of  what  can 
amount to, for a large international bank, thousands of internal risk models. 
The underlying principle of the Basel 3 risk-weighted capital standards – that a bank’s capital 
should  take  account  of  the  riskiness  of  its  assets  –  remains  valid.  But  it  is  not  enough. 
Concerns about the vulnerability of risk-weights to “model risk” call for an alternative, simpler 
lens  for  measuring  bank  capital  adequacy  –  one  that  is  not  reliant  on  large  numbers  of 
models. 
This  is  the  rationale  behind  the  so-called  “leverage  ratio”  –  a  simple  unweighted  ratio  of 
bank’s equity to a measure of their total un-risk-weighted exposures. 
By itself, of course, such a measure would mean banks’ capital was insensitive to risk. For 
any given level of capital, it would encourage banks to load up on risky assets. 
But alongside the risk-based approach, as an alternative way of measuring capital adequacy, 
it guards against model risk. This in turn makes the overall capital adequacy framework more 
robust. 
The leverage ratio is often described as a “backstop” to the “frontstop” of the more complex 
risk-weighted  approach.  I  have  to  say  that  I  think  this  is  an  unhelpful  description.  The 
leverage ratio is not a “safety net” that one hopes or assumes will never be used. 
Rather,  bank  capital  adequacy  is  subject  to  different  types  of  risks.  It  needs  to  be  seen 
through  a  variety  of  lenses.  Measuring  bank  capital  in  relation  to  the  riskiness  of  assets 
guards  against  banks  not  taking  sufficient  account  of  asset  risk.  Using  a  leverage  ratio 
guards against the inescapable weaknesses in banks’ ability to model risk. 
Whether the leverage ratio or the risk weighted capital ratio bites on any individual bank will 
depend on what are the greatest risks facing that bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Work on an international standard for a leverage ratio is well advanced, though a standard 
will not be set before 2019. The Chancellor of the Exchequer announced last November that 
the  Bank  of  England’s  Financial  Policy  Committee  should  review  whether  a  leverage  ratio 
should be introduced in the UK before 2019. 
The Bank, accordingly, issued a consultation document last Friday on how a leverage ratio 
might work alongside the risk-weighted approach in the UK. 
We  have  made  a  great  deal  of  progress  in  reforming  the  capital  adequacy  framework  for 
banks. We have also made very real progress on the liquidity framework for banks, though I 
do not propose to go into that today. 
But  as  we  have  reinforced  regulatory  standards  for  the  regulated  banking  sector,  there  is 
considerable concern that we have simply moved the risks beyond the regulatory perimeter. 
In short, that bank-like activities, carrying bank-like risks are taking place without bank-like 
regulation and supervision. 
Many of these concerns find expression in the term “shadow banking”. 
I  think “shadow  banking”,  like  “backstops”  and  “frontstops”,  is  an  unhelpful  and  misleading 
description. To be clear, we want to see more diversity in the way credit is provided in the 
economy – more players in the banking sector and more non-bank market-based finance. 
Because  another  lesson  of  the  crisis  for  many  countries  was  that  the  risks  from  a  credit 
“banking monoculture” could be very serious – when banks were badly damaged, it led to a 
credit crunch that left the economy without other forms of credit intermediation. I suspect one 
of  the  reasons  the  US  recovered  more  quickly  from  the  crisis  was  because  it  had  greater 
diversity of credit channels in the economy. 
It is for this reason that the Bank is working with the ECB and others to encourage the revival 
of a robust, simple and transparent securitisation market in Europe. 
But – and this is an important “but” – it is important that bank-like activity does not migrate 
outside  of  the  regular  banking  system  in  an  uncontrolled  manner  that  presents  equally 
important systemic risks. 
The  Financial  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  has  the  statutory  responsibility  to  identify, 
assess, monitor and take action in relation to financial stability risk across the whole financial 
system, including the non-bank financial system. It has the power to make recommendations 
to the Treasury on what activities should be regulated, as well as more general powers in 
respect of information gathering. 
It is not a trivial job. In the UK, the non-bank financial sector is almost as large as the banking 
system, at around £5 trillion excluding derivatives. Nearly all of this represents assets under 
management, and within that the investment fund sector accounts for around one third and 
hedge funds a further 10–15%. 
Globally, the non-bank financial sector stands at more than US$70 trillion, roughly equivalent 
to global GDP. 
Within that, assets managed by investment funds and on behalf of non-bank financial clients 
like insurance groups and pension funds broadly doubled over the decade to 2012 to more 
than US$60 trillion, approaching 90% of global GDP. 
They are now equal to 70% of the commercial banking system. And management of these 
assets has become increasingly concentrated. Five firms now manage around US$13 trillion 
of assets, roughly one fifth of the total. 
It  is  not  surprising  that  this  has  drawn  the  attention  of  commentators  and  regulators 
worldwide. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There is nothing wrong with growing quickly. But when a part of the financial system grows 
quickly  to  90%  of global  GDP  and  much  of  its management  is  highly  concentrated, then I 
think it is right for the regulatory community to look hard at the systemic risks this might pose. 
That  is  why  the  issue  of  systemic  risks  arising  from  investment  and  hedge  funds  and  the 
firms  that  manage  them  are  being  looked  at  as  part  of  the  FSB’s  work  on  systemically 
important  financial  institutions.  In  January,  the  FSB  published  a  consultation  paper  on  its 
proposed methodology for identifying such firms in these sectors. Based on the consultation 
results, the FSB will report to the G20 Leaders Summit in Brisbane in November this year. 
We need to recognise, of course, that investment funds face – and pose – very different risks 
to banks. They typically manage pools of assets on behalf of investors who bear the ultimate 
investment  risk.  They  can  operate  with  some  leverage,  but  this  is  generally  subject  to 
restrictions. 
Asset managers act as agents to such funds, and make investment decisions on behalf of 
end investors that are consistent with their objectives and agreed mandates. 
However,  despite  their  generally  low-leverage,  agency  business  model,  investment  funds 
can pose risks to financial stability. They often offer investors same or next-day redemptions, 
despite holding assets for which secondary market liquidity can be uncertain. In this way, like 
banks, they can face liquidity risks. 
A concern from a financial stability standpoint is that heavy asset sales necessary in times of 
stress  to  meet  investor  redemptions  could  disrupt  systemically  important  asset  markets, 
particularly where a fund (or funds) has a concentrated market position. 
There  have,  so  far,  been  few  historical  examples  of  financial  instability  caused  by  funds 
experiencing distress. But we should be careful about drawing too much comfort from this. 
The scale of funds and the market environment are different now. 
For  example,  funds’  investments  in  emerging  market  assets  and  high-yield  bonds  have 
quadrupled over the past five years. It is unclear what volume of redemptions could be met 
quickly without causing disorder in these markets. A year ago, the so called “taper tantrum” 
was a pointer to what could happen. 
And  such  risks  may  have  become  greater  due  to  changes  in  the  market.  Concerns  have 
been  raised  by  some  in  the  industry  that  reforms  to  bank  capital  and  liquidity  regulation 
could, taken together, have potentially serious consequences for market liquidity. 
The regulatory community takes such concerns seriously and is looking closely at them. 
But we should not set as an objective a return to pre-crisis liquidity conditions. Liquidity risk 
premia  were  likely  too  low  before  the  crisis  because  liquidity  risk  was  under-priced.  And 
market-makers  were  permitted  to  fund  their  inventory  with  dangerously  high  levels  of 
leverage, funded at very short maturities and, needless to say, the risk-weights attached to 
this sort of activity were very low. 
As a result, dealers were, it is true, able to carry high levels of inventory and to accommodate 
easily shifts in the demand for market-making. But they were also vulnerable to falls in asset 
prices and tightening in wholesale markets conditions. When faced with severe stress, they 
were forced to withdraw from market-making altogether. 
In short, when conditions became really testing, market liquidity, like bank capital, proved to 
be an illusion. 
With  regulation  tighter,  it  may  well  be  harder  for  market-makers  to  absorb  inventory  when 
end  investors  wish  to  off-load  assets;  market  liquidity  may  start  to  fall  away  at  an  earlier 
point. The risk of another complete failure of market liquidity should be much reduced. But 
market participants will not always be able to sell what they want, where they want and when 
they want. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Investors need to recognize this change in market structure and adjust accordingly. 
In  this  respect  it  is  perhaps  worth  observing  that  it  is  currently  quite  puzzling  that,  when 
market participants seem to be worried about market liquidity and the impact of regulation on 
market making, liquidity risk premia seem to be so compressed. It does raise questions over 
whether liquidity risks have been properly priced. 
Central bankers are, of course, supposed to worry about new risks. But I would not want to 
leave you with the impression that nothing has improved in the financial stability world. 
I do think the reforms already made to the capital adequacy and liquidity frameworks have 
improved markedly the robustness of the system. 
A leverage ratio, if and when it is introduced in the UK alongside the risk-weighted approach, 
would  in  my  view  make  the  capital  adequacy  regime  for  the  banking  sector  appreciably 
stronger by guarding against model risk. 
And,  as  regards  the  non-bank  financial  sector,  what  some  would  classify  as  “shadow 
banking”  –  I  also  think  we  are  starting  to  see  some  positive  momentum  towards  the 
development of diversified credit channels in the UK and the EU – though there is a great 
way still to go. 
At the same time, the financial regulatory community is keeping a pretty close watch as to 
whether risks are migrating from the bank to non-bank sector and building up elsewhere. 
The  FPC  recently  made  its  first  analysis  and  assessment  of  risks  in  the  UK  outside  the 
regulated banking system. 
That assessment was made difficult by generally incomplete data in this area, which we are 
starting  to  correct.  But  it  concluded  that,  based  on  its  current  risk  assessment  and  policy 
initiatives underway internationally – including through the FSB work on shadow banking that 
is coming to completion this year – it did not currently see a case for recommending changes 
to the UK regulatory framework. 
I am afraid, for financial stability, that is as good as it gets. The financial sector evolves at a 
phenomenal speed. Risks can change and build very quickly. So the FPC will have to repeat 
its assessment of risks from the non-bank financial sector at least annually. 
In this area, as in the banking sector, it has to keep risk under close and regular review. And 
it has to be prepared to act. 
But  that,  of  course,  is  the  nature  of  preserving  financial  stability  and  preventing  a 
reoccurrence of the illusions I described earlier. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
