  Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 August 2014. 
 Today,  on  27  August  2014,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. After discussions on the recent economic and 
monetary developments in Albania, and their future course, the Supervisory Council of the 
Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.50%. The Supervisory 
Council  deems  that  the  current  monetary  conditions  are  adequate  to  ensure  the  return  of 
inflation to target in the medium term. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 After  falling  in  the  previous  three  months,  annual  inflation  picked  up  in  July,  standing  at 
1.8%.  As  in  the  previous  months,  annual  inflation  continued  to  be  determined  by  the 
performance  of  food  prices,  especially  seasonal  fresh  food.  Other  CPI  items  continued  to 
provide low and steady contribution to the increase of inflation. 
From the macroeconomic perspective, prices continue to be determined by low inflationary 
pressures, from both the demand and supply side. Below-potential economic growth and the 
negative  output  gap  exerted  contained  pressures  on  prices.  Imported  inflation  was  also 
moderate  and  downward,  due  to  low  inflation  in  our  trading  partners’  economies  and  the 
steady exchange rate. Inflation expectations remain low, and monetary expansion is in line 
with moderate price rises in the medium term. 
New data on the real sector analysed in the last meeting are scarce. Signals from indirect 
indicators corroborate our previous assessments for a faster economic growth in the second 
quarter, in line with forecasts for a gradual recovery throughout the year. During the period, 
the positive performance of private domestic demand was driven by the more favourable 
lending standards and the enhanced confidence of both businesses and households. At the 
same time, foreign demand for goods and services continued to grow, but the increase in 
imports due to the recovery of consumption and investment has weakened its contribution to 
economic  growth.  Exports  and  imports  of  goods  continued  to  grow,  by  9.2%  and  10.4%, 
respectively, in annual terms during the second quarter, and the trade deficit by 11.6%. 
As expected, the consolidating fiscal policy conditioned the drop of public sector demand 
and its direct negative contribution to aggregate demand. The consolidation path of the fiscal 
policy  is  reflected  in  both  revenue  increase  and  spending  decrease.  The  performance  of 
revenues was affected by the rapid increase of tax revenues, due to the effects of the new 
fiscal package and improvement of the tax system administration. On the other hand, budget 
expenditure fell both for current and capital expenditure categories. Budget deficit stood at 
around ALL 22.2 billion, at the end of the first six months, or around 54% lower than in the 
previous  year.  The  Bank  of  Albania  supports  the  measures  for  fiscal  consolidation,  as  the 
pursuit  of  such  a  policy  contributes  to  maintaining  long-term  stability  and  reducing  risk 
premiums  in  the  economy.  However,  the  Bank  of  Albania  reiterates  the  need  for  a  more 
uniform  distribution  of  expenditure  and  budget  deficit  throughout  the  year,  in  order  to 
minimise the volatility in economic activity and financial markets. 
Financial  markets  were  relatively  calm  during  July  and  August.  The  activity  in  these 
markets  ranged  in  normal  levels,  characterised  by  contained  liquidity  pressures  and  small 
fluctuations in interest rates. In response to the stimulating monetary policy, markets tended 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  to reduce interest rates, although the intensity of reduction varied across market segments. 
Thus,  a  faster  reduction  of  interest  rates  has  been  noted  in  the  interbank  market,  on  lek 
deposits  and  in  the  short-term  segment  of  government  securities.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
interest  rates  on  long-term  government  securities  and  on  credit  fell  at  a  slower  pace.  The 
latter continue to reflect high risk premiums, related both to the burdened balance sheet of 
Albanian businesses and the conservative lending policies adopted by banking groups. 
Annual growth of money supply was 0.9% in June. Its performance reflected the low need for 
funds by the public sector and the decline in credit to the private sector. The annual decline 
of credit to the private sector was 1.8% in June, maintaining the same pace as in May. In the 
meantime, in monthly terms, credit grew for the second consecutive month, albeit at lower 
levels than the historical ones. Signals for eased standards of supply and growth of credit 
demand,  obtained  from  the  surveys  conducted  in  the  second  quarter,  seem  to  materialise 
slowly in improved credit performance. As we have previously stated, the tightened lending 
standards  and  the  sluggish  credit  performance  is  a  regional  and  European  phenomenon, 
which may be solved only in the presence of the steady growth of the domestic economy and 
the complete calming down of European financial markets. The Bank of Albania deems that 
the  country’s  reality  and  perspective  require  adopting  more  realistic  strategies  for  a  faster 
crediting  to  the  economy.  While  upholding  the  financial  stability,  we  have  taken  and  will 
continue to take the right measures to support this process. On the other hand, sound and 
improving  balance  sheets  of  the  Albanian  banking  system  guarantee  the  funding  of  the 
Albanian economy in the medium and long term. 
*** 
At the end of the discussions, the Supervisory Council concluded that the incoming available 
information  does  not  change  our  baseline  projections.  The  economy  is  expected  to  grow 
gradually  during  the  year,  driven  primarily  by  domestic  demand.  Reflecting  the  monetary 
stimulus, the heightened confidence in the economy, as well as the expected improvement of 
financial  conditions  and  business  climate  in  our  trading  partners,  the  Albanian  economy  is 
expected  to  converge  gradually  towards  its  potential  in  the  medium  term.  Closure  of  the 
negative output gap will lead to the gradual return of inflation to target. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 2.50%. Based on available information and in line with our projections, 
the Supervisory Council deems that the stable return of inflation to target will require keeping 
the  key  interest  rate  at  low  levels  for  some  quarters  ahead.  Risks  surrounding  the  basic 
projections remain on the downside, closely related to the stability of sources of growth, as 
well  as  economic  and  financial  developments  in  trading  partners.  The  Bank  of  Albania 
remains  vigilant  and  is  monitoring  the  situation;  it  is  totally  committed  and  has  all  the 
necessary instruments for meeting the inflation target. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
