  Jens Weidmann: Speech at the German-British Chamber of Industry & 
Commerce Annual Dinner 2014 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  to  the  German-
British Chamber of Commerce Annual Dinner 2014, London, 23 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ambassador, Sir Nigel, Dr Fouquet, ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for the invitation and 
for the opportunity to speak here today. 
According to geological surveys, around 7,000 years ago, Europe looked quite different from 
what it looks today. A single land mass, known as Doggerland, stretched from Britain’s east 
coast to the Netherlands and the western coasts of Germany and Denmark. Britain was not 
an island, but an integral part of continental Europe. 
The end of the Ice Age seems to have ushered in the end of Doggerland as well. The melting 
ice caused the level of the North Sea to rise until the land mass was fully submerged. 
An alternative hypothesis suggests that Britain’s separation from Europe came with a bang 
rather than a whimper. A huge tsunami triggered by a sub-marine landslide off the coast of 
Norway, the Storegga Slide, is supposed to have cut Britain off from mainland Europe. 
Whatever the ultimate cause, the fact remains that today Britain and Europe are still divided 
geographically  by  the  English  Channel.  But  human  enterprise  has  managed  to  bridge  this 
divide, or rather, it has tunnelled it. And just as the resolve of the Eurotunnel engineers has 
shortened  the  journey  from  Paris  to  London  to  less  than  two  and  a  half  hours,  so  the 
dedication of post-war statesmen has overcome the political and economic divisions that had 
troubled Europe for so long. 
Almost to the day a hundred years ago, Kaiser Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary declared 
war on the kingdom of Serbia. That marked the start of the first of two global wars, which 
together cost the unfathomable number of more than 80 million lives. 
In  1946,  only  a  year  after  the  atrocities  originated  by  Germany  had  ended,  a  European 
statesman proposed a remedy to this tragedy of Europe. The proposal was as simple as it 
was bold – to “re-create the European family”. 
What sounded utopian at the time is reality today. Rarely has a political  vision been more 
vindicated than the one laid out by Winston Churchill in Zurich in 1946. Europe has finally 
found the peace that had eluded it for so long. 
The  recent  tensions  in  the  Ukraine,  however,  serve  as  a  strong  reminder  that  we  should 
never take peace for granted, not in Europe, nor anywhere else in the world. 
The benefits of European integration 
2. 
Churchill’s  vision  was  a  political  one.  But  the  re-creation  of  the  European  family  was 
advanced largely by the integration of national economies. And while peace and stability are 
rightly the most celebrated achievements of the European Union, economic integration has 
produced remarkable results in its own right. 
Economic integration raises welfare through two mechanisms: first, via increased trade, and 
second,  via  increased  competition,  which  in  turn  strengthens  innovation  and  productivity. 
Judging  economic  developments  against  a  non-existing  counterfactual,  in  this  case  non-
integration, is obviously  a tricky business. But the studies available show that the effect is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sizeable in any case. Europe is wealthier because of economic integration, with estimates of 
the output boost ranging from 5 % to more than 25 %.1, 2, 3  
And it seems that Britain, too, has gained. Half of its trade is with the European Union, and 
studies  suggest  that  EU  membership  has  boosted  Britain’s  trade  in  goods  with  other  EU 
countries by more than 50 %.4 The Center for Economic Performance5 at the London School 
of Economics has found that the immediate benefits of increased trade amount to 1¼% to 
3 %  of  GDP.  And  if  the  longer-term  effects  of  strengthened  competition  and  increased 
productivity are taken into account as well, EU membership is estimated to have provided a 
boost of up to 10.5 % of GDP. 
But as much as the UK gains from being part of the EU, so the EU gains from having the UK 
as a member. The EU is stronger today because of Britain’s contribution to it. The European 
economy is more open and dynamic as a result of Britain’s commitment to open and flexible 
markets – a position very much in tune with the Bundesbank’s, I might add. 
EU’s and EMU’s unfinished business 
3. 
And that commitment to open and flexible markets holds the promise of even bigger returns. 
A lot of the potential inherent in our most important European catalyst for growth, the single 
market, is still untapped. 
The single market has been very successful in facilitating trade in goods. Hence, competition 
in this area is intense. The mark-ups that firms are able to charge in addition to their costs 
due to market power are low and are comparable to those in the US, for example. When it 
comes  to  services,  however,  the  picture  looks  different.  Mark-ups  are  higher,  on  average, 
than  in  the  US.  It  is  probably  safe  to  say  that  the  Services  Directive  has  fallen  short  of 
expectations. 
Britain,  in  particular,  with  its  advanced  services  sector  stands  to gain from  dismantling  the 
existing  barriers  to  cross-border  trade  in  services.  Originally,  the  Services  Directive  was 
designed  to  establish  the  so-called  “country  of  origin  principle”  that  already  holds  for  EU 
trade in goods. This principle states that a services firm should no longer be hampered by 
regulation in the import country if it has already complied with the national regulations in its 
home country. 
However, the final version of the directive did not include this principle. Simulations carried 
out by the Netherlands’ Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis6 show that by dropping it, the 
expected  output  boost  as  a  result  of  the  Services  Directive  is  reduced  by  some  40 %. 
Completing  the  single  market  for  services  therefore  holds  the  promise  of  substantial 
economic gains. 
                                                
1  Badinger, H. (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review 
of World Economics 141, 50–78.  
2  Nauro  F.  Campos,  Fabrizio  Coricelli,  Luigi  Moretti  (2014),  “Economic  Growth  and  Political  Integration: 
Estimating  the  Benefits  from  Membership  in  the  European  Union  Using  the  Synthetic  Counterfactuals 
Method”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 8162. 
3  Boltho,  Andrea  and  Eichengreen,  Barry  (2008),  “The  Economic  Impact  of  European  Integration”,  CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. 6820. 
4  John  Springford,  Simon  Tilford,  Philip Whyte  (2014),  “The  economic  consequences  of  leaving  the  EU”,  the 
final report of the CER Commission on the UK and the EU single market. 
5  G. Ottaviano et. al. (2014) The Costs and Benefits of Leaving the EU, CEP Discussion Paper. 
6  Roland de Bruijn, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour (2008), “Economic benefits of an Integrated European Market for 
Services”, Journal of Policy Modeling 30, 301–319. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The same goes for bringing the single market into line with the digital age. When it comes to 
the digital economy, fragmentations still abound, in particular with regard to legal issues such 
as  privacy  and  data  protection,  content  and  copyright,  liability  of  online  intermediaries, 
e-payments  and  electronic  contracts.  The  EU  is  still  comprised  of  28  individual  digital 
markets rather than one single digital market. 
This  is  holding  back  innovation,  growth  and,  ultimately,  jobs.  Studies7  suggest  that 
establishing a harmonised and well-regulated digital single market holds the same potential 
as  the  introduction  of  the  original  one,  raising  GDP  by  as  much  as  4 %.  In  Germany,  for 
example, this could imply an additional 427,000 jobs over the period 2015 to 2020. 
Some steps have already been taken towards a true single market for the digital economy, 
but  we  are  not there  yet.  Continuing to  the  end  would  provide  a  major boost  to  European 
competitiveness. It is therefore more than worth the effort. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the field of policy which has seen the most far-reaching centralisation 
in Europe is clearly the field of monetary policy, at least for the 18 member states of the euro 
area. But the mutualisation of monetary policy is not only an issue for the euro-area member 
states but for all European countries. Our extensive trade links imply that developments in 
the  monetary  union  reverberate  in  the  non-euro-area  countries  as  well,  as  the  crisis  has 
shown very forcefully. 
The euro area teams up one common monetary policy with 18 national fiscal and economic 
policies.  This  approach reflects  a  currency  area  composed  of  sovereign  member  states. It 
grants member states sufficient leeway to preserve their diversity, that is, to establish their 
own business models or to tailor institutions and policies to their own national preferences. At 
the  same  time,  it  leaves  the  consequences  of  such  decisions  with  the  respective  member 
state  and  consistently  rules  out  the  option  of  mutualising  public  debt  with  other  euro-area 
states. 
But  this  set-up  also  creates  vulnerabilities.  First,  a  combination  of  this kind gives  rise  to  a 
deficit bias, as it allows the costs of fiscal imprudence to be shifted partially on to others. An 
unsustainable  fiscal  situation  in  one  country  has  repercussions  for  monetary  union  as  a 
whole. You can compare this to what economists call the “tragedy of the commons”. Just as 
overfishing creates negative externalities for other countries, excessive public debt harms the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Excessive  debt  in  one  member  state  drives  up  longer-term  interest 
rates for all euro-area countries. 
And second, each member state issues debt in a currency it cannot create. Hence, a high 
level  of  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  ensure  that  solvency  concerns  do  not  spiral  out  of 
control. 
For monetary policymakers focussing on maintaining price stability, the question of how to 
safeguard public finance is thus of particular concern. As so often, Mervyn King put it most 
aptly when he said that “Central banks are often accused of being obsessed with inflation. 
This is untrue. If they are obsessed with anything, it is with fiscal policy.” 
The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw the risk of unsustainable public finances for 
a stability-oriented monetary policy. That is why precautions were put in place to safeguard 
sound public finances and to protect monetary policy. They took the form of a prohibition of 
monetary  financing  of  government  deficits,  the  no  bail-out  clause  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. 
But  the  precautions  taken  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  to  ensure  sound  public  finances  have 
proven insufficient. The rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have been broken numerous 
times in the past, not least by Germany, France and Italy. And the no bail-out clause failed to 
                                                
7  Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  exert the expected disciplining effect on governments in the run-up to the crisis, as markets 
did  not  account  enough  for  different  macroeconomic  developments  in  the  countries 
concerned.  In  this  way,  the  markets  might  have  anticipated  that  concerns  about  financial 
stability  would  deter  the  euro-area  member  states  from  rigorously  applying  the  no  bail-out 
clause. And that is precisely what happened when the crisis broke out. 
The rescue packages provided to countries which lost market access did help to calm the 
situation. But at the same time, they have thrown the balance between liability and control 
out of kilter. While spending decisions essentially remain a national prerogative, liability has 
become  partially  mutualised.  The  tendency  to  incur  further  debt  is  thus  strengthened,  not 
weakened. 
What is to be done? Some necessary steps have already been taken. The fiscal rules have 
been stiffened, with greater automaticity in the Stability and Growth Pact and the introduction 
of the fiscal compact. 
However, as we have learned in the crisis, rules have to be applied to fulfil their purpose, and 
they can only be the first line of defence. They need to be complemented by a functioning 
market discipline to counter the temptation not to observe the rules. Sound public finances 
will only be achieved if we rigorously set about restoring the balance between liability and 
control. 
One  way  to  do  this  would  be  a  genuine  fiscal  union.  If  common  debt  were  matched  by 
common control, incentives could be aligned. But this would require a quantum leap in terms 
of  ceding  sovereignty  to  the  European  level,  a  leap  neither  the  electorates  nor  the 
governments of the member states seem willing to take. 
If a true fiscal union that requires extensive changes to the European Treaties is not on the 
cards, then we need to take the second avenue. That implies taking concrete steps towards 
restoring  a  balance  of  individual  control  and  individual  responsibility  within  the  existing 
Maastricht framework. A framework which is in line with what Margaret Thatcher once said in 
her famous speech at the College of Europe – that improving the workings of the European 
Union does not automatically require stronger centralisation. 
Individual 
the 
consequences  of  their  decisions.  This  means  that  it  is  primarily  up  to  the  respective 
government and its citizens to come up with the revenue needed to repay public debt. This 
holds, in particular, since high levels of public debt often go hand in hand with substantial 
private assets. 
But it also implies that the risk of non-repayment ultimately lies with the investors, since they 
are the ones who reap the return when things go well. And if the fiscal limit has been reached 
for  real,  public  debt  needs  to  be  restructured  without  posing  a  systemic  threat  to  financial 
stability. 
The  introduction  of  collective  action  clauses  into  sovereign  bonds  was  a  first  step  in  that 
direction.  But  more  steps  are  needed.  The  Bundesbank  has  put  forward  a  proposal  for 
sovereign  bonds  to  include  an  automatic  maturity  extension  of  three  years  in  case  a 
sovereign  accesses  the  European  rescue  mechanisms.  This  automatic  maturity  extension 
would  allow  the  sovereign  in  question  to  tackle  its  fiscal  challenges  while  preventing 
investors from bolting. The amount of official financial support would be reduced, and time 
could be bought to figure out if the problem is one of temporary illiquidity or insolvency. 
But ultimately, all these questions boil down to the quip of American economist Allan Meltzer: 
“Capitalism  without  failure  is  like  religion  without  sin.  It  doesn’t  work.”  For  the  above 
proposals to work, we need to make sure that sovereign insolvencies are possible without 
bringing down the financial system as a whole. 
that  sovereigns,  banks  and 
investors  bear 
responsibility 
requires 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To that end, doing away with the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in banks’ balance 
sheets is of the essence. The current regulatory framework permits preferential treatment of 
sovereign exposures in various forms. 
While bank exposures to a single counterparty are limited, in principle, to a quarter of their 
eligible  capital,  exposures  to  sovereigns  are  exempted  from  that  large  exposures  regime. 
Thus, many European banks hold bonds from one sovereign only – their home country. But a 
high level of undiversified sovereign exposure is what makes sovereign default a potentially 
systemic event. For this reason, the large exposures regime needs to apply to sovereigns as 
well. 
Moreover,  sovereign  exposures  are  privileged  by  low  or  zero  capital  requirements.  An 
adequate  risk-weighting  of  sovereign  bonds  would  make  banks  more  resilient  if  the  fiscal 
position of the respective sovereign were to deteriorate. And it would bring spreads more into 
line with the underlying risk, thus sending a disciplining signal to the sovereign. 
If  additional  capital  requirements  for  European  banks  were  imposed  to  cover  sovereign 
exposures, the additional capital would be rather small on aggregate – albeit with substantial 
differences between banks. The inclusion of sovereigns in the large exposures regime might 
lead to more substantial repercussions. But these would be manageable if introduced over a 
transition period – which without question has to be granted. 
Obviously, establishing a sustainable fiscal framework and consolidating public budgets are 
only two of the numerous challenges facing the euro area in becoming more stable. Equally 
important 
restoration  of 
competitiveness in those countries that have fallen behind and through a further reduction of 
indebtedness in the private sector there. 
Declining  unit  labour  costs  and  reduced  current  account  deficits  due  also  to  increasing 
exports  show  that  we  have  already  come  a  long  way  in  regaining  competitiveness.  At  the 
same  time  private  debt  declined  somewhat,  reducing  the  burden  on  households’  and 
enterprises’ shoulders a bit. 
But as in a marathon, the last kilometres are always the hardest. What remains especially 
challenging  is  the  intended  increase  of  growth  potential.  Additional  structural  reforms  are 
certainly needed – and, by the way, not only in the countries under stress but in Germany, 
too. 
By the same token, further work has to be done with respect to financial regulation, and that 
applies  not  only  to  the  euro  area,  but  globally.  Some  key  objectives  in  this  respect  are: 
spelling out international standards on the loss-absorbing capacity of systemically important 
banks,  achieving  cross-border  acceptance  of  a  bank  resolution,  peer  reviewing  measures 
regulating the shadow banking sector and establishing saver derivative markets. 
to  correct  macroeconomic 
imbalances  – 
through 
the 
is 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me come to a close. 
Britain and continental Europe may not be connected by Doggerland anymore, but there are 
myriad other ties that bind us together to form a common Union. 
And it is precisely because our views sometimes differ that we are, together, more than the 
sum of our parts. If Britain continues to make its voice heard in Europe, I am confident that 
the Union will become more outward-looking, open and prosperous for that. 
To those who think Europe would be better off giving in to the temptation of insularity, let me 
say it in the words of the Beatles: “You say goodbye, and I say hello.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
