  Deepali Pant Joshi: Protecting customers – safeguarding stability 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Tenth  M.R.Pai  Memorial  Awards,  held  at 
Indian  Merchants’  Chamber,  Mumbai, 
16 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
At the outset, I thank the All India Bank Depositors’ Association for inviting me to this – their 
Annual event. I am deeply honoured to be here today for the 10th M R Pai Memorial Awards. 
It is with a sense of great humility that I deliver this address. 
The memorial is a fitting tribute to Shri M R Pai, a crusader of Customer Rights. A Karma 
Yogi  in  the  spirit  of  the  Bhagwad  Geeta,  one  who  worked  selflessly  and  without  hope  of 
reward, guided by the Gita’s maxim “Karmaniva Dhikaraste ma phaleshu kadachanam.” The 
Indian edition of Reader’s Digest featured him on the cover of their October 1995 issue under 
the title “M R Pai – Champion of the Consumer.” I had occasion to meet him when he visited 
the RBI colony at Prabhadevi in 1996. He founded the All India Bank Depositors’ Association 
(AIBDA) which he steered for decades. 
He published the book “Depositors’ Rights and Customer Service in Banks” Under the aegis 
of  the  AIBDA.  This  award,  I  understand,  was  instituted  in  the  year  2004  posthumously  to 
honour Shri M R Pai by Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank. It is apposite that the 
All India Bank Depositors’ Association has chosen to celebrate his life and commemorate his 
memory by conferring this award. I am delighted that this year’s award has been claimed in 
the  same  spirit  by  another  relentless  crusader  of  Customer  rights,  Ms  Sucheta  Dalal.  I 
understand  the  process  of  selection  is  rigorous  and  I  extend  warm  congratulations  to 
Ms Dalal  and  Debasis  Basu  whose  articles  in  Business  Standard  are  often  on  consumer 
protection  and  Money  life  Foundation,  on  securing  this  prestigious  award  which  is  a 
recognition of their untiring efforts in the cause of the customer. 
RBI mission 
The  RBI’s  mission  of  safeguarding  stability  and  protecting  customers  places  Customer 
Protection at the core of our work. We are mandated in terms of Section 35A of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, which explicates the Power of the Reserve Bank to give directions –  
(1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that –  
(a) in the 178 [public interest]; or 
(aa) in the interest of banking policy; or 
(b) to prevent the affairs of any banking company being conducted in a manner 
detrimental  to  the  interests  of  the  depositors  or  in  a  manner  prejudicial  to  the 
interests of the banking company; or 
(c) to secure the proper management of any banking company generally, 
it  is  necessary  to  issue  directions  to  banking  companies  generally  or  to  any 
banking company in particular, it may, from time to time, issue such directions as 
it  deems  fit,  and  the  banking  companies  or  the  banking  company,  as  the  case 
may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
This  mandate  clearly  places  the  protection  of  customers’  best  interests  at  the  heart  of  the 
Central Bank’s work. The issue of services rendered by banks to the common person dates 
back to the R.K. Talwar Committee (1975) and the Goiporia Committee (1990). The Report 
of  the  first  Narasimham  Committee  (1991)  ushered  in  the  financial  sector  reforms,  which 
were expected to spur competition in the banking sector through deregulation and entry of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  new private sector banks, which, in turn, was to ensure high quality customer service to meet 
the long pending aspirations of the bank customers. There is an increasing realisation, that 
competitive  forces  alone,  the  invisible  hand  of  the  market  do  not  ensure  fair  treatment  or 
adequate quality in service to the customers at a justifiable price, in a transparent manner. 
Regulatory intervention and oversight are necessary. 
In his seminal and oft quoted report, Dr. Rajan stated “Consumer Protection is important. Not 
every household is fully cognizant of the transactions they enter into. While the line between 
excessive paternalism and appropriate individual responsibility is always hard to draw in a 
developing  country  like  ours,  it  may  well  veer  to  a  little  more  paternalism  in  interactions 
between  financial  firms  and  less  sophisticated  households.  It  is  important  to  improve 
Consumer literacy, the transparency of products that are sold and in certain cases limit sales 
of certain products in certain jurisdictions especially if these have prudential consequences.” 
Reserve Bank of India as the Central Bank of the country, is proactively engaged in initiatives 
to further Customer Service. First, by building a strong banking system which enables access 
to financial services for all. Second, to enhance and expand the reach of the Banking system 
both  in  quantitative  and  qualitative  terms.  RBI,  through  micro  level  supervisory  processes 
and  macro  level  assessments,  institutes  measures  to  increase  Customer  Awareness  to 
ensure Customer Protection. As Central Bankers we are not alone, Customer protection is 
now recognized as an important function – indeed the Dharma of the Central Bank. The post-
crisis  financial  sector  is  driven  by  a  new  paradigm  of  customer  awareness,  empowerment 
and  protection.  The  financial  crisis  brought  into  sharp  focus  the  importance  of  customer 
protection which underpins the stability of the financial system. Rapid increase in the use of 
financial services underscores the need for strengthening measures to protect the customers 
of financial services. We have the largest and most widespread network of Banks in Asia. 
Banks dominate the financial landscape of our country. The Financial intermediation process 
offers  efficiency,  rewards  and  optimal  returns  but  also  poses  risks  to  the  customers  and 
hence  the  active  regulatory  initiatives  on  customer  protection  have  gained  traction  and 
salience. 
Let us remember the Mahatma who enunciated that “A customer is the most important visitor 
on  our  premises.  He  is  not  dependent  on  us.  We  are  dependent  on  him.  He  is  not  an 
interruption of our work. He is the purpose of it. He is not an outsider of our business. He is 
part of it. We are not doing him a favour by serving him. He is doing us a favour by giving us 
the opportunity to do so.” 
Greater and repeated reminders of this adage are needed. Firstly, there is a granularity of 
customers due to differences in age, income, education and awareness. Secondly, we must 
recognize  that  there  is  an  asymmetry  of  bargaining  power  between  the  financial  service 
providers and the customer. By and large, customers are always the weaker parties in need 
of  protection  and  the  vulnerable  and  poor  customers  in  even  greater  need  of  protection, 
i.e.,LIC  of  India  vs.  Consumer  Education  &  Research  Centre  (AIR  1995  SC-1811).  While 
considering  the  validity  of  LIC  policy  under  table  58  restricted  only  to  salaried  persons  in 
government/semi-government or reputed commercial firms, the Supreme Court observed: 
“It  is  well  settled  law  that  if  a  contract  or  a  clause  in  a  contract  is  found 
unreasonable  or  unfair  or  irrational,  one  must  look  to  the  relative  bargaining 
power of the contracting parties.” 
Thirdly  customers  need  to  be  enabled  to  navigate  the  financial  markets  to  make  choices 
appropriate to their needs. There should be an ingrained Suitability clause in all the products 
sold  by  the  financial  service  providers.  Customers  must  be  able  to  understand  financial 
products  appropriate  to their  needs  and  income  streams  and  should  be  equipped  with  the 
knowledge  and  skills  to  assess  measure  and  mitigate  risks  and  make  informed  decisions 
about the suitability of financial products to their situation. 
As  Dr.  Chakrabarty  put  it,  let  me  raise  a  fundamental  issue  here.  The  financial  services 
sector is essentially driven by commercial intent and the actions of service providers and the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  issue of consumer protection should be taken care of by competitive market forces. Why are 
we then discussing the issue of financial consumer protection? It is because the barriers to 
entry  for  the  service  providers  in  the  financial  sector,  especially  banking,  are  quite  stiff.  In 
view of regulatory restrictions on number of market players, consumers are forced to receive 
services from a limited set of service providers. Furthermore, in view of rampant information, 
illiteracy,  the  self-regulating  market  behaviour  does  not  work  especially  for  the  poor  and 
vulnerable and hence, ensuring consumer protection becomes a regulatory obligation. 
There  is  no  acme  of  customer  service.  The  present  experience  of  the  customer  must  be 
better  than  the  previous  experience  of  the  customer.  The  bank’s  front  line  staff  should  be 
sympathetic  and  empathetic.  They  must  be  adequately  sensitized,  trained  and  given 
exposure to interact with customers and deal with the issues raised by them. RBI customer 
service initiatives include the setting up of the Banking Ombudsman recognizing the need for 
an Ombudsman in larger public interest as a public good. 
To encourage a formal channel of communication between the customers and the bank at 
the branch level, banks were advised to take necessary steps for strengthening the branch 
level customer service committees with greater involvement of customers. Senior citizens are 
important, they are to be included in the branch level customer service committees. These 
should be as a mechanism of effective corporate governance. 
In  the  mid-term  review  of  the  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  2003–2004  a  decade  back,  to 
review  the  level  of  public  service  provided  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  banks,  to  evolve 
appropriate  incentives  to  facilitate  change  on  an  ongoing  basis,  the  Committee  on 
Procedures and Performance Audit of Public Services was set up under DG, Dr. Tarapore. 
The Committee stressed the need to (i) benchmark the current level of service, (ii) review the 
progress periodically, (iii) enhance the timeliness and quality, (iv) rationalize the processes 
taking  into  account  technological  developments,  and  (v)  suggest  appropriate  incentives  to 
facilitate change on an ongoing basis. This led to the setting up of the Banking Codes and 
Standards Board of India. Annual Consolidation of all RBI instructions on Customer Service 
through  a  Master  Circular  on  Customer  Service  in  Banks,  amendment  of  the  Banking 
Ombudsmen  Scheme  in  the  year  2006  to  make  the  alternate  redress  mechanism  more 
efficient and easily accessible, our recent customer protection measures include: 
Simplification of KYC Measures – Measures taken for simplification: 
1. 
 
  2. 
 
Single document for proof of identity and proof of address 
There  is  now  no  requirement  of  submitting  two  separate  documents  for  proof  of 
identity and proof of address. If the officially valid document submitted for opening a 
bank account has both identity and address of the person, then there is no need for 
submitting any other documentary proof. 
Apart from passport, driving licence, voters’ ID card and PAN card, Aadhaar letter 
issued  by  UIDAI  and  Job  Card  issued  by  NREGA  signed  by  a  State Government 
official are also accepted as proof of identity/address. These are known as officially 
valid documents (OVDs) for KYC purpose. 
To  further  ease  the  KYC  process,  the  information  containing  personal  details  like 
name, address, age, gender, etc., and photographs made available from UIDAI as a 
result of e-KYC process can also be treated as an “Officially Valid Document”. 
No separate proof of address is required for current address 
If  the  current  address  is  different  from  the  address  mentioned  on  the  Proof  of 
Address submitted by the customer, a simple declaration by her/him about her/his 
current address would be sufficient. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 3. 
 
   Relaxation regarding officially valid documents (OVDs) for low risk customers 
If a person does not have any of the “officially valid documents” mentioned above, 
but  if  is  categorised  as  “low  risk”  by  the  banks,  then  she/he  can  open  a  bank 
account by submitting any one of the following documents: 
(a)  identity  card  with  applicant’s  Photograph  issued  by  Central/State  Government 
Departments,  Statutory/Regulatory  Authorities,  Public  Sector  Undertakings, 
Scheduled Commercial Banks, and Public Financial Institutions; 
(b) letter issued by a gazetted officer, with a duly attested photograph of the person. 
Periodic updation of KYC 
4. 
Time intervals for periodic updation of KYC for existing low/medium and high risk customers 
have  been  increased  from  5/2  years  to  10/8/2  years,  respectively.  The  requirement  of 
positive confirmation at the interval of 3/2 years in respect of low/medium risk customers has 
been withdrawn. 
5. 
 
  Other relaxations 
(i)  In  case  a  customer  categorised  as  low  risk  is  unable  to  submit  the  KYC 
documents due to genuine reasons, she/he may submit the same to the bank within 
a period of six months from the date of opening account. 
(ii)  Third  party  verification  of  KYC  is  allowed,  which  allows  banks/FIs  to  rely  on 
KYC/CDD carried out by other banks/FIs. Once the proposed Central KYC Registry 
is  in  place,  customers  would  be  saved  from  the  trouble  of  submitting  the  KYC 
documents  to  each  and  every  bank/FI  whenever  she/he  opens  an  account  with  a 
different bank/FI. 
(iii)  KYC  verification  of all  the  members  of  SHG  is  not required  while  opening  the 
savings  bank  account  of  the  SHG  and  KYC  verification  of  only  the  officials  would 
suffice. No separate KYC verification is needed at the time of credit linking the SHG. 
Home loans-levy of foreclosure charges/pre-payment penalty 
In accordance with the recommendations of The Committee on Customer Service in Banks 
(Chairman : M. Damodaran), the foreclosure charges / prepayment penalty on home loans 
has been removed. This is expected to lead to reduction in discrimination between existing 
and  new  borrowers.  Though  many  banks  had  in  the  recent  past  voluntarily  abolished  pre-
payment penalties on floating rate home loans, there is a need to ensure uniformity across 
the banking system, banks will not be permitted to charge foreclosure charges / pre-payment 
penalties on home loans on floating interest rate basis, with immediate effect. In case of Dual 
Rate/Special  Rate  home  loans,  the  provisions  of  our  above  mentioned  circular  will  be 
applicable from the date the rate of interest on the loan becomes floating. 
Recommendations of Damodaran Committee on Customer Service in Banks – 
uniformity in intersol charges 
As “Intersol” charges are charges levied by the bank to cover the cost of extending services 
to  customers  by  using  the  CBS  /  Internet  /  Intranet  platform,  the  cost  should  be  branch  / 
customer agnostic in-principle. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  bank  customers  are  treated  fairly  and  reasonably  without  any 
discrimination  and  in  a  transparent  manner  at  all  branches  of  banks  /  service  delivery 
locations  under  CBS  environment,  banks  are  expected  to  follow  a  uniform,  fair  and 
transparent pricing policy and not discriminate between their customers at home branch and 
non-home branches. Accordingly, if a particular service is provided free at home branch the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  same should be available free at non home branches also. There should be no discrimination 
as regards intersol charges between similar transactions done by customers at home branch 
and those done at non-home branches. 
• Charges levied by banks for sending SMS alerts 
Banks have put in place a system of SMS alerts so as to help customers in fraud mitigation 
and  have  been  levying  uniform  service  charges  to  various  categories  of  customers. 
Considering the technology available with banks and the telecom service providers, it should 
be  possible  for  banks  to  charge  customers  based  on  actual  usage  of  SMS  alerts. 
Accordingly,  with  effect from  November  26,  2013,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  reasonableness 
and equity in the charges levied by banks for sending SMS alerts to customers, banks are 
advised to leverage the technology available with them and the telecom service providers to 
ensure that such charges are levied on all customers on actual usage basis. 
• Levy of penal charges on non-maintenance of minimum balance in inoperative 
accounts 
Consequent upon First Bi-monthly Policy Statement 2014–15 announced on April 1, 2014, 
banks  have  been  advised  that  with  effect  from  May  6,  2014,  banks  cannot  levy  penal 
charges for non-maintenance of minimum balances in any inoperative account. 
• Levy of foreclosure charges/prepayment penalty on floating rate term loans 
Consequent upon First Bi-monthly Policy Statement 2014–15 announced on April 1, 2014, 
with  effect  from  May  7,  2014,  banks  are  not  permitted  to  charge  foreclosure  charges/ 
prepayment penalties on floating rate term loans sanctioned to individual borrowers. 
• Premature repayment of term/fixed deposits with “either or survivor” or “former or 
survivor” mandate 
In case of term deposits with “either or survivor” or “former or survivor” mandate, banks are 
permitted to allow premature withdrawal of the deposit by the surviving joint depositor on the 
death of the other, only if, there is a joint mandate from the joint depositors to this effect. The 
joint deposit holders may be permitted to give the mandate either at the time of placing fixed 
deposit or anytime subsequently during the term / tenure of the deposit. If such a mandate is 
obtained,  banks  can  allow  premature  withdrawal  of  term  /  fixed  deposits  by  the  surviving 
depositor  without  seeking  the  concurrence  of  the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased  joint  deposit 
holder. Premature withdrawal would not attract any penal charge. 
• Acknowledgement of from 15-G/15-H 
With a view to protect interest of the depositors and for rendering better customer service, 
banks were advised in May 2013 to give an acknowledgment at the time of receipt of Form 
15-G/15-H. This will help in building a system of accountability and customers will not be put 
to inconvenience due to any omission on part of the banks. 
• Settlement of claims of deceased depositor – simplification of procedure – placing of 
claim forms on bank’s website 
Banks have been advised once again that they should strictly comply  with the instructions 
contained  in  our  Circular  dated  June  9,  2005  for  hassle-free  settlement  of  claims  on  the 
death of a depositor. Further, with a view to facilitate timely settlement of claims on the death 
of a depositor, banks have been advised to provide claim forms for settlement of claims of 
the  deceased  accounts,  to  any  person/s  who  is/are  approaching  the  bank/branches  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  forms. Claim forms may also be put on the bank’s website prominently so that claimants of 
the  deceased  depositor  can  access  and  download  the  forms  without  having  to  visit  the 
concerned bank/branch for obtaining such forms for filing claim with the bank. 
• Unclaimed deposits/inoperative accounts in banks – treatment of certain savings 
bank accounts opened for credit of scholarship amounts and credit of direct benefit 
transfer under government schemes 
State and Central Governments had expressed difficulties in crediting cheques/Direct Benefit 
Transfer/Electronic  Benefit  Transfer/Scholarships  for  students,  etc.  into  accounts/accounts 
with  zero  balance  opened  for  the  beneficiaries  under  various  Central/State  Government 
schemes but had been classified as dormant/inoperative due to non-operation of the account 
for over two years. Keeping this in view, banks have been advised to allot a different “product 
code”  in  their  CBS  to  all  such  accounts  opened  by  banks  so  that  the  stipulation  of 
inoperative/dormant account due to non-operation does not apply while crediting proceeds. 
In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  fraud  in  such  accounts,  while  allowing  operations  in  these 
accounts,  due  diligence should  be  exercised  by  ensuring the genuineness  of transactions, 
verification of signature and identity, etc. However, banks have to ensure that the customer is 
not inconvenienced in any manner. 
• Timely issue of TDS Certificate to customers 
It had come to our notice that some banks were not providing TDS Certificate in Form 16A to 
their  customers  in  time,  causing  inconvenience  to  customers  in  filing  income-tax  returns 
timely.  With  a  view  to  protecting  the  interest  of  the  depositors  and  for  rendering  better 
customer service, banks have been advised to provide TDS Certificate in Form 16A, to their 
customers in respect of whom they (banks) have deducted tax at source. Banks have been 
advised to put in place systems that will enable them to provide Form 16A to the customers 
within the time-frame prescribed under the Income Tax Rules. 
• Guidelines for the purpose of opening/operating bank accounts of persons with 
autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation, mental illness and mental disabilities 
• Need for bank branches/ATMs to be made accessible to persons with disabilities 
Banks  are  advised  to  take  necessary  steps  to  provide  all  existing  ATMs/future  ATMs  with 
ramps. Care may also be taken to make arrangements in such a way that the height of ATMs 
does not create an impediment in their use by wheelchair users. However, in cases where it 
is  impracticable  to  provide  such  ramp  facilities,  whether  permanently  fixed  to  earth  or 
otherwise, this requirement may be dispensed with, for reasons recorded and displayed in 
branches or ATMs concerned. Banks are also advised to take appropriate steps, including 
providing of ramps at the entrance of bank branches, wherever feasible, so that the persons 
with  disabilities/wheel  chair  users  can  enter  bank  branches  and  conduct  business  without 
difficulty. Banks have been advised to report the progress made in this regard periodically to 
their respective Customer Service Committee of the Board and ensure compliance. 
• Talking ATMs with Braille keypads to facilitate use by persons with visual 
impairment 
Banks should make all new ATMs installed from July 1, 2014 as talking ATMs with Braille 
keypads.  Banks  should  lay  down  a  road  map  for  converting  all  existing  ATMs  as  talking 
ATMs  with  Braille  keypads  and  the  same  may  be  reviewed  from  time  to  time  by  the 
Customer Service Committee of the Board. Magnifying glasses should also be provided in all 
bank branches for the use of persons with low vision, wherever they require for carrying out 
banking  transactions  with  ease.  The  branches  should  display  at  a  prominent  place  notice 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  about  the  availability  of  magnifying  glasses  and  other  facilities  available  for  persons  with 
disabilities. 
Dr.  Rajan  recently  stated  “we  have  to  reach  everyone,  however  remote  or  small,  with 
financial services. It means financial literacy and consumer protection. I should emphasize 
the need for banks like the ones represented in this room to move beyond simply opening 
bank accounts to ensuring that poor customers are confident and comfortable enough to use 
them.” Banks would do well to heed this sage counsel. 
Customers should be able to understand not only simple financial products but also complex 
financial products. They should be equipped with the knowledge and skills to assess risks 
and make informed decisions about the suitability of financial products to their own individual 
situation.  A  well-functioning  customer  protection  regime  provides  effective  safeguards  for 
retail financial services customers while empowering customers to exercise their legal rights 
and fulfill their legal obligations. 
Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) 
2. 
The Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) was introduced in the year 1995 by the RBI for 
expeditious  and  inexpensive  redress  of  customers’  grievances  against  deficiencies  in 
banking services. Due to increasing levels of awareness and expectations of the customers 
of banks Gunnar Myrdal in Asian Drama terms “the revolution of rising expectations” and the 
range of new products offered by these banks. The BOS has undergone extensive changes. 
The administration of the Scheme vests with RBI since 2006. In May 2007, the BOS 2006 
was  amended  to  enable  appeal  against  Award,  to  the  Appellate  Authority,  the  Deputy 
Governor in charge of the department. The BOS 2006 was amended extending its ambit to 
deficiencies  in  internet  banking  and  non-adherence  to  the  BCSBI  Codes  and  the  Code  of 
Bank’s commitment to Customers. 
Though  the  necessary  institutional  arrangement  for  establishing  standards  and  codes  for 
banking services and grievance redress are in place, these rules need objective, timely and 
fair implementation. The Suitability clause, if implemented in letter and spirit by Banks will 
enable  them  to  understand  the  specific  expectations  of  diverse  customer  groups  and  to 
devise products, pricing and delivery strategies that are in alignment with these. Consumer 
issues  in  the  new  economic  order  are  even  more  pressing  the  urgency  of  Customer 
Protection post-crisis in the developed countries and the concerns on consumer protection of 
the developing countries have led the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
to formulate “Principles on Consumer Protection”. 
The presence of a credible and effective regulatory regime acts as a source of confidence 
and  comfort  in  the  financial  system  and  is  a  safeguard  of  financial  stability.  This  helps  in 
attracting more participants to the marketplace, thereby making the financial system inclusive 
and  efficient.  The  experience  from  the  global  financial  crisis  is  that  self-regulation,  often, 
does not work. The presence of a strong, intrusive and hands-on regulator / supervisor gives 
the  confidence  that  markets  will  operate  as  per  sound  principles  and  would  be  free  from 
unfair and unethical practices. This trust forms the basis of functioning of the entire financial 
system and any dent in this trust can have a significant destabilizing influence. As Governor 
Reddy expressed and I quote, “Banking is a trust-based relationship and the banking licence 
from the regulator  provides  an  assurance  of  trust to the  public  at  large.  To the  banks, the 
banking licence provides the privilege of accepting uncollateralised deposits from the public. 
However, the acts of stealth banking, negative option marketing, misleading advertisements, 
information gathering from customers for cross selling of products and services, and tie-up 
arrangements  are  inconsistent  with  the  concept  of  a  trust-based  relationship.  The  lack  of 
transparency, coupled with the difficulty of consumers in identifying key information from the 
large volume of material and communication in fine print, leads to an information asymmetry, 
which renders the banker-customer relationship one of unequals.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Retention of customers: 
3. 
All banks offer similar products (i) Accept Deposits (ii) Provide credit (iii) provide payments 
and remittance services (iv) foreign exchange facilities (v) provide financial instruments. In 
the  process,  banks  extend  services  to  their  customers.  Sadly,  the  friendly  neighbourhood 
Banker  is  disappearing  as  is  the  feet  on  street,  ear  to  the  ground  salesman,  the  distance 
between banks and customers is increasing. This is not a good thing. Branch Manager who 
was a friend, may not be aware of the number of customers of the branch, frontline staff may 
be ignorant of features of the varied products on offer. Technology emerged as the backbone 
of banking operations, revolutionizing service delivery through new platforms and channels. 
These developments created greater challenges for the customer in terms of service quality, 
non-human interface, unsolicited marketing of products, ever-increasing fine-prints etc. all of 
these disagreeable compounded due to lack of awareness of the average customer. Hence, 
knowing their customers and understanding their own product offerings must be the starting 
point  of  the  Banks’  customer  protection  framework.  As  all  banks  broadly  have  the  same 
products, it is only better customer service which sets one Bank apart from another. 
The cost of Customer acquisition is 8–10 times greater than of retention of current customer. 
Broadly, customer expectations while dealing with banks are a) professionalism, quick and 
efficient service b) transparent, fair and non-discriminatory dealings c) clear communication 
about charges/costs d) safety of their deposits in the account and e) To be listened to with 
courtesy and respect. 
Putting in place a formal customer retention framework would be a smart move. 
Twin Peak approach to customer protection 
The twin-peak approach focuses on customer protection. It distinguishes two agencies, one 
which  focusses  on  Prudential  Regulation  and  the  other  on  Market  Conduct/Customer 
Protection.  Though  the  structure  varies,  the  underlying  thesis  is  to  strengthen  customer 
protection and ensure Financial Stability. 
Right to fair treatment is the most important right of Customers. 
TCF principles 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      
Helping  customers  fully  understand  the  features,  benefits,  costs  and  risks 
associated with the financial products and services they buy/avail 
Minimizing the sale of inappropriate financial products/render undesirable financial 
services  by  encouraging  best  practices  before,  during  and  after  sale  of 
products/rendering services 
Transparent and non-discriminatory pricing of products and services .The concept of 
Treating Customers Fairly needs to underpin the business model. 
Consumer protection – The RBI’s charter of customer rights 
Let me quote Dr. Rajan on the FSLRC at the SBI oration. Dr. Rajan succinctly explained, in 
laying out the need for consumer protection, raising the issue of whether products sold are 
suitable for the target customer, and putting the onus on the financial institution to determine 
suitability, the report has forced regulators to review their consumer protection frameworks. 
We at the RBI are indeed engaged in such an exercise, informed by the valuable guidelines 
in the FSLRC report. Reserve Bank of India, as announced in its first Bi-Monthly Monetary 
Policy in April 2014 evolved a draft Charter of Customer Rights after extensive consultations 
with all stakeholders, studying global best practices and domestic experience. 
The Charter of Customer Rights is simple and comprises five critical rights viz., a) Right to 
Fair  Treatment,  b)  Right  to  Transparency,  Fair  and  Honest  Dealing,  c)  Right  to  Suitability, 
d) Right  to  Privacy  and  e)  Right  to  Grievance  Redress  and  Compensation  Right  to  Fair 
Treatment 
I will not say more on this as the draft is in public domain as part of the consultative process 
for comment. “From the principle of “caveat emptor”, Latin for “buyer beware”, we have to 
move to the principle “caveat Venditor”, Latin for “seller beware.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  The  current  system  of  regulations  that  govern  sale  of  financial  products  and  services  is 
based on caveat emptor as a doctrine. The caveat emptor principle has led to fundamental 
flaws  in  the  customer  protection  architecture  and  has  created  large  welfare  losses  for 
customers.  Let  me  explain  further,  caveat  venditor  principle  is  a  counter  to  caveat  emptor 
and suggests that seller (banks) can also be deceived in a market transaction. This forces 
the  seller  to  take  responsibility  for  the  product  and  discourages  the  seller  from  selling  the 
products of inferior quality, “Caveat Venditor” vests the burden of effort of proving that the 
shortcoming deficiency of service was absent on the seller of the product. We have to reach 
everyone with Financial services as per the Prime Minister’s vision of the Jan DhanYojana 
and extend the highest degree of Consumer protection to all users of financial services but 
very specially, for the vulnerable poor. Profit is certainly essential and not an ugly word at all. 
Banks  can  and  do  charge  for  their  services  but  we  must  again  stress  the  need  for 
reasonableness  of  service  charges  while  accepting  the  need  for  profit  margins  and 
profitability of Banks. Market based returns over inflation must be offered to Customers. 
There is a pressing need to move to a customer protection regime where the provider is held 
accountable for the service sold to the buyer, by ascertaining that the products sold or the 
advice given was suitable for the buyer considering her needs and current financial situation, 
that is, the customer must have a “right to suitability”. Once the rights are enshrined in the 
Charter  of  Customer  Rights,  it  will  be  mandatory  for  all  banks  to  adhere  to  them.  The 
framework  governing  customer  protection  should  consist  of  fairness,  transparency  of  rules 
and  conditions,  suitability  of  products  that  matches  customer  needs,  ability  to  repay, 
existence of a grievance redress process, clear specifications of liability if things go wrong, 
simplicity of the product and duty to inform about changes in the product. 
Customer  protection  is  very  important  both  for  all  those  of  us  who  are  literate  and 
enlightened customers in this room and even more for those who are not in this room – the 
poor, the uneducated and the illiterate customers. With the increasing complexity of Banking 
and the growing chasm of the dangerous digital, this acquires even greater salience. The All 
India  Bank  Depositors’  Association,  Money  Life  Consumer  Activists,  Complainants, 
Customer vigilantes all play a significant role in providing valuable inputs to RBI in furthering 
our initiatives in the area of Customer Protection. 
What  we  need  are  collaboration,  commitment,  credible  action  and  concrete  deliverables. 
Governor Rajan’s Five Pillar financial sector blueprint will chart the direction of development 
of our financial system in years to come. Pillar Four places a high priority on the Consumer 
Protection  agenda.  Among  the  areas  of  policy  focus  are  the  development  of  cost  efficient 
delivery  channels  as  Payment  Banks  and  Small  Banks  that  will  enhance  the  outreach  of 
financial services, expand the range of products and services to meet the distinct financial 
needs  of  the  underserved  and  strengthen  the  institutional  arrangements  to  enhance  the 
capacity  of  providers  of  such  financial  services.  Equally  important  will  be  the  attention 
accorded to financial consumer education and protection in which the standards of consumer 
care  are  high  and  consumers  have  choices  and  are confident  about  making their financial 
decisions.  The customer  Charter  of  rights  will  go  some  way  in  enhancing financial  literacy 
and  financial  capability  of  consumers  to  make  well  informed  and  responsible  financial 
decisions  and  thus  participate  meaningfully  and  effectively  in  the  financial  system.  5C’s 
Framework to support our mission to safeguard stability and protect consumers: 
Customer– is at the heart of the Central Bank’s focus and must be the core of the Bank’s 
focus too; 
Confidence– working to help consumers have confidence in financial services, products and 
regulation; 
Compliance– monitoring and enforcing compliance with consumer protection rules; 
Challenge–  being  prepared  to  challenge  firms  and  ourselves  to  get  a  better  outcome  for 
customers; in case of doubt, the customer is always right and 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Culture– promoting a consumer-focussed approach to the provision of financial services. 
This  talk  is  titled  Protecting  Customers  Safeguarding  Stability  as  the  two  are  inalienable. 
There  has  to  be  a  synergy  between  financial  inclusion,  financial  literacy  and  customer 
protection  for  sustainable  financial  stability.  Appropriately,  the  All  India  Bank  Depositors’ 
Association has selected Money Life Foundation for this year’s award for their zealous efforts 
and hard work in the area Customer Protection. Inclusion, Economic Growth and Stability – 
these  are  the  watch  words  of  the  Central  Bank.  The  macro  economic  framework  and 
financial  sector  development  necessitate  financial  deepening  and  a  robust  framework  of 
Customer Protection for stability. We are at an inflection point. We have gone some way, yet 
much needs to be done in this area. The crusader’s work in the area of Customer Protection 
is never done, the bar of necessity must be raised higher. 
Thank  you  for  a  patient  hearing!  And  again  thanks  to  All  India  Depositors’  Association  for 
having me here today. 
References 
1. 
One Hundred Small Steps, Report of the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms. 
Raghuram Rajan Planning Commission Government of India. 
Finance and Opportunity in India –Address by Dr Raghuram Rajan at the twentieth 
Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture on August 11, 2014. 
Dr. Y V Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India speech on the occasion of release 
of  the  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  Customers  at  the  RBI,  Mumbai  on  July  1, 
2006. 
Report of the Committee on Comprehensive Financial services for small businesses 
and low Income households, Nachiket Mor, RBI 2013. 
Dr  KC  Chakrabarty  RBI  Banque  de  France  Seminar  on  Customer  Engagement 
College of Agricultural Banking Pune March 22, 2013. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
