  Daniel Mminele: Recent major developments in global and domestic 
markets 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Financial Markets Department’s Annual Cocktail Function, Pretoria, 24 June 2014. 
 Good evening, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to the Financial Markets Department’s Annual 
Cocktail function. As has become tradition for this event, we would like to take stock of the 
major  developments  in  global  and  domestic  financial  markets  over  the  past  year,  before 
updating  you  on  matters  relating  to  the  Financial  Markets  Department  and  initiatives 
undertaken over the past year. Tonight we will adopt a different approach, namely that I will 
cover the first section, and then hand over to Leon Myburgh, Head of the Financial Markets 
Department, to update you on departmental activities. 
Given recent releases of the Monetary Policy Review, the Quarterly Bulletin and speeches, I 
shall not comment in any detail on recent economic developments. 
Re-pricing of risks in international and local financial markets 
Those of you who were able to attend our function last year will recall that the assessment at 
the time was that of increasing confidence about the gradual “healing” of the global economy 
and  financial  system,  and  the  reduction  in  “tail  risks”  that  had  unsettled  markets  for  the 
previous two years. These improvements were at the time largely attributable to the drastic 
policy actions undertaken on an on-going basis by the world’s major central banks. Yet at the 
same time, it was already becoming evident that there was a build-up of risks, and that the 
impact  on  financial  markets  of  the  timing,  as  well  as  the  pace,  of  the  eventual  and 
unavoidable reversal of these extraordinary measures, could be substantial. 
Looking  back  over  the  past  twelve  months,  these  factors  became  the  dominant  drivers  of 
market movements, as was anticipated at the time. The gradual improvement in the major 
economies that was expected a year ago has continued, by and large, to materialise. Global 
economic growth has picked up, albeit unevenly. The underlying strength of the recovery has 
been confirmed in the United States, the Euro zone has emerged from recession, and there 
are indications that a prolonged period of deflation could be ending in Japan. The extent of 
the slowdown in emerging market economies appears to have been one of the main surprise 
developments  over  the  last  year  as  emerging  markets  were  not  spared  the  negative 
consequences  of  global  risk  realignment  while  expectations  of  lesser  liquidity  provision  by 
the  US  Federal  Reserve  led  to  increasing  differentiation  by  investors  across  emerging-
market assets. As you know, currencies and bonds of those countries experiencing relatively 
wide current account deficits, sluggish economic expansion and inflationary pressures under-
performed  assets  of  emerging  markets  who  performed  better  on  these  metrics.  Concerns 
about  a  deceleration  in  Chinese  economic  growth  also  affected  financial  assets  in 
commodity-exporting countries, like South Africa, which had benefitted from China’s surging 
industrial demand in earlier years. 
While  the  global  economic  recovery  remains  broadly  on  track,  high  levels  of  uncertainty, 
vulnerabilities  and  fragilities  remain,  and  the  global  growth  outlook  continues  to  harbour 
downside risks, as the first quarter of 2014 has shown. 
As  indicated  above,  global  financial  markets  developments  have  been  mainly  driven  by 
changing  expectations  around  asset  purchase  tapering  by  the  Fed  and  the  eventual 
normalisation in US policy rates. Consequently, the latter part of 2013 saw long-term bond 
yields increase in all major developed and emerging economies, and yield curves steepened 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  as investors required a higher “term premium” across a broad range of fixed-income assets, 
while  currencies  of  emerging  market  countries  at  times  adjusted  abruptly  and  sharply, 
leading to a general tightening of financing conditions. 
More recently we have observed an easing of financing conditions, based on expectations 
that  monetary  policy  in  the  US  will  only  adjust  gradually.  These  developments  are 
underpinned  by  improved  communication  by  major  central  banks  and  further  policy 
measures such as the ones recently announced by the ECB. This has resulted in increased 
risk taking in financial markets and made carry trades more attractive given reduced levels of 
volatility. Emerging markets have been benefiting from these developments by way of better 
performance of their currencies and capital inflows. 
Unfortunately, the increased risk taking in financial markets is not matched by increased risk 
taking  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy.  In  addition  concerns  are  emerging  that  the 
extraordinarily  low  levels  of  volatility  (e.g.  the  VIX  index  is  below  pre-crisis  levels)  may  be 
providing  incentives  to  misprice  risk  and  thus  increase  financial  stability  risks.  A  further 
hazard  going  forward  is  the  increasing  divergence  in  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies, with the US Fed and the Bank of England moving towards lifting policy rates as 
part of normalisation, when on the other hand the ECB and Bank of Japan are expected to 
ease monetary conditions further. 
Thus  the  current  situation  in  global  financial  markets  does  not  allow  for  complacency  and 
requires policy makers and market participants to remain alert and carefully manage risks. 
Domestic markets within the global context 
Given  the  high  level  of  integration  with  international  financial  markets,  domestic  financial 
market developments reflected these developments, but were also significantly influenced by 
South Africa intrinsic factors. The under-performance of the rand relative to other emerging-
market  currencies  was  particularly  noticeable  over  three  specific  periods.  The  first  one 
occurred  in  May  and  June  2013,  when  the  Federal  Reserve  first  talked  of  “tapering”  its 
Quantitative Easing programme. The second one, in August 2013, coincided with a rise in 
risk aversion towards countries with large current-account deficits and deteriorating growth 
fundamentals. In the third phase, from mid-December to late January this year, in addition, 
investors appeared to be differentiating against countries that were seen to have been slow 
in their policy responses to tapering and normalisation risks. This period was characterised 
by  significant  net  sales  of  domestic  securities  held  by  non-resident  investors.  Of  course  it 
was not only global developments that influenced local markets, as on-going labour market 
disruptions  added  to  negative  sentiment,  underperformance  in  the  real  economy,  and  a 
worsening Balance of Payments situation. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  last  few  months  have  brought  some  signs  of  greater  stability  to 
both global and domestic financial markets: The rand has recovered since its late January 
trough; the yield on the R186 benchmark government bond has declined by 64 basis points; 
and the JSE‟s All-Share Index has climbed to new highs, gaining 10.4 per cent on a year-to-
date  basis,  and  net  non-resident  flows  into  the  local  currency  bond  market  stabilised  in 
February to April, before posting a net positive inflow of R10,6 billion in May and R8,2 billion 
for June (until 23 June). 
The levels of development, sophistication and depth of our financial markets have allowed 
South Africa to weather the turbulence of the past year reasonably well. However, we have 
to  acknowledge  that  there  are  still  some  risks  in  the  system,  even  if  they  are  difficult  to 
quantify.  Bond  yields  are  low  relative  to  the  averages  of  the  past  decade,  and  the  non-
resident share of government bond holdings remains very high by historical standards. Carry 
trade  activity,  which  seemed  to  support  the  domestic  bond  market  in  May,  is  by  its  own 
nature  a  temporary  phenomenon,  even  though  its  timing  is  unpredictable.  These  factors 
suggest that local yields could be vulnerable to risks of a renewed global bond selloff or a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sudden  spurt  in  risk  aversion.  By  several  metrics,  finally,  South  African  equities  appear 
increasingly expensive. 
But it is important to accept that the transition period on the path of policy normalisation will 
not always be smooth, and not to confuse the bouts of volatility that we have experienced, 
and which are likely to be with us for a while, with instability in our markets. 
Monetary policy challenges 
Monetary policy  in South Africa is currently facing an increasingly challenging situation, as 
the domestic economic growth outlook has deteriorated markedly even as inflation broke out 
of  its  target  range.  This  deterioration  is  heavily  influenced  by  supply  side  factors  and  final 
domestic  demand  has  slowed  in  recent  quarters,  indicating  a  continued  lack  of  demand-
driven  price  pressures  in  the  economy. This  suggests that the  current rate  cycle  need  not 
match the speed and magnitude of earlier cycles. As you are aware, we entered the present 
rate hiking cycle in January this year when the repo rate was increased by 50 basis points to 
5.5 per cent per annum in reaction to a deteriorating inflation profile, with the Bank’s inflation 
forecast  suggesting  that  the  upper  band  of  the  inflation  target  would  be  exceeded  for  an 
extended  period. The most  recent  CPI  print  at 6.6  per cent came out above  expectations, 
which followed recent consumer and producer price data releases signalling a growing pass-
through of previous rand depreciation to prices of durable and semi-durable goods. 
Such a risky environment continues to call for vigilance by the Monetary Policy Committee, to 
ensure  that  any  pass-through  of  previous  rand  depreciation  to  inflation  does  not  become 
permanent, that inflation expectations do not become unanchored from current levels, but in 
fact improve as they are uncomfortably close to the upper range of the inflation target. As 
indicated  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  the  current  rate  hiking  cycle  will  need  to  be 
responsive to incoming data and information in relation to, among other factors, exchange 
rate developments, food price developments, labour market data and Balance of Payments 
dynamics. But the fact remains that inflation is uncomfortably high, and that risks continue to 
be tilted to the upside, and that interest rates will have to normalise in due course. 
In  this  complex  environment  communicating  with  the  financial  markets,  which  provide  an 
important link in the transmission of monetary policy, becomes particularly important. Central 
banks  implement  monetary  policy  decisions  mainly  by  transacting  in  the financial  markets. 
While  the  past  year  has  clearly  shown  the  benefits  of  an  improved  level  of  central  bank 
communication  about  likely  future  action,  it  also  needs  to  be  recognised  that  while  policy 
makers in certain instances may have more data at their disposal than market participants, 
the information available is by no means perfect or conclusive enough to allow an analysis 
that  could  result  in  undertakings  or  even  promises  of  future  action.  It  is  also  important  for 
market  participants  to  realise  that  while  feedback  mechanisms  between  the  market  and 
policy  makers  are  invaluable,  central  banks  will  always  be  careful  not  to  allocate  a 
disproportionate weight to market information that may be embedded in market prices such 
as  FRA  rates,  and  will  always  cross-check  with  other  information  and  relevant  economic 
variables. While at times policy makers may feel the need to correct certain impressions that 
may exist and are influencing market prices at particular times, or give appropriate guidance, 
it should not be expected of policy makers to keep commenting directly on short-run market 
movements,  as  has  been  suggested  by  some.  „Running  commentary‟  in  this  regard  could 
unnecessarily add to volatility. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by once again thanking you for attending our event today, and also thank 
you for the cooperation we have enjoyed with you over the past year as both policy makers 
and  market  participants  were  navigating  choppy  waters  within  an  increasingly  complex 
environment. Our consultative structure in the form of the Financial Markets Liaison Group 
(FMLG) has matured, and I would like to thank many of you present today, who participate in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  foreign  exchange  manipulations.  We  will  continue 
the various sub-committees of the FMLG and provide us with valuable inputs to inform our 
work here at the central bank. The FMLG will continue to play an important role as we further 
develop our markets and ensure their efficiency, transparency and integrity. In this regard, 
we  also  continue  to  monitor global  investigations  around  reference  rates.  Furthermore,  we 
have noted with concern the recent reports from abroad regarding the investigations around 
alleged 
to  monitor  and  consult 
developments  in  this  regard  and  consult  when  necessary  to  ensure  that  practices  in  our 
financial  markets  continue  to  be  characterised  by  appropriate  levels  of  transparency  and 
integrity. 
Let  me  now  hand  over  to  Leon  Myburgh  to  share  with  you  initiatives  that  the  Financial 
Markets Department has been busy with. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
