Deepali Pant Joshi: Strategy adopted for financial inclusion 
Speech  by  Dr  Deepali  Pant  Joshi,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  a 
workshop, organised by the Government of Madhya Pradesh, New Delhi, 24 January 2014. 
 One of the major challenges for next decade or more to banks in the country is to capture the 
banking  business  of  over  50%  population  of  this  country  of  over  1.2  billion  people.  Poor 
people need to be provided with access to financial products at low transaction cost. They 
need  to  be  provided  assistance  on  the  demand  side  (in  terms  of  financial  awareness  and 
literacy)  as  well  as  on  the  supply  side  (in  the  form  of  availability  of  customized  financial 
products). Taking into account their seasonal inflow of income from agricultural operations, 
migration from one place to another seasonal and irregular work availability and income, the 
existing  financial  system  needs  to  be  designed  to  suit  their  requirements  and  to  be  more 
responsive to their needs. No doubt banks and regulators play a major role in this, but we 
also need to think beyond traditional ways and delivery channels to speed up the efforts. 
Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Hon’ble Governor, RBI has powerfully enunciated the need for broad 
based diversified growth leading to rapid reduction in poverty. Governor has also laid down 
RBI’s  developmental  measures  for  the  near  future  on  five  pillars  and  one  of  the  most 
important pillar amongst them is Financial Inclusion where the objective is to expand access 
of finance to small and medium enterprises, the unorganized sector, the poor, and remote 
and underserved areas of the country. 
The approach adopted for achieving the objectives under financial inclusion 
RBI’s perspective on Financial Inclusion aims at giving a specific direction to the collaborated 
efforts  to  gain  synergic  benefits.  Therefore,  we  have  defined  Financial  Inclusion  as  “the 
process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate  financial  products  and  services  needed  by  all 
sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low 
income  groups  in  particular  at  an  affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and  transparent  manner  by 
mainstream institutional players.” 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  made  sustained  efforts  to  increase  the  penetration  of  formal 
financial  services  in  unbanked  areas,  while  continuing  with  its  policy  of ensuring  adequate 
but viable flow of credit to priority sectors of the economy. We have adopted a structured, 
planned  and  integrated  approach  towards  FI  which  is  focusing  on  improving  access  to 
financial  services  and  also  encouraging  demand  for  financial  services  through  financial 
literacy initiatives. Some of the defining features of our approach to FI are: 
Institutional mechanism 
Under the institutional mechanism put in place for financial inclusion, we have the Financial 
Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC),  which  has  an  exclusive  mandate  for  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  literacy.  A  separate  Technical  Group  on  financial  inclusion  and 
financial literacy, under the Chairmanship of a Deputy Governor, has been set up under the 
aegis  of  FSDC.  The  Group  has  representations  from  all  the  financial  sector  regulators.  In 
order to spearhead efforts towards greater financial inclusion, RBI has constituted a Financial 
Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC) under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor. The FIAC 
has few Directors from the Central Board of RBI and experts drawn from NGO sector/other 
civil  society  representatives,  etc.  as  members.  At  the  State  level,  there  are  State  Level 
Bankers  Committee  (SLBC)  further  supported  by  Lead  District  Managers  (671  Districts)  at 
the district level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Bank led model 
In India, we have adopted a bank- led model for financial inclusion, which seeks to leverage 
on technology. The FI initiatives would have to be ICT based and would ride on new delivery 
models  that  would  need  to  be  developed  by  the  market  participants  to  best  suit  their 
requirements. 
Our  experience  has  shown  that  the  goal  of  financial  inclusion  is  better  served  through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  suite  of  products 
required  to  bring  in  effective/meaningful  financial  inclusion.  Other  players  such  as  mobile 
companies have been allowed to partner with banks in offering services collaboratively. 
Integrated approach – financial inclusion & financial literacy 
Considering that financial Literacy is an important adjunct for promoting financial inclusion, 
consumer  protection  and  ultimately  financial  stability,  RBI  has  adopted  an  integrated 
approach wherein efforts towards Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy would go hand in 
hand. 
Bouquet of financial products 
In the absence of banks a large number of informal intermediaries had mushroomed, mostly 
in the rural areas, which were acting as proxy to the banks. Such unregulated entities were in 
the business of extending only credit products that too at exorbitant rates of interest mostly to 
the illiterate section of the population. This had resulted in huge indebtedness amongst the 
poor people. With our renewed efforts under financial inclusion we have now advised banks 
to ensure that all the financial needs of the customers are met by offering, at the minimum, 
four basic products to customers, viz. 
The idea is to ensure that customers who are linked to the banking system is provided with 
all the basic financial products that are required to enhance their income generation capacity 
thus  helping  them  to  come  out  of  poverty.  Such  an  initiative  is  expected  to  be  a  win-win 
situation for both banks as also the large section of poor people residing in the rural areas. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Combination of branch and BC structure 
We  are  advocating  a  combination  of  Brick  and  Mortar  structure  with  Click  and  Mouse 
technology  for  extending  financial  inclusion,  especially  in  geographically  dispersed  areas. 
Banks have to make effective use of technology to provide banking services in remote areas. 
In addition to creating a large network of small branches in rural areas, the Reserve Bank 
has  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of  intermediaries  in  providing  banking  services 
through the use of business correspondents. The BC model allows banks to do “cash in – 
cash out” transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing the 
last mile problem. 
Leveraging on technology 
Penetrating banking services through the traditional brick and mortar model was expensive 
for  banks. We  realized  that  the  task  of  Financial  Inclusion  was  gigantic  and  would  not  be 
possible without actively leveraging on technology. We have therefore encouraged banks to 
leverage  on  technology  to  attain  greater  reach  and  penetration  for  minimizing  the  cost  of 
providing financial services in far flung areas of the country. With adoption of technology it 
has  been  possible  for  banks  to  deliver  banking  products  and  services  to  the  doorsteps  of 
villages. 
Engaging Business Correspondents: The Reserve Bank has permitted banks to engage 
Business  Facilitators  (BFs)  and  Business  Correspondents  (BCs)  as  intermediaries  for 
providing financial and banking services. The BC Model allows banks to provide door step 
delivery of services especially to do “cash in – cash out” transactions, thus addressing the 
“last mile” problem. The list of eligible individuals/entities who can be engaged as BCs are 
being  widened  from  time  to  time  and  we  have  adopted  a  test  and  learn  approach  to  this 
process.  Now,  even  for  profit  organisations  excluding  NBFCs  and  Telcos  have  been 
permitted to operate as BCs of banks. 
Relaxation of KYC norms: The strict KYC norms inhibited linkage of common people with 
the Banking System. Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements for opening bank accounts 
have been relaxed for small accounts. Further, in order to leverage on the initiative of UIDAI, 
we have allowed “Aadhaar” as one of the eligible document for meeting KYC requirements 
and very recently have also allowed banks to provide e-KYC services provided through the 
Aadhaar platform. 
Simplified branch authorisation: To address the issue of uneven spread of bank branches, 
branch  licensing  norms  have  been  relaxed  considerably  and  banks  are  now  free  to  open 
branches  in  centres  with  population  less  than  1  lakh  under  general  permission,  subject  to 
reporting. 
Opening  of  branches  in  unbanked  rural  centres:  To  further  step  up  the  opening  of 
branches  in  rural  areas,  banks  have  been  mandated  to  open  at  least  25  per  cent  of  the 
branches in unbanked rural centres. To help facilitate achieving this mandate, banks have 
been  advised  to  open  to  open  small  intermediary  brick  and mortar structures  between  the 
base  branch  and  the  unbanked  villages. The  idea  is  to  create  an  eco-system for  ensuring 
efficient  delivery  of  services,  efficiency  in  cash  management,  redressal  of  customer 
grievances  and  closer  supervision  of  BC  operations.  This  is  expected  to  facilitate  quicker 
branch expansion in unbanked rural centres. 
Financial inclusion plan of banks 
We  have  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  a  structured  and  planned  approach  to  financial 
inclusion  with  commitment  at  the  highest  levels,  through  preparation  of  Board  approved 
Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first phase of FIPs was implemented over the period 
2010–2013. The Reserve Bank has used the FIPs to gauge the performance of banks under 
their  FI  initiatives.  In  this  direction  we  have  put  in  place  a  structured  and  comprehensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
monitoring mechanism for evaluating banks’ performance vis-à-vis their targets. To ensure 
support of the Top Management of the Bank to the Financial Inclusion process and to ensure 
accountability of the senior functionaries of the bank, one on one annual review meetings are 
held  with  CMDs/CEOs  of  banks.  A  snapshot  of  the  progress  made  by  banks  under  the 
Financial Inclusion Plan during the period from April 2010 to March 2013 are as follows: 
• 
Banking outlets in villages have increased to nearly 2,68,000 from 67,694 outlets in 
March 2010. 
About 7,400 rural branches have been opened during this 3-year period compared 
with a reduction of about 1300 rural branches during the last two decades. 
Nearly  109  million  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  have  been 
added,  taking  the total number  of  BSBDA  to  182  million.  The  share  of  ICT-based 
accounts  has  increased  substantially.  The  percentage  of  ICT  accounts  to  total 
BSBDAs increased from 25 per cent in March 2010 to 45 per cent in March 2013. 
With the addition of nearly 9.48 million farm sector households during this period, 
33.8 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit as at 
the end of March 2013. 
With  the  addition  of  nearly  2.24  million  nonfarm  sector  households  during  this 
period, 3.6 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit 
as at the end of March 2013. 
About 490 million transactions have been carried out in ICT-based accounts through 
BCs during the three-year period. 
     Banking outlets 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
We  have  now  created  a  large  banking  network  and  have  also  managed  to  open  a  large 
number of small accounts. The focus under the FI plan has now shifted towards leveraging 
the  banking  network  created  for  extending  other  products  viz.  credit,  etc.  which  will  help 
make the business more viable for banks. This would also ensure that the large number of 
accounts opened see large volume of transactions taking place and people reap the benefits 
of getting linked to the formal financial institutions. 
Roadmap for providing Banking Services in unbanked villages: With financial inclusion 
gaining  increasing  recognition  as  a  business  opportunity  and  with  all  banks  geared  to 
increase  presence,  we  adopted  a  phase-wise  approach  to  provide  banking  services  in  all 
unbanked  villages  in  the  country.  On  completion  of  the  first  phase  where  nearly 
74000 villages with population more than 2000 were provided with a banking outlet, we are 
now  in  the  second  phase  where  the  remaining  unbanked  villages,  numbering  close  to 
4,90,000, have been identified in villages less than 2000 population and allocated to banks, 
for opening of banking outlets by Match 2016. Under the roadmap for provision of banking 
facilities  in  villages  with  less  than  2000  population,  SLBC,  Madhya  Pradesh  has  identified 
and allotted 47660 unbanked villages among various, out of which 18986 unbanked villages 
are required to be covered by March 2014. 
Direct Benefit Transfer – The GoI has plans to route the social security payments through 
the  banking  network  by  leveraging  on  the  Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  System  based 
platform.  In  order  to  ensure  smooth  roll  out  of  the  Government’s  Direct  Benefit  Transfer 
(DBT) initiative, banks have been advised to open accounts of all eligible individuals and to 
seed the existing and new accounts with Aadhaar numbers. 
Financial  Literacy  –  We  have  realized  that  Financial  Literacy  is  an  important  adjunct  for 
promoting financial inclusion. We have adopted an integrated approach, wherein our efforts 
towards  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  go  hand  in  hand.  Through  Financial 
literacy  and  education,  we  disseminate  information  on  the  general  banking  concepts  to 
diverse target groups, including school and college students, women, rural and urban poor, 
pensioners  and  senior  citizens  to  enable  them  to  make  informed  financial  decisions.  To 
support this we have nearly 800 financial literacy centres set up by banks. We have designed 
a  mass  scale  Financial  Literacy  Program  with  an  objective  to  integrate  the  financially 
excluded population with low level of income and low literacy level with the formal financial 
system. Financial Literacy Centres organize Outdoor Literacy camps which are spread over 
a  period  of  three  months  and  delivered  in  three  phases  wherein  along  with  creating 
awareness, accounts are also opened in the Literacy camps. 
Way forward – issues and challenges 
Structure 
With adoption of new branchless delivery channels by banks, there is a need for banks to 
revamp the structure for carrying out banking operations. There cannot be a fixed structured 
defined  which  can  be  adopted  by  all  the  banks.  Each  bank  has  to  based  on  its  current 
architecture develop a structure that can enhance its financial inclusion efforts. This would 
entail the following:- 
• 
Review  of  the  HR  policies  with  respect  to  recruitment  of  staff  in  view  of  the  FI 
requirements. Separate cadre of staff can be thought off for catering to the needs of 
providing banking services in far flung rural areas. 
Banks have to think and act differently and make themselves more flexible so as to 
meet even the smallest requirements of the rural population. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
 BC model 
There  are  many  challenges  being  faced  while  implementing  BC  model.  Sustainability  and 
scalability of the BC model is essential. More and more innovative products will have to be 
introduced which would benefit both banks as well as the rural people and at the same time 
make the BC model more viable. Review of the cash management practices for delivery of 
banking services through the branchless modes need to be done for ensuring scaling up of 
the various models. 
Transactions 
During  the  first  phase  of  our  FI  initiative,  we  have  had  success  as  regards  opening  of 
banking outlets by banks and also in opening bank accounts for large number of individuals. 
Going forward our idea is to enable more transactions in these accounts by providing more 
credit products, which will not only help rural people to avail of credit at comparatively lower 
rates of interest but at the same time also make the BC model viable for banks. Banks have 
been  advised  to  leverage  upon  the  Direct  Benefit  Transfer  initiative  of  the  Government  of 
India for linking all the individuals to the banking system and for utilizing the large amounts 
likely to be credited in these accounts for encouraging issue of deposit and credit products. 
Collaboration 
Finally,  financial  inclusion  cannot  be  achieved  without  the  active  involvement  of  all 
stakeholders like RBI, other financial regulators, banks, governments, NGOs, civil societies, 
etc. The current policy objective of inclusive growth with financial stability cannot be achieved 
without  ensuring  universal  financial  inclusion.  Banks  alone  will  not  be  able  to  achieve  this 
unless  an  entire  support  system  would  be  partnering  with  them  in  this  mission.  All  the 
stakeholders need to join hands and make it possible. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
