  Karnit Flug: The macroeconomic situation and the stability of the 
financial system 
Main  points  of  address  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  TheMarker 
Financial Conference, Tel-Aviv, 4 March 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found in the Hebrew version of the speech on the Bank of Israel’s website. 
The macroeconomic situation 
The global economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. Growth in the US continues to 
take  root  –  even  though  the  recent  data  has  been  weak,  apparently  due  to  the  harsh 
weather. In Europe, the very moderate and fragile recovery is continuing, with some concern 
of deflation. In the emerging markets, there has been some improvement, although in some 
of the larger countries, mainly those that have current account deficits, there have been signs 
of  weakness  and  fragility  in  recent  months.  Together  with  the  moderate  recovery,  global 
trade is also expanding. Growth in Israel moves in line with, and higher than, that of the other 
advanced economies, and we expect that both the correlation and the gap will continue this 
year as well (slide 2). 
However, looking at recent months, we see a further slowdown in growth in Israel, and the 
pace  of  growth  declined  from  about  3  percent  in  the  past  year  and  a  half  to  less  than 
2.5 percent in the past two quarters, while business output grew in those two quarters by just 
1.6 percent (slide 3). Exports were the main factor in the slowdown in the third quarter, and 
there  were  signs  of  improvement  in  it  in  the  fourth  quarter.,  but  at  this  stage,  they  are 
concentrated mainly in the pharmaceuticals industry and to a certain extent in the chemicals 
and electronics industries as well, and we have not yet seen the improvement expand to the 
other export industries. 
The labor market continues to show a mixed trend: The unemployment rate declined and is 
at  a  historic  low  thanks  to  an  increase  in  employment  rates  that  took  place  together  with 
stabilization of the participation rate at a very high level (slide 4). Our assessment is that the 
decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  reflects,  among  other  things,  a  structural  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate due to processes increasing labor market elasticity in recent years that 
led to a decline in the frictional and the natural unemployment rates. Furthermore, most of 
the growth in employment in the past two years was in the public service industries – mainly 
in  the  non-governmental  portion  of  the  public  services  –  while  the  number  of  Israeli 
employees  in  the  business  sector  did  not  grow  (slide  5).  The  number  of  work  hours  per 
employee in the business sector also declined, and the rate of those who are involuntarily in 
part-time employment increased. These reflect a certain weakness in the labor market. 
Inflation in the past 12 months was 1.4 percent, and one year forward inflation expectations 
are anchored within the target range, below the center of the range (slide 6). Following the 
relatively rapid appreciation in the shekel exchange rate during the first half of 2013, there 
has been a moderation in the pace of appreciation (slide 7). It is important to note that the 
main  forces  acting  for  appreciation  this  year  are  the  start  of  natural  gas  production  and 
expectations of the effect it will have on the balance of payments in the next few years, as 
well  as  the  relatively  good  position  of  the  economy  that  is  reflected  in  a  current  account 
surplus and in the flow of direct investments in innovative and attractive Israeli companies. 
All of these factors formed the basis of monetary policy this year, including the background to 
the  most  recent  interest  rate  reduction.  It  is  important  to  mention  that  the  monetary  policy 
goals  set  in  the  law  are,  first  of  all,  maintaining  price  stability,  meaning  keeping  inflation 
within the range of 1–3 percent, and subject to that, support of growth and employment, and 
of  financial  stability.  Therefore,  the  decline  in  inflation,  together  with  expectations  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  moderation in inflation, enabled and even supported the reduction of the interest rate, which 
is intended to support activity and growth, both by lowering the cost of credit and by its effect 
on the exchange rate which mainly affects the commercial sector – the export industries and 
alternatives to imports. 
As I have noted in the past, we are not indifferent to developments in the exchange rate, and 
we  are  aware  of  the  effects  it  has  on  exports  and  on  employment  in  the  commercial 
industries. Therefore, in addition to the interest rate policy, the Bank of Israel also intervenes 
directly  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  –  and  we  were  active  in  the  past  year  both  in 
purchases to offset the effect of natural gas production on the current account of the balance 
of payments, and in order to moderate excess volatility in the exchange rate that is not in line 
with fundamental economic forces (slide 8). We must remember that the foreign exchange 
reserves are an important component of financial stability, and there are studies around the 
world that indicate that a high level of foreign exchange reserves reduce the likelihood of a 
financial crisis in the economy. 
Regarding  the  housing  market,  home  prices  have  continued  to  increase  at  a  rapid  pace, 
increasing by about 8 percent in 2013, together with a rapid increase in the number of new 
mortgages  taken  out.  The  Supervisor  of  Banks  adopted  measures  intended  to  reduce  the 
risks inherent in mortgages and in their rapid growth. The recent measures adopted – which 
restrict the payment-to-income ratio and set out that at least one-third of the mortgage should 
be  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  –  are  acting  to  reduce  the  risk  that  households  that  took  out  a 
mortgage will have difficulty in meeting their payments, for instance in a situation where one 
of the household members loses his job, or if the burden of repayment increases due to an 
increase  in  the  interest  rate.  The  decline  in  the  share  of  mortgages  with  an  loan-to-value 
(LTV) ratio above 60 percent, and the decline in the share of mortgages with a payment-to-
income (PTI) ratio above 40 percent, indicate that the measures adopted have reduced the 
risk inherent in mortgages (slide 9). With that, the continued rapid growth in the number of 
mortgages and in their weight in the bank’s credit portfolio are a risk factor, and if additional 
measures are required, we will not hesitate to take them. 
The increase in the number of building starts and completions that we witnessed in the past 
year,  to  almost  45,000  starts  and  more  than  40,000  completions  –  higher  than  the  basic 
demand for homes that is derived from growth in the number of households – is a positive 
development. If this trend continues – and we see that the government is making efforts 
in  this  direction  –  and  if  it  includes  areas  of  high  demand,  it  will  act  to  reduce  the 
pressure and stabilize home prices. 
Financial stability 
The  picture  of  the  stability  of  the  economy  can  be  presented  in  multi-dimensional  form  by 
way of a radar chart that includes real data, accounting data and survey data, as well as data 
that show the risk philosophy of Israeli and global investors (slide 11). The diagram for the 
end of January 2014 indicates that the financial system and the economy are stable. The red 
diagram reflects the situation at the end of 2008, and shows a picture in which almost all risk 
indices,  both  global  and  domestic,  were  at  record  high  levels  at  the  height  of  the  global 
financial crisis. The blue diagram, which shows the levels of the current risk indices, indicates 
relatively  low  levels,  with  most  of  the  measured  risks  reflecting  the  global  macroeconomic 
situation  –  moderate  growth,  high  unemployment,  and  low  indices  reflecting  consumer 
confidence and business confidence. These, of course, also have an effect on the domestic 
macroeconomic  risk,  which  reflects  moderate  growth.  In  contrast,  the  market  risk  indices, 
both in Israel and globally, are at low levels, which creates a gap – both in Israel and abroad 
–  between  the  real  situation  and  the  investors’  risk  philosophy.  This  gap  is  apparently 
affected  by  the  search  for  yields  in  a  low  interest-rate  environment,  but  it  is  possible  that 
expectations of an increase in corporate profits that will accompany the recovery also have 
an effect. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A view of the business sector’s sources of financing indicates that the trend of a decline in 
the weight of bank credit and an increase in the weight of domestic nonbank credit – through 
corporate bonds and recently through direct loans from institutional investors as well – that 
we  witnessed  since  the  beginning  of  the  century  continues  even  after  the  global  crisis  of 
2008–9 (slide 12). This is obviously a positive process, in that it increases and variegates the 
sources  of financing to the  business  sector,  creates  competition for  the  banks  and  acts to 
reduce  the  cost  of  financing,  thereby  supporting  growth.  However,  the  process  is  also 
accompanied  by  the  creation  of  risks  that  must  be  addressed.  Among  other  things,  these 
reflect the fact that the nonbank credit market has developed rapidly, while its regulation is 
developing  gradually.  During  the  global  crisis,  most  of  the  negative  impact  to  the  financial 
system in Israel was reflected in this market: Yields in the market skyrocketed and issuances 
froze. In total, more than 100 companies have entered debt restructuring proceedings thus 
far – representing bonds totaling about NIS 40 billion. It is important to emphasize that this 
number does not represent the scope of the loss absorbed by investors, which will naturally 
be lower (slide 13). 
Since  the  global  crisis,  as  a  lesson  from  global  developments  as  well  as  developments  in 
Israel, in order to reduce the risks of a crisis and to reduce the damage of a crisis should one 
take  place,  many  measures  are  being  taken  in  the  field  of  regulation  that  are  intended  to 
reinforce  the  durability  of  the  financial  institutions  and  system.  Regulations  have  been 
updated in the field of corporate governance and risk management at the banks; the Basel III 
guidelines have been adopted in the area of capital requirements, and rules in the area of 
liquidity and leverage will be adopted; the use of stress tests to identify risks in institutions 
and in the system as a whole has been increased; the Business Concentration Law has been 
passed  to  reduce  the  risks  derived  from  complex  and  leveraged  business  groups  and  to 
separate control of real corporation from financial corporations; the recommendations of the 
Hudak committee to strengthen control of investments by financial entities in corporate bonds 
have  been  adopted;  the  supervision  of  the  payments  and  settlement  systems  has  been 
strengthened; and the Banking Supervision Department has taken a series of measures to 
reduce the risks in the mortgage market (slide 14). 
Beyond  these  changes,  which  have  already  been  implemented  or  are  in  the  process  of 
implementation  or  assessment,  there  is  also  a  series  of  committee  recommendations  or 
recommendations  that  are  still  being  formulated,  that  are  meant  to  complement  the 
improvement of regulation: the Goldschmidt committee to arrange the management of direct 
loans  by  institutions;  the  Andoran  committee,  which  is  handling  debt  restructuring 
proceedings in the economy. There is also a bill in advanced stages of legislation to handle a 
failing bank, similar to legislation enacted in this area following the crisis in other advanced 
countries. 
Even  though  much  has  been  done  in  the  field  of  financial  regulation  since  the  crisis,  and 
there  are  steps  still  being  taken,  there  remains  much  work  to  do.  One  of  the  important 
lessons taken out of the development of the financial crisis in various countries is the fact 
that while the institutions themselves were, in most cases, subject to supervision, there were 
parts of the system that are not supervised or are less supervised, which expanded rapidly. It 
also became clear that the connections between the various institutions, and the interfaces 
between  them,  which  led  to  the  rapid  transfer  of  risks  between  parts  of  the  system  and 
increased its fragility, were neglected by regulators around the world. Therefore, the issue of 
an overall view of the financial system, and the issue of coordination and joint work by the 
various regulators is at the center of the recommendations of the various international bodies 
on an issue that is at the heart of the required reforms in the field of financial regulation. 
In terms of Israel, it is desired, as the International Monetary Fund has recommended in this 
regard,  to  establish  a  financial  stability  committee  that  will  entrench  the  coordination  and 
cooperation  between  all  of  the  financial  regulatory  authorities,  with  the  aim  of  identifying, 
preventing and reducing systemic risks. This committee is supposed to define, monitor and 
assess  systemic  risks;  examine  risks  and  exposures  in  the  financial  system  in  order  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
identify  and  assess  systemic  risks;  promote  the  exchange  of  information  among  the 
financial regulatory authorities and between them and the stabilizing institutions (the Bank of 
Israel  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance); improve the coordination and cooperation  between 
the financial regulatory authorities and the stabilizers in analyzing evaluating, developing and 
operating tools and methods to prevent and reduce systemic risks; issue warnings when a 
systemic  risk  could  become  a  material  risk;  make  recommendations  of  measures  to 
prevent or reduce systemic risks that are identified; and track the actions taken as a result of 
the warnings and the implementation of the recommendations (slide 15). It is proposed that 
the staff work for the committee be done by the Financial Stability Division that was recently 
established  in  the  Bank  of  Israel  Research  Department,  with  the  aim  of  acting  to  promote 
financial stability which, according to the new Bank of Israel Law, is one of the Bank’s goals. 
A stable financial environment, and a financial system in which the public places its trust, are 
essential  for  sustainable  growth  and  a  continued  increase  in  the  standard  of  living.  I  am 
convinced  that  completing  the  steps  that  are  currently  being  taken,  including  the 
establishment of the committee as I have outlined, will contribute to the economy’s ability to 
withstand shocks which, by nature, will come. We have the privilege of taking these steps 
during a period of relative calm and stability, and it is therefore important that we complete 
them soon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
