Sir K Dwight Venner: The economics of nationhood – the political 
economy of economic union in the Eastern Caribbean 
Text of the 8th Patrick Emmanuel Memorial Lecture by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, St Kitts, 21 November 2013. 
 I  feel  very  fortunate  to  be  invited  to  give  this  memorial  lecture  in  honour  of  a  friend  and 
colleague and patriot in the struggle for our national independence and regional unity. As I 
reflected  on  Patrick’s  contribution  to  the  creation  of  a  viable  polity  and  its  associated 
economy in the region, and particularly in the OECS, it struck me quite forcibly that I should 
be  asked  to  deliver  this  lecture  at  this  time  and  in  this  place,  and  at  a  time  when  my 
colleagues and I at the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank are grappling with the survival and 
progress of our beloved islands. 
Patrick’s  work  on  the  political  evolution  of  the  region  is  outstanding.  However,  being  an 
economist  as  opposed  to  a  political  scientist,  my  admiration  for  him  soared  with  his 
monumental work in editing and compiling the work of Sir Arthur Lewis in the three-volume 
publication, Sir Arthur Lewis Collected Papers 1941–1988. It was quite unfortunate that he 
left us at that time because one can only imagine the kind of insights he would have been 
able to give us from such an effort. Certainly the approach to the political economy of the 
region  would  have  benefitted. I make this  point deliberately,  as  clearly,  the  combination of 
these two social science disciplines, politics and economics, is critical to our policy making 
efforts and approaches in the region. 
Sir Arthur Lewis was, by inclination and philosophy a political economist as he saw applied 
economics as one of the tools for promoting economic development. He operated during his 
career,  both  in  the  field  of  academia  and  in  the  practical  world  of  developing  a  regional 
university, to address the socioeconomic needs of the region. He also established a regional 
development bank to address the financial and developmental needs of the region, and in 
particular,  those  of  the  OECS  countries  –  the  so  called  LDCs  –  the  lesser  developed 
countries of the region. These countries have not been able to escape the word “lesser” as 
they are also described geographically as the “Lesser Antilles” and colloquially by the bigger 
islands  as  “small  islands”.  Lewis  by  his  academic  work  and  his  practical  experience  laid 
significant claim to being a political economist. It is against this background that I speak on 
the general topic, “The OECS in the present Caribbean moment: Challenges, Lessons, and 
Future  Prospects”.  I  have  however  tweaked  it  somewhat  to  become,  “The  Economics  of 
Nationhood: The Political Economy of Economic Union in the Eastern Caribbean”. 
The islands of the OECS now find themselves  at the crossroads of their economic history 
and at an existential moment in time. In deciding on the way forward, our countries’ recent 
history,  future  scenarios  which  can  be  simulated,  and  the  possible  outcomes  which  could 
result  from  the  political  and  economic  choices  we  make,  need  to  be  contemplated  and 
debated. The  way  forward,  as  we  well  know,  is  fraught  with  danger  as forces  outside  and 
within the region contemplate our future as viable entities, or predict our possible demise. For 
instance, the rating agency Moody’s seems to take every opportunity, supported by regional 
elements  outside  of  the  OECS,  to  herald  the  demise  of  our  currency  and  currency  union, 
proposing  that  we  devalue  or  dollarize  and  dismantle  the  currency  union,  which  has  been 
largely responsible for our stability since the attainment of our independence. 
The  evidence,  on  the  contrary,  seems  to  suggest  that  the  stability  of  the  currency  and  the 
safety of deposits in the banking system have been the anchors on which the stability of our 
economies  and  financial  system  have  been  built  over  the  last  three  decades,  in  the  face  of 
monumental  challenges  up  to  and  including  the  current  global  crisis.  This  crisis  and  these 
challenges give us a once in a lifetime opportunity to restructure our economies and polities 
and  to  put  forward  our  best  efforts  and  determination  to  effect  the  socioeconomic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transformation  of  our  countries  beyond  doubt.  This  would  not  only  be  to  the  benefit  of  our 
citizens but would also send a salutary message to our detractors, both without and within the 
region. 
The title of the presentation then becomes self-explanatory. During the last days of the West 
Indies Federation a pamphlet was produced in Trinidad and Tobago making the case for that 
country’s emergence as a separate nation state outside of the federation. In my view this is 
the  moment  for  the  OECS  countries  to  consolidate  their  independence,  sovereignty,  and 
nationhood and to establish a more perfect union among themselves – a State Nation, if you 
will.  This  can  be  defined  as  “a  grouping  of  separate  sovereign  states  who  pool  their 
sovereignty  and  resources  and  coordinate  their  policies  as  an  instrument  for  collective 
decision making and collective action to achieve the goals of socioeconomic development”. 
This  would  give  them  the  political,  technical  and  administrative  capacity  to  collectively 
address the threats to their sovereignty and future prospects. It is time for the establishment 
of the Union of Eastern Caribbean States. 
The presentation will proceed in three segments as follows: 
i. 
ii. 
A brief historical overview from adult suffrage to the present time; 
An analysis of the integration process as the foremost instrument for achieving our 
goals; and 
The model and means for achieving socioeconomic transformation. 
iii. 
To put the story in context we must formulate a conception of the challenges and possibilities 
facing  the  OECS  countries  as  they  have  presented  themselves  from  adult  suffrage  to  the 
current period and going forward. This can be distilled from assessing: 
a) 
three  stages  of  the  countries’  economic  history,  two  retrospective  and  one 
prospective; 
three possible scenarios; and 
four possible outcomes based on the political and economic choices we make at this 
time. 
b) 
c) 
The period from universal adult suffrage to independence; 
The period from independence to the current global crisis; 
The post global crisis, that is, where are we are heading. 
The three economic stages can be identified as: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
The three scenarios which we contemplate as we seek to make the appropriate choices in 
moving forward are that: 
1) 
The  global  economy  remains  in  its  low  growth,  high  unemployment  mode, 
particularly  in  our  main  trading  partners,  while  the  OECS  countries  continue  with 
their current policies. 
The global economy does not return to its pre-crisis levels while the OECS makes 
significant policy adjustments. 
The  global  economy  goes  through  substantial  restructuring  and  rebalancing  while 
the OECS undergoes substantial socioeconomic transformation. 
2) 
3) 
Four  outcomes  are  possible  for  the  OECS  countries  depending  on  their  policy  choices. 
These are: 
1) 
2) 
 
Failed or failing states; 
Barebones Survival; 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Moderate progress; or 
Socioeconomic Transformation 
3) 
4) 
The  first  historical  period  marks  a  seminal  moment  in  our  political  history,  that  is,  the 
attainment of universal adult suffrage. This gave the people of the region for the first time the 
right to elect their own representatives to the legislature. This inevitably led to the formation 
of political parties and the ability to channel the demand for constitutional advancement and 
self-government through organized political bodies. These changes were all a direct result of 
the revolts in the 1930s which incidentally started on the Buckleys Estate in St Kitts and is 
considered to be the event which heralded the birth of the modern West Indian democratic 
state. 
Since this is only a brief overview I will only cite a few critical events which are germane to 
the theme of this presentation. Adult suffrage was granted to the OECS countries in 1952. 
This created the environment for the advancement of the demand for dominion status which 
revolved  around  the  establishment  of  the  West  Indian  Federation,  as  the  islands  were 
considered too small to attain such status on an individual island basis. The islands were in 
fact  governed  at  this  time  as  two  federations,  namely,  the  Leeward  and  Windward  Island 
Federations. These were dismantled and each island entered the federal arrangements as 
separate entities. This, in fact, was the first act of disintegration in the federal saga. 
The  federation  failed,  one  can  say,  for  many  reasons  but  three  are  important  for  this 
narrative: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Jamaica’s determination to protect its nascent industrial development; 
Trinidad and Tobago’s resistance to freedom of movement of people; and 
The  perception  by  both  countries  that  the  smaller  islands  would  be  a  major 
impediment to their economic progress. 
they  could  negotiate  bilaterally  with  Britain 
Following the demise of the federation another attempt was made to link Barbados and the 
smaller islands together in an arrangement referred to as the “little eight”. This too failed as 
Barbados would not proceed without assurances from the British on the financing of the new 
entity. Barbados went on to its own independence in 1966 and the islands were virtually left 
in  constitutional  limbo.  They  then  began  searching  for  a  way  out  of  the  situation  with 
discussions on the nature of the relationships with the British and with each other. 
In  1967,  the  West  Indies  Associate  States  was  established  with  countries  sharing  some 
common  services  which  were  meant  to  lower  the  cost  of  government  and  to  foster  closer 
working  relationships  amongst  themselves  in  preparation  for  independence.  The  British 
posed two options to the islands, they could jointly declare their independence and write their 
own  constitutions,  or 
for  single  state 
independence. They chose the latter and between 1974 and 1983 the islands achieved their 
independence. In 1981 the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States was established with 
the signing of the Treaty of Basseterre and in 1983 the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank was 
established by Agreement among the countries. 
This led to the next stage of our history which presented tremendous challenges to the newly 
independent states. The period was characterized by the continuing impact of the oil crises 
of 1973 and 1979 as well as several disastrous hurricanes, recessions in our main trading 
partners, the gradual removal of trade preferences by the British and the Europeans, and the 
graduation of the countries from concessional borrowing from the International Development 
Association (IDA). 
The 1980s was the period of highest economic growth, averaging 6 per cent. However the 
following decades were characterized by a secular decline in growth for a number of reasons 
including a decline in factor productivity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  global  crisis  exposed  and  exacerbated  the  structural  deficiencies  of  our  economies, 
namely,  extremely  small  size,  extreme  openness,  and  severe  vulnerability. We  are  now  at 
the crossroads as we assess the impact of the global crisis on our economies, polities and 
societies and reflect on the way forward and the outcomes which are possible depending on 
our  policy  choices.  These  were  outlined  earlier  as  failing  states,  barebones  survival, 
moderate  progress  and  socioeconomic  development.  The  last  is  the  obvious  desired 
outcome but getting there will not be easy and will require substantial changes in our political 
and economic policies and cultures. 
The necessary but not sufficient condition for socioeconomic transformation in the OECS has 
always  been  integration.  This  has  been  very  evident  from  the  beginning  because  of  the 
countries extremely small size and status as micro states in the international community. 
After the demise of the federation it was the OECS countries which found it the most difficult 
to  achieve  constitutional  independence.  The  larger  states  always  had  a  sense  of  manifest 
destiny based on the assumption that they could achieve their socioeconomic goals on their 
own. History has proven otherwise to date, but suffice it to say, this has never been the case 
in  the  OECS.  Even  though  they  opted  for  independence  as  single  states,  the  OECS 
countries  have  deliberately  established  a  network  of  vital  institutions  such  as  the  regional 
court  and  the  currency  and  central  banking  arrangements,  which  even  preceded  similar 
institutions in the European Union, the oldest and most advanced integration arrangement in 
the international system. 
The  Treaty  of  Basseterre,  in  which  these  institutions  and  others  have  been  embedded, 
provides  the  overarching  framework  for  the  functioning  of  the  OECS  arrangements.  The 
concept  of  shared  sovereignty,  as  envisaged  by  the treaty,  has  proven to  be  a  successful 
formula for  the  stability  and  development  of  these  countries  in  the  past  and,  with  the  new 
challenges,  will  be  even  more  vital  in  the  future.  Indeed,  this  has  prompted  a  significant 
advancement of the treaty to provide for the establishment of an economic union in response 
to the current crisis. 
It would be useful to pause here in order to examine the various forms of integration which 
are  available  to  us.  These  could  be  considered  to  be  formal  or  informal,  functional  or 
dysfunctional depending on the position in which a country finds itself as the various choices 
present  themselves.  As  I  noted  earlier,  there  are  a  number  of  choices  which  the  OECS 
countries are now confronted with and which could result in one of the four outcomes: failing 
states, barebones survival, moderate progress, and socioeconomic transformation. 
Leaving aside for the moment the orthodox stages of integration which ascend from a free 
trade area to a full blown political union, other forms of integration may present themselves if 
our backs are to the wall. For example, a failing state or barebones survival scenario could 
precipitate  a  particular form  of  integration.  Small  states could  have  close  ties  to a  wealthy 
individual, who by virtue of access to resources and the government’s lack of fiscal space, 
could  assert  some  level  of  influence  or  dominance  over  critical  areas  of  the  economy  or 
financial  system  and,  by  extension,  on  the  political  system.  Similarly,  private  sector 
companies  which  have  a  dominant  place  in  vital  sectors  of  the  economy,  for  instance, 
mining,  agriculture,  tourism,  and  finance  could  extract  substantial  rents  from  incentive 
legislation and other tax concessions. 
Another  choice  could  be  absorption  into  neighboring  countries  which  have  substantial 
resources and could fund our development if we were a part of their polity. Countries which 
come  to  mind  are  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Venezuela,  Canada  and  the  United  States  of 
America. 
There is in fact some de facto integration into the Eastern Seaboard of North America, which 
is  our  main  trading  partner, through the  inflow  of  direct foreign  investment, tourist arrivals, 
migration and remittances, as well as the peg to the US dollar. These choices, and in the 
case of the Eastern Seaboard, circumstances, do not seem to be compatible with our notion 
of sovereignty and the goal of attaining socioeconomic transformation on our own terms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The story of the Caribbean since independence some fifty years ago is that we have made 
remarkable  progress  in  the  delivery  of  liberal  democracy,  the  rule  of  law,  the  rights  and 
freedoms  expected  of  a  civilized  society  and  meeting  the  United  Nations  Human 
Development Indices. In addition, we have excelled in the sporting arena, in scholarship and 
the  arts  and  sciences,  and  in  music  and  literature.  However,  in  the  economic  sphere,  we 
have not reached anywhere close to our real potential. The orthodox approach to integration 
has  been  the  chosen  path  in  the  region  as  a  whole  and  has  been  so  recognized  in  our 
treaties, domestic laws and institutions. The question then becomes why has it not delivered 
on the economic front? 
Integration is a necessary though not a sufficient condition for attaining our socioeconomic 
objectives and the current integration model and process, as well as its implementation, must 
in some way be flawed. In the region we have two integration arrangements operating side 
by side with common membership. The CARICOM arrangement encompasses all countries 
while the OECS is a subset of the wider arrangement. The OECS is however a much deeper 
arrangement which has been upgraded in the new treaty to be an economic union. 
The success of the OECS, in my opinion, is a necessary though not a sufficient condition for 
the  success  of  CARICOM  on  two  counts.  Firstly,  if  the  OECS  with  its  much  closer  and 
deeper arrangements, which include a common currency, cannot succeed, then the chances 
for CARICOM doing so are that much less. Secondly, a much more closely coordinated and 
economically advanced OECS with substantially increased per capita incomes, removes the 
stigma of being, so to speak, “poor relations” and provides more economic opportunities for 
firms  and  citizens  from  the  MDCs.  Already,  firms  in  Barbados  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
benefit  significantly  from  doing  business  in  the  Currency  Union  and  this  will  enhance  their 
prospects.  The  progress  of  the  OECS  should  usher  in  more  reciprocal  and  beneficial 
commercial relationships between the two polar elements of CARICOM. 
How would the OECS achieve this new status? By implementing, as a matter of urgency, the 
Treaty which was ratified on 21st January 2011. This treaty provides the political, economic 
and  administrative  framework  and  architecture  for  executing  the  substantial  adjustment 
required to achieve the socioeconomic development of the economies of the member states. 
The treaty explicitly sets out the framework of a state by identifying the essential elements of 
such an entity, that is, an Executive, a Legislature and a Judiciary. 
The real game changer is the Legislature, which is selected from the elected members of the 
National Assemblies and, which in the first instance, acts as a filter for legislation in restricted 
areas to be passed by the Executive. This institution secures the participation of two critical 
actors  in  the  integration  process,  namely  opposition  parties  and  the  public.  In  short, 
integration will now become an open subject at the national and regional levels and should 
therefore gain more support. 
The  new  arrangements  will  also  establish  in  effect  a  dual  system  of  government  and 
governance.  At  the  regional  level,  there  will  be  supranational  and  functional  cooperation 
structures  while  at  the  national  level  there  will  be  the  national  government  and  local  or 
community  arrangements.  The  key  to  these  arrangements  would  be  the  creation  of  more 
representative,  but  efficient  and  effective  processes,  which  would  lower  the  cost  and 
increase the productivity of the state. 
One of the objectives of the economic union arrangements is to establish a state structure 
across  an  entire  geographic  area  which  would  become,  as  set  out  in  the  treaty  and  its 
protocol,  a  single  financial  and  economic  space.  An  important  achievement  in  this  regard 
would be to arrive at a balanced allocation of time spent on regional and national matters, as 
this has been one of the main impediments to the advancement and success of integration in 
the region. This will involve time management and agenda setting at both the national and 
regional  levels.  One  of the  critical factors  in  creating the governance  arrangements  is  that 
there  is  effective  political  responsibility  for  regional  matters  and  that  there  are  political 
incentives to ensure that the authorities are fully engaged. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
public sector modernization at the national and regional levels 
private sector development, and 
financial sector development 
Having established a single space, the combined goals of the space must be ascertained by 
public discussion and consensus, hence the importance of the regional legislature. Within the 
treaty, the goals of growth, competitiveness and socio economic transformation have been 
outlined, which then allows for the application of policies across the space to achieve these 
goals. At present monetary policy is a regional matter and the executing agency is the central 
bank. This has been a major instrument in securing the stability of the financial sector and 
has been defined in the new treaty as an “institution” of the OECS. 
Fiscal policy has been a national policy tool but, at a special meeting of the Monetary Council 
in  Grenada  this  year,  it  was  agreed  that  there  should  be  effective  coordination  of  this 
instrument. Trade policy and international relations policy would be appropriately coordinated 
at  the  national  and  regional  levels.  This  process  has  to  be  vigorously  driven  by  three 
fundamental programmes, namely 
• 
• 
• 
The integration model, as characterized by the original Treaty of Basseterre, has worked for 
the OECS region but it is also fair to say that it has not been fully exploited. The new treaty, 
which  is  at  a  higher  level  of the  integration  process,  has great  potential  to  deliver,  but the 
political economy of the OECS has to be carefully examined and understood to ensure its 
successful implementation. 
The economic union provides the political space and the economic environment to treat with 
one  of  the  fundamental  structural  issues  that  has  dogged  the  OECS  countries  throughout 
their economic history and marred their relations with the other countries of the region, that 
is, critical mass. This has manifested itself in the high cost of government and the extremely 
small  size  of  domestic  markets.  These  binding  constraints  on  both  the  public  and  private 
sectors have seriously affected the growth potential of each country. The contrast in possible 
outcomes  can  be  seen  in  two  arrangements  in  both  sectors.  The  banana  industry  in  the 
Windward Islands was established on the basis of the production capacity in all four islands 
which  made  the  shipping  and  marketing  more  cost  effective.  Also  the  sharing  of  central 
banking arrangements has produced an effective instrument of monetary policy. 
The economic union also gives the OECS considerably more leverage within CARICOM and 
with  external  parties,  particularly  the  International  Financial  Institutions  and  development 
partners.  It  provides  a  basic  platform  for  the  successful  integration  into  regional  and 
international markets. The questions which now confront us are: What are the political trade-
offs which must be made to arrive at the form of integration implied by the new treaty and 
which could lead to the successful socioeconomic development of the member countries?, 
and What can the political traffic bear either now or in the not too distant future? 
The current nationalism is built on a very narrow economic base and it is fairly clear, given 
the  structural  features  of  these  economies,  that  it  will  be  a  major  struggle  to  achieve  our 
targets on our own. In fact, not even in the larger countries have these been achieved. The 
issue  which  has  to  be  put  to  the  citizens  of  the  OECS,  and  the  wider  Caribbean  for  that 
matter is: Where would we be realistically on the scale of outcomes if we were on our own? 
To repeat, failed or failing states, barebones survival, moderate progress, or socioeconomic 
development. As we ponder this decision, the level of unemployment especially among the 
youth  increases  and  the  outmigration  of  skilled  workers  proceeds  apace.  Someone  in  the 
political firmament must step up to the plate and provide a political framework for taking us 
through these very challenging times. 
Since  this  is  a  lecture  to  honour  an  outstanding  political  scientist  one  can  ask:  How  can 
politics and political scientists make a contribution to this effort? In doing so it is enlightening 
to  take  note  of  the  contrasting  views  of  the  important  questions  that  political  scientists, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economists  and  political  economists  put  forward  in  their  concern  with  a  choice  involving 
fundamental  change.  The  economist  is  said  to  advance  a  strategy  or  policy  to  achieve  a 
desirable  economic  end,  such  as  the  maximum  growth  of  national  product  and  poses  the 
question: “What political arrangement is most conducive to achieving this objective?” or “How 
can the political impediments to achieving this objective be removed or neutralized?” 
The  political  scientist  projects  some  desirable  political  end,  such  as  the  complete 
independence from other nations and asks the question: “what level of economic productivity 
or  what  type  of  ownership  of the  means  of  production  will  best  achieve  this  objective?”  or 
“How can the economic impediments to achieving this objective be removed or neutralized?” 
The  political  economist  instead  of  trying  to  neutralize  the  politics  or  asking  the  standard 
question in political science, reframes the questions to ask in the first instance. “Given the 
resources  at  the  disposal  of  the  regime,  now  or  potentially,  what  opportunities  exist  for 
increasing the production of goods and services in the country?” And in the second instance 
“Given  the  resources  of  the  regime,  now  or  potentially,  what  political  choices  are  possible 
and what might be their cumulative effects?” These arguments can be found in a delightful 
book  by  Warren  Ilchman  and  Norman  Uphoff  entitled  “The  Political  Economy  of  Change” 
which  examines  the  efficacy  of  politics  and  political  science  in  developing  countries  and 
incorporates economic method into political science methodology in order to find solutions for 
statesmen.  The  arguments  also  raise  again  the  age  old  question:  “What  should  be  the 
relationship of men of knowledge to men of power?” 
One would posit as an observer that our efforts at integration have excluded politics almost in 
a  deliberate  way  as  if  this  sanitization,  so  to  speak,  would  facilitate  success.  Integration 
however is not an apolitical subject and the further up the integration rung it gets, the more 
the  need  for  an  appropriate  political  framework  to  guide  the  way  and  take  vital  decisions. 
Administrative and technical personnel cannot take the lead in pushing forward integration. It 
lies solely in the hands of the political elite. 
The political elite in the OECS must now set its aim steadfastly on the goal of socioeconomic 
development  and  craft  the  political  and  administrative  institutions  to  facilitate  the  process. 
Shaping a new state nation in the region will require dealing with the political and economic 
impediments  and  addressing  with  urgency  the  modernization  process  in  the  OECS.  An 
effective,  efficient  and  entrepreneurial  state  is  a  critical  element  in  this  process  to  be 
complemented by an innovative and internationally competitive private sector. 
Strategically there are four agencies which have very specific roles to play under the guiding 
political inputs of the OECS Heads of Government and their ministerial colleagues: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The Ministries of Finance and Planning  
The Public Service Unions 
The  private  sector  represented  by  an  all-embracing,  dynamic,  innovative,  and 
regionalist-oriented Business Council; and 
A resilient, well capitalized and innovative national banking sector. 
iv. 
The socioeconomic transformation will require a rate of growth of between 5 and 7 percent 
over a period of at least ten years to double per capita incomes in the OECS. This rate of 
growth  will  be  able  to  address  the  unemployment  and  poverty  levels  and  maintain  and 
improve the human development indices. 
Given the integration arrangements as well as the political choices and political management 
of the process, the strategy involves a reduction in the cost and an increase in the efficiency 
of  government,  allied  with  a  significant  increase  in  private  sector  output  for  export.  There 
must  be  a  balance  between  consumption  and  production  which  would  involve  a  pact 
between the state, the private sector and the trade unions to maintain the balance and trade 
– offs between wages, prices, employment and productivity. This pact has been successful in 
Barbados and should be replicated throughout the region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Another critical area to be tackled is the resources – expectation gap. This results from the 
demonstration  effect  of  being  in  this  hemisphere,  in  close  proximity  to  the  land  of  mass 
consumption, the United States, coupled with the impact of multi–party, competitive, elective 
politics which escalates the demand for public services. Political parties must play a critical 
role in the management of these expectations. 
The consumption orientation of the economic system has however been underpinned by a 
very sophisticated import machinery evident in both the real sector and the financial sector. 
Structural  changes  to  both  sectors  will  be  required. The  banking  system  will  have  to  be  a 
major  target  for  restructuring,  especially  since  it  controls  over  75  percent  of  the  loanable 
funds  in  the  economy.  A  strong  national  banking  system  would  be  a  prerequisite  for 
influencing the process, coupled with a deliberate effort, as is now taking place, to strengthen 
money and capital market institutions. 
The private sector will also have to reinvent itself to change its structure from being one-third 
formal, two-thirds informal and 90 percent concentrated on wholesale, retail, real estate and 
construction  activities.  The  new  balance  should  see  a  reversal  of  the  formal/informal  ratio 
and at least a 60/40 arrangement of non-tradeables to tradeables. 
In the government sector a cadre of technically and administratively competent professionals 
should spearhead the restructuring of the state machinery to create a highly competent and 
developmental  state.  The  role  of  public  sector  unions  is  of  critical  importance,  as  it  is 
necessary that they buy into the creation of such a state. In short the modernization of the 
state has to be one of the highest priorities of the political authorities. 
The modernization of the state and the development of the real and financial sectors will be 
the complement of a three-prong strategy and programme which can be outlined as follows: 
i. 
A financial sector safety net 
A fiscal safety net 
An environmental safety net 
A social safety net. 
An  externally  financed  stimulus  package  synchronized  with  four  critical  safety  net 
programmes to address the structural vulnerabilities of the countries. These safety 
nets would be: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
An  industrial  policy  that  targets  a  lead  transformational  sector  in  which  the  region 
has a comparative advantage that can be turned into a competitive advantage. 
A number of overarching and interlocking national and regional projects which will 
facilitate  the modernization  process.  Dubbed the  great modernization  projects,  we 
have  identified  seven  of  them,  namely,  transportation,  energy,  environment,  ICT, 
education and skills training, research and development and governance. 
ii. 
iii. 
In  conclusion  one  can  only  affirm  that  these  are  very  challenging  times.  The  international 
economy can be characterized as being fraught with danger as there continues to be great 
uncertainty and volatility. On the other hand these circumstances have presented us with a 
once in a life time opportunity to restructure our economies, polities, and societies. 
I  end  with  a  quotation  which  sums  up  my  feelings  on  these  matters  “We  believe  it  is  a 
necessity of our times to translate our beliefs, our hopes and ideals into concrete action”. 
Thank You 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
