Már Guðmundsson: Managing capital flows in a financially integrated 
area – lessons from the Icelandic financial crisis 
Remarks by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a conference 
organised  by  the International  Monetary  Fund,  Bank  of  Estonia  and  Sveriges  Riksbank  on 
Nordic-Baltic financial linkages and challenges, Tallinn, 13 December 2013. 
 2. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Eesti Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and the IMF for inviting me to speak at 
this most interesting event. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  focus  on  those  aspects  of  the  Icelandic  financial  crisis  that  are  most 
closely associated with the topic of this session, which is financial integration. I will draw out 
some  salient  features  of  that  story  and  then  link  them  to  several  lessons  that  might  be  of 
more general relevance. 
In  the  autumn  of  2008,  two  separate  but  interrelated  sub-stories  of  the  recent  Icelandic 
financial and economic saga converged in a tragic grand finale. These are: 
1. 
Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic management in small, 
open, and financially integrated economies. This is a story that has played out many 
times around the globe, and many of its elements have been seen before in Iceland. 
The rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of EU legislation 
(the European “passport”). This story was much more unique, as it involved the first 
banking crisis in Europe since the EU single market was formed in the early 1990s. 
Let  me  briefly  discuss  each  of  these  in  turn,  in  order  to  set  the  stage  for  the  policy 
discussions. 
First, the macroeconomic boom-bust story. All the usual suspects were present: very strong 
capital inflows fuelling a credit and asset price boom that subsequently turned into a bubble 
at  the  same  time  as  the  economy  overheated  and  an  unsustainable  external  position 
developed, as could be seen in a double-digit current account deficit. And macroeconomic 
and prudential policies were not up to the task. 
At the deepest level, this part of the story was related to three factors: 
1. 
The  complications  that  tend  to  arise  with  macroeconomic  management  as  very 
small, open economies become more and more financially integrated; 
The specific conditions of ample and cheap credit at the global level; 
And major policy mistakes in Iceland, both of the type that would be deemed to be 
such  in  any  book  (such  as  giving  an  already  overheated  economy  a  demand 
stimulus),  and  those  more  closely  related  to  the  orthodoxy  prevailing  at  the  time: 
freely floating exchange rates, interest rate policy focusing mainly on low inflation in 
terms of goods and services, and good micro-supervision; and  let the markets do 
the rest. 
2. 
3. 
The first factor is perhaps of interest here. The process runs as follows: Domestic interest 
rates at the longer end of the maturity spectrum tend to become more closely correlated with 
the  global  rate,  or  the  rate  of  the  largest  trading  partner,  and  less  correlated  with  the 
domestic  policy  rate.  This  means  that  monetary  transmission  tends  to  go  increasingly 
through the exchange rate channel, which is only a problem, however, if the exchange rate 
behaves badly. Unfortunately, there is a lot of evidence to suggest that it does. Uncovered 
interest rate parity (UIP) does not hold except over long horizons. Interest rate differentials 
give rise to widespread carry trading, which is by nature a bet against UIP. Exchange rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
thus diverge from fundamentals for protracted periods, followed by sharp corrections. So the 
exchange rate often seems to be as much a source of shocks and instability as a tool for 
adjustment  and  stabilisation.  Ultimately,  these cycles  can  take  the  boom-bust form  and,  in 
extreme  cases,  can  result  in  serious  financial  instability  or  crisis.  The  research  on  this 
phenomenon is still ongoing, but there is a lot of evidence to suggest that the problem would 
not disappear even if macroeconomic policies in the traditional sense were perfect. 
This process was important in the Icelandic episode. The capital inflows were driven by the 
traditional  push  and  pull  factors.  But  when  a  benign  upturn  originally  driven  by  FDI  in  the 
energy-intensive sector turned into overheating, and fiscal and other demand levers pulled 
by the Government were either insufficiently used or pulling in the other direction, monetary 
policy  was  overburdened  and  the  increased  interest  rate  differential  that  resulted  pulled  in 
further capital and carry trade positions. 
Let me now turn to the banking part of the story. Before the collapse, the banking system had 
expanded very rapidly, growing in just five years from a combined balance sheet of less than 
2 times GDP at the end of 2003 to 10 times GDP. Most of this expansion was cross-border, 
and  a  significant  part  of  it  was  really  off-border,  having  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both 
financing and investment took place abroad. Around two-thirds of the balance sheet of the 
three cross-border banks was denominated in foreign currency. As is typical for banks, the 
FX  part  of  the  balance  sheet  had  a  significant  maturity  mismatch.  However,  there  was  no 
safety net of the type that we have in a national setting to back it up. This turned out to be the 
fatal  flaw  in  the  whole  setup,  although  we  now  know  that  these  banks  were  also 
undercapitalised,  which  might  have  done  them  in  at  a  later  stage.  But  so  were  several 
European banks that were considered solid at the time – and some of them are still around! 
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
Iceland’s big banks were faced with a wholesale run on their foreign currency liabilities and 
were  therefore  heading  towards  a  default  on  those  liabilities  in  the  absence  of  LOLR 
assistance in foreign currency. However, given their size, it was impossible for the Icelandic 
authorities to provide such assistance on their own. 
Given the lack of international cooperation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to consider 
radical solutions. Although they were probably not articulated fully at the time, these solutions 
entailed several goals: preserving a functioning domestic payment system, ring-fencing the 
sovereign in the case of bank failures, limiting the socialisation of private sector losses, and 
creating the conditions for the reconstruction of a domestic banking system. 
In essence, the adopted solution saved the domestic operations of the banking system and 
let  the  international  part  to  go  into  a  resolution  process.  The  new  banks  were  created  by 
carving  the  domestic  assets  and  liabilities  out  of  the  old,  failing  banks.  The  new  banking 
system amounted to 1.7 times GDP. 
To a significant degree, these measures were successful in keeping the domestic payment 
system and basic banking services up and running, which was a key factor in dampening the 
effect of the banks’ failure on the economy. 
There  were  two  key  elements to  the policy  response  during the  autumn  of  2008. The first 
was crisis management vis-à-vis the failing banks, which I have just mentioned. The second 
was the economic programme developed by the Icelandic authorities in co-operation with the 
IMF.  The  programme  had  three  key  goals:  stabilisation  of  the  exchange  rate,  fiscal 
sustainability, and reconstruction of the financial sector. Comprehensive capital controls were 
an  important  element  in  the  programme,  but  their  rationale  was  to  help  to  stabilise  the 
exchange rate in a situation where the currency had fallen more than 50% in 2008, where 
foreign  króna  positions  that  were  a  legacy  of  carry  trade  and  capital  inflows  amounted  to 
around 40% of GDP, and where a large fiscal deficit that had to be financed in the domestic 
market had developed. The capital controls therefore gave monetary policy more scope to 
help  stabilise  and  turn  around  the  real  economy  once  inflation  came  down.  Subsequently, 
they shielded the eocnomy from the financial spillover effects of the crisis in the eurozone. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But  the  problem  is  that  they  are  still  in  place,  over  five  years  after the climax  of  Iceland´s 
financial crisis. The reason is that Iceland is still facing a balance of payments crisis that is a 
legacy  of former  capital inflows  and  the  unwinding  of these  big  cross-border  banks. There 
are three elements to this, as is described in this slide: contractual foreign debt payments in 
the  next  few  years,  well  in  excess  of  reasonable  expectations  of  the  size  of  the  current 
account surplus; offshore krónur, a legacy of the carry trade, which still amount to 20% of 
GDP; and potential króna payments, from the old banks to foreign residents, amounting to 
another 25% of GDP. 
We  can  see  from  the  Icelandic  case,  and  indeed  many  others,  that  although  financial 
integration  can  offer  many  benefits  to  small,  open  economies,  it  also  potentially  entails 
significant risks that can turn into a nightmare if left unchecked. In Iceland’s case, it was a 
pretty dramatic. What are the lessons, then? In the interest of time, I will briefly mention a 
select few. 
The first issue that I would like to mention is the need to monitor closely both net capital flows 
that immediately affect the economy – especially credit growth, asset prices, and domestic 
demand – and the developments of gross external assets and liabilities that might not affect 
the economy until risks materialise and banks are undergoing the transformation from being 
international  in  life  to  being  national  in  death.  During  the  financial  crisis,  there  have  been 
numerous  cases  of  vulnerabilities  in  gross  positions  coming  home  to  roost,  such  as  the 
dollar-denominated parts of European banks’ balance sheets. In Iceland and similar cases 
there is also a statistical issue here that needs to be acknowledged: the distinction between 
flows that actually entered or left the country at the time and those that were simply flowing 
offshore  in  both  directions  but  were  booked  through  the  Icelandic  headquarters  and  thus 
recorded in the country’s BP and IIP. 
The  second  lesson  relates  to  the  EU  framework  for  cross-border  banking,  which  clearly 
facilitated the cross- and off-border expansion of the Icelandic banks through the so-called 
European passport. It was and is deeply flawed. 
The basic problem is that the freedoms are not matched by public action and frameworks at 
the EU and EEA level. Bank size relative to country size was assumed to be a matter of no 
concern,  and  FX  risk  was  largely  ignored.  Based  on  the  Icelandic  experience,  a  banking 
union makes perfect sense, but only fully for the eurozone, and even then it has to include all 
three elements – common supervision, resolution, and deposit insurance – in order to break 
the  deadly  embrace  of  banks  and  sovereigns.  In  the  interim,  I  think  small  countries, 
especially those with their own currencies, will have to impose their own prudential measures 
in order to defend themselves against the risks they face. 
The third lesson relates to the structure of the financial sector in small, open economies in 
the  absence  of  robust  and  credible  international  or  regional  safety  nets.  To  my  mind, 
international  financial  centres  cannot  be  located  in  such  countries  without  some  ex  ante 
mechanism  that  at  least  partly  insulates  the  domestic  economy  from  the  risks  involved.  In 
some sense, this is what Iceland did in the nick of time in early October 2008. Furthermore, 
in  very  small,  open  economies  with  their  own  currency,  like  Iceland,  the  international 
activities  of  domestic  banks  and  FX  risks  on  their  balance  sheets  must  be  limited  and 
regulated. In this context, we have been thinking about the prudential regime that must be in 
place in Iceland when we have lifted capital controls and Icelandic banks are again free to 
use  their  European  passporting  rights.  We  will  have  more  stringent  restrictions  on 
permissible  currency  mismatches  than  in  the  past,  also  taking  into  account  positions  of 
unhedged  households  and  companies,  but  more  importantly,  we  will,  through  some 
combination  of  LCR-  and  NSFR-type  ratios  in  foreign  exchange,  put  strict  limits  on 
FX maturity  mismatches.  The  combination  of  these  and  other  measures  will  make  it 
impossible for the banking system to attain the size and cross-border reach it had before the 
crisis. The  big question is  whether  it  will  be  deemed  compatible  with  the  EEA  Agreement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
More  generally,  I  think  the  distinction  between  macroprudential  measures  and  capital 
controls can be more complex than many make it out to be. 
The fourth lesson is on capital flows: Deal with the inflows if you  want to avoid the risk of 
having to introduce comprehensive capital controls on outflows, which can work as in Iceland 
but have increasingly negative side effects on the economy. The measures that can be taken 
to  deal  with 
include  adopting  correctly  aligned  macroeconomic  and 
macroprudential  policies,  leaning  into  the  wind  by  buying  part  of  the  inflows  into  foreign 
exchange  reserves,  and  even  in  extreme  cases,  deploying  selective  capital  inflow 
management tools. 
The  final  lesson  from  all  of  this  is  that  if  we  are  going  to  reap  the  benefits  of  financial 
globalisation, we must make it safer. 
inflows 
the 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 