  Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking supervision and central banking 
Speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chair of the 
Board  of  the  FIN-FSA  (the  Finnish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority),  at  the  3rd  FIN-FSA 
Conference on “EU Regulation and Supervision”, Helsinki, 5 June 2014. 
 In  her  opening  remarks,  Anneli  Tuominen,  Director  General  of  the  FSA,  touched  upon  a 
number of important questions concerning the costs and benefits of the banking union to the 
supervised banks themselves. I would like to follow up on this by asking how is the banking 
union beneficial from a central banking perspective? 
In the euro area, the connection between the new supervisory mechanism and central 
banking  is  evident  from  the  institutional  set-up.  The  common  Euroarea  banking 
supervision, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has been attached to the ECB, which 
will  in  November  2014  assume  new  supervisory  powers.  This  solution  –  as  opposed  to 
establishing a separate European supervisory entity – follows largely the need to establish 
the SSM quickly within the limits of the current EU treaties. 
We should not forget, however, that in many ways the ECB responsible for bank supervision 
is not the same ECB that is responsible for monetary policy. 
The  decision-making  of  the  two  functions  have  been  purposefully  kept  separate  and  on 
supervisory  matters  the  new  Supervisory  Board  will  have  a  predominant  role,  even  if  the 
Council must still approve these decisions afterwards. 
The  two  functions  will  also  have  separate  staff,  restrictions  on  exchange  of  confidential 
information and are even located in separate buildings in different sides of Frankfurt. 
So, apart from the institutional set-up, what does the banking union mean to the euro 
area and the European system of central banks? I would expect the primary benefits to 
relate  to  its  impact  on  broader  financial  stability  and  the  degree  of  European  financial 
integration. Let me briefly touch upon each of these in turn: 
• 
In the short-term, the ongoing comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance 
sheets  encourages  euro  area’s  ailing  banks  to  return  to  full  health.  Balance 
sheet transparency and confidence in banks’ capital levels will, in turn, contribute to 
the efforts to reduce the interdependence between banks and sovereigns. 
To be clear, banking union is not a solution by itself to shore up highly indebted euro area 
economies  back  to  financial  and  fiscal  health.  Addressing  such  problems  require  many 
additional efforts, not least of all political perseverance in implementing structural reforms in 
the affected economies themselves. 
Similarly, the Banking Union will not directly limit the share of banks’ assets tied to sovereign 
debt. Placing strict limits to banks’ sovereign holdings would rather be a separate regulatory 
matter and would warrant careful, longer-term deliberations. 
That  said,  the  comprehensive  assessment  should  enhance  confidence  in  the  European 
banking sector and add impetus to banks’ efforts to improve their capital adequacy. In this 
respect,  much  has  already  been  achieved  in  the  run-up  to  the  exercise.  The  improved 
confidence,  in  turn,  promotes  provision  of  healthy  credit  to  the  economy  and  thereby 
contributes to Europe’s recovery prospects. 
• 
From a longer-term perspective, the Banking Union will help us prevent and at 
least  mitigate  potential  distortions  and  their  destabilizing  effects  on  the 
European financial markets. The SSM will be a key element in addressing banking 
sector risks before they materialize and, like the ECB in the area of monetary policy, 
lend credibility to national banking supervision by conducting it with a supranational 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  perspective.  I  argue  that  this  is  a  fundamental  change  in  the  culture  of  how 
European supervision and resolution are conducted. We move from national efforts 
to  prop  up  domestic  banks  to  appropriate  pan-European  supervision,  i.e.  to  a 
system where the structure of decision making matches the international character 
of the banks and markets. 
The change does not only include the improved supranational banking supervision, but also 
other  elements.  The  SSM  will  be  complemented  by  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive  (BRRD)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM).  The  new  legal  framework 
will allow early intervention in troubled banks. It will also make possible the bail-in of banks’ 
shareholders, and so creditors help to dissolve the expectation that banks’ resolution costs 
would fall on the tax payers. This new resolution regime is backed up by the cross-border 
risk-sharing  via  the  single  resolution  fund,  which  will  be  financed  by  the  banking  industry 
itself.  All  this  will  alleviate  concentration  of  the  ultimate  liability  for  troubled  banks  on  any 
single  sovereign.  As  an  important  result,  the  arrangements  could  decouple  the  banking 
industry from the fiscal condition of the sovereigns concerned. 
Why does all this matter for the central banks? Financial stability and the central banks’ 
key objective of price stability are obviously connected, both directly and indirectly through 
the  real  economy.  But  a  stable  financial  system  also  fosters  greater  integration  of  the 
financial  markets.  And  the  more  integrated  the  financial  markets  are  in  the  euro  area,  the 
more effective will be the transmission of ECB’s monetary policy decisions. 
One of the features of the financial crisis was the impairment of this transmission mechanism 
as financial  markets  within  the  euro  area  started  to fragment  along the  national  lines. The 
interest rates faced by businesses and households diverged significantly between member 
states  not  only  because  of  differences  in  their  operating  environment,  but  because  banks’ 
own borrowing terms were tied together with those of their home-country sovereigns. 
In  such  circumstances,  common  monetary  policy  stance  would  also  have  different 
implications from country-to-country depending on the financial state of the sovereign. In the 
course  of  the  crisis,  reversing  this  financial  fragmentation  became  an  important  policy 
question for euro area central bankers. 
In thinking about the benefits of the banking union, we should also take a moment to 
think about the alternative. In theory, we could either (i) retain the status quo and accept 
the  destabilizing  features  inherent  in  the  pre-crisis  financial  system  or  (ii)  reverse  the  past 
gains  in  European  financial  integration  and  revert  our  banking  sectors  back  within  their 
national borders. 
From the perspective of a euro-area central banker, neither of these alternatives is desirable. 
As  demonstrated  by  the  crisis,  the  first  option  could  cause  devastating  effects  on  the  real 
economy  with  severe  collateral  damages.  Without  the  steps  taken  in  the  past  two  years 
toward the banking union, the European financial market could lose its credibility as a deeply 
integrated and seamlessly functioning market. 
As to the second option, I have already highlighted the interdependence between financial 
integration  and  common  monetary  policy.  If  the  transmission  of  common  monetary  policy 
was restricted by national borders, its impact would be highly limited at best and destabilizing 
at worst. To a large extent, a nationally fragmented financial system could substantially set 
back other areas of European integration too, such as free movement of goods, services and 
labor. 
Now,  I’ve  discussed  why  and  how  central  banks  benefit  from  the  financial  stability 
effects of the banking union. But the central banks themselves are, of course, integral 
part  of  the  financial  system  and  contribute  to  financial  stability  through  their  own 
actions. 
Here it is worth noting that, with the SSM, the ECB assumes responsibility for both 
bank-specific  and  system-wide  prudential  supervision.  This  means  more  systematic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  oversight of SSM-member states’ overall financial stability, which is backed up by the set of 
macroprudential tools in the new capital requirement regulation and directive (CRR/CRD4). 
Where the primary responsibility for national macroprudential policy rests with the designated 
national authorities, the SSM regulation allows the ECB to call for stricter national measures 
based on its own independent analysis. 
As  with  micro-prudential  supervision,  the  benefit  of  ECB’s  oversight  role  is  not  only  in  the 
enhanced credibility, but also in the broader cross-country perspective inherent in the SSM’s 
decision-making.  This  helps  ensure  that  macroprudential  policies  are  implemented  in  a 
consistent manner, thereby safeguarding the integrity of the EU’s single rule-book. 
At the same time, the additional oversight by the ECB limits the risk of the so-called inaction 
bias to ensure that systemic risks, where identified, are addressed in a timely fashion. 
Furthermore, the macro-prudential tools allow targeted attenuation of national credit cycles, 
thereby  also  limiting  heterogeneity  in  economic  cycles  within  the  euro  area.  This,  in  turn, 
helps  support  more  balanced  growth  in  the  region  and  helps  monetary  policy  to  remain 
focused on the euro area aggregates. 
Finally, let me admit that I have mainly focused on the banking union’s impact largely 
from the perspective of a euro-area member state. The benefits of financial stability in the 
euro area will certainly be felt also outside its borders, but the overall balance of the banking 
union’s costs and benefits may differ between its members and non-members. And having 
the banking supervisory and resolution regime fully effective only in the Euroarea – at least in 
the very beginning – would mean that the institutional arrangements do not fully correspond 
to the reality that banks can operate across national borders in Europe. 
The banking union is open to members outside the euro area, but so far none have opted to 
join  in.  Should  this  remain  so,  the  borders  of  the  banking  union  would  slice  across  our 
current, closely integrated financial markets in the Nordic countries. This raises the question 
how  this  level  of  financial  integration  can  be  sustained  if  the  institutional  supervisory  and 
crisis resolution arrangements remain separate? 
Although  our  current  institutional  set-up  may  not  be  optimal,  we  also  have  in  the  Nordic 
region long traditions of cooperation in financial supervision. If anything, the Banking Union 
should  give  us  incentives  to  strengthen  this  cooperation  and  find  collaborative  working 
arrangements  that  help  us  to  make  the  most  of  the  Banking  Union’s  benefits  also  at  its 
borders. 
The  fact  that  most  of  us  share  the  same  EU-wide  regulatory  rule  book  (CRR/CRD4)  and 
instructions for crisis resolution (the BRRD) provides a good basis for this. But we also need 
to make sure that our national financial stability decisions pay due regard to their effects on 
other countries. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The main benefit of the banking union is that through it we will correct one weakness in our 
European financial market structure; the supranational institutional supervision and resolution 
set-up will match to the real operational scope and scale of the banking industry. 
In addition, let me summarize some key benefits for the European central banks; 
• 
• 
monetary policy transmission mechanism made more secured, 
prospects  for  financial  stability  and  efficient  functioning  of  financial  markets  are 
improved and 
we get a world class banking supervision in Europe. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
