K C Chakrabarty: Inclusion, growth and governance – issues and way 
forward 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the 35th SKOCH Summit, New Delhi, 21 March 2014. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Bipin  Nair  and  Ms.  Mruga  Paranjape  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged 
1.  Lord  Meghnad  Desai,  Professor  Emeritus,  London  School  of  Economics;  Shri  Rana 
Kapoor,  Managing  Director  &  CEO,  Yes  Bank  and  President,  ASSOCHAM;  Shri  Sameer 
Kochhar, Chairman, SKOCH Group; members of the print and electronic media; ladies and 
gentlemen!  It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  present  here  today  at  the  inaugural 
session  of  this  SKOCH  Summit  which  features  the  theme  of  “Inclusion,  Growth  and 
Governance”.  The  theme  of  the  conference  is  particularly  relevant  at  this  juncture  in  our 
economy  when  the  economic  growth  has  considerably  slowed  down.  Across  the  globe, 
especially in the awake of the financial crisis, there has been a growing appreciation of the 
fact  that  sustainable  growth  and  financial  stability  can  only  be  achieved  through  greater 
financial inclusion. The policymakers in India have been cognizant of the need for equitable 
development and have pursued polices which aimed at greater financial inclusion over the 
years. Generating sustainable economic growth through increased financial inclusion has, of 
late, become the central mantra of the regulators and policy makers, not only in India, but 
across the globe. But, how far have we succeeded in our efforts? Undoubtedly, over the last 
five-six years, ever since RBI has encouraged the banks to adopt a structured approach for 
financial  inclusion,  the  banking  sector  has  done  a  good  job.  One  can  see  the  statistics 
related to number of basic bank accounts opened, number of Kisan credit cards (KCCs) and 
General credit cards(GCCs) issued, etc. These numbers are by no means small. But, if you 
ask me whether we are satisfied with the progress, the answer would be an unqualified “NO.” 
We are not happy with the quality of Financial Inclusion that we have achieved over these 
years.  When  we  say  quality,  we  mean  that  although  a  number  of  accounts  have  been 
opened,  many  people  have  been  issued  KCCs  and  GCCs;  the  number  of  transactions  in 
these  accounts  continues  to  be  minuscule.  What  really  pains  me  is  that  contrary  to  the 
potential  that  exists,  the  progress  is  quite  unsatisfactory.  The  larger  question,  therefore,  is 
what  is  holding  us  back?  Why  are  the  banks  not  able  to  bring  in  meaningful  financial 
inclusion?  To  my  mind,  a  fair  share  of  the  collective  failure  of  the  stakeholders  can  be 
attributed to poor governance of our Financial Inclusion framework and lack of accountability 
at the highest policy level i.e. Board and at the level of senior management. 
2. I am, therefore, happy that SKOCH has chosen this theme, which is aimed at highlighting 
this linkage between inclusion, growth and governance. As I mentioned a little while back, we 
set in motion a structured framework for promoting financial inclusion some 5–6 years ago 
and hence, this is an ideal time to take stock of our initiatives, reflect on our achievements 
and initiate course correction, wherever necessary. In my address today, I intend to focus on 
the progress made in our financial inclusion efforts, the attendant issues and challenges and 
the improvements needed in the governance framework of the financial inclusion initiatives in 
the banks in order to make it truly meaningful. 
3.  There  is  an  inalienable  link  between  growth  and  governance  and  this  has  been 
established through several empirical studies. The concept of good governance emerged at 
the  end  of  the  1980s,  first  at  the  World  Bank  which  was  further  developed  upon  by 
international  development  aid  agencies  and  organizations  such  as  UNDP  and  OECD. 
According  to  the  World  Bank,  good  governance  entails  sound  public  sector  management 
(efficiency,  effectiveness  and  economy),  accountability,  exchange  and 
flow  of 
information  (transparency),  and  a  legal  framework  for  development  (justice,  respect  for 
human rights and liberties)(World Bank, 1994). UNDP states 9 major characteristics of good 
free 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
law,  Transparency,  Responsiveness,  Consensus 
governance:  Participation,  Rule  of 
orientation,  Equity,  Effectiveness  and  Efficiency,  Accountability  and  Strategic  Vision.  Good 
governance can spur the process of economic growth and lead to gains which are tangible, 
equitable and inclusive. 
4.  Similarly,  there  is  an  equally  compelling  link  between  growth  and  financial  inclusion 
especially in the emerging market economies. This is on account of the pivotal role that the 
banks play as financial intermediaries in these economies, both at a macro and a micro level. 
At a macro level, banks contribute to growth through mobilization of savings and allocation of 
credit  towards  the  most  optimal  deployment  avenues  available  in  the  economy;  while  at  a 
micro  level,  banks  provide  households  and  businesses  an  opportunity  to  realize  their 
economic  goals  and  improve  their  financial  position  by  providing  a  range  of  financial 
services, thereby contributing to overall growth. However, the ability of banks to play this vital 
role is constrained by their lack of reach across a large segment of the population on account 
of financial exclusion. Financial inclusion and the consequent increased penetration of banks 
to the hitherto unbanked segments, thus, have strong linkages to economic growth. 
Growth through financial inclusion: historical perspective 
5.  The  criticality  of  the  financial  sector  in  ensuring  equitable  and  sustainable  development 
was  realized  quite  early  in  the  post-independence  period  and  there  was  a  focus  on 
channeling  credit  to  the  neglected  sectors  of  the  economy  and  weaker  sections  of  the 
population. Increasing access to credit for the poor has remained a core concern for India’s 
planning architecture, in its fight against poverty. Having recognized the social and economic 
imperatives  of  broader  financial  inclusion  early,  the  policy  makers  set  about  finding 
innovative ways to empower the poor. Starting with the nationalization of banks (1969/1980), 
outlining  priority  sector  lending  requirements  for  banks,  introduction  of  the  Lead  Bank 
Scheme, establishment of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs-1975–76), Service Area Approach 
(1989) and Self-Help Group-Bank Linkage Programme (1989–90), all these initiatives were 
taken  with  an  underlying  objective  of  taking  banking  services  to  the  masses  and  making 
them participate in the developmental process of the economy. The financial sector reforms, 
set  in  motion  in  the  1990s,  saw  the  focus  shift  to  strengthening  financial  institutions  and 
bringing  in  new  players  to  infuse  competitiveness,  with  the  ultimate  objective  of  achieving 
enhanced  financial  access,  greater  efficiency  and  improved  consumer  satisfaction.  These 
initiatives, undoubtedly, had a positive impact and resulted in some improvement in access 
of banking services to remote parts of the country. However, since these initiatives lacked a 
structured  and  coordinated  approach,  the  developments  were  rather  skewed  with  few 
regions  witnessing  better  financial  access  and  inclusion  than  others.  The  skewness  in 
financial development across regions could mainly be attributed to poor polices as well as 
inadequacy  of  Governance  framework.  The  lack  of  formal  structure  and  effective  co-
ordination  in  the  financial  inclusion  initiatives,  thus,  contributed  to  regional  disparities  in 
growth and economic prosperity. 
Good governance: an essential pre-requisite 
6. The vision of inclusive growth and governance dictates the need to broaden and deepen 
access to development finance for all. Only well functioning and efficiently governed financial 
institutions can provide financial services to meet the growing needs of the economy. Despite 
early  recognition  of  the  need  for  universal  financial  inclusion,  a  large  cross-section  of  the 
population remained financially excluded. As I mentioned before, though various measures 
initiated by the regulator/Government in the post-independent period resulted in impressive 
gains  in  rural  outreach  and  volume  of  credit,  the  structure  suffered  from  inherently  weak 
governance. The achievements were “quantitatively impressive, but qualitatively weak”. Due 
to the target driven approach to social banking, the initiatives were not part of the business 
strategy of banks. The effort on the part of the banks was always aimed at somehow meeting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  lending  targets,  mostly  at  subsidized  rates  of  interest,  or  with  subsidy  from  the 
Government under various government directed schemes. 
7.  Overtime  and  especially,  in  the  wake  of  the  adoption  of  the  RBI  encouraged  structured 
Financial  Inclusion  Framework  adopted  by  banks  over  the  last  few  years,  there  has  been 
substantive  development  in  the  architecture  and  thinking  on  financial  inclusion.  There  has 
been a growing realization that there is no “one-size-fits-all” financial inclusion strategy which 
can be cloned over the length and breadth of our country, although few core conditions are 
essential to maximize the benefits derived from such a strategy. Effective Governance is the 
most predominant of these conditions and is, in fact, a sine qua non for achieving financial 
inclusion. 
8.  Effective  financial  inclusion  cannot  be  achieved  until  the  entire  structure  of  the  financial 
inclusion  programme  is  supported  by  good  governance.  Good  governance  in  our  financial 
inclusion  programme  is  supposed  to  be  achieved  by  having  a  planned  and  structurally 
integrated  framework,  supported  by  a  policy  vision.  As  a  first  step  towards  creating  this 
governance  structure,  effort  has  been  made  to  precisely  define  financial  inclusion  and  all 
ingredients  associated  with  it.  In  the  subsequent  paragraphs  we  shall  be  presenting  the 
entire governance structure of our financial inclusion programme, the progress achieved so 
far and issues and challenges that need to be tackled to make it a success. 
Definition of financial inclusion 
(A)  
9. Financial Inclusion is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and 
services  needed  by  all  sections  of  the  society  in  general  and  vulnerable  groups  such  as 
weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  in  particular,  at  an  affordable  cost,  in  a  fair  and 
transparent manner, by regulated, mainstream institutional players. 
A bank led model 
Approach to financial inclusion 
(a)  
10. We have adopted a bank- led model for financial inclusion, which seeks to leverage on 
technology. Our belief has been that in view of the geographic expanse of our country, the 
success of Financial Inclusion initiatives would depend on the solution being ICT- enabled, 
with  the  market  participants  developing  new  delivery  models  to  best  suit  their  individual 
requirements. 
11. Our experience has shown that the goal of financial inclusion can be best served through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  entire  suite  of 
products necessary for effective financial inclusion. There has been criticism of our approach 
in not recognizing mono product offerings from service providers like telcos (remittance) and 
MFIs/SHGs (credit) as part of the mainstream financial inclusion process. As I said before, 
unless  the  players  can  offer  the  entire  suite  of  products,  it  cannot  be  considered  financial 
inclusion as it will only cater to a small chunk of the financial needs of the population and 
would, hence, not be complete financial inclusion. In fact, the mainstream financial players 
i.e. banks have the ability to cross-subsidize across various product/services and offer the FI 
products in most efficient and cost-effective manner. This does not, however, mean that we 
have entirely excluded other players. We have suggested that other entities, such as mobile 
service providers, can synergistically collaborate with banks in offering services. Our belief is 
that such partnerships with banks could be a game changer as far as financial inclusion is 
concerned. 
(b)  
12.  We  have  adopted  a  structured,  planned  and  integrated  approach  towards  Financial 
Inclusion which is focusing on improving access to financial services and also encouraging 
demand  for  financial  services  through  Financial  Literacy  initiatives.  We  recognize  that  the 
success of the financial inclusion efforts depend not just on the extent to which the reach of 
An integrated approach – financial inclusion & financial literacy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
the formal financial sector is improved, but also on whether the target population is aware 
about the benefits of moving on to the formal financial system and is inclined to make this 
transition. 
(c)  
13.  Let  me  now  dwell  upon  the  institutional  mechanism  that  has  been  built  for  ensuring 
success of financial inclusion across the country. 
i. 
Building a robust institutional mechanism for FI 
The  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  headed  by  the  Finance 
Minister  is  at  the  apex.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  FSDC,  we  have  a  Sub-Group  of 
FSDC headed by the Governor, RBI and within that is a Technical Group, headed 
by a Deputy Governor, RBI exclusively mandated to focus on financial inclusion and 
financial literacy. The membership of these groups comprises of representatives of 
all financial sector regulators, which makes the structure of the group very strong. 
In order to gauge the performance of banks and to continuously review the various 
models adopted under Financial Inclusion, RBI has constituted a Financial Inclusion 
Advisory  Committee  (FIAC),  headed  by  a  Deputy  Governor  from  RBI,  which  has 
members comprising of few Directors from the Central Board of RBI as also experts 
drawn  from  various  NGOs/other  civil  society  representatives,  etc.  The  collective 
expertise  and  experience  of  these  members  is  expected  to  be  leveraged  towards 
developing viable and sustainable banking services delivery models for meeting the 
objective of total financial inclusion. 
Further, we also leverage upon the infrastructure created at the state level, wherein 
we  have  the  State  Level  Bankers  Committee  (SLBC)  at  the  Apex  which  is  ably 
supported by the Lead District Managers (LDMs) at the District level. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  the  initiatives  on  the  supply  side  are  ably  supported  by 
initiatives on the demand side, we have around 896 financial literacy centres set up 
by  banks.  Banks  have  been  advised  to  educate,  train  and  counsel  people  in  the 
rural  areas  regarding  the  benefits  of  getting  linked  to  the  mainstream  financial 
system and also to take all out efforts to ensure that such people get converted into 
long term customers of the banks. 
Bouquet of financial products 
(d)  
14.  In  the  absence  of  banks,  a  large  number  of  informal  financial  market  intermediaries 
mushroomed, particularly in the rural areas, which were acting as proxy to the banks. Many 
of these entities were in the business of extending only credit products, that too at exorbitant 
rates  of  interest,  mostly  to  the  illiterate  section  of  the  population.  This  led  to  huge 
indebtedness  amongst  the  poor  people  and  their  deteriorating  financial  health.  Under  our 
financial inclusion framework, we expect the banks to ensure that all the financial needs of 
the customers are met by offering them, at a minimum, the following four basic products: 
 
 
 
 
15.  The  objective  is  to  ensure  that  customers  who  are  linked  to  the  banking  system  are 
provided  with  all  the  basic  financial  products  that  are  required  to  enhance  their  income 
generation capacity, thereby, helping them to come out of poverty. 
(e)  
16.  We  realize  that  the task  of  Financial  Inclusion  is  gigantic  and it  would  not  be possible 
without  leveraging  technology.  Recognizing  that  banking  services  through  the  traditional 
brick  and  mortar  model  is  expensive  for  banks,  we  have  encouraged  them  to  adopt  and 
A savings cum overdraft account 
A pure savings account, ideally a recurring or variable recurring deposit 
A remittance product to facilitate EBT and other remittances, and 
Entrepreneurial credit products like a GCC or a KCC 
Leveraging on technology 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Combination of branch and BC outlets 
leverage  technology  to  attain  greater  reach  and  penetration  while  keeping  the  cost  of 
providing financial services to the minimum. While we remain technology neutral, we require 
banks to seamlessly integrate whatever technology they choose, with their CBS architecture. 
This  approach  is  expected  to  enable  banks  to  minimize  the  cost  of  providing  financial 
services  in  far  flung  areas  of  the  country,  which  is  the  key  for  success  of  our  financial 
inclusion initiatives. 
(f)  
17. We have been advocating a combination of Brick and Mortar structure i.e. Branch with 
Click  and  Mouse  technology  (BC  outlets)  for  extending  financial  inclusion,  especially  in 
geographically  dispersed  areas.  However,  for  the  BC  model  to  succeed  there  is  need  for 
strong  support  from  the  base  branch.  Banks  have,  therefore,  been  advised  to  open  small 
intermediary brick and mortar structures between the base branch and the BC outlets. The 
whole purpose of the exercise is to create an entire ecosystem for ensuring efficient delivery 
of  services,  efficiency  in  cash  management,  redress  of  customer  grievances  and  closer 
supervision of BC operations for better credit administration. 
Branch expansion 
Regulatory initiatives 
Enhancing reach 
Agent banking model – use of business correspondents 
(B)  
(i)  
(a)  
18.  In  January  2006,  the  Reserve  Bank  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of 
intermediaries  such  as  business  facilitators  and  business  correspondents  in  providing 
banking services. The BC model allows banks to do “cash in – cash out” transactions at a 
location  closer  to  the  rural  population,  with  the  help  of  technology.  This  innovative  model 
aimed at addressing the last mile problem. 
(b)  
19. RBI has considerably relaxed the branch opening norms for banks. Branch authorisation 
has been relaxed to the extent that banks do not require prior permission to open branches 
in centres with population less than 1 lakh, they have only to report having done so. 
20. To further step up the opening of branches in rural areas, banks have been mandated to 
open  at  least  25  per  cent  of  their  new  branches  in  unbanked  rural  centres.  To  further 
encourage the banks towards pursuing this mandate, banks have been advised to consider 
frontloading (prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a three year 
cycle co-terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plans. This is expected to facilitate quicker 
branch expansion in unbanked rural centres. 
21.  Along  with  increasing  brick  and  mortar  presence  through  branch  expansion,  we  have 
also encouraged banks to adopt modes such as ICT-BC outlets, Kiosks, off-site Rural ATMs, 
mobile vans, etc. 
(ii)  
(a)  
22. One of the major constraints faced by the people in getting linked to the formal banking 
system  was  the  strict  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  norms.  To  facilitate  easy  opening  of 
accounts  especially  for  small  customers,  the  KYC  guidelines  have  been  simplified  so  that 
these accounts can be opened by means of self-certification in the presence of bank officials. 
Further, in order to leverage upon the initiative of UIDAI, RBI has recently allowed “Aadhaar”, 
the unique identification number to be used as one of the eligible documents for meeting the 
KYC requirement for opening a bank account. Very recently, RBI has also allowed banks to 
use the E-Aadhaar facility provided by UIDAI for KYC purposes. 
Enhancing access 
Relaxed KYC norms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts (BSBDAs) 
(b)  
23.  Banks  have  been  advised  to  make  available  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts 
(BSBDAs) for all individuals with zero minimum balance and facility of ATM card/ Debit card. 
Existing  impediments  of  minimum  balance  maintenance,  bank  charges,  etc.  are  being 
addressed through the same. With this it has become a right for every eligible Indian citizen 
to open basic savings account with banks. Further, banks have also been advised to provide 
in-built overdrafts in such basic savings accounts so as to meet the emergency credit needs 
of  the  customer  and  prevent  them  from  having  to  approach  money  lenders  in  distress 
situation.  The  entrepreneurial  credit  has  also  been  simplified  in  the  form  of  KCC  for  farm 
sector household and GCC for non-farm sector households. 
(c)  
Leveraging the banking network for extending social benefits – direct benefit 
transfers 
24. The recent introduction of direct benefit transfer, based on validation of the identity of the 
beneficiary through Aadhaar, will help facilitate delivery of  social welfare benefits by direct 
credit  to  the  bank  accounts  of  beneficiaries,  thereby  preventing  leakages  and  wastages  in 
the  system.  The  government,  in  future,  has  plans  of  routing  all  social  security  payments 
through the banking network using the Aadhaar based platform as a unique financial address 
of  beneficiaries.  In  order  to  ensure  smooth  roll  out  of  the  Government’s  Direct  Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) initiative, banks have been advised to: 
 
Open  accounts  of  all  eligible  individuals  in  camp  mode  with  the  support  of  local 
Government authorities. 
Seed the existing and new accounts with Aadhaar numbers. 
Put  in  place  an  effective  mechanism  to  monitor  and  review  the  progress  in 
implementation of DBT (G2P – Government to Personal Payments). 
 (C)  
Financial inclusion: a viable business proposition 
Financial inclusion plan of banks 
25.  Contrary  to  common  perception,  financial  inclusion  can,  with  better  governance,  be  a 
viable business proposition because of the huge untapped market, which can be brought into 
the fold of banking services. Financial Inclusion, prima facie, needs to be viewed as “money 
at the bottom of the pyramid”. With the banks being free to charge reasonable interest rates 
on the advances as also to internally fix charges for various service offerings, what banks 
actually  need  is  to  develop  an  appropriate  business  and  delivery  model  in  line  with  their 
business  strategy  and  comparative  advantage  and  align  the  same  to  their  business  plan. 
This will create an environment of competitiveness amongst banks and in the process will 
benefit the unbanked population. 
26.  As  I  have  mentioned  above,  we  have  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  a  structured  and 
planned approach to financial inclusion with commitment at the highest levels. Towards this 
end,  the  banks  have  been  advised  to  prepare  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  (FIPs)  containing 
self-determined targets on various parameters to be achieved during the FIP period, with the 
approval  from  their  respective  Boards,.  The  first  phase  of FIPs  was  implemented  over  the 
period  2010–2013  and  the  second  phase  of  FIPs  has  been  finalized  and  is  under 
implementation. The Reserve Bank has used the FIPs to gauge the performance of banks 
under  their  FI  initiatives.  For  this  purpose,  a  structured  and  comprehensive  monitoring 
mechanism has been put in place for evaluating banks’ performance vis-à-vis their planned 
targets. To ensure engagement of the Top Management/senior functionaries of the Bank in 
the  FI  process,  a  system  of  annual  review  meetings  between  CMDs/CEOs  of  banks  and 
Deputy Governor of RBI has also been institutionalized. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Performance of banks under the financial inclusion plan 
27.  The  achievements  of  the  banking  system  under  the  FIP  can  be  accessed  from  the 
following monitoring data (for the period up to December 2013):- 
i. 
Banking  connectivity  has  been  extended  to  nearly  328679  villages  from  67,694 
villages in March 2010. 
The total no of BSBDAs have gone up to 229 million of which 108 million are ICT 
based accounts. 
Credit to farm sector households have touched 39 million households while credit 
to non farm sector households have touched more than 6 million households 
About 238 million transactions have already been carried out in ICT based accounts 
through BCs during the nine month period ended December 2013 as against 250 
million transactions recorded during the year 2012–2013. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
28.  After  completion  of  the  first  FIP  period,  it  was  realized  that  although  a  large  banking 
network had been created along with the opening of large number of bank accounts, simply 
creating  the  banking  infrastructure  and  opening  banking  accounts  would  not  fulfill  the 
objectives of achieving meaningful financial inclusion. As an improved governance measure, 
with  an  underlying  objective  of  ensuring  involvement  of  all  stakeholders  in  the  Financial 
Inclusion  efforts  and  in  order  to  ensure  uniformity  in  the  reporting  structure  under  the 
Financial Inclusion Plan, banks were advised to ensure that their FIPs are disaggregated and 
that they percolate down up to the branch level. The focus under the new plan is to ensure 
that the newly created banking network is utilized not just for offering deposit and remittance 
products, but also for extending other products viz. credit, which can help make the business 
more viable for banks. This would also ensure that not only the volume of transactions in the 
newly opened accounts increase but the people also reap the benefits of getting linked to the 
formal financial system. 
Facilitating a balanced approach – roadmap for providing banking services in 
unbanked villages 
29. With the banks slowly realizing the potential business opportunity in financial inclusion 
and gearing up to penetrate the rural areas, , RBI came up with the idea of notional allocation 
of  villages  amongst  banks,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  efforts  of  banks  are  not  duplicated. 
This was also with the objective of ensuring presence of at least one banking outlet in all the 
unbanked villages of the country. 
30.  In  this  direction,  a  phase-wise  approach  was  adopted  wherein  SLBCs/DCCs  were 
advised to identify unbanked villages with population more than 2000 and notionally allocate 
them amongst banks operating in the region. While the first phase saw coverage of almost 
74,000  unbanked  villages  (having  a  population  above  2000),  in  the  second  phase,  the 
SLBCs/DCCs  have  identified  approximately  4,90,000  remaining  unbanked  villages.  These 
villages have also been notionally allotted to banks and the target is to provide each of these 
villages with a banking outlet by 2016. 
Financial literacy and financial education 
31. As I had mentioned earlier, we have adopted an integrated approach of promoting supply 
of  financial  services  through  improved  financial  access  and  ensuring  greater  demand  for 
financial  services  through  financial  literacy  initiatives.  In  the  Indian  context,  the  problem  of 
financial illiteracy is more acute with awareness levels of the rural population regarding the 
benefits of linking with mainstream financial institutions, being extremely poor. 
32.  Therefore,  we  have  ensured  that  our  supply  side  initiatives  are  ably  supported  by 
initiatives  on  the  demand  side.  Our  idea  is  to  include  financial  education  in  the  school 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
curriculum so as to educate children about the benefits of banks and banking services. In this 
direction, the Technical Group of the FSDC has already come out with a National Strategy on 
Financial Education, which has been approved by the FSDC. 
33. RBI has advised banks to set up Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) across the country. 
Banks  have  so  far  set  up  around  896  FLCs  as  of  December  2013.  These  FLCs  have 
reportedly educated more than 10 million people through various literacy programs. Banks 
have  been  further  advised  to  scale  up  financial  literacy  efforts  through  conduct  of  outdoor 
Financial  Literacy  Camps,  at  least  once  a  month,  both  by  the  FLCs  and  also  by  the  rural 
branches. 
34. In order to standardize the literacy material, RBI has prepared a comprehensive Financial 
Literacy Guide containing Guidance Note for Trainers, Operational Guidelines for conduct of 
Financial  Literacy  Camps,  Standard  Financial  Literacy  Material,  Financial  Diary  for  use  of 
rural customers and a set of 16 posters. Banks have been advised to use the material as a 
standard  curriculum  to  impart  basic  conceptual  understanding  of  financial  products  and 
services. 
Issues & challenges 
(D)  
35. While several initiatives are being taken for ensuring widespread financial access, certain 
factors continue to impede progress of financial inclusion. Let me come to these issues and 
challenges one by one. 
Governance deficit 
36. The need for effective governance implies that the underpinning of all processes, through 
norms that define our actions, allocate power and prescribe a matrix against which we can 
calibrate our performance. Lack of effective governance has been one of the major reasons 
for slow progress in implementing our Financial Inclusion initiatives. 
Ownership and accountability 
37. Why Financial Inclusion is not happening even after the infrastructure being in place? It is 
clearly due to lack of accountability and a problem of attitude. Many of the banks still have 
not  developed  an  appropriate,  cost-effective  delivery  model  for  Financial  Inclusion  and 
therefore,  they  are  still  not  thoroughly  convinced  about  FI  being  a  profitable  business 
opportunity.  Resultantly,  they  still  perceive  this  to  be  a  social/  regulatory  obligation  and 
consequently  their  efforts  are  half-hearted.  The  inadequacy  of  MIS  creates  further 
complications. The sunken cost for  setting up the intermediate brick and mortar structures 
and developing the BC network has to be seen as future investment. Obviously, it cannot be 
revenue accretive from day one. Still, if one were to logically work out the mathematics of 
serving the customers in a brick and mortar branch and through a BC, keeping the fixed and 
variable  cost  in  mind,  certainly  the  BC  model  would  work  out  much  cheaper  in  the 
intermediate term. Therefore, for the FI model to work, the banks need to take ownership of 
the  model  and  ensure  continuous  and  full  support  to  the  Business  Correspondents  at  the 
ground level. There is need to punish the non-performers in the system and the governance 
system has to be improved for ensuring buy-in from the Top Management and commitment 
and accountability from the rank and file of the bank. 
Delivery model 
38. One of the major challenges is that banks are yet to develop a sustainable and scalable 
business  delivery  model  to  guide  its  Financial  Inclusion  initiatives.  While  several  alternate 
models  have  been  tried  out,  the  BC-ICT  model  has  gained  prominence  amongst  banks. 
However, many banks are yet to settle upon on a BC model which is scalable and will help 
them achieve their targets under financial inclusion. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Viability issues 
39. While access to financial services has improved, the usage of the financial infrastructure 
continues  to  be  tardy.  While  more  than  3  lakh  banking  outlets  are  available  across  the 
country,  the  number  of  transactions  in  many  accounts  opened  by  the  BCs,  remains 
unimpressive. This not only restricts the potential benefits that could accrue from increased 
financial access but also reduces the viability of Financial Inclusion activities for banks and 
BCs. The reduced viability, in turn, impacts the scalability of the model and, in the process, 
hampers the Financial Inclusion efforts. 
Hindrances constraining BC operations 
40.  We  have  identified  certain  deficiencies  which  are  hampering  the  scaling  up  of  the  BC 
model. These include restrictive Cash Management Systems followed by banks wherein BCs 
are  required  to  fully  prefund  their  business  operations  in  terms  of  cash  limits  and  security 
obtained  from  BCs;  Non-insurance  of  cash  held  in  transit  by  BCs;  Low  or  untimely 
remuneration paid to BCs/CSPs; allowing transactions only in limited products through the 
BC channel. These have restricted the involvement and effectiveness of the BCs as a vital 
peg in the financial inclusion jigsaw. 
41. Our review has shown that different banks are adopting different practices. We feel that 
the time has come for banks to come together and identify the best practices for the scaling 
up of the BC model. We have asked banks to work under the aegis of IBA and come up with 
“Best Self Regulatory Practices for BC Operations” based on industry best practices.RBI is 
also  considering  issuing  instructions  to  banks  for  standardizing  operations  under  the  BC 
model. 
Technology issues 
42.  While  banks  have  innovated  on  technology,  the  same  has  not  resulted  in  significant 
reduction  in  the  cost  of  providing  financial  services.  Beneficiaries/  stakeholders  often 
complain of constraints in digital/ physical connectivity. This, coupled with delays in issuance 
of smart cards, reliability issues in hardware infrastructure such as hand held devices, etc. 
have impacted the quick roll out of financial services across the country. Over dependence 
on  vendors  and  the  resultant  problems  is  a  serious  governance  deficit  which  needs  to  be 
overcome for effective rollout of our Financial Inclusion initiatives. 
Collaboration 
43. Finally, the collective will power of the society and of all the concerned stakeholders is 
lacking  and  this  adversely  impacts  the  effective  implementation  of  our  Financial  Inclusion 
initiatives. 
Regulatory governance to self governance 
(E)  
44.  The  primary  role  of  the  regulator  is  to  issue  broad  guidelines  to  ensure  standardized 
practices across the banks at the national level. In line with these broad guidelines, it is the 
responsibility  of  the  bank  management  to  develop  their  own  internal  processes,  structures 
and  governance  framework  based  on  their  business  model  and  overall  business  strategy. 
The internal governance should ensure that a robust system is developed to keep a check on 
adherence to rules and regulations. 
45. Presently, there is a top-down approach to implementation of regulation and regulatory 
controls at all levels. Financial Inclusion delivery models also operate in similar ways where 
top-down approach is followed by banks while deciding the operational aspects of Business 
Correspondents and other delivery channels. It is this approach which needs a fundamental 
change.  We  need  to  move  from  forced  implementation  to  willing  participation  to  facilitate 
achievement  of  Financial  Inclusion  goals.  Effective  governance  at  all  levels  within  banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Alignment of business plan with all micro policies 
Self regulation 
Bottom up and participatory approach 
Robust internal checks and control 
Knowledge sharing at industry level 
would  ensure  that  regulations  are  seen  as  an  essential  element  of  business  and  are  not 
adhered  to  merely  for  compliance  sake.  Banks’  policies  should  evolve  from  best  practices 
and  ground  level  realities.  The  regulator  should  not  be  required  to  micro  manage  the 
principles  on  which  Financial  Inclusion  model  operates.  This  can  be  achieved  in  following 
ways: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
46. In general, Governance is administered in three ways viz. through market forces, through 
governing  body  or  through  network.  In  an  organizational  set  up,  it’s  about  the  rules  and 
regulations  that  guide  all  activities.  Regulatory  governance  reflects  the  emergence  of  de-
centered and mutually adaptive policy regimes which rest on regulation rather than service 
provision. From the perspective of the Governance framework guiding the financial inclusion 
process, banks need to devise their own strategies to ensure that an effective and conducive 
governance regime is in place to ensure attainment of the FI goals. 
levels.  Without  effective 
Conclusion 
47.  Good  governance  is  at  the  core  of  improving  the  delivery  of  public  services.  Good 
governance provides a mechanism for linking inclusion, decision making, and accountability. 
Problems in infrastructure, critical for building an inclusive India, can often be traced back to 
lack of ownership and poor governance. Many of the initiatives launched over the years for 
achieving  the  objective  of  rapid  growth  coupled  with  poverty  alleviation  and  inclusiveness 
have failed to achieve their goals because of lack of ownership, ineffective governance and 
insufficient  accountability  at  various 
implementation,  even 
substantial government expenditure results in limited success. 
48.  The  success  of  banks  cannot  be  measured  simply  in  terms  of  profit  their  banking 
operations generate. The banking services are equally about addressing the financial needs 
of  various  stakeholders.  Not  only  is  it  about  making  the  system  more  inclusive,  it  is  also 
about protecting the financial consumer, through improved awareness and better grievance 
redressal mechanisms. The mantra of good corporate governance, therefore, does not just 
encompass ethics and business practices followed by the bank or its personnel; it has to go 
beyond compliance with regulatory directives. It must consider fair and acceptable behavior, 
among others, to those who are more vulnerable, even if it is at some cost to their bottom 
lines. 
49. For our  Financial Inclusion initiatives to succeed, it is important for banks to craft new 
policies  on  governance  and  compliance,  wherein  good  governance  should  be  the  primary 
responsibility of the bank’s board of directors and its senior management. While we respect 
the mandate of the leadership of each bank to make strategic decisions as it is these choices 
that differentiate one bank from another as a business proposition; however, the governance 
perspective that we seek must be fundamentally entrenched as a core competency across all 
banks. 
50.  There  is  a  causal  linkage  between  growth  and  good  Governance.  The  deficit  of 
governance can impair and impede development. I am often asked why the BC model is not 
scaling up as it should to meet the humungous credit needs of our population. The answer is 
simple. The model lacks effective governance at every level. There is inadequate supervision 
of the banks’ frontline staff. The vision of the Board room is not transmitted to the frontline 
manager.  Governance  failure  is  also  reflected  in  the  vendor  dependence  in  the  usage  of 
technology.  We  have  to  chart  a  clear  path  and  change  this  dependence  into  efficient  and 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
effective systems which are scalable and sustainable. So, the overarching theme here is a 
persistent  and  immediate  need  to  address  the  governance  deficit  to  ensure  financial 
inclusion and concomitant growth. 
51. In sum, good governance and accountability at different levels of bank management is 
the key for the success of the financial inclusion programme. Maximum attention needs to be 
paid to firmly showcase the virtues of financial inclusion to the banks’ boards and to ensure 
its acceptance at the highest level. It is also important at the same time to make the Boards 
accountable to deliver the results on the mandate of financial inclusion. The acceptability and 
accountability  at  lower  level  of  management  will  automatically  follow.  We  also  need  to 
improve  governance  mechanism  for  delivery  of  banking  services  through  BC  network  by 
ensuring  better  co-ordination  and  governance  amongst  all  stakeholders,  including  the 
technology providers, vendors, etc. Up until now, we have followed a carrot and stick policy 
to  ensure  the  success  of  financial  inclusion  programme  with  the  carrots  being  used  more 
predominantly.  Having  created  a  flexible  and  friendly  regulatory  environment  for  financial 
inclusion for inclusive banking practices, time has come for us to use the stick more often, 
albeit  judiciously,  to  make  financial  inclusion  an  integral  part  of  banking  operation  and  its 
acceptability  at  bank  board  level.  This  has  to  be  supported  by  good  governance  at  every 
level of the management associated with the delivery of the financial inclusion programme. 
52. I once again congratulate the organizers for the topical selection of the theme and hope 
that  delegates  at  the  summit  would  appreciate  the  role  of  governance  deficit  in  impeding 
financial inclusion and growth in the country and take correctives steps within their respective 
organizations  to  ensure  that  universal  financial  inclusion  can  be  achieved  in  a  time-bound 
manner. I would like to close with an extract from Robert Frost’s famous poem:- 
“The woods are lovely, dark and deep, 
but I have promises to keep 
and miles to go before I sleep”. 
Yes, a lot has been achieved in our journey towards universal financial inclusion, but there is 
a  long  road  still  to  travel  for  fulfilling  the  promises  we  have  made  to  the  people  of  this 
country. What can ensure success in this challenging task of delivering meaningful financial 
inclusion is full commitment of the Board and the senior management of the banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
