Jens Weidmann: Market economy principles in monetary union 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Wolfram 
Engels Prize ceremony, Kronberg, 28 March 2014. 
 Welcome 
Professor Eilfort, 
Professor Raffelhüschen, 
Doctor Hildmann, 
Professor Schweickart, 
members of the Kronberger Kreis, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  awarding  me  the  Wolfram  Engels  Prize,  and  my  special  thanks  to  you, 
Professor Siegert, for the laudation. 
The Wolfram Engels Prize was last awarded in 2007. It is therefore by no means awarded in 
an inflationary manner – not at all a mistake in the eyes of a central banker. This makes this 
award,  bestowed  in  honour  of  a  dedicated  champion  of  the  market  economy,  even  more 
special. 
I am delighted to accept this prize and see it as supporting not only my work but, above all, 
that  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  its  staff,  fully  aware  that  the  Bank’s  opinion  is  not 
shared  in  all  quarters.  The  Bank  has  recently  been  referred  to  as  the  centre  of  the  most 
dogmatic neo-liberal thinking in Europe. I assume this was not meant as a compliment, and, 
moreover, it is not even accurate. 
The  Market  Economy  Foundation,  the  foundation  awarding  this  prize,  campaigns  for 
regulatory policy and market-oriented thought and is thus making a vital contribution to the 
economic policy debate. And it is precisely this approach that sits more comfortably with the 
Bank’s own stance. 
Together  with  the  Kronberger  Kreis,  the  foundation  strives  to  have  market  economy 
principles valued and respected, and to widen the reach of social market economy ideas. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  speak  about  market  economy  principles  in  the 
European  monetary  union  and  to  discuss  how  to  strengthen  the  principle  of  liability,  as  a 
constitutive principle of monetary union. 
Market economy principles and European integration 
“Constitutive  principles”  is  of  course  an  allusion  to  Walter  Eucken,  whose  constitutive 
principles of competitive order are still the main pillars of our current economic constitution. 
Effective  competition  is  key  for  a  market  economy  and  its  economic  performance.  In  turn, 
competition  requires  free  price  formation.  Competition  creates  prosperity.  However, 
competition also requires protection. 
For competition to have a control function, prices must be stable. Eucken thus stressed the 
“primacy of monetary policy”. He also noted the importance of central rights and obligations 
for a competitive economy: open markets, rights to private property, freedom of contract and 
the principle of liability, which I have already mentioned. 
He defines liability as an essential regulatory policy institution. In his “Principles of economic 
policy”,  he  uses  the  example  of  an  economic  order  with  private  property  and  a  centrally 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
controlled economy to demonstrate what happens when liability and control (steering power) 
drift apart. 
Given the institutional framework of monetary union, this problem is still highly topical, and I 
shall revisit it later on. 
Eucken  names  “consistency  of  economic  policy”  as  the  final  constitutive  principle  of 
competitive  order.  He  complains  that  economic  policymakers  suffer  from  a  nervous 
restlessness, often today dispensing with those very rules that were in place yesterday. Little 
has  changed  over  time.  Eucken’s  words  still  ring  true  regarding  current  economic  policy 
measures in Berlin. 
The  introduction  of  a  statutory  minimum  wage  of  €8.50  to  be  applied  across  the  board 
launches  a  large-scale  macroeconomic  experiment  which,  if  applied  as  intended,  may 
endanger the labour market success of recent years. And the pension package will go back 
on some previous pension reforms and create incentives for early retirement, thwarting the 
necessary extension of working life given an ageing population. 
Such  a  policy  will  place  an  additional  burden  on  future  generations  but,  as  Groucho  Marx 
once said, “Why should I do anything for posterity? What has posterity ever done for me?” 
While  the  ordoliberals  of  the  Freiburg  School  stressed  the  importance  of  Ordnungspolitik 
(translatable  as  regulatory  policy)  and  mostly  rejected  intervention  in  economic  processes 
(such as introducing a minimum wage), the founding fathers of the social market economy 
saw a need for government economic policy over and beyond this framework. 
However, economic policy should be in line with the market mechanism and comply with the 
principle of subsidiarity. The principle of economic policy in line with the market mechanism 
and the principle of subsidiarity, borrowed from Catholic social teachings, are thus likewise to 
be seen as the founding principles of our economic order. 
Thus,  market  economy  principles  have  not  just  shaped  the  economic  system  in  Germany, 
but are also major pillars of European integration. 
A constitutive principle of European economic integration was, and still is, non-discrimination 
against  external  providers  of  goods  and  services.  The  four  fundamental  freedoms  of  the 
single  market  are  the  result  of  this  principle  and  are  summed  up  succinctly  in  an  expert 
opinion  by  the  Kronberger  Kreis  on  European  integration,  to  which  Wolfram  Engels  also 
contributed:  “The  libertarian  message  of  the  Treaty  of  Rome  was  an  economy  with  cross-
border competition”. 
The  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  states  that  the  activities  of  the 
European  Union  are  to  be  “conducted  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  an  open  market 
economy with free competition”. European competition law and rules on state aid have had 
beneficial effects on member states, often despite resistance from national policymakers – 
one example being market liberalisation. The Market Economy Foundation rightly awarded 
the Wolfram  Engels  Prize  to  Mario  Monti,  then  a  European  Commissioner,  in  2001 for  his 
commitment to competition law in Europe. 
Open  markets  and  free,  but  protected,  competition  have  increased  levels  of  prosperity  in 
Europe  and  this  economic  success  played  a  major  role  in  making  European  integration 
attractive, especially to central and eastern European countries. However, accession to the 
EU has also meant new dependencies and contagion channels requiring member states to 
toughen their stance on stability. 
However,  European  policy  is  of  course  not  to  be  considered  sacred.  Policies  made  in 
Brussels  are  not  always  in  line  with  noble  principles,  such  as  that  of market  conformity  or 
subsidiarity. We only need think of the Common Agricultural Policy or the Common Industrial 
Policy. Policymakers in Brussels and national policymakers act no differently; both are quick 
to  put  market  economy  principles  second  if  this  appears  warranted  in  the  pursuit  of 
supposedly more important objectives. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Those  in  favour  of  a  minimum  wage,  rent  price  ceiling  or  the  policy  switch  to  non-nuclear 
energy generation are undoubtedly pursuing honourable and important objectives. However, 
experience has shown that social and ecological objectives, too, can generally be achieved 
more successfully if political instruments are in line with, and not opposed to, the principles of 
market economy. 
The  Kronberger  Kreis’  first  study  back  in  1983  was  entitled  Mehr  Mut  zum  Markt  (“More 
market,  more  glory”).  This  is  still  the  motto  of  the  Kronberger  Kreis  today  and  is  just  as 
pertinent. However, this reaffirmation of the market is otherwise currently not so popular. 
The  crisis  has  certainly  changed  the  view  of  the  market  economy  system  and  has  raised 
doubts about the efficiency of markets. Business as usual is, of course, not an option. 
However, I do not believe that the crisis has called into question the fundamental principles 
of  market  economy.  Instead,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  principles  embodied  by 
Ordnungspolitik  were  not  sufficiently  implemented  in  some  areas.  For  instance,  in  the 
financial sector, these principles and the resultant rules had virtually been reversed in some 
cases. 
Market economy principles in monetary union 
Primacy of monetary policy 
The European Union is also based on market economy principles; two in particular: first, the 
principle of liability and, second, that which Eucken called primacy of monetary policy. 
Primacy  of  monetary  policy  is  reflected  by  the  fact  that  the  Eurosystem  has  chosen  price 
stability as its primary objective. The Eurosystem shall support the general economic policies 
in  the  Union  but  only  where  this  is  “[without]  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability” 
(Article 127 TFEU). 
According  to  the  legal  opinion  of  the  Federal  Constitutional  Court,  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy mandate stops where the Eurosystem begins managing economic policy; in 
other words, if the Eurosystem, for instance, grants financial aid to member states or takes 
measures to safeguard the current composition of the euro area. 
Prices must be stable for competition to have a control function. In his book Wohlstand für 
alle  (“Prosperity  for  all”),  Ludwig  Erhard  wrote  “the  social  market  economy  is  unthinkable 
without a consistent policy of price stability”. 
In  line  with  his  convictions,  Erhard  campaigned  for  the  Bundesbank’s  primary  task  to  be 
safeguarding price stability and for it to remain independent from political interference. The 
Bundesbank thus became a model of success. However, it was decades before the model of 
an  independent  central  bank  whose  primary  mandate  is  pursuing  the  objective  of  price 
stability took hold internationally. 
Independence is not an end in itself – the central bank should not become a “state within a 
state”.  Instead  it  should  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  independence  and  price  stability  are 
positively correlated. Independent central banks are better able to safeguard price stability 
than  dependent  ones.  Independence  and  a  Eurosystem  mandate  strictly  limited  to  price 
stability are thus two sides of the same coin. 
Conversely,  this  means  that  the  trend  currently  emerging  to  confer  more  and  more 
responsibility on central banks can ultimately challenge their independence. This, in turn, can 
make it more difficult for central banks to maintain price stability. 
Some may contend that the crisis has shown that monetary policy should not just focus on 
keeping  consumer  prices  stable,  but  should  also  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  However,  I  believe  that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  define  financial  stability  as  an 
additional objective for monetary policy under a dual mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
However,  this  naturally  does  not  mean  that  central  banks  should  not  assume  any 
responsibility for financial stability. The reigning consensus is that central banks should be 
given a macroprudential mandate. 
At  European  level  we  now  have  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and,  in 
Germany, the Financial Stability Committee (FSC). Central banks play a major role in both of 
these  institutions.  The  FSC,  which  was  set  up  in  2013,  comprises  the  Bundesbank,  the 
Federal Ministry of Finance, BaFin and – in an advisory function – the Federal Agency for 
Financial Market Stabilisation. 
The  committee  discusses  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  based  on  analyses 
conducted by the Bundesbank. If the committee fears that unfavourable developments are 
afoot, it can issue warnings or recommendations. However, it does not have the authority to 
decide on macroprudential measures. 
As macroprudential measures can trigger massive redistribution effects, the decision as to 
whether  they  are  implemented  requires  parliamentary  control  and  should  therefore  not  be 
made by an independent central bank. Such a decision could ultimately endanger a central 
bank’s independence. 
There is also no doubt that financial stability policy requires its own set of tools. However, the 
macroprudential 
those  such  as 
countercyclical capital buffers for banks, is still a “work in progress” and has yet to be put to 
the test. 
It is essential, and the ECB Governing Council is united on this front, that involving central 
banks  in  financial  stability  policy  does  not  alter  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  – 
ensuring  price  stability.  Otherwise  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  could  be  endangered. 
And money is nothing other than trust that has taken on solid form. 
However,  as  monetary  policymakers,  we  should  not  stand  on  the  sidelines  and  watch  the 
next  crisis  brewing.  Any  looming  financial  imbalances  that  pose  a  threat  to  price  stability 
should be countered with monetary policy tools. 
Incidentally, this has already been built into the ECB Governing Council’s two-pillar strategy. 
The aim of monetary analysis, which is part of the second of these pillars, is to identify the 
medium to long-term inflation risks resulting from monetary variables. 
However, monetary analysis is no crystal ball giving a glimpse into the future. The financial 
market crisis has also impeded the predictive quality of financial or monetary indicators for 
future price developments. In this regard, it is also a “work in progress”. 
financial  stability  policymakers, 
including 
toolkit 
for 
Principle of liability 
3.2 
The  second  fundamental  principle  of  monetary  union  is  the  principle  of  individual  national 
responsibility. 
Much as a market economy can function only if businesspersons assume responsibility for 
the consequences of their decisions, a monetary union, too, can only function if governments 
and banks carry the responsibility for their decisions. 
In the Maastricht Treaty, monetary union is defined in such a way that monetary and foreign 
exchange  policy  are  communitised  but  fiscal  and  economic  policy  remain  a  national 
responsibility. As a result of this asymmetrical set-up – one monetary policy, 18 fiscal policies 
– the stability of the single currency is under constant tension. 
The already existing propensity to run up debt is even higher for governments in monetary 
union  as  the  negative  repercussion  of  excessive  debt  can  be  passed  on  in  part  to  other 
member  states.  In  addition,  it  was  clear  when  the  monetary  union  was  set  up  that  the 
member states would borrow with money they could not create on their own; doubts about 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the solvency of a country could therefore more quickly have serious consequences for the 
financial stability of the country in question and thus spread to the other member states. 
This is one of the reasons why fiscal discipline is so important in a monetary union, which is 
why precautions to prevent risks to stability were inserted into the Treaty. 
First, the member states agreed, in particular, to avoid excessive deficits; the debt rules were 
fleshed out in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Second, monetary financing of governments was prohibited by banning central banks from 
lending to member states. 
Third, the member states agreed that each country is and remains responsible for its own 
debt.  In  addition,  the  no-bailout  rule  states  that  no  EU  institution  and  no  member  state  is 
responsible for the debt of another. 
In the 1992 study on unity and plurality in Europe already cited above, the Kronberger Kreis 
around Wolfram Engels critically examined the issue of fiscal discipline, stating that “There 
are,  however,  also  factors  that  give  rise  to  the  fear  that  convergence  with  fiscal  discipline 
may not be strong enough to prevent undesirable developments”. 
The  hope  prior  to  monetary  union  had  been  that  the  financial  markets  would  exert  a 
disciplinary effect on fiscal policy. It was expected that the exclusion of mutual liability would 
cause investors in government securities to demand adequate risk premiums, which would 
have rendered government borrowing that much more expensive. 
This  expectation  was  not  fulfilled,  however.  On  the  contrary,  exceptional  interest  rate 
convergence even before monetary union enabled the previously high interest rate countries 
to borrow on exceptionally favourable terms. 
The  fact  that  risk  premiums  for  all  countries  of  the  monetary  union  contracted  so  heavily, 
receding  in  some  cases  to  only  a  few  basis  points,  is  likely,  among  other  things,  to  be 
attributable to investors’ apparent doubts about the credibility of the exclusion of liability. In 
any event, most recent history has shown that the doubts about the no bail-out rule were not 
irrational. 
The fact is that the low interest rates caused a great deal of capital to flow into the euro-area 
periphery countries, which was not put to use in a very profitable manner. Wage increases 
which  outpace  productivity  growth  put  additional  strains  on  the  competitiveness  of 
economies.  On  balance,  public  and/or  private  debt  grew  strongly  while  current  accounts 
deteriorated. 
This was the breeding ground for the euro-area debt crisis, which began in 2010 following 
the global financial and economic crisis. The substantial increase in risk premiums for bonds 
of  peripheral  countries  pushed  several  countries,  in  particular  Greece,  to  the  brink  of 
insolvency. 
In this crisis situation, the euro rescue packages and Eurosystem measures prevented the 
crisis from escalating. However, these crisis measures permanently weakened the principle 
of individual responsibility. 
They  caused  a  redistribution  of  risk  and  put  elements  of  mutualised  liability  in  place, 
disrupting  the  balance  in  the  relationship  between  liability  and  control  in  the  regulatory 
framework of monetary union: the set of options for controlling the member states’ borrowing 
did not keep pace. 
One might argue that the fiscal rules were, in fact, tightened in the aftermath of the crisis – 
Stability and Growth Pact, fiscal compact and European semester are concepts which come 
to mind. Undoubtedly, these were steps in the right direction. But whether these tightened 
rules will have the desired binding effect remains to be seen. It is, above all, the European 
Commission that is called upon to be strict in laying down the rules, and certain doubts are 
unfortunately justified. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As we know, it is not the case that there haven’t been any rules in place thus far. However, 
they  have  been  inadequately  implemented.  The  deficit  limit  of  3%  of  GDP  has  been 
breached seven times by Germany, eight times by France and a whole of nine times by Italy. 
According to the Commission’s forecast, eight of the 18 member states will breach the deficit 
ceiling this year. 
Allow me to quote one last time from the 1992 Kronberger Kreis study – with a wink: “From 
the  point  of  view  of  an  individual  country,  the  agreed  ceilings  for  deficits  and  debt  levels 
represent a certain protection against unsound fiscal policies of other members of the union. 
At the same time, however, it is also a self-commitment by the governments of the member 
states towards their citizens. The fact that the European Commission has been tasked with 
monitoring compliance with the criteria reinforces this self-commitment and does not  imply 
the Commission’s conservatorship over national fiscal policy just yet.” 
22 years later, we must admit that we were probably a bit too optimistic regarding the self-
commitment and its reinforcement by the Commission. 
The key question now is how to once again reconcile liability and control or, in other words, 
how the framework of monetary union can be reformed to provide the common currency with 
a solid foundation. 
Essentially, as the Scientific Advisory Board at the Federal Ministry of Finance put it as well, 
there  is  the  “choice  between  two  diametrically  opposing  institutional  arrangements”.  Either 
we proceed towards deeper political integration – a fiscal union, say – or we improve on the 
existing framework and bolster the individual national responsibility of the individual member 
states as a constitutive feature of monetary union. 
However,  a fiscal  union must  not simply  mean  extending  mutualised  liability,  because  that 
would merely be a transfer union. A real fiscal union would depend on the member states 
transferring  national  sovereignty  to  the  community  level,  for  example  by  giving  the 
community the necessary right to intervene in the event of unsound public finances. 
I believe that there is currently no will, among either the general public or governments, to 
truly concede sovereignty, which would be a prerequisite for a fiscal union; and this state of 
affairs is not about to change anytime soon. On the contrary, the member states continue to 
insist on having the final say. 
When the European Commission recommended last year that the deadline for correcting the 
excessive  government  deficit  be  extended  for  France  and  other  countries,  while  in  return 
expecting  France  to  implement  concrete  reforms,  the  French  president reacted  indignantly 
saying that: “The European Commission cannot dictate to us what we have to do.” 
I  think  this  example  illustrates  rather  clearly  the  willingness  of  the  member  states  to  allow 
interference from outside parties. 
Therefore,  it  seems  to  be  that  strengthening  the  Maastricht  framework  is  the  only  way 
forward  when  it  comes to  establishing  a  stable regulatory framework.  However,  this  would 
mean that the liability principle, too, would have to be strengthened or, to quote Otmar Issing: 
“For a monetary union, in which the countries (…) have transferred their monetary policy to a 
supranational institution, while insisting in all other areas that they remain sovereign states, 
the  no-bail-out  principle  is  the  only  solution.  Those  who  insist  on  self-determination  must 
bear the consequences of their own actions by themselves.” 
Implications of the liability principle for reforming the EMU framework 
But  how  can  the  liability  principle  be  strengthened  and  what  does  “strengthening  the 
Maastricht framework” mean in concrete terms? 
Strengthening the liability principle essentially means that both governments and banks must 
continue to take responsibility for the consequences of their actions. This implies that citizens 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
are primarily liable for the public finances of the country in question, and that, secondarily, 
investors bear the consequences of their investment decisions. 
I  believe,  for  example,  that  a  European  framework  which  is  based  on  individual  national 
responsibility must first fall back on the taxpayers of the affected country in an exceptional 
financial  emergency  of  a  member  state,  given  that  high  public  debt  levels  are  often 
associated with significant private net wealth. 
In  order  for  governments  with  a  waning  creditworthiness  to  gain  time  to  find  sustainable 
solutions for their public finances, it is also important to be able to restructure government 
debt  without  endangering  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Introducing  collective  action 
clauses  for  the  issuance  of  sovereign  bonds  was  certainly  a  step  in  the  right  direction. 
However, the Bundesbank believes that additional steps are required. 
The Bundesbank suggested that a clause should be hard-wired into the terms and conditions 
for the issuance of euro-area government bonds that would automatically extend the maturity 
of a given country’s bonds by three years if that country received loans from the ESM fund. 
Automatically extending bond maturities in this manner would buy time for crisis countries to 
resolve their problems without private creditors pulling their capital out. This would allow a 
better balance to be struck between liability and control. 
First, the automatic extension of maturities would cause the volume of financial assistance to 
decrease significantly. Second, sufficient time would be available to determine whether the 
problem is one of solvency or liquidity, in other words whether a country is permanently or 
only temporarily unable to obtain funding in the market. 
Strengthening the liability principle ultimately means that, in extremis, it must be possible to 
declare  “governments  and  systemically  important  banks  insolvent”  without  jeopardising 
financial stability in the single currency area. Only the possibility of failure can ensure that 
financial markets exercise their disciplining function on banks and governments. 
Until now, the insolvency of governments and systemically important banks has practically 
not been permitted because of the probably quite realistic fear that this would threaten the 
stability of the financial system in the whole euro area. So what ought to be done to ensure 
that insolvent governments and banks no longer represent a systemic risk in future? 
Among  other  things,  the  disastrous  sovereign-bank  nexus  would  have  to  be  broken.  To 
ensure this, we must do the following. 
First, we must further strengthen the financial system’s resilience. 
Second, we must regulate the financial markets strictly and on the basis of uniform rules. 
Third, we must effectively implement a credible resolution regime for banks. 
And lastly, we must end preferential regulatory treatment of government bonds. 
Progress has already been made with regard to resilience; in particular the implementation of 
the  Basel  III  capital  rules  improves  banks’  ability  to  absorb  loss.  Moreover,  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  which  is due to be launched in November of this year, offers the 
opportunity to apply a uniform and rigorous supervisory regime. 
European banking supervision also requires European banking resolution; otherwise, there 
would  be  a  disconnect  between  control  and  liability.  It  is  therefore  right  that  a  Single 
Resolution Mechanism is now about to be established. 
Wolfram Engels once wrote: “Bankruptcy is a part of the market economy.” However, it has 
been virtually impossible to apply this essentially self-evident principle to the banking sector. 
In  the  future,  whenever  a  bank  fails,  resolution  costs  must  generally  be  borne  first  by 
shareholders  and  creditors  at  the  top  of  a  liability  cascade.  After  that,  a  bank-financed 
resolution fund would come into play, and only as a last resort should public – read, taxpayer 
– funds be used. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
This is what the Council, Parliament and Commission agreed this past week, which is to be 
welcomed. Despite individual exceptions with regard to details, which are part and parcel of 
the process of compromise, the agreed resolution mechanism allows a fundamental principle 
of  market  economics  to  be  enforced;  it  should  primarily  be  the  owners  and  creditors  of  a 
bank who bear the risks of their investments and not the taxpayer. 
To  sever  the  harmful  sovereign-bank  nexus,  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of 
government  bonds,  too,  would  have  to  cease.  This  is  an  anachronism  based  on  the  false 
assumption  that  government  bonds  are  risk-free  investments.  The  crisis  has  vividly 
demonstrated that investments in government bonds, too, entail risks. 
At  present,  no  large  exposure  limits  are  in  place  for  government  bonds  –  nor  are  banks 
required to back government bonds with capital. Under the current capital rules, a zero risk 
weight  applies  to  these  assets,  which  means  that  these  government  bonds  can  be  fully 
funded  with  borrowed  money,  which  gives  them  an  advantage  over  lending  to  the  private 
sector. 
This preferential treatment has been a factor in banks in several euro-area periphery states, 
in  particular,  raising  their  exposure  to  domestic  government  bonds  during  the  crisis;  they 
have  thereby  tied  even  more  closely  their  fate  to  that  of  their  national  government.  Banks 
tend to circumvent the liability principle in this way. 
If all goes well, banks pocket a decent profit owing to the crisis countries’ comparatively high 
bond  yields  and  the  favourable  refinancing  rates.  However,  if  the  government  were  to 
become insolvent, the consequences for banks would be negligible as they would ultimately 
have to be resolved in any case. 
For  this  reason,  I  have  for quite  some  time  now  been  calling  for  government  bonds  to  be 
backed with a level of capital that adequately reflects the risk and for caps to be imposed on 
such  investments,  as  is  commonplace  for  loans  to  private  debtors.  And  I  am  glad  that 
Federal  Finance  Minister  Schäuble  has  come  to  share  this  view.  At  a  Bundesbank 
conference some weeks ago he said: “This issue must be put on the political agenda.” 
Meanwhile, he will need to persuade his colleagues in the more highly indebted countries; 
after all, zero-weighting is a major selling point for government bonds, including those with a 
lower credit rating. 
In conclusion, it can probably be said that a great deal has been set in motion to make the 
financial system more robust, but a lot remains to be done. What is clear, and I would hereby 
like to wrap up my comments on the reform of the operational framework of monetary union, 
is that a stable monetary union cannot exist without a stable financial system. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  the  end  of  my  speech  I  would  like  to  once  again  express  my 
gratitude  for  being  awarded  the  Wolfram  Engels  Prize.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the 
informedia foundation for donating the prize money of €15,000. 
With  good  reason,  the  Bundesbank’s  code  of  conduct  prohibits  Board  members  from 
accepting such sums of money for themselves. Instead, I would like to see this money go to 
Deutscher  Kinderhospizverein.  The  association  helps  children  who  suffer  from  a  life-
shortening  disease  and  their  families  along  this  difficult  path  –  a  commitment  I  believe 
deserves the highest recognition and support. 
Being  awarded  the  Wolfram  Engels  Prize  encourages  me  to  continue  to  take  clear  and 
sometimes  uncomfortable  stands.  I  firmly  believe  that  market  economy  principles  and  the 
rule of law are the main pillars of our economic order, European integration and monetary 
union. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Those who emphasise principles quickly gain a reputation for being a “stickler for principles”. 
However, a key lesson from the crisis is that the positive influence of markets can only be 
effective if the implementation of market economy principles of order is ensured. 
Before  I  take  up  any  more  of  your  time,  another  Erhardt  quote  comes  to  mind  –  not  by 
Ludwig Erhard this time but by Heinz Erhardt who said that “one generally produces many 
words if one has nothing to say”. 
On that note, I hope I haven’t produced too many words this evening and would like to thank 
you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
