Andreas Dombret: Statement at the OECD Working Party 3-Meeting 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the OECD Working Party 3-Meeting, Paris, 14 January 2014. 
  to 
the 
from 
risks 
financial  market 
recovery  stemming 
Dear colleagues, 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  open  the  first  round  of  our  working  group’s 
meeting. Let me begin by wishing you a Happy New Year. In my remarks I will focus on the 
major OECD economies and address three issues. 
• 
First,  the  current  economic  situation,  taking  into  account  the  major  economic 
developments  in  2013.  Here,  I  can  be  brief  thanks  to  the  excellent  background 
papers the secretariat provided. 
Second,  possible 
developments. 
And third, policy requirements to keep up the current growth momentum. 
• 
In  2013,  recovery  was  underway  in  the  majority  of  OECD  economies  –  including  the  euro 
area as a whole. This positive momentum has been confirmed by the latest OECD leading 
indicators that were published yesterday. However, growth is still low when compared to the 
levels  achieved  before  the  global  financial  crisis.  In  addition,  the  recovery  has  been 
remarkably uneven. 
The US comes closest to a self-sustaining expansion. Here, I would like to emphasize the 
substantial progress in household deleveraging and the successful correction in the housing 
markets. Both factors will help future growth to be grounded on sound fundamentals. But the 
Fed’s caution shows that considerable economic slack probably remains. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  recovery  is  still  nascent,  muted  and  uneven.  However,  a  number  of 
crisis countries have left their recessions behind. Rebalancing is underway. According to the 
recent  OECD  Economic  Outlook,  all  crisis  countries  are  expected  to  achieve  a  current 
account  surplus  in  2014.  This  would  equal  an  average  improvement  of  more  than  10 
percentage points of GDP compared to 2008. Thus, competitiveness-enhancing reforms are 
beginning to bear fruit and need to be continued. 
Germany is part of the rebalancing equation. Since 2007, the intra euro-area German current 
account  surplus  has  continuously  shrunk  from  4 ½-%  of  GDP  to  2 ¼-%  of  GDP.  This 
adjustment  has  been  driven  by  rising  imports.  Domestic  absorption  has  become  a  more 
important driver of economic growth. As business investment is projected to rebound in 2014 
and 2015, the rebalancing should proceed. 
Japan is a special case, given its long-lasting deflation. Here also, the end-2012 recession 
gave  way  to  a  remarkable  expansion  in  2013.  Furthermore,  against  the  backdrop  of 
significant monetary easing there are indications that deflation finally may come to an end. 
In a nutshell: the advanced economies have entered 2014 in better shape than they  were 
one year ago. But they are far from being in good shape. 
The  economic  improvements  were  backed  by  the  extraordinary  low  policy  rates  and 
unconventional  measures  by  central  banks.  Insofar  monetary  policy  can  be  regarded  as 
successful. But it came at a price. Monetary policy is in uncharted territory. Questions came 
up whether further monetary easing could have diminishing or even negative returns. 
Against  this  background,  sizeable  downward  risks  and  vulnerabilities  continue  to  exist.  In 
addition to those mentioned in the background note, I will briefly focus on the fragilities of the 
recovery in the context of financial market developments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  2013  there  was  only  one  way  for  most  asset  prices  to  go:  upward.  The  EuroStoxx  50 
increased  by  18%,  the  FTSE  100  by  14%,  the  Dow  Jones  by  28%,  and  the  Nikkei 
skyrocketed  even  by  57%.  Funding  conditions  for  troubled  sovereigns  and  banks  eased 
significantly. Market volatility decreased, too. 
After years of risk aversion, sentiment switched to a “risk on” mode. 2013 was a very good 
year for financial investors. However, I look at these developments with some unease. 
Indeed,  catching-up  dynamics  after  excessive  pessimism  up  to  the  summer  of  2012  can 
explain some of the asset price increases. Yet abundant global liquidity in addition to abating 
risks and improving fundamentals has certainly played a role, too. One might even argue that 
the  influence  of  ultra-loose  monetary  policies  has  begun  to  be  stronger  on  financial  asset 
prices than on real activity. 
The  contrast  between  buoyant  financial  markets,  on  the  one  hand,  and  still  limited 
improvements  in  economic  fundamentals  and  activity,  on  the  other,  is  apparent.  The  low 
volatility  we  have  observed  over  the  last  quarters  might  even  have  blurred  market 
participants’ risk perception. 
Did  financial  markets  enter  a  new  phase  of  “irrational  exuberance”?  Such  a  verdict  is 
certainly  debatable.  But  at  least  financial  markets  have  anticipated  significant  further 
improvements of economic fundamentals and prospects. 
This creates vast room for negative confidence shocks. The global financial crisis taught us 
how detrimental contagion and a negative feedback loop between the financial markets and 
the real economy can be. Therefore policy makers should be ambitious to deliver. Fighting 
reform fatigue will be the best insurance against the downside risks. 
Building on the progress made in 2013, we will need to lay the groundwork for a sustained 
recovery in 2014. Economic policies should be geared toward restoring the role of the private 
sector in the growth process. Policies should foster productivity gains, increased employment 
and higher investment in the real sector. The public sector must be prepared for leaving the 
driver’s seat of the economic developments. 
As regards monetary policy issues, we will discuss them in detail this afternoon. So I will just 
make one remark. Should the Fed and the BoE exit from their current extraordinary loose 
monetary  policy  stance  earlier  than  other  major  central  banks  this  would  constitute  a 
challenge  for  communication  and  expectation  management.  However,  in  contrast  to  a 
widespread  view,  a  timely  exit  should  be  primarily  seen  as  a  welcome  step  towards 
normalization and not as a “risk”. 
Reducing the role of the public sector also translates into tackling its high debt levels. This 
remains  a  key  challenge.  Consequently,  policy  makers  need  to  use  the  current  period  of 
relative calm and make progress in bringing down public debt ratios. In the euro area, the 
trajectory  of  public  debt  has  not  been  reversed  yet.  In  Japan,  the  required  adjustment 
remains particularly challenging, while the US would benefit from long-term financial reforms. 
Banking  sector  policies  must  ensure  that  the  sector  is  well-capitalized  and  that  balance 
sheets  are  strong.  This  is  especially  important  for  the  euro  area’s  bank-based  financial 
system.  With  the  first  steps  towards  a  banking  union  and  the  recapitalization  measures 
already implemented, a lot has been done. However, with regard to many European banks 
there are still signs that markets do not believe that banks’ non-performing assets have been 
cleaned  up  thoroughly.  The  ECB’s  upcoming  assessment  is  both  a  chance  to  create 
transparency  about  banks’  asset  quality  and 
for  adequate 
capitalization.  It  will  contribute  to  enabling  banks  to  once  again  perform  their  role  as 
financiers of the real economy. 
However,  in  economic  policy  there  is  no  silver  bullet.  I  caution  against  the  view  that  a 
banking union can solve the crisis the euro area is currently facing. If successfully completed, 
it will be milestone for European financial integration. But it cannot serve as a substitute for 
to  establish 
the  basis 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
further structural reform and fiscal adjustment. Financial and structural reforms need to give 
incentives  for  increased  private  sector  investment.  In  some  euro-area  economies  we  will 
need  to  reduce  the  excessive  debt  burden  in  the  non-financial  sector  and  to  improve 
competitiveness, building on last year’s achievements. 
In Japan it is crucial to implement the third arrow of “Abenomics” as the IMF emphasized in 
its latest World Economic Outlook. China, which we  will discuss in more detail over lunch, 
has embarked on a profound reform of the economic and social model in order to create the 
foundation for private sector-led growth in the future. 
So  I  welcome  the  emphasis  the  secretariat’s  background  note  places  on  investment.  The 
economic situation in the major OECD economies may differ significantly. However, with the 
notable exception of Canada, lackluster investment has been a common feature. More of the 
same of ultra-loose monetary policy will be no solution to this problem. The agenda of the 
Australian G20 presidency and ongoing work on the OECD level leave me confident that the 
work on fostering investment will continue during the year. 
Let me conclude by posing three questions: 
• 
First, will private sector investment pick up this year and take over a central role in 
sustaining growth? 
Second, will monetary policy – where the required conditions are met – manage an 
orderly exit from its extraordinary measures? 
Third, will fiscal consolidation and structural policies be continued in a challenging 
political environment? 
  If we respond with “Yes” to these three questions at our meeting in January 2015, then 2014 
will later be considered as a good year – the fourth condition of course being that Germany 
wins the World Soccer Championship. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
