  Christopher Kent: Non-mining business investment – where to from 
here? 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Bloomberg Economic Summit, Sydney, 16 September 2014. 
 I  thank  Lara  Bui,  Natasha  Cassidy,  Bernadette  Donovan,  Stephen  Elias,  Craig  Evans,  Gianni  La  Cava,  Kevin 
Lane and Tom Rosewall for help in preparing these remarks. 
Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
Introduction 
I’d like to thank Bloomberg for the opportunity to talk to you today. I discussed this topic at 
this  same  venue  18  months  ago.  The  outlook  for  non-mining  business  investment  is  an 
important element of our forecasts. It depends on a range of forces acting on the economy, 
including  the  stimulus  currently  being  provided  by  the  very  low  level  of  interest rates.  But, 
forecasting economic activity is hard. Understanding and forecasting business investment is 
arguably harder still. 
When I was here in April of last year, I’d suggested that: 
• 
• 
• 
mining investment would be likely to peak in 2013; 
non-mining investment would be likely to pick up, but only gradually; and 
growth for the economy as a whole would be a little below trend in 2013 and then 
pick up gradually through 2014. 
It  now  looks  like  mining  investment  peaked  in  late  2012  (Graph  1).  Despite  a  substantial 
decline in mining investment since then, growth of the economy overall picked up to a pace 
that was around trend over the course of the past year. Much of that improvement has owed 
to a sharp rise in resource exports. 
At  the  same  time,  there  has  also  been  an  improvement  in  the  growth  rate  of  economic 
activity  in  the  non-mining  sectors,  even  though  non-mining  business  investment  has 
remained subdued. This better growth of non-mining activity often gets missed given all the 
focus  on  the  resources  boom. While  this  improvement  is  welcome,  a  key  question  is  how 
durable the improvement will be? It might even gather a bit more steam, thereby helping to 
drive overall growth to an above-trend pace at some point. Such developments are possible 
but by no means certain. They depend in part on non-mining business investment, which is 
the motivation for my talk today. 
Recent past 
Over recent years, non-mining business investment has been subdued. After recovering from 
the decline that followed the global financial crisis, non-mining business investment in real 
terms has been little changed over the past three years or so (Graph 2). In nominal terms, 
non-mining  business  investment  is  at  a  very  low  level  as  a  share  of  GDP  relative  to  its 
history.1 
                                                
1  
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  period  of  weak  non-mining  investment  up  to  2012,  and  non-mining  activity  more 
generally,  allowed  for  the  unprecedented  mining  investment  boom  without  leading  to  excess  aggregate 
demand and all of the problems associated with that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Non-mining business investment should depend, in large part, on the strength of expected 
demand in the non-mining sectors of the economy (over the life of that investment). Current 
demand conditions, however, may have a strong influence on investment for two reasons. 
First, firms tend to draw on recent experience when assessing prospects for future demand. 
Second,  stronger  sales  today  will  boost  current  cash  flows,  which  will  assist  firms  facing 
financial constraints. 
Hence, the gradual pick-up in the growth of non-mining economic activity over the past year 
augurs well for investment. Low interest rates and robust population growth are underpinning 
strong  demand  in  the  housing  market,  with  house  prices  rising  rapidly  and  dwelling 
investment picking up strongly. Low interest rates are also supporting growth of consumption 
at  a  time  when  subdued  conditions  in  the  labour  market  are  weighing  on  the  growth  of 
incomes. These developments, as well as growth in export industries such as tourism and 
education, are consistent with a pick-up in business conditions across a range of industries. 
Despite these gains, survey measures of non-mining capacity utilisation have not improved 
much  over  the  past  year.  A  measure  derived  from  the  NAB  survey  (based  on  weighting 
industries  according  to  their  contribution  to  investment)  implies  that  capacity  utilisation 
remains  a  bit  below  average  (Graph  3).  By  itself,  this  suggests  that  demand  in  the  non-
mining sector will need to rise a little further before businesses feel the need to undertake 
substantial investment in new capacity. Our forecasts for the economy suggest that this will 
occur in time, but the extent and timing of new investment remains uncertain. 
It’s not just output/demand that matters 
In  addition  to  the  strength  of  demand,  a  range  of  other  factors  also  influence  investment 
decisions. In particular, investment depends on whether the expected return to new capital 
outweighs the cost of installing it. In other words, a firm should invest whenever the market 
value of its existing capital is greater than its book value. This is known, in academic circles, 
as Tobin’s Q theory of investment, where Q is the ratio of the market value to the book value 
of capital. 
It turns out that empirical support for the relationship between investment and the Q-ratio is 
weak for the economy as a whole.2 However, it is possible to show that such a relationship 
exists at the level of individual firms (Graph 4). Estimates from Tobin’s Q type models based 
on Australian firm-level data indicate that non-mining investment has been unusually  weak 
by  historical  standards  in  recent  years. This  is true  after controlling for many  other factors 
typically  included  in  such  models,  such  as  sales  growth  and  cash  flows.  For  firms  in  the 
Bank’s  liaison  program,  it  also  appears  that  investment  has  been  weaker  than  the  recent 
growth in sales would suggest. 
With that in mind, let’s consider some possible explanations for the weakness in non-mining 
business investment, and what that might imply for the outlook. 
                                                
2   The poor performance of Tobin’s Q models is quite common in the literature. For a discussion of some of the 
problems,  see  Chirinko  R  (1993),  “Business  Fixed  Investment  Spending:  Modeling  Strategies,  Empirical 
Results  and  Policy  Implications”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  31(4),  pp  1875–1911.  For  a  more  recent 
discussion, see Roberts M and T Whited (2013), “Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance”, Chapter 7 in 
the Handbook of Economics of Finance, 2A, pp 493–572. The results of estimating these types of models on 
aggregate Australian data have been generally disappointing (for instance, see Cockerell L and S Pennings 
(2007),  “Private  Business  Investment  in  Australia”,  RBA  Research  Discussion  Paper  No  2007–09).  Some 
studies that use firm-level data have had some success in modelling investment using the Q ratio, but even 
these  results  are  sensitive  to  certain  modelling  choices  (see,  for  example,  La  Cava  G  (2005),  “Financial 
Constraints,  the  User  Cost  of  Capital  and  Corporate  Investment  in  Australia”,  RBA  Research  Discussion 
Paper No 2005–12). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The cost of borrowing remains too high and external finance is difficult to access? 
My  discussion  so  far  has  ignored  the  fact  that  firms  face  financing  constraints  of  varying 
degrees and certain types of finance are more costly to obtain than others. In particular, the 
cost of external equity finance is typically greater than the cost of external debt which, in turn, 
is greater than the cost of internal funding. 
Financial constraints certainly became more pervasive for many firms as the global financial 
crisis  unfolded.  However,  those  constraints  have  eased  over  time.  More  recently,  external 
financing  has  become  widely  available  at  very  favourable  cost.  Primarily,  this  reflects  the 
stance of monetary policy (both in Australia and abroad), which is delivering historically low 
levels of interest rates, ample liquidity and has helped to push up equity prices. 
Indeed, a common refrain of firms in the course of our business liaison has been that neither 
the cost nor the availability of external finance have been factors limiting investment of late. 
Moreover,  (non-financial)  corporate  balance  sheet  data  indicate  that  many  Australian 
companies currently hold relatively high levels of cash, suggesting that they have access to 
resources to finance investment when the time comes. 
The exchange rate is too high? 
The exchange rate has declined somewhat relative to its peak in the first half of 2013. But it 
remains  high,  especially  given  the  sizeable  decline  in  commodity  prices  this  year.  The 
implications of this vary across traded and non-traded sectors. 
A  further  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  would  provide  additional  support  to  demand  for 
domestic firms producing tradable goods and services. At the same time, however, the high 
exchange rate also means that imported capital goods are currently relatively cheap. 
Hence,  the  still-high  level  of  the  exchange  rate  may  be  a  net  positive  factor  for  the 
investment plans of some firms in non-tradable industries. For firms in tradable industries, on 
the other hand, the low cost of imported capital is offset by the effect of the high exchange 
rate on the demand for the goods and services they produce. 
In short, the high exchange rate might be playing a part in restraining investment in some 
sectors of the economy, but it’s unlikely to be the full story. 
Animal spirits are too weak? 
What  is  often referred to  as  “animal  spirits”  consists  of three key  elements.3  First,  there  is 
uncertainty, which describes the range of possible outcomes, let’s say for demand, but other 
things like costs matter too. Second, there is the expected or most likely outcome. Together, 
these  describe  the  distribution  of  possible  outcomes.  But  firms’  willingness  to  invest  also 
depends  on  the  third  element,  which  is  their  appetite  for  risk.  I’ll  consider  each  of  these 
elements in turn. 
The outlook is too uncertain? 
On  the  surface,  uncertainty  seems  like  an  appealing  explanation  for  subdued  investment. 
However, we should remember that firms always have to make investment decisions in an 
environment of uncertainty, not just about the prospects for the macroeconomy but also for 
their industry. Rather, the question we need to ask is whether uncertainty in recent years has 
been elevated? 
                                                
3   For a detailed discussion of the difference between these concepts, see Haddow A, C Hare, J Hooley and 
T Shakir (2013), “Macroeconomic Uncertainty: What is It, How Can We Measure It and Why Does it Matter?”, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 53(2), pp 100–109. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  There  are  a  number  of  ways  that  we  might  try  to  measure  the  extent  of  uncertainty.  One 
measure  is  the  volatility  of  firms’  share  prices  (Graph  5).4  Another  is  the  dispersion  of 
analysts’ forecasts of firms’ earnings (per share). A third can be constructed by looking at the 
proportion  of  news  stories  that  mention  uncertainty.5  These  measures  all  increased  at  the 
time of the global financial crisis. All of the measures have since declined to be around the 
levels  seen  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  when  non-mining  business  investment  had  been 
growing strongly.6 
Expectations regarding demand are too weak? 
Even if uncertainty about the range of possible demand outcomes is not too different from 
the past, the most likely outcome – the mean of the distribution – might still be too weak to 
lead to significant new investment projects. 
Business  surveys  ask firms  what  they  expect  conditions  will  be  like  in  the  near future;  the 
results are described as “business confidence”. The long-running NAB survey suggests that 
business confidence was in decline and below its long-run average up to the middle of last 
year  (Graph  6).  Since  then,  it  has  picked  up  noticeably.  This  improvement  was  shortly 
followed  by  a  broad-based  pick-up  in  the  survey’s  measure  of  actual  business  conditions 
(that  is,  trading  conditions,  profits  and  employment).  According  to  the  NAB  survey,  and  a 
number  of  other  business  surveys,  business  confidence  and  conditions  are  now  above 
average. 
However, our liaison program suggests that businesses generally remain reluctant to take on 
significant  new  investment  projects  until  they  can  be  confident  of  a  more  sustained 
improvement in demand conditions. How long do conditions need to hold at above average 
levels before the improvement is considered to be sustainable? 
We don’t know the answer to this. In part, this is because animal spirits are by no means 
mechanistic or predictable. What matters for your investment plans is not just what you think 
about the future, but what you think your competitors think about the future. In part, this is 
because if your competitors are less than enthused about investing, the pressure for you to 
invest to avoid being left behind is lessened, and vice versa. 
Elevated risk aversion? 
Even though measures of uncertainty appear to have declined, and firms’ confidence about 
future business conditions is above average, firms’ investment plans may sit idle if they are 
more risk averse than in the past. (By firms, I mean both managers and shareholders alike.) 
It’s  clear  that  firms  became  more  risk  averse  at  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  It 
seems that they remain affected by that experience. While the direct effects of the crisis on 
the  Australian  economy  were  generally  short-lived  and  relatively  minor  compared  with  the 
experience of many economies, the events of that time led many Australian businesses and 
households to re-evaluate their appetites for risk. The household sector increased its saving 
rate noticeably at the time of the crisis and it remains around the more prudent levels that 
                                                
4   The measure in the top panel of Graph 5 is the S&P-ASX “VIX Index”, which is based on option pricing data 
and measures expected levels of near-term volatility in the Australian equity market; it includes mining sector 
stocks. 
5   For  details  of  the  methodology,  see  Baker  S,  N  Bloom  and  S  Davis  (2013),  “Measuring  Economic  Policy 
Uncertainty”, unpublished manuscript, available at <policyuncertainty.com>. 
6   One  thing  that  businesses  often  cite  as  a  concern  is  uncertainty  about  various  policies  affecting  different 
industries. It’s hard to judge, though, the extent to which that source of uncertainty is greater today, if at all, 
than it was in the past. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
had been the norm in earlier decades.7 Also, businesses deleveraged and have built up their 
levels of cash holdings. 
One measure of firms’ appetite for risk is their “hurdle” rates of return. These serve as rules 
of thumb for firms to evaluate whether or not to proceed with a particular project. The higher 
the hurdle, the less likely any given project will be given the go ahead. There is no evidence 
that hurdle rates of return have increased over recent years. But neither is there evidence 
that  they  have  declined  even  though  the  average  cost  of  capital  for firms  has  fallen.8  This 
larger gap between the hurdle rates and the average cost of capital implies a reduction in 
firms’  appetite  for  risk.  This  result,  which  is  consistent  with  information  from  our  liaison 
program, appears to be a global phenomenon. 
Our liaison provides other evidence of a more cautious approach to investment over recent 
years. In particular, many firms now require investment projects to satisfy shorter payback 
periods and be approved at higher levels of management than was typical in the past.9 
Other longer-term determinants? 
The  current  weakness  in  non-mining  business  investment  may  reflect  the  effect  of  some 
longer-run  determinants  of  investment.  One  such  candidate  is  (multifactor)  productivity 
growth.  Relatively  weak  growth  of  productivity  over  much  of  the  past  decade  would  have 
weighed on the return to capital and reduced the incentives to add to the capital stock in non-
mining industries (Graph 7). (In principle, this effect should already be reflected in levels of 
Tobin’s Q.) 
If productivity growth were to remain relatively low, that would weigh on overall growth of the 
economy. Low growth of investment would naturally follow from low productivity growth, but it 
would not be the cause of weak growth of the overall economy. In any case, it’s hard to know 
exactly  what  productivity  growth  is  likely  to  do  in  the  future.  More  recently,  multifactor 
productivity growth appears to have increased a little. It is currently not far from growth rates 
seen prior to the mid 1990s, which was a period of especially rapid growth. 
In  summary,  some  of  these  explanations  have  more merit than  others. External  finance  is 
generally readily available and at very low cost, so this can’t explain the weakness in non-
mining business investment. Looking at the available data, it’s hard to argue that heightened 
uncertainty is playing much, if any, role. Rather, some combination of relatively low growth in 
domestic demand, the effects of the high exchange rate, a lack of confidence and a lower 
appetite for risk (than in the past) appears plausible. There are some metrics consistent with 
this, and it aligns too with what businesses say is holding them back. 
What do the data suggest about the future? 
The Australian Bureau of Statistics capital expenditure (“Capex”) survey provides a measure 
of firms’ investment plans for up to 18 months ahead.10 
                                                
7   The saving rate has drifted down a little over the past couple of years, and the stronger growth of household 
credit of late suggests that there has been some pick-up in the appetite for risk among households. 
8   For  a  discussion  of  the  experience  of  US  firms,  see  Sharpe  A  and  G  Suarez  (2014),  “The  Insensitivity  of 
Investment to Interest Rates: Evidence from a Survey of CFOs”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 
Working Paper 2014–02. 
In a related vein, there is evidence that Australian listed companies have more risk-related meetings now than 
in  the  early  2000s.  It’s possible  that  this  is a  response  to an  increased compliance  burden,  though  such a 
change  may  have  reduced  firms’  appetites  for  risk  nonetheless.  (Special  thanks  to  Gianni  La  Cava  for 
suggesting this measure and to Lara Bui who painstakingly constructed it.) 
9  
10   The survey needs to be adjusted for the fact that realised investment tends to vary predictably from what is 
initially  expected  by  firms.  There  are  various  ways  to  do  this.  For  forecasting  purposes,  the  most  reliable 
method  is  to  adjust  investment  expectations  by  the  average  “realisation”  ratio  over  the  full  history  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  most  recent  survey  implies  a  modest  increase  in  nominal  non-mining  business 
investment in 2014/15, in the order of 4½ per cent. The survey suggests that investment is 
likely to rise for a number of industries, including: rental hiring and real estate; information 
media  and  technology;  retail;  and  construction.  This  picture  is  consistent  with  the  ongoing 
recovery in household expenditure, including on dwelling investment, and in non-residential 
building construction. Investment is expected to decline in the manufacturing sector and for 
utilities. 
Given  that  firms  adapt  their  plans  as  events  unfold,  the  early  readings  on  investment 
intentions  for  a  given  year  often  turn  out  to  be  wrong.  We  can  see  the  extent  of  this  by 
comparing  the  early  estimates  for  a  given  year  with  the  final  (seventh)  estimates  in  the 
Capex data. This is shown here based on the third estimate, which is what we currently have 
to hand for this financial year (Graph 8). We can see that even over the course of just a few 
quarters, business investment can turn out to be quite a bit higher, or quite a bit lower, than 
the most recent reading from the survey suggests. For example, investment covered by the 
Capex  survey  was  much  weaker  than  had  been  expected  initially  through  the  1990s 
recession and early 2000s slowdown. But it was stronger than initially expected through the 
mid 2000s and a bit stronger than expected last financial year. 
In short, if firms decide to undertake more investment than they had earlier anticipated, that 
investment can come about relatively quickly. 
Conclusions 
In conclusion, non-mining business investment has been subdued and measures of capacity 
utilisation remain a bit below average levels. Meanwhile, over the past year or so there has 
been  a  gradual  increase  in  the  pace  of  growth  of  economic  activity  outside  of  the  mining 
sector, owing in part to the very low level of interest rates. 
Subdued investment (outside the mining sector) has been consistent with a period of greater 
uncertainty  and  below-average  confidence.  However,  a  number  of  indicators  suggest  that 
uncertainty has declined to levels seen prior to the global financial crisis. Also, measures of 
business confidence have picked up over the course of the past year to be a bit above long-
run  average  levels. While  this  is  a  welcome  development,  it  may  not  be  sufficient  to  spur 
investment if businesses’ appetite for risk remains relatively low. Moreover, the still-high level 
of the exchange rate may be weighing on investment of firms in the traded sector. 
Nevertheless, there are tangible indications that non-mining business investment will grow at 
a  modest  pace  this  financial  year.  And  if  firms’  willingness  to  take  on  risks  improves, 
investment could easily be stronger still. It’s always hard to know if and when such a change 
in sentiment might occur. But it is more likely to do so when the fundamental determinants of 
investment are in place. The ready availability of internal and external finance, at very low 
cost, is one element of that. The stronger growth of demand across the non-mining parts of 
the economy over the past year or so is another. If history is any guide, eventually the period 
of elevated risk aversion is likely to give way to a concern among businesses, not of losses, 
but of lost opportunities and a loss of market share. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                   
survey; for details, see Berkelmans L and G Spence (2013), “Realisation Ratios in the Capital Expenditure 
Survey”, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 1–6. It is also worth noting that the Capex survey provides only a partial 
read on non-mining business investment because it excludes firms from a number of key industries, including 
agriculture, health care and education (which accounted for about 16 per cent of private non-mining business 
investment in 2012/13) and it excludes investment in intangible assets (which accounts for about 15 per cent 
of total private business investment). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 1 
 
 
Graph 2 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Graph 3 
 
 
Graph 4 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 5 
 
 
Graph 6 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Graph 7 
 
 
Graph 8 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
