  Andreas Dombret: Financial regulation as a global challenge 
Remarks  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a reception to say goodbye to Mr Jakob Orthacker, Financial Attaché, and to 
welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker, London, 11 June 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you,  Ambassador  Ammon,  for  hosting  this  event  here  at  the  German  Embassy  in 
London. I am happy to have the opportunity to officially thank the Bundesbank’s departing 
representative, Mr Jakob Orthacker, and to welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker. 
I am particularly happy that Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, is here 
today. Thank you, Jon, for your remarks. 
Now  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  financial  regulation  and  the  need  for  international 
cooperation. My argument begins with the idea that a global financial system requires global 
regulation.  To  push  this  idea  further,  I  would  define  the  term  “global”  in  at  least  three 
dimensions and argue that regulation should be consistent in all of them. 
First, regulation needs to be consistent across jurisdictions. This is necessary to provide a 
level  playing  field  and  reduce  the  scope  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  Against  this  backdrop, 
recent  regulatory  initiatives  in  some  countries  indicate  that  the  “balkanisation”  of  the 
regulatory space represents a genuine risk. We have to be aware of that. 
Second, regulation needs to be consistent across sectors. This is again necessary to prevent 
regulatory  arbitrage.  In  practical  terms  this  means  that  we  have  to  deal  with  the  shadow 
banking  system.  Consequently,  the  G20  have  moved  shadow  banking  high  up  on  their 
agenda. 
Third, regulation needs to be consistent across asset classes. Take the regulatory treatment 
of government bonds as an example. I cannot see a single good reason why banks should 
not  have  to  back  government  bonds  in  their  balance  sheets  by  capital,  but  I  see  many 
reasons why they should – not least the objective of breaking the sovereign-bank nexus. 
Financial  regulation  that  is  consistent  along  these  three  dimensions  will  help  to  make  the 
financial system a safer place. 
However, while being a safer place in the aggregate, the financial system is not necessarily a 
safe  place  for  individual  banks.  After  all,  we  live  in  a  market  economy  and  creative 
destruction  is  a  central  element.  Individual  banks  must  be  able  to  fail  like  any  other 
enterprise. 
This must also hold for large banks which are often labelled “too big to fail”. To allow them to 
fail without destabilising the entire system we need resolution mechanisms. And here again, 
we  have  a  global  dimension.  Banks  that  are  deemed  too  big  to  fail  are  globally  operating 
enterprises; resolving them requires a great deal of international cooperation. 
I think it is obvious that to make the financial system a safer place we have to cooperate in 
regulation, in supervision, and in the resolution of banks. 
However, these are not the only challenges we face. Last week, the ECB Governing Council 
took far-reaching decisions in reaction to the long period of very low interest rates. It lowered 
the  key  interest  rates  for  refinancing  operations  to  0.15%  and  cut  the  interest  rate  on  the 
deposit  facility  to  –0.10%.  At  the  same  time,  it  decided  to conduct  a  series  of  TARGETed 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  aimed  at  improving  bank  lending  to  the  euro  area  non-
financial private sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  While  the  decision  of  last  Thursday  was  appropriate  given  the  present  economic 
environment, we should now analyse the effects of these decisions before starting the next 
round  of  monetary  policy  easing.  And  let  me  make  one  thing  clear:  Monetary  policy  has 
played a very important role in fighting the crisis but it cannot solve the euro area’s problems. 
Another challenge we face concerns the United Kingdom and Germany, in particular. Both 
our countries are confronted with rising property prices and with the overarching question of 
whether there is a bubble building up. At least in Germany, we do not see a bubble at this 
point in time. Price increases are focused on large cities; for the country as a whole prices 
rose by a moderate 4.5% last year. 
Nevertheless,  further  monitoring  and  in-depth  analysis  are certainly  necessary.  And  in  this 
regard, the Bank of England certainly leads the way. Although the structures of our property 
markets differ in many respects, there is still a lot we can learn from each other’s experience. 
Thus, I highly value the cooperation between the Bank of England and the Bundesbank. 
In any case, international cooperation always starts at the personal level. This is where our 
representatives  in  London  come  into  play.  Their  task  is  to  build  networks,  to  share 
information and ideas, to explain the Bundesbank’s positions and to facilitate cooperation. 
For the past three years Mr Orthacker has filled this position here in London. And judging 
from the distinguished crowd gathered today, he has done an excellent job. I would like to 
thank him personally and in the name of the Bundesbank for his service. 
I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker. She is 
an  expert  from  the  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Department  and  has  considerable 
experience in market infrastructures and related regulatory issues. Some of you have already 
met her, and I am certain that she will be a worthy successor to Mr Orthacker. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
