  Richard W Fisher: “Never let your brains go to your head” (With 
reference to the Sages of the Ages, Diana Sorensen, John Paul Jones 
and “Babe” Fisher) 
Address  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, for the 151st Commencement, Bryant University, Smithfield, Rhode 
Island, 17 May 2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Before I begin my formal remarks, I want the candidates for degrees to think about the fact 
that over 5,000 people are here today to celebrate your success. These are your parents and 
grandparents,  cousins,  uncles  and  aunts;  your  brothers  and  sisters;  your  friends;  your 
teachers and coaches and counselors. They have been by your side through joyful moments 
and less-joyful ones. They have encouraged you. They have believed in you. And they have 
occasionally badgered and hectored you and … driven you nuts. All to good effect. They are 
here with glad and happy hearts to celebrate your admission to the society of educated men 
and  women.  You  will  be  applauded  by  them  many  times  today.  But  I  want  you,  the 
graduating class, to turn the table on them and give them a round of applause. So stand up, 
turn around, put your hands together and give them a cheer. Thank them for loving you. 
Now, please be seated. 
I  also  want  to  salute  the  outgoing  chairman  of  the  Bryant  University  board  of  trustees, 
Michael Edward Fisher, ’67. I want to thank him not only for his six years as chairman and for 
his total devotion to Bryant, but also for doing his family proud – especially his little brother … 
me. 
Blessed to be Americans 
Mike  Fisher  and  I  grew  up  in  what  can  most  charitably  be  described  as  “unusual 
circumstances”. Our father started out his life in conditions right out of Charles Dickens: At 
the  age  of  5  years  and 2  months,  he  was  arrested for  begging for food  and  sentenced to 
seven  years 
in  Australia’s  harshest  prison,  a  God-awful  place  called  Westbrook 
Reformatory.1 He was spared the destiny of most inmates there – he was released quickly 
and  lived  to  see  better  days  –  but  to  say  he  grew  up  rough  is  an  understatement.  Our 
mother, born in a small South African outpost where Norwegians, Swedes and Danes carved 
a life out of the “bush”, lost her father at the age of 4 and was raised by a single mom who 
cooked for a boarding house. Neither of our parents had a formal education. But both were 
smart and ambitious for a better life. What did they do? They came to America. It was here 
that their family flourished. 
If you are ever tempted to doubt what hardworking immigrants bring to our shores and the 
power  and  moral  imperative  of  a  free  economy  or  American-style  democracy,  think  twice. 
Only in America could two sons of a once-homeless beggar and the daughter of a boarding-
house cook become what you see here on this stage today: One the distinguished chairman 
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Bryant  University,  and  the  other  a  policymaker  for  the  most 
important central bank in the world who is somehow deemed worthy of receiving an honorary 
doctorate and being chosen as speaker for the 151st commencement of this fine university. 
We are blessed to be Americans. 
                                                
1  Westbrook: Surviving Australia’s Most Sadistic Reformatory, by William Stokes, Sydney, Australia: Macmillan 
by Pan Macmillan Australia, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Sages of the Ages 
Now, the only thing that stands between you and receiving your Bryant degree is … me. I will 
speak  quickly  and  take  up  just  a  few  moments  of  your  time  before  you  celebrate  your 
accomplishments. 
By now, you have taken enough writing courses to know the tongue-in-cheek definition of a 
good  essay:  It  is  a  collection  of  other  people’s  thoughts  disguised  as  your  own!2  Most 
graduation speeches are no different. The standard routine for a commencement speaker is 
to  dig  through  Bartlett’s  or  the  Oxford  Dictionary  of  Quotations  or  resort  to  Google  and 
Wikiquote to find something said by some sage that will grace a graduation ceremony with a 
lesson students can take with them as they go off into this mysterious and challenging world. 
To find something profound that I might pinch for your amusement today, I pored over the 
sayings of the great minds through time: Plato, Socrates, Mencius, Muhammad, St. Paul and 
St. Augustine, Voltaire, Martin Luther, Mother Teresa … Miley Cyrus, Justin Bieber. 
The maxims put forward by the sages of the ages are inspiring, but you already know them 
or you would not be where you are today: Be disciplined; be prepared; be loyal and thrifty 
and brave; always question conventional wisdom; take risks; push the envelope; be true to 
yourself; never promise more than you can deliver; never compromise your integrity; don’t 
waste your talents; never forget that you have been given those talents in order to do good; 
never, ever, ever, ever give up the pursuit of excellence. 
These  are  all  wise  maxims.  But,  truth  be  told,  it  would  save  time  and  expedite  many  a 
graduation ceremony if organizers would forgo a commencement speaker and simply remind 
the graduating class to read and, throughout life, reread the Old and New Testament or the 
Quran  or  Confucius  or  Shakespeare  –  the  ultimate  sources  of  almost  every  graduation 
speech I have ever read or listened to. 
For  example,  it  would  tax  the  capacity  of  the  most  powerful  search  engine  to  pull  up  the 
countless  commencement  speakers  who  have 
lifted  and  adapted  variations  of 
Shakespeare’s lines in King Henry VI, Part 2, Act 4, Scene VII that “ignorance is the curse of 
God, [k]nowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven”. 
Diana Sorensen’s dictum 
One of the most intriguing living thinkers, Diana Sorensen, the dean of arts and humanities at 
Harvard University, defines a knowledgeable graduate taking wing as follows: 
“He  or  she  is  competent  in  making  discerning  judgments  with  tools  derived  from  science, 
engineering,  social  science,  the  arts  and  humanities.  He  or  she  should  be  a  persuasive 
speaker who can articulate the reasons for his positions; who can write with clarity, elegance 
and conceptual power; an innovator who will take risks but first makes sure the limb they go 
out  on  is  a  sturdy  one;  a  creative  individual  who  has  faced  challenges  posed  by  artistic 
production  and  experimentation;  a  global  citizen  who  can  speak,  read,  write  in  at  least  a 
second  language;  and  who  will  learn  what  it  takes  to  negotiate  different  world  views 
emanating  from  different  cultural  traditions,  a  tolerant  yet  rigorous  thinker  whose  moral 
compass is guided by ethical reasoning.”3  
Class of 2014, I don’t want to put any pressure on you! But that pretty much summarizes the 
skill set we all hope you have started to acquire at Bryant and will now go on to hone in life. 
                                                
2 
If memory serves from my days at Oxford University, this observation was noted by Graham Chapman, one of 
the stalwarts of Monty Python’s Flying Circus. 
3  Dean Sorensen’s comments are summarized in “Coming Back, Looking Forward”, Harvard Gazette, Sept. 26, 
2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Babe Fisher and John Paul Jones 
Preparing to speak to you today, I asked: How might I, a central banker whose musings are 
given to the arcana of economic and monetary policy, possibly improve upon the wisdom of 
the  ultimate  sources?  Not  easily.  So  I  dug  deep  into  my  memory  bank  and  called  upon  a 
source more erudite than the lessons of the Bible or the Quran, Confucius or Shakespeare, 
and even more insightful than Diana Sorensen – Mike’s and my mother, Magnhild Andersen 
Fisher, whom everybody called “Babe”. 
Babe Fisher never enjoyed the benefit of the type of education you have received. Yet she 
was a wise woman. She was a kind of female Nordic Yogi Berra who dispensed exquisite 
pearls  of  wisdom  to  her  boys.  One  is  especially  germane  for  this  ceremony.  Our  mother 
would say: “Never let your brains go to your head”. The pun is horrific but the message is 
profound:  To  achieve  success,  you  will  need  to  keep  your  superb  education  and  your 
considerable talent in perspective. Brains and the gift of talent are necessary, but they are 
insufficient for success in life. 
Time  and  again,  in  business  and  universities  and  government  we  see  instances  in  which 
women and men of towering intellect get far at first but ultimately snatch defeat from the jaws 
of victory. They do so because they have forgotten to develop their emotional quotient with 
the same devotion they applied to developing their intelligence quotient. My heartfelt advice 
to you is to work as hard on expanding your EQ as you have on harnessing your IQ. 
You all have great futures ahead of you. You will get there just as fast, and enjoy it much 
more, if you remember that a sound mind resides most comfortably in a sound, well-rounded 
person and that a sound, well-rounded person has more than a superior education and brain. 
The whole person is as important an achievement for those few who have been admitted to 
the “society of educated men and women” as is the achievement of intellectual excellence. 
As a former midshipman, I have always been inspired by the creed of the father of the Navy, 
John Paul Jones, as written by his biographer Augustus Buell. “It is by no means enough that 
an officer of the Navy should be a capable mariner. He must be that, of course, but also a 
great  deal  more.  He  should  be  as  well  a  gentleman  of  liberal  education,  refined manners, 
punctilious courtesy, and the nicest sense of personal honor. He should be the soul of tact, 
patience, justice, firmness, and charity. … Every commander should keep constantly before 
him the great truth, that to be well obeyed, he must be perfectly esteemed.” 
I would say that Jones (or Buell) nailed it. Take the naval reference and the gender bias out, 
and you have the ultimate guide for all of you who depart Bryant today aspiring to lead: You 
must be more than smart and have more than a mighty intellect; you must develop the whole 
woman, the whole man to be a leader in whatever field you chose. 
A smattering of Latin 
Which brings me to the last requirement for most all commencement orations – a smattering 
of  Latin.  Commencement  speakers  at  great  schools  seem  to  delight  in  showing  off  their 
command of an ancient tongue. Many a commencement speaker might have concluded this 
afternoon’s remarks with labor omnia vincit – a stern reminder that labor conquers all things. 
It is true, indeed, that you can’t rest on your laurels or your good family name or a Bryant 
education or just plain good luck. You have to work hard and sweat to succeed. And in doing 
so,  you  have  to  remember  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano  –  a  sound  mind  resides  best  in  a 
sound body. 
But that is way too ponderous. This is, after all, a festive day! So I will conclude with this: 
“Bubbus, sed possum explicarle, non sed possum comprehendere.” 
For  those  of  you  unschooled  in  the  language  of  the  ancient  Romans,  that  is  Texas-ized, 
distorted Latin for “Bubba, I can explain it to you, but I can’t understand it for you.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This afternoon I have done my best to explain to the Class of 2014 that success comes to 
those  who  best  put  their  talents  in  context  and  who  connect  their  substantial  intellectual 
achievement  to  an  equally  developed  emotional  capacity.  Those  of  us  who  lead  cerebral 
lives  must  constantly  strive  to  elevate  our  people  skills  to  a  level  equal  to  our  intellectual 
skills. I can explain that to you ad nauseam (aha! Another Latin phrase!). But you must come 
to understand it on your own. 
And if you do – if you go through your promising lives remembering that the “whole person is 
the best person” – my guess is that someday one of you in the Class of 2014 will be standing 
at  this  very  podium  giving  the  commencement  speech  to  some  future  generation  of 
graduates and their thousands of supporters and admirers. And having the greatest pleasure 
a speaker can have: Quoting your very own mom. 
Congratulations, God bless you and good luck! 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
