Graeme Wheeler: Meeting demand for statistics in a fast moving world 
Remarks  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Official Statistics User Forum, Wellington, 26 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
It’s a pleasure to be here today and talk about the Reserve Bank’s experience as a user of 
official  statistics.  Like  many  central  banks,  we’re  a  major  user  and  producer  of  statistics. 
We’re a big user of economic statistics so I’ll start by talking about some of our needs in this 
area. I’ll then go on to discuss our role in collecting, using and disseminating statistics on the 
financial system and some of the changes we’re facing. And I’ll offer a central banker’s view 
of some of the challenges that statisticians face in meeting the growing demands from users 
of these statistics. 
At  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  rely  heavily  on  a  broad  range  of  economic  data.  Statistics  New 
Zealand produces many of the statistics we use but we also rely on data from other domestic 
and offshore sources. Once every quarter, we undertake an in-depth forecast to arrive at our 
best  projection  of  where  the  economy  and  inflation  are  headed  in  the  future.  This  in  turn 
helps  guide  our  policy  decisions.  We  use  a  range  of  economic  models,  all  of  which  rely 
heavily on data, and apply lots of judgment. 
Our  assessment  of  the  economy  is  very  comprehensive.  When  we  look  at  the  external 
economy, we consider the economies of our major trading partners, the terms of trade, the 
exchange rate and the current account. When we look at the domestic economy we consider 
household and business spending, savings, credit trends and confidence. When we assess 
inflation pressures, we consider the economy’s growth potential alongside its actual growth 
rate and take into account the labour market, import prices and other factors that influence 
prices. 
Let me give you an idea of just how reliant we are on economic statistics. Our system for 
processing,  storing  and  managing  time  series  data  is  known  as  the  Financial  Sector 
Information System (FSIS). We developed it about six years ago and it provides us with a 
robust  database  for  nearly  all  the  data  we  produce  or  use.  Today,  FSIS  holds  around 
36,000 time series. Around 20,000 of these are macro-economic time series relating to New 
Zealand and the global economy. Statistics New Zealand would produce the lion’s share of 
those 20,000 series. 
You’ll be relieved to hear that I’m not going to talk about all 20,000 statistics but let me make 
a few comments about what matters to us as a large scale user. Timeliness and reliability are 
obviously important when  we’re trying to assess the economy in real time. So too is good 
quality guidance on how the statistics are compiled or what the statisticians call “metadata”. 
When we encounter puzzles in the data, it is essential to be able to have open and honest 
conversations  with  Statistics  New  Zealand  about  what  might  be  causing  them.  Revisions 
need  to  be  handled  carefully.  Most  data  are  revised  from  time  to  time,  but  if revisions  are 
large  enough  to  re-write  history,  the  original  data  would  have  had  the  potential  to  mislead 
policymakers. The earlier we can learn about upcoming revisions and what is driving them 
the better. 
Another thing that matters for us and for all users of Official Statistics is harmonisation. The 
economic  data  Statistics  New  Zealand  produces  should  ideally  be  consistent  with  the 
financial  data  the  Reserve  Bank  produces.  There  is  real  value  in  working  off  a  common 
business register when we are putting together institutional statistics. That has real benefits 
for all users. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What would be our top four ‘wants’ from Statistics New Zealand? We’d like sector balance 
sheets that would tell us who owes what to whom across the economy and with the rest of 
the  world.  We’d  like  a  quarterly  income-based  measure  of  GDP,  which  would  provide  a 
useful  alternative  perspective  on  output  to  the  existing  production  and  expenditure-based 
measures. We’d like GDP to be rebased at the very least every 10 years to capture structural 
change in the economy. And we would love a monthly CPI to enable more timely analysis 
and forecasting of inflation. 
We recognise that there are many statistical needs and resources are limited. But nor should 
we lose sight of their value. New Zealand’s annual GDP is more than $220 billion so better 
quality  or  more  timely  decisions  that  result  in  a  very  slight  improvement  in  economic 
performance could easily be worth millions of dollars per annum. 
We greatly value having a voice in Statistics New Zealand’s data development process and 
the  opportunity  to  engage  at  a  point  in  the  process  where  our  views  can  be  taken  into 
account. By all accounts, our relationship with Statistics New Zealand is in a good shape but 
both parties need to work hard and keep improving it. 
The Reserve Bank’s financial statistics 
Turning now to financial statistics, the Bank is a major user of data on the financial system, 
most  of  which  we  produce  in-house,  drawing  on  the  powers  under  the  Reserve  Bank  Act 
(1989)  to  collect  data  from  financial  institutions.  These  data  account  for  most  of  the  other 
16,000 time series in our FSIS database and include institutional data collected for prudential 
purposes,  data  on  the  financial  markets,  data  on  notes  and  coins,  and  published  financial 
system statistics. 
Our survey respondents include banks and other financial institutions and this “micro-data” is 
used in our role as a prudential regulator and supervisor. Commercial confidentiality means 
that  this  data  isn’t  generally  published,  but  we  use  it  to  compile  broader  financial  system 
statistics. We’ve  a  well-established  practice  of  constructing  and  publishing  these  statistics. 
An example would be the Standard Statistical Return for the banking system, which provides 
comprehensive  information  on  the  banking  system’s  balance  sheet.  Some  of  our  statistics 
act  as  inputs  in  the  production  of  Statistics  New  Zealand’s  own  statistics,  including  the 
national accounts. 
Table 1 
Some key Reserve Bank Financial Sector Statistics 
Collection 
Standard Statistical Return 
(SSR) 
Credit card survey 
Liquidity survey 
LVR new commitments 
Trade weighted indexes 
Planned/Under Development 
Insurance data collection 
Managed funds survey 
Income statement survey 
Bank balance sheet survey 
NZ Securities database 
Coverage 
Banks and Non-bank lending institutions 
Credit card issuers 
Banks 
Banks with residential mortgage lending 
Major trading partner currencies 
Licensed insurers 
Investment and superannuation funds managed by NZ fund 
managers  
Banks 
Banks 
Securities issued in the New Zealand market 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial statistics since the global financial crisis 
Our financial data collections have grown substantially in recent years for three reasons. 
First, the intensity of our prudential oversight has increased since the Global Financial Crisis 
of 2008/09. We’ve sought to strengthen our prudential regime for banks for example. 
As elsewhere, the GFC showed that risks around bank liquidity and funding in a period of 
financial  turmoil  were  potentially  much  greater  than  anyone  had  expected.  In  2010,  we 
introduced new standards for banks requiring new minimum liquid asset requirements and a 
minimum  core  funding  ratio.  Introducing  these  new  standards  meant  that  we  needed  new 
liquidity and funding data to monitor compliance with the new standards at both an individual 
bank and financial system level. 
Another  example  of  stronger  prudential  standards  has  been  the  introduction  of  temporary 
speed  limits  on  the  banks’  high-loan-to-value  (LVR)  lending  reflecting  our  concern  at  the 
growing  risks  in  the  housing  sector.  This,  in  turn,  required  us  to  collect  additional  data  on 
banks’ housing lending broken down by LVR. 
A second driver expanding our need for statistics has been the expansion of our regulatory 
responsibilities in recent years. 
Since 2008, the Reserve Bank has been given responsibility for the prudential regulation of 
the Non-Bank Deposit Taking Sector (NBDT). New standards for capital, liquidity and related 
party  exposures  inevitably  require  more  data  to  be  collected  from  the  industry  and  may 
prompt a further upgrading of the sector’s statistics in the future. 
In 2010, we became the prudential regulator and supervisor of the Insurance sector, which 
up until that time had been relatively loosely regulated in New Zealand. This meant that there 
is currently little in the way of formal statistics on the insurance sector. Consequently we’re 
currently  planning  a  data  collection  from  the  industry  designed  to  meet our  prudential  and 
broader  statistical  needs.  This  is  a  major  job  as  there  are  around  100  newly  licensed 
insurers, and there are a wide range of potential risks to cover. 
The third driver behind the expansion in our financial collections has been growing demand 
from  the  general  public,  international  agencies,  media  and  financial  analysts  in  the  years 
following  the  financial  crisis.  There’s  a  growing  appetite  for  more  granularity  and  detail  in 
financial  statistics  and  for  coverage  of  new  areas.  For  example,  there’s  demand  for  more 
detail on the financial products and services offered by banks, expanded data on financial 
prices, and the ability to drill down into financial sub-sectors to a rather greater extent than 
before. And there’s much greater interest in understanding the capital markets – an area that 
to date hasn’t been well captured in statistics in New Zealand. 
Meeting demand for statistics in a fast moving world 
What statistics to produce and when poses important challenges for us as the main producer 
of New Zealand’s financial statistics. We need to respond to the increasing demands for data 
and  data  transparency  but  we  also  need  to  manage  the  cost,  size  and  complexity  of  our 
statistical function and keep respondent burden to an acceptable level. 
Decisions to proceed with new collections must be based on a clear business case. In many 
respects  the  decision  to  begin  a  new  financial  data  collection  has  the  hallmarks  of  an 
investment  decision  to  purchase  a  long-lived  asset.  We  engage  extensively  with  users  in 
trying to identify clearly the benefits of the new data for financial analysis and policymaking in 
the future. Some of the benefits associated with new statistics accrue several years down the 
track once a good time series is developed. Choices made now about what (or) not to collect 
and  how  to  collect  it  can  have  implications  for  the  quality  of  financial  analysis  (or 
policymaking) for years into the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In assessing the costs of the new collection we also focus on the costs that our respondents 
might incur in undertaking significant internal system changes and enhancements in order to 
provide the information. We have an obligation to ensure that the costs that they incur are 
“worth it”. 
Keeping up with structural change is always a challenge. The absence of financial statistics 
on  a  particular  part  of  the  financial  sector  can  sometimes  mask  structural  changes 
completely, because financial analysts have no way of seeing them. More often, we may be 
aware  of  shifting  patterns  but  lack  the  statistics  that  can  properly  capture  them.  This  can 
occur  when  new  types  of  financial  institution  develop  or  when  existing  financial  activities 
migrate  from  one  type  of  institution  to  another  that  isn’t  well  represented  by  our  statistics. 
Structural changes can be very difficult to detect when they involve new financial products, 
unregulated institutions or the provision of financial services from offshore. 
Structural change can also arise due to shifts in trading patterns between New Zealand and 
the rest of the world. Since the 1970s, the Bank has published weighted average measures 
of the New Zealand dollar relative to the currencies of our major trading partners. We report 
a variety of real and nominal measures of these trade weighted exchange rates (TWIs) on 
our website. Our flagship TWI was developed 15 years ago following the introduction of the 
euro and is based on five currencies (the US dollar, Australian dollar, yen, euro and British 
pound). Since then, trading patterns have changed dramatically. In particular, China is now 
the largest single destination for New Zealand’s merchandise exports and its exchange rate 
has  become  more  flexible.  Some  years  ago  we  developed  a  broader  14  currency  trade 
weighted  index,  which  included  the  Chinese  currency  and  this  is  published  daily  on  our 
website  alongside  the  five  currency  index.  However,  we  are  currently  undertaking  a  full 
review of all the exchange rate measures that we publish, which we hope to complete before 
the end of the year. 
Even  with  good  statistical  practices,  and  extensive  liaison  with  users,  many  statistical 
collections ultimately become obsolete and need overhauling. Our standard statistical return 
for  the  banking  system  has  served  us  well  over  the  past  15  years  but  we’re  now  re-
developing  it.  That  reflects  changes  in  the  banking  sector  over  the  period  and  a  better 
understanding of what to monitor in the sector. For example, the existing return provides little 
if any data on the banks’ incomes and expenses and other performance metrics. Our hope is 
that a new collection methodology will serve us well for the next 15 years. 
During the rapid changes associated with the GFC, it became clear that the traditional time 
lags in the availability of some of our financial sector data became too long for fully informed 
analysis. Increasingly we drew on data from banks’ internal management systems that could 
be provided closer to real time. 
We’ve used this experience to try and shorten the time lag in the availability of some of our 
financial  data.  We’ve  done  this  in  areas  such  as  bank  credit,  liquidity,  solvency  and  debt 
issuance. Timeliness is essential for good policy making but timing also needs to be weighed 
alongside  other  parameters  such  as  data  quality,  respondent  burden  and  the  costs  of 
processing the data more quickly. 
Financial  systems  are  complex,  and  users  –  especially  uninformed  users–  often  have 
difficulty interpreting the data. Our challenge is to provide the external users of our statistics 
with metadata and guidance around the use of our statistics without overloading them with 
too  much  information.  As  we  seek  to  re-develop  many  of  our  statistics  over  the  next  few 
years and develop new ones, we will need to give equal attention to the support we provide 
to the users of the new statistics. 
Let me conclude briefly by saying 
There is no magic to good policy making. Good decisions depend on good quality statistics 
and information. Official statistics play a crucial role in informing the decisions that we take. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
They also provide accountability for those decisions. As a user of official statistics we would 
like  to  see  a  number  of  improvements  to  the  suite  of  data  we  consume.  We  want  faster, 
higher frequency, more comprehensive and higher quality statistics. 
New Zealand’s financial sector statistics, most of which are collected by the Reserve Bank, 
are  in  the  midst  of  substantial  change.  The  insights  and  changes  prompted  by  the  global 
financial crisis have provided us with a unique opportunity to assess the quality and fitness of 
purpose  of  our  financial  statistics  and  given  some  urgency  to  introduce  some  new  data 
collections, redevelop existing collections, and explore new avenues for data supply. Whilst 
we’re the biggest user of our own statistics, we are taking into account the needs of a broad 
range of stakeholders in meeting this challenge. 
I wish you a fruitful two days. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
