  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Ishikawa, 10 September 2014. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Ishikawa Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Kanazawa Branch. 
The Bank of Japan decided on the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) in January last year. The Bank then in 
April  introduced  aggressive  monetary  easing  called  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing (QQE) to achieve the price stability target. The Bank has been pursuing QQE since 
then. 
One year and five months have passed since the Bank introduced QQE, and the policy has 
been having its intended effects so far. The impact of QQE is expected to become stronger 
going  forward,  making  it  particularly  important  for  the  Bank  to  ensure  the  public  fully 
understands its policy. 
Today, before exchanging views with you, I would like to explain the current situation of and 
outlook for Japan’s economy. I will then talk about the background behind QQE. 
I.  
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
Economic activity 
A.  
Let me start by explaining the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity. 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend,  although  a  decline  in 
demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  can  be 
observed. The GDP statistics released this week show that after growing strongly at a rate of 
1.5 percent quarter-on-quarter in the January–March quarter, real GDP fell substantially, by 
1.8 percent, in the April–June quarter (Chart 1). Because of the large decline in the April–June 
quarter, there appears to be some skepticism whether the economic recovery remains intact. 
However,  since  the  increase  in  demand  in  the  January–March  quarter  was  very  large  as 
consumers brought purchases forward, it was only to be expected that the subsequent decline 
in demand and hence in real GDP in the April–June quarter would also be large. What matters 
is the mechanism underlying the economic recovery and not temporary factors, and the Bank 
judges that the virtuous cycle of economic activity remains firmly intact in both the household 
and corporate sectors. Let me first touch on the virtuous cycle in the household sector and 
then move on to the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector. 
Household sector 
Looking  at  the  environment  facing  the  household  sector,  the  labor  market  continues  to 
improve steadily. The unemployment rate in July registered at 3.8 percent, while the active 
job openings-to-applicants ratio was 1.10, and both have thus returned to the levels prior to 
the  global  financial  crisis  (Chart  2).  The  employment  conditions  DI  in  the  June  Tankan 
Survey – the Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan – shows that more and 
more firms, particularly in the non-manufacturing sector, feel that there is a labor shortage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  number  of  regular  employees  has  been  around 
1.5 percent (Chart 3). 
With the labor market becoming tighter, hourly cash earnings of part-time employees have 
been  increasing  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  Moreover,  scheduled  cash  earnings  have 
increased  slightly,  indicating  that  the  impact  of  base  pay  raises  in  the  annual  wage 
negotiations this spring is starting to appear in the data, and non-scheduled cash earnings 
and  summer  bonuses  have  increased.  Against  this  background,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in monthly cash earnings of full-time employees has been positive. As a result, the 
annual rate of increase in the nominal wage per employee has gradually accelerated. Finally, 
employee  income  –  that  is,  nominal  wages  multiplied  by  the  number  of  employees  –  has 
been  growing  at  around  2  percent  year-on-year  for  some  months,  and  the  rate  of  growth 
further accelerated in July. 
With  the  employment  and  income  situation  improving  steadily,  private  consumption  has 
remained  resilient  as  a  trend,  and  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the 
consumption tax hike have gradually begun to wane. In interviews, some firms expressed the 
view  that  since  the  front-loading  of  purchases  –  especially  of  durable  goods  such  as 
automobiles – had been very large, the subsequent decline was also likely to be prolonged. 
However,  many  department  stores  and  food  supermarkets,  for  example,  report  that  the 
margin of the decline in demand has been narrowing gradually. 
Looking ahead, the labor market is likely to continue tightening as the economy continues to 
recover and, as I will discuss later, corporate profits are expected to improve and  inflation 
expectations are likely to increase. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of increase in nominal 
wages  is  expected  to  gradually  show  a  clear  uptrend.  Against  the  backdrop  of  these 
employment  and  income  developments,  the  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  in  the 
household  sector  is  expected  to  remain  in  place.  Nevertheless,  the  Bank  will  continue  to 
carefully examine how the decline in real income that the consumption tax hike has brought 
about affects households’ spending behavior. 
Corporate sector 
Next, I will explain the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector. 
Exports  have  shown  some  weakness  and the recovery  in  exports  has been  delayed.  That 
being said, as I will explain later in more detail, exports are expected to head for a moderate 
increase. 
Despite the sluggishness in exports, the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector has remained 
in place. In fact, corporate profits have continued to improve. Looking at listed companies’ 
results  for  the  April–June  quarter  of  this  year,  consolidated  profits  have  continued  to  rise, 
mainly due to the good performance of overseas sales, and have generally been at favorable 
levels. Business sentiment has also remained favorable on the whole, although it temporarily 
deteriorated – particularly in the non-manufacturing sector – due to the effects of the decline 
in  demand 
large 
manufacturing  firms  has  remained  on  an  upward  trend  despite  the  weakness  in  exports, 
reflecting the fact that profitability continues to be favorable. 
With  corporate  profits  continuing  to  improve  and  business  sentiment  being  generally 
favorable,  business  fixed  investment,  particularly  in  the  non-manufacturing  sector,  has 
increased moderately. Moreover, even in the manufacturing sector, which had been lagging, 
a  clear  recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  can  be  observed  (Chart  4).  With  corporate 
profits  continuing  their  improving  trend,  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a 
moderate  increasing  trend  as  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  grow  stronger  through  the 
decline  in  expected  real  interest  rates.  The  June  Tankan  survey  shows  that  aggregate 
investment in fiscal 2014 is scheduled to increase. Therefore, the virtuous cycle of economic 
activity  in  the  corporate  sector  is  expected  to  remain  intact  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
improvement in corporate profits and favorable business sentiment. 
tax  hike.  Business  sentiment  among 
the  consumption 
following 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outlook for and concerns about economic activity 
Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  moderate  recovery  trend,  since  the  virtuous 
cycle of economic activity in both the household and corporate sectors is likely to remain in 
place, as I just mentioned. At the July Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), the Bank conducted 
an interim assessment of the April 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook 
Report) through fiscal 2016. Looking at the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, 
real GDP is projected to grow at 1.0 percent in fiscal 2014, 1.5 percent in fiscal 2015, and 
1.3 percent in fiscal 2016 (Chart 5). 
Regarding the outlook for economic activity, a potential concern is developments in exports. As 
I  just  mentioned,  Japan’s  exports  have  shown  some  weakness.  The  recent  weakness  in 
exports is essentially due to cyclical factors, mainly the sluggishness in emerging economies. 
At the same time, the unexpectedly large slowdown of the U.S. economy in the January–March 
quarter of this year due to the unusually severe winter weather seems to have affected exports 
with  a  lag,  putting  downward  pressure  on  them  through  early  spring.  In  addition,  a  possible 
structural  factor  why  the  recovery  in  Japan’s  exports  has  lagged  behind  the  recovery  in 
overseas  economies  that  may  have  played  a  certain  role  is  the  accelerated  relocation  of 
production overseas by Japanese manufacturing firms. 
Looking ahead, with structural problems such as fiscal and current account deficits persisting 
in  some  emerging  economies,  economic  growth  in  emerging  economies,  and  particularly 
growth in domestic demand, is expected to remain subdued for the time being. On the other 
hand,  growth  in  the  advanced  economies  such  as  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  is 
expected to accelerate, while the Chinese economy is expected to continue to register stable 
growth.  Growth  in  these  economies  will  likely  spread  to  emerging  economies,  so  that  the 
growth rate of overseas economies overall is expected to accelerate gradually. This is also 
confirmed  by  the  World  Economic  Outlook  Update  published  in  July  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund: global economic growth, which slowed to 3.2 percent in 2013, is projected to 
accelerate gradually to 3.4 percent in 2014 and 4.0 percent in 2015 (Chart 6). Therefore, the 
cyclical  factors  responsible  for  the  weakness  in  exports  so  far  are  likely  to  gradually 
disappear  and  exports  are  expected  to  head  for  a  moderate  increase.  In  addition,  from  a 
somewhat longer-term perspective, the correction of the excessive appreciation of the yen in 
the past will mitigate downward pressure on exports by decelerating the pace of relocation of 
production overseas. 
Price developments 
B.  
Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding 
fresh food) excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike was plus 1.3 percent in 
July. Thus, Japan’s economy is on course to achieving an inflation rate of 2 percent – the 
price stability target – as expected (Chart 7). 
When assessing price developments, it is important to bear in mind that monthly figures for 
the CPI tend to fluctuate and that trend inflationary pressure is determined by two factors: 
improvements in the output gap and rising inflation expectations. To assess trend inflation, it 
is necessary for the Bank to carefully examine these two factors. As I mentioned, Japan’s 
labor market has tightened, and firms’ excess capacity has almost disappeared as capacity 
utilization  has  increased.  As  a  result,  the  output  gap  has  been  improving  moderately  and 
recently  reached  around  0  percent  (Chart  8).  Moreover,  as  I  will  explain  later,  medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to accelerate moderately, along with 
increasing  wages,  against  the  backdrop  of  rising  inflation  expectations  as  well  as 
improvements  in  the  output  gap,  given  that  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
growing at a pace above its potential. Specifically, the inflation rate is expected to be around 
1¼  percent  for  some  time,  since  upward  pressure  from  energy-related  goods,  particularly 
petroleum  products,  will  likely  wane.  Subsequently,  with  the  output  gap  remaining  positive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and medium- to long-term inflation expectations rising, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI is expected to follow an uptrend again and reach about 2 percent around the middle of 
the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through 2016, that is, in or around fiscal 2015. 
Looking at the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the interim assessment of 
the Outlook Report at the July MPM, projections for the year-on-year growth rate in the CPI 
(excluding fresh food) are plus 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, plus 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015, 
and plus 2.1 percent for fiscal 2016, after excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax 
hikes (Chart 5). 
II.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
What is QQE? 
A.  
For the remainder of my speech I would like to focus on several points concerning the Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. 
The  QQE  policy  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  since  April  last  year  has  two  major  pillars 
(Chart 9). 
The first  pillar  is  a  commitment to  achieve  the 2  percent price  stability  target  as  swiftly  as 
possible. Specifically, the Bank clearly pledged that it would achieve the price stability target 
of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
The  second  pillar  consists  of  underpinning  the first  pillar  – the  commitment  –  with  specific 
actions.  As  the  wording  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicates,  these  actions  involve  an 
expansion of the quantity and changes in the quality of assets on the balance sheet of the 
Bank. 
The quantitative aspect refers to the substantial increase in the amount of money provided 
by  the  Bank  to  the  financial  system,  that  is,  the  increase  in  the  monetary  base,  through 
purchases of various assets, in particular Japanese government bonds (JGBs). 
The qualitative aspect refers to the purchase of riskier assets. The Bank started to include 
purchases  of  government  bonds  with  longer  remaining  maturities.  In  order  to  affect  risk 
premiums on assets, the Bank has also increased the amounts of purchases of exchange-
traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
Transmission channels of QQE 
B.  
Many of you may be interested in the channels through which QQE with its two pillars affects 
the real economy and to what extent the effects of QQE have spread through the economy. 
Let me explain the transmission channels of monetary easing. A key transmission channel is 
the  lowering  of  expected  real  interest  rates  (Chart  10).  Expected  real  interest  rates  are 
nominal interest rates actually observed in financial markets or over the counter less the rate 
of  inflation  people  expect.  While  nominal  interest  rates  can  be  observed,  expected  real 
interest rates are the rates economic entities anticipate taking into account price changes. 
QQE  aims  at  putting  downward  pressure  on  nominal  interest  rates  through  large-scale 
purchases of long-term government bonds and purchases of other assets while raising the 
expected rate of inflation. The aim is therefore to lower expected real interest rates, that is, 
nominal interest rates less the expected rate of inflation. 
If  economic  entities’  expected  real  interest  rates  fall, this  will  stimulate  demand  in  the  real 
economy  in  a  number  of  ways  (Chart  11).  For  example,  when  real  interest  rates  decline, 
people will shift their portfolios from cash, deposits, and fixed-income securities – which will 
have  become  relatively  less  attractive  –  to  equities  and  tangible  assets  such  as  land  and 
housing, or to foreign currency-denominated assets with higher returns. The resulting rise in 
equity  prices  and  the  appreciation  of  foreign  currencies  will  stimulate  private  consumption 
through wealth effects. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In addition to the decline in expected real interest rates, other factors such as an increase in 
consumption, a rise in stock prices, and the depreciation of the yen, will encourage firms to 
be  more  proactive  in  their  business  fixed  investment.  The  depreciation  of  the  yen  is  also 
expected to give rise to an increase in exports. 
With  an  increase  in  demand  through  these  channels,  the  shortage  of  demand  in  the 
economy will be eliminated, prices will rise, and overcoming deflation will be in sight. 
Further  increases  in  production  due  to  growing  demand  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  labor 
income  through  improved  labor  market  conditions  and,  in  turn,  further  raise  private 
consumption.  The  resulting  increase  in  corporate  profits  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  firms’ 
business  fixed  investment.  This  chain  of  developments  leads  to  a  virtuous  cycle  in  the 
economy. 
Effects of QQE 
C.  
In  the  economy,  monetary  policy  has  so  far  been  having  its  intended  effects  through  the 
transmission channels I have explained. 
On the one hand, nominal interest rates, including long-term government bond yields, have 
been  stable,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  economic  entities’  inflation  expectations  have  been 
rising on the whole, as I will explain in a moment. Therefore, expected real interest rates – 
that  is,  nominal  interest  rates  minus  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  –  have  been  declining. 
This,  in  turn,  has  boosted  private  demand,  such  as  consumption  and  investment,  raising 
aggregate demand in the economy as a whole. Economic growth in fiscal 2013 jumped to 
2.3 percent following slow growth between only 0 and 1 percent in the two preceding years. 
Against  this  background,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  prices  has  been 
increasing as a trend toward around 2 percent – the price stability target. 
Corporate sector output has been increasing in response to the rise in aggregate demand, 
and labor demand has been increasing accordingly. Since nominal wages have been on an 
uptrend along with the increase in the number of workers, employee income as a whole has 
been rising, underpinning domestic demand. 
Therefore, QQE has been having its intended effects, and the effects of monetary easing are 
expected  to  further  strengthen  with  the  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and 
spending being sustained. 
When talking about these developments on previous occasions, I have sometimes heard the 
concern that real wages may actually be declining, since nominal wages cannot keep up with 
the increase in inflation. In response, I have been saying that it is necessary to be patient 
and  to  watch  the  policy  effects  over  a  period  of  time,  since  the  effects  unfold  in  a  certain 
order. 
From  firms’  perspective,  it  is  not  easy  to  reduce  the  number  of  regular  workers  once 
increased and it is difficult to reduce wages once raised. Therefore, in general, increases in 
employment tend to start in the form of additional non-regular workers being hired, and wage 
increases tend to take the form of increases in special cash earnings such as bonuses or in 
non-scheduled  cash  earnings.  While  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  scheduled  cash 
earnings had been on a downtrend reflecting the increase in the share of part-time workers in 
total employment, scheduled cash earnings stopped declining in May this year and started to 
increase in June. 
Real  wages  had  been  declining  until  recently.  However,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
April consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of change in real wages turned positive for 
full-time workers in June and for part-time workers in July (Chart 12). 
Once future economic prospects and the outlook for firms’ profits become more favorable as 
the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending continues, it is likely that wages 
will rise steadily in line with or above the rate of inflation. For this to happen, it is important to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  continue  with  the  appropriate  conduct  of  monetary  policy  measures  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target in a stable manner. 
Inflation expectations and prices 
D.  
As mentioned earlier, in order to put downward pressure on expected real interest rates it is 
necessary to work on people’s inflation expectations. Under 15 years of protracted deflation, 
there was a growing share of younger people who had never experienced inflation, and the 
view that prices will not rise had become entrenched in people’s mindset. Dispelling such a 
deflationary  mindset  and  changing  people’s  expectations  so  that  they  expect  moderate 
inflation is quite a difficult challenge. That is why the current large-scale monetary easing had 
become necessary. 
Various  surveys  and  market  indicators  point  to  a  general  uptrend  in  people’s  inflation 
expectations (Charts 13 and 14). This can be attributed to the fact that the impact of QQE on 
inflation expectations has been spreading. In addition, this uptrend also reflects an increase 
in  the  number  of  people  who  had  been  reluctant  to  believe  that  Japan  would  experience 
inflation until they saw it and who are now adjusting their expectations. Such skeptics have 
adjusted their expectations due to the rise in actual inflation reflecting the improvement in the 
output gap. This tendency is likely to become stronger going forward. 
The rise in inflation expectations, moreover, has the effect of directly raising actual inflation 
through  an  additional  channel  distinct  from  the  boost  to  aggregate  demand  through  lower 
expected real interest rates. Specifically, when people expect future inflation, their price and 
wage setting will be based on such expectations, thus adding inflationary pressure. 
In this context, it is useful to refer to the concept of the Phillips curve, which illustrates the 
relationship  between  economic  activity  and  inflation.  Recently,  inflation  has  clearly  been 
above the level suggested by the Phillips curve derived from data for the period of deflation 
(Chart  15).  In  addition  to  a  move  along  the  Phillips  curve  due  to  the  improvement  in 
economic  activity,  this  may  reflect  an  upward  shift  in  the  Phillips  curve  due  to  upward 
pressure on the curve itself stemming from the rise in inflation expectations. 
The depreciation of the yen and inflation 
E.  
On this basis, the Bank believes that the price stability target of 2 percent will be achieved, 
as I mentioned earlier. Of course, there are some skeptical voices. For example, some argue 
that the current rise in inflation is the result of a rise in the price of imports, especially energy, 
due  to the  depreciation of  the  yen,  so  that  once  such  exchange  rate  effects  dissipate, the 
pace of inflation should slow down. 
However,  statistical  analysis  for  the  period  prior  to  the  introduction  of  QQE  shows  no 
significant  relationship  between  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  yen  and  inflation  in 
Japan (Chart 16). That is, a depreciation of the yen does not necessarily lead to inflation. 
Let me briefly explain why this is the case. Assuming that all else remains equal, a rise in the 
prices  of  imports  due  to  a  depreciation  of  the  yen  or  other  factors  indeed  creates  upward 
pressure  on  prices.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  resulting  negative  income  effect  will 
reduce  the  demand  for  imports  and  other  goods  and  services,  which,  in  turn,  will  exert 
downward pressure on the prices of imports and other goods and services. For example, if 
gasoline prices rise, you may try to drive less or reduce your purchases of other products. 
A  clear  relationship  between  the  yen-dollar  exchange  rate  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in consumer prices can only be observed in the short period after the introduction of 
QQE (Chart 17). This suggests that current inflation has not been brought about merely by 
the depreciation of the yen. Instead, it appears that QQE has triggered certain mechanisms 
resulting  in  price  increases  that  were  not  seen  during  episodes  of  monetary  easing  in  the 
past. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  How a rise in prices of specific goods and services reflecting, for example, a depreciation of 
the  yen  ultimately  affects  aggregate  demand  and  aggregate  prices  depends  on  the 
interaction  of  the  various  mechanisms.  Thus,  there  is  no  one-to-one  relationship  between 
changes  in  the  prices  of  specific  goods  and  services  and  the  price  level  overall.  In  other 
words, one cannot forecast macro-level changes simply by adding up micro-level changes. 
In  the  end,  to  forecast  price  developments  at  the  macro  level,  analyses  from  a  macro 
perspective are necessary. Specifically, it is essential to examine the output gap, that is, how 
much demand there is relative to the supply capacity of the economy as a whole. 
The  main  factor  underlying  the  current  level  of  inflation  is  the  growing  demand  in  the 
economy as a whole, and the effects of monetary policy played a certain role in the growth in 
demand.  Because  of  such  demand  pressure,  firms  have  been  able  to  smoothly  pass  on 
increases in costs as well as the consumption tax hike to higher sales prices. 
QQE and strategies to raise the growth potential 
F.  
With monetary  policy  having  its  intended  effects  and  the  output gap  improving, firms  have 
gradually started to face supply constraints such as shortages in labor and capital stock that 
had not surfaced under deflation. 
Japan’s unemployment rate increased from 3–4 percent in the mid-1990s to 5–6 percent in 
the 2000s, despite the fact that the working age population has been shrinking since 1996. 
On  the  other  hand,  more  recently,  the  economy  has  been  facing  a  labor  shortage,  which, 
given  the  decline  in  the  number  of  workers,  is  what  one  would  expect  under  normal 
circumstances. Thus, one could say that Japan’s economy is gradually returning to a much 
more  normal  situation,  in  which  the  unemployment  rate  falls  as  the  number  of  workers 
shrinks. 
Due  to  the  decline  in  the  working  age  population,  as  well  as  a  slowdown  in  productivity 
growth and sluggish business fixed investment, Japan’s potential growth rate is estimated to 
have  declined  to  around  0.5  percent.  Now  that  the  improvement  in  the  output  gap  has 
brought challenges on the supply-side to the fore, this is a good time to make efforts to raise 
the growth potential by increasing the capital stock and pursuing growth strategies such as 
measures to respond to the decline in the working age population and to promote innovation 
through regulatory and institutional reforms. 
The reason I refer to the importance of strengthening growth potential here is not that it is a 
necessary  condition  for  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  The  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent can be achieved through the appropriate conduct of monetary policy, regardless of 
the  level  of  potential  growth  rate.  If  aggregate  demand  grows  due  to  monetary  easing, 
workers  will  work  more  efficiently,  while  the  improvement  in  business  sentiment  will  lead 
firms to take risks and invest in capital stock and to promote technological innovation. This, in 
turn, is likely to raise the growth potential to some extent. 
However,  such  monetary  easing  alone  will  not  be  sufficient  to  achieve  the  government’s 
target of “real economic growth of about 2 percent on average for 10 years” and can only 
provide  a  supplementary  boost  to  Japan’s  growth  potential.  To  achieve  the  government’s 
target,  it  is  necessary  to  raise  Japan’s  growth  potential  by  pushing  ahead  with  drastic 
structural reforms through a growth strategy. 
In  a  deflationary  recession,  it  is  difficult  to  push  ahead  with  such  structural  reforms,  since 
there  is  bound  to  be  strong  resistance  against  policy  measures  that,  for  example,  seek  to 
increase competition through deregulation, due to the severe economic pain such measures 
would bring about. Therefore, monetary policy to overcome deflation and maintain inflation at 
about 2 percent in the medium to long term is a necessary condition to promote structural 
reforms in order to raise the potential growth rate. This has been my view even since before I 
became Deputy Governor of the Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Based  on  these  considerations,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  strive  to  pursue  appropriate 
monetary policy measures on its own accord to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent 
at the earliest possible time. 
Concluding remarks 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Ishikawa Prefecture. 
Ishikawa  Prefecture  is  a  manufacturing  region  and  there  are  a  number  of  firms  that  have 
unique  technologies  of  worldwide  prominence.  In  addition,  there  are  many  vigorous  small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  in  Ishikawa  Prefecture,  and  the  prefecture  has  a 
disproportionate  share  in  the  list  of  300  of  Japan’s  Exciting  Monozukuri  (Manufacturing) 
SMEs  released  by  the  Ministry  of  Economy,  Trade  and  Industry.  Moreover,  with  regard to 
human  resource  utilization,  Ishikawa  Prefecture  comes  first  in  Japan  in  terms  of  the 
employment rate of women, and the overall employment rate is also relatively high. 
The economy of Ishikawa Prefecture has been recovering moderately, although it has been 
affected by the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the 
consumption  tax  hike.  With  the  employment  and  income  situation  improving,  private 
consumption  has  been  moderately  picking  up  as  a  trend.  Business  fixed  investment  has 
increased  as  corporate  profits  have  improved  steadily.  Meanwhile,  public  investment  has 
been at a high level, and housing investment appears to have stopped weakening, despite 
the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike. Reflecting these developments in 
demand,  industrial  production  has  been  hovering  at  a  high  level  and  the  employment  and 
income  situation  has  improved.  Therefore,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  has  been 
operating. 
Given this assessment of the regional economy, I hope that the extension of the Hokuriku 
Shinkansen line to Kanazawa in March 2015 will further boost economic activity in the region 
on both the tourism and the business front. With regard to tourism, an increasing number of 
visitors are expected to come to this region, and there has been an increase in the building 
and  renovation  of  hotels  and  other  commercial  facilities  to  respond  to  this  increase  in 
demand. Regarding business, firms have been launching initiatives such as developing new 
sales networks and tapping new customers as well as promoting the relocation of enterprises 
to the region from outside the region. 
Moreover, I have heard that – taking advantage of the clustering of the textile industry in this 
region  –  industry,  the  prefectural  administration,  and  academics  in  coordination  have 
launched initiatives to develop new materials made from carbon fibers. I have also heard that 
initiatives  aiming  to  promote  new  industries  such  as  aircraft-related  industries  and medical 
and nursing services have been implemented. I sincerely hope that, with the extension of the 
Hokuriku  Shinkansen  line  to  Kanazawa,  the  region  will  enjoy  further  growth  in  the  future 
through the strengthening of joint efforts between the public and the private sector in a wide 
range of areas to boost the economy of the region. 
Thank you.  
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
