  R Gandhi: Role of Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) in financial 
sector – regulatory challenges 
Text of the Frank Moraes oration lecture by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve 
Bank of India, Chennai, 16 June 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Sindhu Pancholy is gratefully acknowledged. 
Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen. 
1. 
2.  
It  is  with  a  great  feeling  of  pride  that  I  stand  before  you  to  deliver  this  oration  in 
memory of the legendary Frank Moraes. I congratulate the United Writers Association and 
Frank  Moraes  Foundation  for  regularly  organizing  the  distinguished  Frank  Moraes  Oration 
lecture.  I  join  everyone  here  in  congratulating  Chevalier  Dr.  K.  Thiagarajan  on  being 
accorded with the prestigious Celebrity Champion Honour instituted by Community Welfare 
Foundation, in recognition of his pioneering initiatives relating to birth-control and outstanding 
community service rendered for over four decades. 
3.  
Frank Moraes was an eminent journalist who was known for having extended the 
realm  of  journalism  to  socio-political  dimensions  of  development,  fearless  comment  of  the 
highest in the land and a broader vision of India, both within and outside the country. He was 
fiercely  independent,  with  full  faith  in  his  own  convictions.  He  is  rumored  to  have  kept  his 
resignation letter in his pocket. Basically a lawyer, Moraes became a journalist and later a 
writer with a passion for writing contemporary Indian history. My heartful thanks to the United 
Writers Association and to Chevalier Dr. Thiagarajan in particular for giving me this privilege 
to deliver this oration in Frank Moraes’ memory. 
4.  
Challenges as the subject for this oration. 
5.  
If it looks like a duck, quacks like a duck, and acts like a duck, then it is a duck – or 
so  the  saying  goes.  What  about  an  institution  that  looks like  a  bank, acts  like  a bank  and 
behaves like a bank? Is it a bank? Often it is not a bank – it is a shadow bank. 
the  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies  (NBFCs):  Regulatory 
I  have  chosen 
Shadow banks 
The term “shadow bank” was coined by economist Paul McCulley in a 2007 speech 
6.  
at  the  annual  financial  symposium  hosted  by  the  Kansas  City  Federal  Reserve  Bank  in 
Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming.  In  McCulley’s  talk,  shadow  banking  had  a  distinctly  U.S.  focus 
though  there  were  shadow  banking  institutions  in  the  UK,  Europe  and  even  in  China.  He 
referred  mainly  to  non  –  bank  financial  institutions  that  engaged  in  what  economists  call 
maturity transformation. Commercial banks engage in maturity transformation when they use 
deposits, which are normally short term, to fund loans that are longer term. Shadow banks do 
something  similar.  Further,  they  do  much  more.  They  are  the  hedge  funds;  they  were  the 
conduits  for  asset  backed  securities;  they  were  the  special  purpose  vehicles  for  highly 
leveraged activity, with serious asset liability mismatch. 
7.  
The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  an  organization  of  financial  and  supervisory 
authorities from major economies and international financial institutions, developed a broader 
definition of shadow banks that includes all entities outside the regulated banking system that 
perform the core banking function of credit intermediation (that is, taking money from savers 
and lending it to borrowers). 
Why  are  they  called  shadow  banks?  Because  there  was  so  little  transparency,  it 
8.  
often was unclear who owed (or would owe later) what to whom. Most of their liabilities were 
off  balance  sheet;  so  also  most  of  their  assets.  As  someone  put  it,  the  shadow  banking 
entities were characterized by a lack of disclosure and information about the value of their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  assets  (or  sometimes  even  what  the  assets  were);  opaque  governance  and  ownership 
structures;  little  regulatory  or  supervisory  oversight  of  the  type  associated  with  traditional 
banks; virtually no loss-absorbing capital or cash for redemptions; and a lack of access to 
formal liquidity support to help prevent fire sales. 
9.  
How  did  they  come  on  scene?  Why  nobody  bothered  about  them?  That  was 
because  they  did  not  mobilize  demand  deposits  and  did  not  engage  in  payment  services. 
Maturity transformation i.e. raising funds and indulging in lending and investment activities is 
a legitimate economic activity. Since public funds were not to be called upon to rescue these 
institutions, they were not regulated. 
10.  
However, during the financial crisis of 2007 and 08, these shadow banks received 
heightened  attention,  because  of  their  role  in  precipitating  the  crisis.  The  world  woke  up 
rudely to the crisis and more specifically to the existence of shadow banks. 
11.  
Demands  for  regulating  them  attained  increasing  crescendo.  Economist  Paul 
Krugman  said  that  the  shadow  banking  system  was  the  core  cause  of  the  crisis.  “As  the 
shadow  banking  system  expanded  to  rival  or  even  surpass  conventional  banking  in 
importance,  politicians  and  government  officials  should  have  realized  that  they  were  re-
creating  the  kind  of  financial  vulnerability  that  made  the  Great  Depression  possible  –  and 
they should have responded by extending regulations and the financial safety net to cover 
these new institutions. Influential figures should have proclaimed a simple rule: anything that 
does what a bank does, anything that has to be rescued in crises the way banks are, should 
be regulated like a bank.” 
12.  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also voiced that the spillover effects of the 
shadow banking system onto systemic risk needs to be contained. The G-20, duly prodded 
by the FSB declared that the shadow banking system should be regulated. The USA brought 
them  under  regulation  in  2010  under  the  Dodd  Frank  Act.  The  UK  goes  further  to  even 
accord them central bank liquidity. 
Shadow banks in India 
13.  
Do we have shadow banks in India? The answer is yes. It is yes, because we have 
financial institutions which accept deposits and extend credit like banks, but we do not call 
them shadow banks; we call them the Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs). Are they 
in  fact  shadow  banks?  No,  because  these  institutions  have  been  under  the  regulatory 
structure of the Reserve Bank of India, right from 1963 i.e. 50 full years before the developed 
west is doing so. 
Evolution of regulation of NBFCs in India 
14.  
In the wake of failure of several banks in the late 1950s and early 1960s in India, 
large number of ordinary depositors lost their money. This led to the formation of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation by the Reserve Bank, to provide guarantee to the depositors. (Later 
by  adding  a  credit  guarantee  element,  it  became  the  DICGC).  While  this  provided  the 
necessary  safety  net  for  the  bank  depositors,  the  Reserve  Bank  did  note  that  there  were 
deposit  taking  activities  undertaken  by  non-banking  companies.  Though  they  were  not 
systemically as important as the banks, the Reserve Bank initiated regulating them, as they 
had the potential to cause pain to their depositors. 
15.  
Later in 1996, in the wake of the failure of a big NBFC, the Reserve Bank tightened 
the regulatory structure over the NBFCs, with rigorous registration requirements, enhanced 
reporting and supervision. Reserve Bank also decided that no more NBFC will be permitted 
to raise deposits from the public. Later when the NBFCs sourced their funding heavily from 
the  banking  system,  it  raised  systemic  risk  issues.  Sensing  that  it  can  cause  financial 
instability, the Reserve Bank brought asset side prudential regulations onto the NBFCs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  NBFCs of India 
16.  
The definition of the term “NBFC” entails a very wide meaning. NBFCs include not 
just  the  finance  companies  that  the  general  public  is  largely  familiar  with;  the  term  also 
entails wider group of companies that are engaged in investment business, insurance, chit 
fund, nidhi, merchant banking, stock broking, alternative investments, etc. as their principal 
business. Today I would be concentrating only on those NBFCs that are under the regulatory 
purview of the Reserve Bank. 
Traditionally, India has had a bank-dominated financial sector. Even so, there have 
17.  
always  been  NBFCs.  These  were  in  early  times  small  family  run  businesses  for  deposits 
acceptance  and  lending  activities.  Even  today,  the  sector  may  be  “small”  as  compared  to 
banking  sector  with  a  total  asset  size  of  just  around  14  percent  of  that  of  scheduled 
commercial  banks  (other  than  RRBs).  However,  there  is  no  denying  that  the  sector  has 
grown tremendously over the years in size, form and complexity, with some of the NBFCs 
operating  as  conglomerates  having  business  interests  spread  to  sectors  like  insurance, 
broking, mutual fund and real estate. Concomitant with the above, interconnectedness and 
systemic importance of the NBFC sector also have increased. 
18.  
NBFCs  being  financial  intermediaries  are  engaged  in  the  activity  of  bringing  the 
saving and the investing community together. In this role they are perceived to be playing a 
complimentary role to banks rather than competitors, as it is a known fact that majority of the 
population  in  the  country  do  not  yet  have  access  to  mainstream  financial  products  and 
services including a bank account and therefore the country needs institutions beyond banks 
for  reaching  out  in  areas  where  banks’  presence  may  be  lesser.  Thus  NBFCs  especially 
those  catering  to  the  urban  and  rural  poor  namely  NBFC-MFIs  and  Asset  Finance 
Companies  have  a  complimentary  role  in  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  of  the  country. 
Further, some of the big NBFCs viz; infrastructure finance companies are engaged in lending 
exclusively to the infrastructure sector and some are into factoring business, thereby giving 
fillip to the growth and development of the respective sector of their operations. Thus NBFCs 
have  also  carved  niche  business  areas  for  them  within  the  financial  sector  space  and  are 
also popular for providing customized products like second hand vehicle financing, mostly at 
the  doorstep  of  the  customer.  In  short,  NBFCs  bring  the  much  needed  diversity  to  the 
financial  sector  thereby  diversifying  the  risks,  increasing  liquidity  in  the  markets  thereby 
promoting financial stability and bringing efficiency to the financial sector. 
19.  
At the same time, their growing size and interconnectedness also raise concerns on 
financial stability. Reserve Bank’s endeavour in this context has been  to streamline NBFC 
regulation,  address  the  risks  posed  by  them  to  financial  stability,  address  depositors’  and 
customers’ interests, address regulatory arbitrage and help the sector grow in a healthy and 
efficient manner. Some of the regulatory measures include identifying systemically important 
non-deposit taking NBFCs as those with asset size of  ₹100 crore and above and bringing 
them under stricter prudential norms (CRAR and exposure norms), issuing guidelines on Fair 
Practices Code, aligning the guidelines on restructuring and securitization with that of banks, 
permitting NBFCs-ND-SI to issue perpetual debt instruments etc. 
NBFCs as components of the financial sector 
20.  
financial sector can be gauged from the details given below: 
A broad picture of the role of NBFCs and the interconnectedness they have in the 
General 
21.  
The  total  number  of  NBFCs  as  on  March  31,  2014  are  12,029  of  which  deposit 
taking  NBFCs  are  241  and  non-deposit  taking  NBFCs  with  asset  size  of  ₹100  crore  and 
above are 465, non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size between ₹50 crore and ₹100 crore 
are 314 and those with asset size less than ₹50 crore are 11009. As on March 31, 2014, the 
average leverage ratio (outside liabilities to owned fund) of the NBFCs-ND-SI stood at 2.94, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  return on assets (net profit as a percentage of total assets) stood at 2.3%, Return on equity 
(net profit as a percentage of equity) stood at 9.22 % and the gross NPA as a percentage of 
total credit exposure (aggregate level) stood at 2.8%. 
Asset liability composition 
Liabilities* of the NBFC sector 
22.  
Owned  funds  (23%  of  total  liabilities),  debentures  (32%),  bank  borrowings  (21%), 
deposit  (1%),  borrowings  from  Financial  Institutions  (1%),  Inter-corporate  borrowings  (2%), 
Commercial Paper (3%), other borrowings (12%), and current liabilities & provisions (5%). 
Assets* of the NBFC sector 
23.  
balances (3%), other current assets (7%) and other assets (1%). 
Loans  &  advances  (73%  of  total  assets),  investments  (16%),  cash  and  bank 
* The data pertains to only reported deposit taking NBFCs and those non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of 
₹100 crore and above. All figures are as on end March, 2014. 
 Role of NBFCs in financial inclusion 
24.  
Financial  inclusion  has  been  defined  as  the  “provision  of  affordable  financial 
services” to those who have been left unattended or under-attended by formal agencies of 
the  financial  system.  These  financial  services  include  “payments  and  remittance  facilities, 
savings, loan and insurance services”. Micro finance has been looked upon as an important 
means of financial inclusion in India. Microfinance is not just provision of micro credit but also 
other services in small quantities to the poor i.e. providing essential financial services to the 
poor  in  an affordable way.  Financial  Inclusion  also  is  aiming  at  the  same  by  providing  the 
poor with not only deposit accounts or credit but also insurance and remittance facility. 
25.  
As  articulated  by  the  Committee  on  Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small 
Businesses  and  Low  Income  Households  (Mor  Committee)  in  its  report,  on  both  Financial 
Inclusion  (defined  as  the  spread  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  services  across  the 
country) and Financial Depth (defined as the percentage of credit to GDP at various levels of 
the economy) the overall situation remains very poor and, on a regional and sectoral basis, 
very uneven. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  While the Reserve Bank’s model for financial inclusion is essentially bank-led, we 
26.  
believe  that  non-bank  entities  do  have  space  to  partner  banks  in  the  financial  inclusion 
initiatives.  We  have  enabled  non-bank  entities  as  Business  Correspondents  of  banks  to 
achieve  the  larger  goal  of  financial  inclusion.  Since  September  2010,  MFIs  that  are  bank-
SHGs, Trusts, Societies or Section 25 companies have been permitted to become Banking 
Correspondents (BCs). At the same time several non-bank entities on their own are part and 
parcel of this greater goal, for e.g. NBFC-MFIs that form the significant part of the MFI sector 
have  deeper  reach  in  the  rural  areas.  NBFC-MFIs  do  not  formally  figure  in  the  bank  led 
model  of  financial  inclusion  but  they  by  their  wider  and  deeper  reach  can  be  catalysts  in 
providing the necessary handhold to the poor borrowers to gain access to essential financial 
services. 
27.  
While  the  new  banks  that  are  being  envisaged  would  definitely  give  fillip  to  the 
country’s financial inclusion initiatives, juxtaposing the humungous task of complete financial 
inclusion against it also brings to focus the need for exploring alternative ways to achieve the 
goal.  The  Mor  Committee  has  observed  that  each  of  the  channels,  be  they  large  National 
Banks,  regional  cooperative  banks,  or  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs)  have  a 
great deal of continuing value to add by focusing on its own differentiated capabilities and 
accomplish  the  national  goals  of  financial  inclusion  by  partnering  with  others  that  bring 
complementary capabilities to bear on the problem. 
Role of NBFCs in capital market 
28.  
Investment  activity  of  NBFC  sector  comprises  around  16%  of  their  total  assets. 
These constitute mainly investments in capital market. There are specialized NBFCs that are 
exclusively  engaged  in  capital  market  investment  i.e.  trading  in  securities.  These  NBFCs 
therefore help in giving liquidity to the capital market. Further, NBFCs also lend to investors 
for investing in capital market. Regulatory challenges in this regard might come in the form of 
probable  overheating  of  the  market,  which  could  be  addressed  through  appropriate 
regulatory measures including enhanced disclosures. 
Role of NBFCs in factoring 
29.  
Factoring  as  defined  in  the  Factoring  Regulation  Act,  2011  involves  acquisition  of 
receivables (by a Factor) thereby getting entitled to undivided interest on the receivables or 
financing  against  the  security  interest  over  any  receivables  but  does  not  include  credit 
facilities provided by a bank in its ordinary course of business against security of receivables. 
Subsequent to the notification of the Factoring Regulation Act by the Government, Reserve 
Bank formed a new category of NBFCs called NBFC-Factors and issued directions to them. 
NBFC-Factors  are  almost  exclusively  engaged  in  providing  factoring  service.  Factoring 
service  which  is  perceived  as  complimentary  to  bank  finance  is  expected  to  enable  the 
availability of much needed working capital finance for the small and medium scale industries 
especially  those  that  have  good  quality  receivables  but  may  not  be  in  a  position  to  obtain 
enough  bank  finance  due  to  lack  of  collateral  or  credit  profile.  By  having  a  continuous 
business relationship with the Factor in place, small traders, industries and exporters get the 
advantage of improving the cash flow and liquidity of their business as also availing ancillary 
services  like  sales  ledger  accounting,  collection  of  receivables,  credit  protection  etc. 
Factoring helps them to free their resources and have a one stop arrangement for various 
business needs enabling smooth running of their business. 
30.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  also  taken  the  initiative  of  mooting  a  “Trade 
Receivables  and  Credit  Exchange”  for  financing  of  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises, 
which is under development stage. The exchange will bring together the MSMEs, the Factors 
and the corporate buyers under one platform whereby MSME’s bills against large companies 
can  be  accepted  electronically  and  auctioned  so  that  MSMEs  are  paid  promptly.  The 
objective is to build a suitable institutional infrastructure which will not only enable an efficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  and cost effective factoring / reverse factoring process to be put in place, but also ensure 
sufficient liquidity is created for all stakeholders through an active secondary market for the 
same. 
Role of NBFCs in vehicle financing / second hand vehicle financing 
31.  
Talking  about  the  niche  sectors  that  NBFCs  cater  to,  vehicle  financing  especially 
second  hand  vehicles  need  special  mention.  Certain  NBFCs  that  are  classified  as  Asset 
Finance  Companies  have  gained  expertise  in  this  segment  and  play  a  significant  role  in 
providing  a  livelihood  to  customers  who  are  drivers.  From  the  Reserve  Bank’s  side,  to 
encourage  the  productive  activity  that  these  NBFCs  are  engaged  in,  we  have  accorded 
certain  additional  dispensations  to  them  in  the  form  of  enhanced  bank  credit,  higher 
exposure  norm  ceiling  and  provision  of  ECB  under  automatic  route  for  leasing  related  to 
infrastructure. 
Role of NBFCs in infrastructure financing 
32.  
Infrastructure  Finance  Companies  and  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  are  NBFCs 
exclusively  into  financing  the  infrastructure  sector.  Some  of  these  companies  have  asset 
books  running  to  lakhs of  crores  of  rupees  and  are  experts  in  long  term  project  financing. 
Recognising their significance, the Reserve Bank has given special dispensations in the form 
of enhanced bank credit, higher exposure norm ceiling and provision of ECB under automatic 
route for on-lending to infrastructure sector. The asset liability pattern however, is a matter of 
concern  in  the  case  of  IFCs  as  these  are  lending  long  term  against  comparatively  shorter 
term liabilities. 
The regulatory challenges 
So, you may wonder, if the NBFCs are performing such a wonderful service to the 
33.  
economy, by being partners in financial inclusion, providing niche financing in the areas like 
infrastructure, factoring, asset financing, etc. what is the concern that the Reserve Bank can 
have? Why have you indicated in the title for this oration “Regulatory Challenges”, you may 
ask me. Let me explain. 
34.  
The need for regulating the financial institutions arise primarily because of the high 
leverage  with  which  they  operate  that  can  cause  financial  instability,  the  asset  liability 
mismatch which can pose serious risks to the investors and depositors, and their capacity to 
engender havoc to the real sectors of the economy. 
35.  
Traditionally, regulation of banks has assumed greater importance than that of their 
non-banking counterparts. One reason, of course, is that protection of depositors has been 
traditionally  an  important  mandate  of  banking  supervisors.  Banks  are  at  the  centre  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  and  monetary  policy  transmission  takes  place  through 
them. Banks play a critical role in credit intermediation through maturity transformation, i.e. 
acceptance of short term liabilities and converting them into long term assets viz. loans and 
advances.  Along  with  economic  value,  this  function  also  creates  potential  liquidity  risk. 
Moreover, banks also operate on a significantly higher leverage compared to any other type 
of  organisations  which  could  amplify  their  vulnerability.  For  all  these  reasons,  banks  are 
subject to a detailed and a rigorous regulatory framework. 
36.  
Non-banks also have depositors; these depositors also need some assurance about 
the safety of their funds. Non-banks also lend their resources as loans and advances, thus 
carrying  out  credit  intermediation  through  maturity  transformation  and  thereby  creating 
liquidity  risk.  Further  non-banks  also  operate  on  a  significantly  higher  leverage  than  an 
ordinary commercial institution. Thus, when non – bank financial entities undertake bank-like 
functions,  large  risks  are  created  which  could  potentially  be  destabilizing  for  the  entire 
system.  Moreover,  the  global  financial  crisis  demonstrated  many  ways  in  which  shadow 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Yes, we have the law. And it has evolved over the time. The challenges today are as 
banking  can  have  an  impact  on  the  global  financial  system,  both  directly  and  through  its 
interconnectedness  with  the  regular  banking  system,  prompting  the  move  to  overhaul  the 
regulation  of  shadow  banking  system.  Like  banks,  a  leveraged  and  maturity-transforming 
shadow banking system can also be vulnerable to “runs” and generate contagion, thereby 
amplifying  systemic  risk.  Shadow  banking  can also  heighten  pro-cyclicality  by  accelerating 
credit supply and asset price increases during upswings and exacerbating fall in asset prices 
during downswings. These effects were powerfully revealed during the global financial crisis 
in the form of dislocation of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) markets, the failure of 
an  originate-to-distribute  model  employing  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  and 
conduits, “runs” on MMFs and a sudden reappraisal of the terms on which securities lending 
and repos were conducted. 
37.  
Now you may say “Yes, we agree that the NBFCs need to be regulated. But, why 
are you saying that there are challenges? Don’t you have the law enabling you to regulate 
them?” 
38.  
follows: 
39.  
First, there are law related challenges i. there are a number of companies that are 
registered  as  finance  companies,  but  are  not  regulated  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  ii.  there  are 
unincorporated  bodies  who  undertake  financial  activities  and  remain  unregulated,  iii.  there 
are incorporated companies and unincorporated entities illegally accepting deposits, iv. there 
are  entities  who  camouflage  deposits  in  some  other  names  and  thus  illegally  accepting 
deposits.  The  law  as  it  stands  today  is  inadequate  to  deal  with  these  issues.  In  order  to 
correct these and initiate action against violations, we need to bring in suitable amendments 
to  the  statutory  provisions.  Reserve  Bank  is  working  with  the  government  for  such 
improvements in the law. 
40.  
Secondly,  as  the  entities,  especially  the  unincorporated  ones,  can  sprung  in  any 
nook and corner of the country and can operate with impunity unnoticed, but endangering 
their  customers’  interest,  we  need  arrangements  and  structured  for  effective  market 
intelligence gathering. The Reserve Bank is restructuring its organisational setup, especially 
in its regional offices, for gathering market intelligence. 
41.  
Thirdly, empowering law and gathering intelligence by themselves are not sufficient. 
Enforcement  of  the  law  is  a  challenge.  This  is  primarily  because  of  the  various  agencies 
involved  in  regulating  the  non-banking  financial  activities of  entities. Right  from  the  central 
government  ministries  like  finance  and  corporate  affairs,  agencies  like  CBI  and  FIU-IND, 
regulatory  agencies  like  the  Reserve  Bank,  SEBI,  the  Registrar  of  Companies,  the  state 
government agencies like the police and others, all have to share information and coordinate 
and  cooperate  to  bring  in  an  effective,  timely  and  unified  enforcement  of  the  law.  The 
Reserve Bank’s State Level Coordination Committees (SLCC) are being strengthened and a 
National level Coordination Committee is also being considered. 
42.  
Fourthly, as was mentioned earlier, world over there is an increasing demand that 
the shadow banks be brought under tighter regulations. G-20 has already expressed it as a 
mission to be achieved by 2015. In our case, bringing them under regulation is not the issue, 
as  they  already  are.  The  challenge  for  us  is  how  differentially  or  how  closely  we  should 
regulate the NBFCs? The demand from the NBFC sector is that they should be subjected to 
light touch regulation. As mentioned earlier, NBFCs were brought under regulatory ambit of 
the Reserve Bank since 1963; we brought them under prudential regulatory framework since 
1997. Nevertheless, the NBFC sector came under pressure during the 2008 crisis due to the 
funding  inter-linkages  among  NBFCs,  mutual  funds  and  commercial  banks.  NBFCs-ND-SI 
relied  significantly  on  short  term  funding  sources  such  as  debentures  (largely  non  - 
convertible short term debentures), and CPs, which constituted around 56.8 percent of the 
total  borrowings  of  NBFCs-ND-SI  as  on  September  30,  2008.  These  funds  were  used  to 
finance  assets  which  were  reportedly  largely  a  mix  of  long  term  assets,  including  hire 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  purchase  and  lease  assets,  long  term  investments,  investment  in  real  estate  by  few 
companies, and loans and advances. These mismatches were created mainly as a business 
strategy for gaining from the higher spreads. However, there were no fall back alternatives in 
cases  of  potential  liquidity  constraints.  The  ripple  effect  of  the  turmoil  in  American  and 
European markets led to liquidity issues and heavy redemption pressure on the mutual funds 
in  India,  as  several  investors,  especially  institutional  investors,  started  pulling  out  their 
investments in liquid and money market funds. Mutual funds being the major subscribers to 
CPs  and  debentures  issued  by  NBFCs,  the  redemption  pressure  on  MFs  translated  into 
funding issues for NBFCs, as they found raising fresh liabilities or rolling over of the maturing 
liabilities  very  difficult.  Drying  up  of  these  sources  of  funds  along  with  the  fact  that  banks 
were increasingly becoming risk averse, heightened their funding problems, exacerbating the 
liquidity tightness. The Reserve Bank undertook many measures, both conventional as well 
as un-conventional, to enhance availability of liquidity to NBFCs’. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I may say that the challenge therefore for the NBFC sector is to grow 
43.  
in a prudential manner while not stopping altogether on financial innovations. The key lies in 
having  in  place  adequate  risk  management  systems  and  procedures  before  entering  into 
risky  areas.  As  for  the  regulator,  it  is  the  constant  endeavour  of  Reserve  Bank  to  enable 
prudential growth of the sector, keeping in view the multiple objectives of financial stability, 
consumer  and  depositor  protection,  and  need  for  more  players  in  the  financial  market, 
addressing  regulatory  arbitrage  concerns  while  not  forgetting  the  uniqueness  of  NBFC 
sector.  The  Bank  presently  is  in  the  process  of  reviewing  the  regulatory  framework  for 
NBFCs  in  the  context  of  recent  developments  including  the  Nachiket  Mor  Committee  and 
others. 
44.  
 
Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
