George A Provopoulos: The SRM, financing the real economy and 
related European initiatives 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
EUROFI, Athens, 31 March 2014. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  Athens  for  this  high-level  seminar,  co-organized  by 
EUROFI, the Greek Presidency, and the Bank of Greece. 
My remarks will focus on two issues. 
First,  I  will  make  a  short  comment  on  the  agreement  reached  on  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRM). 
Second,  I  will  provide  reflections  on  another  important  issue  –  the  financing  of  the  real 
economy and European initiatives related to that financing. 
Resolution in the context of a banking union 
A prominent feature of the crisis was the existence of negative feedback loops between the 
fiscal and banking sectors. From that followed the major lesson, that an effective economic 
and monetary union must include a banking union. 
A key pillar of the euro-area’s banking union will be the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
I believe that the outcome of the recent negotiations on the SRM is satisfactory. 
First,  it  ensures  the  creation  of  a  viable  banking  system  for  the  euro  area  through  the 
resolution of failing banks in an orderly fashion that protects financial stability. 
Second,  the  responsibility  for  deciding  the  time  that  resolution  of  a  credit  institution  is 
warranted remains primarily a task for supervisors, while the Supervisory Board also retains 
the right to declare a credit institution “failing or likely-to-fail” in some cases. 
Third,  resolution  mechanisms  need  efficient  decision-making  procedures 
that  allow 
resolutions to take place quickly and efficiently. In Greece, we resolved 12 banks in the last 
couple  of  years.  All  resolutions  were  carried  out  unannounced  –  typically  over  a  single 
weekend  –  thus  allowing  a  smooth,  uninterrupted  transition  for  depositors  of  the  affected 
institutions. The resolution process under the agreement satisfies this condition. 
Finally,  the  mechanism  needs  a  credible  back-stop.  In  the  Greek  case,  funds  from  the 
Economic  Adjustment  Programme  were  earmarked  specifically 
resolution  and 
recapitalization.  As  a  result,  there  was  never  any  doubt  about  our  ability  to  resolve  and 
recapitalize banks. 
In this connection it has been agreed that the Single Resolution Fund is to be composed of 
contributions  from  banks  over  an  eight-year  period,  while  the  pace  of  mutualisation 
envisaged  is frontloaded.  At the  same time  an  enabling  clause  has  been  approved  by  the 
Council, so that the Fund can seek public bridge financing. 
Overall,  I  welcome  the  agreement  as  a  step  forward  toward  eliminating  the  negative-
feedback loops between banks and sovereigns. 
for 
Financing of the real economy 
Let me turn to the second issue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A key characteristic of the euro area economic recovery is the decline in loans to the private 
sector. This situation applies at both the euro-area and, in many cases, the individual-country 
levels. 
Because  the  euro-area  economy  is  bank-based,  bank  lending  is  especially  significant  for 
SMEs, which produce the bulk of goods and services. 
Consequently, a credit contraction raises the question: Can the recovery be sustained in the 
presence of negative loan growth? 
A number of actions and initiatives are addressing this issue. I will confine my remarks to two 
areas. 
The  first  concerns  monetary  policy.  Throughout  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  put  in  place  both 
conventional and unconventional policy measures with the objective of increasing confidence 
and restoring the smooth operation of the monetary transmission mechanism. 
The volume of credit would have contracted significantly more had it not been for the ample 
provision of liquidity to European banks by the Eurosystem. 
The declining path for real interest rates, suggested by the fact that inflation expectations are 
anchored close to 2% in combination with the ECB’s commitment to keep an accommodative 
monetary policy stance, will lead to a substantial increase of the demand for credit along the 
way. 
There  is,  however,  still  work  to  be  done  on  the  supply  side  of  financial  markets.  This 
circumstance brings me to the second area that deserves attention, i.e. the need to restore 
confidence in the banking sector. 
Confidence  has  been  undermined  by  the  perception  that  some  banks  have  been  holding 
assets of questionable quality on their balance sheets. 
The  resulting  credit  and  counterparty  risk  has  contributed  to  a  rise  in  funding  costs, 
preventing some banks from on-lending to the private sector. 
Supervisors, at both the European and individual country levels, are using tools  –  including 
stress tests, asset quality reviews and transparency exercises  –  to assess the resilience of 
banks and to request injections of capital, so that confidence in the quality of bank balance 
sheets can be restored. 
In  this  context,  the  establishment  of  the  SSM  and  the  comprehensive  assessment  taking 
place will provide a catalyst for the cleaning-up of balance sheets to take place more quickly 
and more comprehensively than would otherwise have been the case. 
The  repair  of  banks’  balance  sheets  is  unavoidable  and  will,  of  necessity,  involve  some 
deleveraging. However, deleveraging does not necessarily lead to credit contraction. 
The “positive” deleveraging policymakers seek is a procedure in which the growth of equity 
allows  banks  to  recognize  bad  loans  and  refrain  from  rolling  them  over,  in  turn,  freeing 
resources and allowing banks to provide loans to firms that can use them productively. 
Again Greece is a prime example of this scenario in action. Following the first recapitalization 
of  our  banks  in  2012,  we  began  to  reform  and  consolidate  the  banking  system.  Banks 
sharply reduced reliance on central-bank funding while making provisions for bad loans. As a 
result, they have been able to attract private investors. 
Recently,  we concluded follow-up stress tests that were exceptionally  well received by the 
markets. Following the release of the results, two core banks have completed much larger 
than requested capital increases of approximately €3 billion, with significant oversubscription. 
One of them has issued an additional unsecured bank note for €500 million with a maturity of 
three years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These are the first signs of markets’ opening up to Greece again. I am therefore confident 
that the second stage of recapitalization will play an important role in restoring confidence in 
Greece and a healthy financing of the economy. 
As  a  longer-term  strategy,  it  would  be  desirable  at  the  European  level  to  develop  market 
standards to allow equity and bond markets to gain ground as a source of funding. 
Doing so would increase the volume of funds available for long-term investment, contribute 
to long-term sustainable growth, and increase the resilience of the corporate sector during 
periods of banking-sector stress. 
The  development  of  a  deep  EU  securitization  market  for  corporate  loans  would  provide 
capital relief to banks, improve risk sharing, and increase banks’ lending capacity. 
To  sum  up,  it  has  to  be  accepted  that  the  crisis  exposed  weaknesses  in  EMU’s  original 
architecture.  However,  European  institutions  have  responded  to  the  crisis  with  decisive 
policies and significant reforms to the original architecture. Those responses will help create 
a more-effective, crisis-resilient, economic and monetary union in the future. 
The  benefits  of  the  efforts  are  already  evident  at  the  euro-area  level,  especially  in  the 
sovereign-bond  markets,  where  conditions  have  normalized  to  a  considerable  extent.  The 
benefits  are  also  evident  in  individual  countries  such  as  Greece,  where  the  crisis,  deep 
though it was, gave us the impetus to consolidate and recapitalize the banking sector, while 
simultaneously  undertaking  reforms  that  will  allow  us  to  reap  substantial  benefits  in  the 
future. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
