  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developing a safe and secure electronic 
payment ecosystem to promote financial inclusion 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Regulatory Forum for the Asia Pacific Region: “Developing a 
Safe  and  Secure  Electronic  Payment  Ecosystem  to  Promote  Financial  Inclusion”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 4 August 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be here today to deliver the Keynote Speech for 
MasterCard’s  Regulatory  Forum  for  the  Asia  Pacific  region  with  the  theme  “Developing  a 
Safe and Secure Electronic Payment Ecosystem to Promote Financial Inclusion”. 
With  2.5  billion  people  across  the  world  still  unbanked,  financial  inclusion  is  a  significant 
global  agenda  to  ensure  that  all  segments  of  the  society,  including  the  most  vulnerable 
groups, have access and usage of quality and affordable financial services. 
This  forum,  which  brings  together  regulators,  international  financial  institutions  and  other 
payment  system  stakeholders,  is  an  important  platform  to  surface  and  exchange  ideas  on 
emerging  trends,  risks  and  opportunities  in  the  use  of  cost-effective  electronic  payment 
system to drive financial inclusion. 
Over  the  years,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  taken  many  measures  in  promoting  financial 
inclusion and in accelerating the country’s migration to electronic payments (e-payments). I 
will share some of my thoughts on the key areas in the payment value chain that could drive 
and expand the financial inclusion agenda via e-payments. 
Measures taken by Bank Negara Malaysia to promote financial inclusion 
Since its inception in 1959, getting the public to have access to financial services has always 
been  a  focus  area  for  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  In  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009, 
financial  inclusion  has  also  been  legislated  as  one  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  primary 
functions.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  designed  the  development  of  a  diversified  financial 
system which meets the needs of various consumers and businesses. 
Many efforts were implemented. For example, to facilitate ease of access to bank accounts, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has introduced basic banking service, a no frills and low cost savings 
account. On the financing side, the Pembiayaan Mikro framework was established in 2006 to 
facilitate  the  provision  of  uncollateralised  micro  financing  by  financial  institutions  in  a  fast, 
easy and convenient manner. 
The Central Bank has also focused on strengthening the enabling infrastructure through the 
establishment  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  (CGC)  to  provide  credit  guarantees  to 
enable SMEs with limited collateral and track record to have access to financing. Since its 
establishment  in  1972,  CGC  has  assisted  more  than  417,000  SMEs  to  obtain  financing 
amounting to about RM50 billion. 
To  facilitate  financial  institutions  in  their  lending  decisions,  the  Central  Credit  Reference 
Information System (CCRIS) and the Credit Bureau Malaysia were also established to gather 
credit history from borrowers within and beyond the regulated financial sector, respectively. 
To date, CCRIS has a database of 9 million users covering approximately 53% of the adult 
population  while  the  Credit  Bureau  Malaysia  has  over  28,000  registered  members  and 
generated more than 1.4 million credit reports. 
To  empower  consumers  to  make  well-informed  financial  decisions,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
has  also  established  financial  advisory  centres  and  contact  points  such  as  the  Credit 
Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency  and  BNMLINK.  Since  its  inception  in  2006, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  AKPK has provided financial education to the public, benefiting more than 260,000 people 
nationwide. 
To  provide  financial  knowledge  to  the  young,  financial  education  elements  are  now 
incorporated as part of the syllabus for primary schools and will be extended to secondary 
schools  by  2017.  Consumer  education  efforts  in  Malaysia  are  also  reinforced  by  a  holistic 
consumer protection framework to ensure financial institutions practise responsible financing, 
conduct effective product transparency and disclosure, as well as, appropriate debt collection 
practices. 
These measures have produced positive outcomes. As a result, 92% of adults (aged 15 and 
above) in Malaysia have access to a deposit account and basic banking services. Malaysia 
has  also  been  ranked  first  for  6  consecutive  years  since  2007  for  “Getting  Credit”  in  the 
“Ease of Doing Business” index by the World Bank. 
Accelerating the migration to e-payments as a key enabler for financial inclusion 
The success of any financial inclusion tool or policy would depend largely on the presence of 
a reliable, efficient and safe payment system. In this regard, with the advancement and the 
willingness of the general public to experiment with new technology, the electronic payment 
system possesses distinct advantages over the traditional paper-based payment system. 
While the unbanked and the underbanked may have limited access to financial services due 
to  geographical  limitations  and  cost  considerations,  the  usage  of  e-payments  by  the 
underserved  via  mobile  technology  could  help  transcend  these  obstacles  by  delivering 
financial  services  efficiently,  securely  and  at  a  lower  cost  compared  to the traditional  brick 
and mortar branches. 
Accelerating  the  migration  to  e-payments  remains  a  primary  agenda  for  the  country.  In 
carrying our mandate to foster a safe, efficient and reliable payment system in Malaysia, a 
clear roadmap has been formulated to drive the country’s migration to e-payments. 
As provided in the Central Bank’s Financial Sector Blueprint (2011 to 2020), specific targets 
have been set to reduce the number of cheques processed per annum from 207 million in 
2010  to  100  million  by  2020  and  to  increase  the  number  of  point-of-sale  (POS)  terminals 
from 7 per thousand inhabitants in 2010 to 25 per thousand inhabitants by 2020. At the same 
time, targets are also set to increase the per capita e-payment transactions from 43 in 2010 
to 200 by 2020 and the per capita debit card transactions from 0.6 in 2010 to 30 by 2020. 
Continuous 
the  enabling 
infrastructure  which  can  be  leveraged  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  unbanked  and  the 
underbanked. Malaysia has a high mobile phone penetration of 144 per 100 inhabitants as at 
end-2013. In addition, the country’s broadband penetration at 67 per 100 households as at 
end-2013, is projected to increase with the implementation of the second phase High-Speed 
Broadband (HSBB) project. 
Malaysia  also  has  a  wide  network  of  about  9,000  access  points  to  banking  services 
comprising  bank  branches  and  agent  banking  network  accounting  for  approximately 
4 access points per 10,000 adults.1 Under the agent banking network, basic banking services 
are  provided  to  customers  through  third  party  agents  such  as  post  offices,  petrol  stations, 
retail outlets and telecommunication agents. The access points are also complemented by 
this  country  have  provided 
infrastructure 
investments 
in 
                                                
1  As  at  end-May  2014,  there  are  2,953  bank  branches  and  5,802  agents  under  the  agent  banking  network 
nationwide. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12,430 ATMs nationwide which represents about 6 ATMs per 10,000 adults. All districts and 
Parliamentary constituencies now have access to basic banking services.2 
We  believe  that  the  payment  instrument  that  has  the  highest  potential  to  drive  financial 
inclusion  in  Malaysia  is  the  debit  card.  Malaysia  has  a  high  debit  card  penetration  of 
19.2 million “active”3 cards-in-circulation which is almost equal to the bankable population of 
approximately 20.4 million adults. The unbanked on the other hand can leverage on prepaid 
cards which function just like debit cards. 
While the number of POS terminals in Malaysia at about 9 per thousand inhabitants is still 
relatively  low  compared  to  about  22  to  33  per  thousand  inhabitants  in  other  advanced 
countries,4 the POS network is anticipated to grow with the introduction of the Payment Card 
Reform framework. 
Key focus areas to drive financial inclusion via e-payments 
While there are success stories globally  where  e-payments have helped advance financial 
inclusion, such success stories must be the norm rather than an exception. In this respect, 
the  public  and  private  sector  collaboration  goes  to  the  heart  of  any  successful  policy  and 
developmental  agenda.  We  also  need  to  take  a  longer  term  view  rather  than  focusing  on 
short  term  and  narrow  self-interests.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  highlight  four  (4)  areas  that 
could drive financial inclusion to the next level, via the use of e-payments. These areas are: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Correcting price distortions and promoting competition; 
Development and sharing of infrastructure investments; 
Strengthening transaction security; and 
Consumer protection and education. 
Correcting price distortions and promoting competition 
1.  
We  need  to  address  price  distortions  and  promote  competitive  practices.  A  market  driven 
environment would ensure that the correct price signals are provided to promote the usage of 
the more cost-effective payment instruments whilst injecting competition. 
The idea is for market players to lower cost and widen the access channels to make financial 
services more affordable and accessible to the general public. A monopolistic market would 
result in less innovative products and higher cost over the long term. 
In  Malaysia,  the  presence  of  price  distortion  had  caused  e-payments  to  be  costlier  than 
paper-based  instruments,  thus  making  it  less  affordable  to  the  masses.  For  instance, 
e-payment services such as Interbank GIRO (IBG) used to be priced above cost at RM2 per 
transaction. Cheque, which costs RM3 to process however, was not directly priced except for 
the stamp duty of 15 sen. 
To  correct  the  price  distortion,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  had  introduced  a  Pricing  Reform 
framework where the price of IBG and cheques are aligned closer to their cost of production. 
At  the  same  time,  the  public  are  provided  with  an  alternative  e-payment  option  which  is 
cheaper and more efficient. To ensure that adequate e-payment services are provided, Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  will  collaborate  with  the  industry  to  establish  a  market-driven  incentive 
framework to drive expansion in the various delivery channels. 
                                                
2  The  total  sub-districts  served  have  increased  to  92.5%  while  the  total  State  Legislative  Assembly  districts 
served has increased to 99.8%. 
3  With at least 1 transaction per month.  
4  Australia, the United Kingdom and Norway.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Since  the  commencement  of  the  Pricing  Reform  framework,  we  have  seen  significant 
improvements.  IBG  transaction  volume  grew  at  a  higher  rate  of  45.6%  on  a  year-on-year 
basis for the first half of 2014 compared to 12.4% for the same period last year. Likewise, 
cheques  declined  at  a faster  pace  of  9.8%  or  10  million  cheques  for  the  first  half  of  2014 
compared to 2% or 2 million cheques for the same period last year. While the data suggests 
some improvements, more need to be done. 
A  particular  area  that  requires  huge  efforts  is  the  distortions  in  the  debit  card  usage  in 
Malaysia. Despite a seemingly high debit card penetration of about 19.2 million “active” debit 
cards in contrast with 5.5 million “active” credit cards, the per capita debit card transaction is 
only 1.7 compared to 11.3 for credit card in 2013, indicating a ratio of 1 debit card transaction 
to about 6 credit card transactions. 
Acquirers charge merchants the same merchant discount rate (MDR) for the acceptance of 
debit and credit cards despite their differing cost structure, which makes debit cards just as 
expensive as credit cards. It is difficult to comprehend the charges imposed on debit cards, 
which  have  ready  cash  in  them,  is  similar  to  the  charges  on  credit  cards.  There  has  also 
been  a  slowdown  in  the  growth  rate  of  POS  terminals  in  Malaysia  since  2012,  which 
indicates  a  potential  saturation  of  POS  terminals  at  those  merchants  who  can  afford  the 
MDR. 
This is further compounded by increases in interchange fees which are likely to cause the 
MDR  to  be  raised  to  even  higher  levels  on  a  system-wide  basis,  thus  hindering  the  wider 
expansion  of  the  POS  network  and  depriving  society  from  the  convenience  of  using  cost-
effective payment cards. 
The  debit  card  should  be  positioned  as  a  cost-effective  payment  card  to  make  it  more 
affordable for small merchants to accept card payments. The expansion of the POS network 
would allow for wider acceptance of the debit card to be used more pervasively, to displace 
the use of cash, thus bringing about cost savings for the country in the long run. 
To correct the distortions and promote competition in the domestic payment card market, a 
Payment Card Reform is certainly timely to stem the indiscriminate increases in interchange 
fees  and  correct  the  price  signals  with  the  view  to  widen  the  POS  network  especially  in 
non-traditional industries and rural areas. 
Development and sharing of infrastructure investment 
2.  
To  be  successful,  e-payment  solutions  must  not  only  be  affordable,  their  expansion  must 
also  be  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  Sustainability  entails  the  ability  to  leverage  on  an 
enlarged  network  which  enables  market  players  to  build  critical  mass  and  achieve  the 
desired economies of scale. 
In this regard, the importance of collective industry efforts to develop and share infrastructure 
cannot  be  emphasised  enough.  Infrastructure  development  is  very  expensive  and  the 
banking industry ought to share the required investments. Infrastructure should not be used 
as  a  competitive  tool  but  rather  as  an  enabler  that  would  promote  modernisation  of  the 
payment system. 
Besides  minimising  cost  and  lowering  the  entry  barrier  for  new  players,  collective 
infrastructure development and sharing of infrastructure costs would allow market players to 
compete directly on product offerings and quality of services, thus providing better value to 
consumers. While regulators can act as the catalyst in prescribing interoperability standards 
and  garnering  industry  efforts  to  facilitate  infrastructure  development  and  sharing  of 
infrastructure costs, the industry must also play its role by adopting new standards quickly. 
In  Malaysia,  there  is  currently  an  industry  initiative  to  migrate  the  ATM  cards  to  the  EMV 
standard with the objective to widen the acceptance of the ATM cards for retail payments. 
There is also an on-going project to establish the National Bill Payments Scheme (NBPS), a 
common  bill  payment  platform  where  billers  only  need  to  connect  to  one  bank  in  order  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  receive payments from customers across all banks. All these efforts are intended to make e-
payments  for  the  public  seamless  and  reduce  duplication  of  resources  in  infrastructure 
investment. 
Strengthening transaction security 
3.  
Let me now turn to the third focus area which is the importance of strengthening transaction 
security to minimise fraud and instil greater confidence in the use of e-payments. Fraud and 
risk management measures must not only be effective, it must also be proportionate to the 
level of risk. Otherwise, it may be too costly to implement or too cumbersome to use, and 
people  might  revert  to  using  cash.  Equally  important  is  the  presence  of  effective  payment 
system rules so that all parties in the payment value chain are held accountable for ensuring 
a minimal standard of security and service level. 
It is of paramount importance to sustain consumers’ perception and confidence in the safety 
of  payment  instruments.  Malaysia  is  the  first  country  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  to  migrate 
from magnetic strip cards to chip-based payment cards. This transition, which was completed 
in  2005  despite  the  initial  resistance  by  the  industry,  had  successfully  eradicated  cases of 
fraudulent  skimming  or  counterfeiting  of  payment  cards.  The  investment  cost  of  RM200 
million was recovered within two and a half years from fraud avoidance. I think it is important 
for the banking industry to take note of this fact. 
The various regulatory measures introduced by Bank Negara Malaysia and the continuous 
investment made by the industry have caused the cases of fraud incidents in e-payments to 
remain at a very low level over the last decade. In 2013, fraud incidents only accounted for 
0.0054%  of  total  transaction  volume  and  0.0011%  of  the  transaction  value  of  e-payment 
transactions. While we should be satisfied with such encouraging outcomes, there is no room 
for complacency as fraudsters are always on the look-out for possible weaknesses to exploit. 
Therefore, continuous efforts need to be taken both at the policy-making and at the industry 
level to continuously identify, remedy and tackle emerging security risks. 
Consumer protection and education 
4.  
The unbanked and the underbanked might find e-payments to be too sophisticated and lack 
the personal touch. In this respect, policymakers and market players have an important role 
to  play  in  educating  and  creating  awareness  among  consumers  on  the  benefits  of 
e-payments  and  the  security  steps  that  they  can  take  to  minimise  fraud  incidents.  Such 
efforts  would  be  effective  when  complemented  with  a  consumer  protection  framework  and 
product disclosure requirements that would instil user confidence and acceptance. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  constantly  collaborates  with  the  industry  to  conduct  roadshows, 
payment system forums and other outreach programs to educate the public of the benefits 
and  security  of  e-payment  transactions.  Apart  from  issuing  requirements  on  consumer 
protection  and  product  disclosure,  an  important  milestone  was  achieved  last  year  where 
protecting the rights and interests of consumers of financial services and products has been 
enshrined as one of regulatory objectives that Bank Negara Malaysia shall strive for in the 
Financial Services Act 2013 and the Islamic Financial Services Act 2013. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  now  living  in  an  exciting  time  with  rapid  technological 
advances in e-payments which, if harnessed well, would serve to drive financial inclusion in a 
major way. 
To be successful in an increasingly competitive payment space, the industry should adopt a 
long term horizon and be prepared to sacrifice immediate term profits in order to sustain its 
profits and build affordable and sustainable e-payment solutions that cater to the needs of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  masses,  including  the  unbanked  and  the  underbanked.  Collective  efforts  to  build  and 
share infrastructure would be a step in the right direction. 
Policymakers  on  the  other  hand  have  the  duty  to  create  the  enabling  environment  by 
removing price distortions, promoting competition and protecting the interest of consumers. 
Equally important are the continuous efforts to safeguard transaction security and enhance 
user  confidence  in  order  not  to  undermine  the  role  of  e-payments  as  a  key  enabler  for 
financial inclusion. 
Since there are participants from around the region especially from the ASEAN countries, I 
hope  that  one  day  we  would  have  one  card  for  ASEAN,  where  ATM  cards  issued  by  any 
bank in the ASEAN countries can be used to transact within the ASEAN region. 
I  hope  you  will  benefit  and  be  inspired  from  the  discussions,  debates  and  sharing  of  best 
practices  during  this  forum.  I  also  hope  there  would  be  a  change  in  the  mindset  of  the 
industry in driving financial inclusion via e-payments. On this note, I wish you all an engaging 
and productive forum.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
