  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Managing Thailand’s turnaround 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Association of 
International Banks (AIB) Dinner Speaker Series, Bangkok, 15 May 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor and pleasure to be back here in this auspicious occasion, and, first of all 
I would like to thank the Association of International Banks for inviting me to give a talk this 
evening. 
Much has changed, since I gave an address at this event last year. Though it is still warm 
and  sunny  in  Thailand,  the  economic  condition  is  not  quite  the  same.  The  economy 
continues to slow down after accelerated domestic spending in the past few years, worsened 
by  political  uncertainty  that  continues  to  this  day.  On  the  external  front,  the  recent  global 
economic  recovery  and  monetary  policy  abroad  has  evolved  with  less  uncertainty  than 
before. 
For  this  exclusive  evening,  it  is  timely  for  me  to  share  with  you  the  recent  economic 
developments and outlook of the Thai economy as well as our roles to support sustainable 
growth  of  the  Thai  economy  and  safeguard  financial  stability  amid  prolonged  political 
uncertainty. 
Recent and current economic situations 
Let me first start by describing the economic developments. Thailand’s recent economic 
circumstances  have  been  unfavorable,  but  may  have  reached  the  trough.  Internally, 
growth has decelerated since the second half last year, owing mainly to diminishing domestic 
spending.  The  champagne  party,  fueled  by  the  first-car  tax  rebate  and  rice  pledging 
schemes, has ended, and we wake up with a hangover: worsened traffic jams, an overflow of 
durable goods and high household debt. Adding to this backdrop, political tension rose and 
parliament  dissolved  late  last  year.  This  has  dented  private  confidence  and  government 
spending, and puts further pressure on already-weak domestic demand. Loss of confidence 
means postponed public and private investment as stakeholders tend to wait for more stable 
economic environment before taking the next steps. 
Last  year,  Thailand  has  not  benefited  from  exports  as  we  expected,  due  to  weak  global 
economic  recovery  and  domestic  supply  constraints.  Furthermore,  tourism  was  negatively 
affected by the political situation. 
With respect to the first quarter of this year, economic performance has been unsatisfactory 
so far and negative growth is predicted. Naturally, negative growth numbers may have raised 
concern regarding a recession. However, I would like to offer a ray of hope by pointing out 
that the second quarter of negative growth is unlikely to occur, as the latest economic 
data  for  March  suggests  growth  may  have  reached  the  lowest  point.  Furthermore  the  so-
called “technical recession” would occur once economic fundamentals have simultaneously 
deteriorated, which is a lengthy process. To date, this situation does not apply to Thailand. 
Looking ahead 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Despite  the  heavy  costs  of  political  uncertainty,  Thailand’s  underlying  fundamentals 
remain  supportive.  Looking  at  variables  whose  imbalances  tended  to  be  associated  with 
crises in the past, we do not see these variables approaching crisis levels but rather staying 
at  low  risk  levels. What we  are  observing  is  a  mainly  sentiment-led  slump  in  demand  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  subsequently an opportunity for strong domestic rebound when sentiment improves. I would 
like to explore some key variables in more detail. 
Financial  volatility  is  well  contained  amidst  economic  slowdown.  Exchange  rate  has 
been relatively stable and international reserves have remained high, reflecting some degree 
of confidence among foreign investors and appropriate exchange rate management. Inflation 
expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  allowing  monetary  policy  some  room  to  address  the 
downside.  We  benefit  from  this  stability  because  consistent  macroeconomic  policy 
commands  credibility  from  the  public.  It  is  worth  mentioning  a  risk  when  it  comes  to 
volatility:  that  even  with  the  Fed’s  QE  tapering  already  factored  into  the  markets,  the 
monetary  policies  of  advanced  economies  continue  to  exhibit  likelihood  of  change.  These 
policy changes could cause Thailand to experience capital outflows or a volatile exchange 
rate. The Bank of Thailand closely monitors these risks and currently assesses them to be 
manageable given Thailand’s financial structure. 
Credit risk is also moderated by the wisdom of the private sector. Private companies have 
recently kept leverage in check at a cautionary debt-earnings ratio. Financial institutions are 
carefully managing loan quality, as household debt levels that have been decelerating since 
last year indicate. Moderate leveraging of firms and households together with strong balance 
sheets of banks allow private sector to withstand economic shocks. 
Unemployment rate is low and stable, leaving households with enough purchasing power 
to start spending again when the economy rebounds. 
Greatly  adding  to  the  strength  of  domestic  purchasing  power  is  the  export  sector.  Global 
recovery  has  become  firmer  as  recent  economic  indicators  such  as  Global  Purchasing 
Managers’ Index, or PMI, reflect the more resilient recovery in advanced economies. Nearer 
to this region, the decelerating Chinese economy is not a major cause for concern since it is 
more about economic restructuring than unexpected slump in domestic demand. The overall 
impact for Thailand  is  that exports are still expected to be our main engine of growth 
this  year.  The  risk  to  watch  out  for  concerning  exports,  again  stems  from  the  monetary 
policy  changes  of  advanced  economies.  These  policy  changes  could  cause  economic 
slowdown in ASEAN and China and further affect Thai exports to these countries; however, 
this type of risk is still remote. 
Other fundamentals include our location and workforce advantages. Thailand is located 
in the center of ASEAN and has well-developed logistics, and acts as a hub for trade with 
CLMV, presenting an opportunity to access fast growing markets. As for the workforce, our 
semi-skilled labor fills an important niche in the world market. 
Looking at strong fundamentals just mentioned, we can see that Thailand’s turnaround is 
no false hope. Indeed, the return to net inflow of foreign investment since the beginning of 
April, indicates the return of foreign interest in Thailand. 
However  Thailand’s  structural  improvement  needs  a  long  way  to  go.  Furthermore, 
economic  fundamentals  can  be  eroded  if  political  uncertainty  and  global  risks 
intensify. The prolonged political impasse will further reduce confidence, financial positions, 
and government spending. The labor force is already beginning to feel the stress, as recent 
surveys show the number of overtime hours worked has begun to shrink. 
Now  I  have  presented  to  you  the  future  conditions,  from  sound  fundamentals  to  possible 
risks. With these conditions in mind, I believe that maintaining status quo while waiting for the 
political  situation  to  resolve  is  not  the  appropriate  way  out  because  sound  fundamentals 
alone  cannot  lead  to  growth.  Thailand  should  use  the  current  lull  in  activity  as  an 
opportunity  to  reposition  for  future  growth.  Indeed  the  private  sector  is  already  in 
transition, but still has a way to go. Further investment will both jolt some energy back into 
the economy and build an even stronger foundation for long term growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Supportive roles of the Bank of Thailand and financial institutions 
An  economy  in  transition  needs  support  from  all  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  real 
sector, financial institutions, and the Bank of Thailand have their own important roles which I 
would like to elaborate. 
Thailand’s  economy  should  transition  from  efficiency  to  innovation  to  build  competitive 
advantages. Up to now, we have increased productivity by reallocating labor and capital. But 
this advantage diminished since the global financial crisis. 
Firms may consider moving up the value chain to differentiate products and enhance 
value.  There  are  two  possibilities  that  exist  in  Thailand  depending  on  the  industry.  The 
industries that are behind need to catch up with the ongoing trend, and industries that have 
the  opportunity,  can  leap  ahead  of  the trend. In  either  case, Research and development 
investment is needed. 
To  address  the  issues  just  mentioned,  Thailand’s  financial  sector,  which  includes  my 
esteemed guests for today and the Bank of Thailand, must set clear directions for our roles. 
To deal with the structural challenges, the private sectors need support from the financial 
sectors.  They  will  require  long  term  and  low  cost  funding,  from  both  domestic  and 
international sources. 
Ladies and gentlemen, your operation of financial institutions with both caution and long term 
vision has so far contributed to financial stability in Thailand. We would like you to continue 
placing value in the long term, and providing liquidity for established customers who 
will definitely return to growth after Thailand’s rebound. Such support creates long term value 
for your international investors and helps both your future returns, and to usher the economy 
through the slump. 
For  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  part,  we  continue  improving  financial  system  strength  and 
efficiency. Further liberalization of financial services, progressing as planned in Financial 
Sector Master Plan II, will provide Thailand opportunity for firms to have better access 
to funds at a more competitive price, especially small businesses which comprise a large 
part  of  the  workforce.  This  adds  another  dimension  to  Thailand’s  competitiveness  and  will 
help strengthen economic growth. 
Now,  let  me  turn  towards  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  other  major  responsibility  –  to  balance 
between financial stability and economic growth. The role of monetary policy is to manage 
the  financial  environment  to  ensure  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  The  Monetary 
Policy Committee, or MPC, has maintained an accommodative monetary policy stance 
throughout the adverse shocks in the last couple of years. 
In  the  current  episode,  we  are  conducting  monetary  policy  to  maintain  a  right  balance 
between economic growth and financial stability, including inflation. The current policy rate 
which is negative in real term has already helped alleviate small businesses and households’ 
interest burden and can help the private sector survive the short term slump. 
Turnaround is coming! 
Weak sentiment due to the uncertainty about the political situation is the root cause of the 
faltering domestic demand. Political resolution is beyond our scope, so it may be appropriate 
to  focus  more  on  the  medium  and  long  term  strategy  necessary  to  support  the 
economic  rebound  once  the  political  status  improves.  The  collaboration  between  private 
businesses and financial sectors to deal with the mentioned structural challenges is required 
to lay a solid foundation of the future economy. 
To conclude my talk today, I would like to reaffirm that our fundamentals are strong and 
that  we  in  Thailand  will  do  our  best  to  regain  full  potential  to  achieve  sustainable 
economic development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Let’s  think  about  challenges  of  the  bear  during  winter.  Even  while  hibernating,  the  bear 
cannot stay perfectly still. It needs to move and keep its muscles warm to prepare for spring. 
Thailand’s current economic condition is like a winter, we stakeholders are the bear that is 
hibernating, and like the bear, we must prepare for the coming spring. If we keep playing 
our  roles  in  managing  the  economic  transition,  we  will  all  reap  the  benefits  of  the 
turnaround. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
