  Mojmír Hampl: Theory lagging behind practice 
Speaking  points  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  for  the 
Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia)  Conference  “The  Future  Direction  on 
Monetary Policy Frameworks and Strategies in Emerging Market Economies”, Kuala Lumpur, 
21 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  to  this  conference.  It  is  an  utmost  pleasure  to  be  here 
today and to speak in front of such a distinguished audience. 
The issues being discussed here are important and I will echo many of the points already 
raised. It seems to me that we all to some extent share a feeling that there are many good 
questions, but sometimes we don’t have that many good answers to them. And because I 
don’t either, I will use the standard escape tactic of those who find themselves intellectually 
in dire straits – if you don’t have a smart answer yourself, use a quote by someone really 
smart and you might look smarter. 
So  I  will  begin  with  one  of  the  famous  quotes  by  Albert  Einstein:  “In  theory,  theory  and 
practice  are  the  same.  In  practice,  they  are  not”.  Yes,  exactly.  And  it  is  true  not  only  in 
physics, but also in the areas of monetary policy and financial stability. 
In theory we central bankers believe we can control inflation, or the sustained growth of the 
general price level. But in practice we tend to say that there are prices that are beyond the 
control  of  monetary  policy,  that  are  somehow  disconnected  from  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy, or that are “completely different”. Real estate prices, asset prices etc. Interesting, isn’t 
it? 
And conversely, in practice we know what financial instability looks like and what it is. But in 
theory  we  haven’t  created  a  rigorous  operationalised  theoretical  system  for  achieving 
financial  stability,  or  even  for  defining  financial  stability.  There  is  no  single,  universally 
accepted definition of financial stability, as quantifiable as the definition of price stability. And 
what is worse, many believe there will never be one. Again, quite interesting. 
So this, in my eyes, is the first constraint we face. At least in the area of financial stability, 
theory lags behind practice. Inflation targeting is a formalised, practical and handy system, 
while  “financial  stability  targeting”  is  not,  despite  huge  steps  forward  recently.  And  I  can’t 
resist  dreaming  of  a  day  when  we  have  a  system  in  the  financial  stability  area  that  is  as 
operationalised as inflation targeting. 
After all, back in 1978, the U.S. economic historian Charles Kindleberger, in his now classic 
book “Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises”, pointed out that financial 
upheavals  had  virtually  always  been  preceded  by  credit  booms,  property  price  and  asset 
price  booms  and  increased  leverage  in  the  financial  system.  All  these  are,  in  a  sense, 
monetary phenomena. So why couldn’t we go further here as well? 
The  second  constraint  is  that  smaller  economies,  both  emerging  and  developed  ones,  are 
quite often in the position not only of monetary-policy takers, but also of regulatory-takers. 
So, they have to face the consequences of regulatory debates and decisions made by “big 
guys” somewhere else – debates and decisions they can influence only to some extent, if at 
all. And the emphasis in the world debate is now being put more on regulation on the micro 
level  and  less  on  these  big  questions  I  am  discussing,  despite  the  hard  work  of  Michael 
Woodford and others here. 
I  understand  that  micro-regulation  is  easier  to  create  and  to  explain  to  the  public,  and 
sometimes  also  easier  to  implement.  But  it  can  also  have  faster  adverse  impacts.  An 
example from Europe – the harmonisation of deposit guarantee schemes (DGS) within the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  EU. It is generally a brilliant idea to have single DGS rules in the single market, but in the 
Czech  Republic  it  has  led  to  the  abolition  of  the  previous  well-established  practice  of  co-
payment when a depositor received an insured deposit from a failed financial institution. Our 
practice  was  10%  co-payment,  so  that  depositors  never  got  back  100%  of  their  insured 
deposits. The harmonised DGS rules established a different unified practice – deposits are 
insured  up  to  100%  of  the  equivalent  of  100,000  euros.  This,  of  course,  means  a  bigger 
incentive  for  moral  hazard  behaviour  on  the  part  of  depositors.  In  the  Czech  Republic, 
depositors very soon started searching for higher interest rates, or higher yields, in smaller 
“saving unions” with inherently riskier business models, as these institutions are also covered 
by  the  DGS  and  suddenly  became  to  a  given  limit  riskless  for  savers  due  to  the 
disappearance of co-payment. Some of these institutions had to leave the market recently, 
eating  up  large  sums  from  the  pre-paid  funds  of  the  domestic  DGS.  I’m  fairly  sure  that 
without  this  moral  hazard  behaviour  induced  by  the  harmonisation  of  the  DGS  rules  the 
impacts on the system would not have been so pronounced. 
Or take another example. The regulatory debate on financial benchmarks in the world (and 
within the EU) influences sometimes adversely the willingness of banks to contribute to the 
benchmarks  also  in  the  markets  where  no  improper  behaviour  of  contributors  has  been 
proven or even detected so far. 
So it is great to harmonise and to coordinate. But you always have to bear in mind that you 
should  not  harmonise  and  coordinate  towards  rules  that  are  riskier  than  the  previous 
uncoordinated rules were on average. 
The  third  constraint  is  the  one  Claudio  Borio  of  the  BIS  calls  the  “time  inconsistency  of 
financial  stability  policies”.  He  says: “Policies  that  are too  timid  in  leaning  against financial 
booms but that are then too aggressive and persistent in leaning against financial busts may 
end  up  leaving  the  authorities  with  no  further  ammunition  over  successive  financial  and 
business cycles”1 Yes, this is the case in many countries, including the Czech Republic now 
we have reached the zero lower bound. So, to put it more bluntly: the problem also might be 
that we central bankers are sometimes more procyclical and less symmetric in our thinking 
than we should be. 
And the fourth constraint is our own disbelief in the power of monetary policy. Our experience 
– even in a small open economy – is that autonomous monetary policy can be very much of 
help, if not key, in stabilising the general macro-environment compared to the situation where 
monetary policy is just being passively accepted from abroad. 
And  I  say  that  despite  the  fact  that  inflation  stabilisation  in  the  current  circumstances  is  a 
necessary  but  not  sufficient  condition  for  long-term  financial  stability.  As  the  debate  today 
shows, what this sufficient condition for long-term financial stability is, is not entirely clear and 
remains to be determined. But I would tend to believe that if there is any way forward in the 
area of financial stability, monetary policy will have to play an absolutely key role – a bigger 
role than many now think or admit. 
Thank you. 
                                                
1   Borio, C.: Monetary policy and financial stability: what role in prevention and recovery?, BIS Working paper 
No. 440, January 2014 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
