Deepali Pant Joshi: Strengthening and revitalising rural cooperative 
credit delivery system 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
National Meet of CEOs of State Cooperative Banks, Mumbai, 21 March 2014. 
 Assistance rendered by Shri A.G. Ray, GM, Smt. Mangaladevi Ashok Kumar AGM and Shri D K Nalban.d AGM is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  with  you  today  and  thank  Dr.  Harsh  Kumar  Bhanwala, 
Chairman, NABARD and the organizers of this National Meet of State Cooperative Banks for 
inviting me to share the Reserve Bank’s perspectives. 
2.  Since  inception  the  Indian  Cooperative  movement  was  initiated  by  the  Government  to 
align the rural credit system with the objectives of development planning. The RBI played an 
important  role.  The  RBI’s  concern  and  involvement  in  the  sphere  of  rural  credit  stemmed 
from its very statute of incorporation. Specific provisions were made in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act 1934 for the establishment of an Agricultural Credit Department and for extending 
refinance  facilities  to  the  cooperatives.  RBI  laid  emphasis  on  strengthening  and  ensuring 
viable  provincial  cooperative  bank,  central  cooperative  banks,  marketing  societies  and 
primary agricultural credit societies in each province for seasonal agricultural operations. 
Role of cooperatives 
3. The cooperative movement in the country, originated as a measure against rural poverty, 
agrarian disturbances in 1875 in the Deccan against moneylenders led to the enactment of 
Taccavi  legislation  in  1892.  Sir  Frederick  Nicholson  recommended  the  establishment  of 
cooperative  societies  on  the  Raiffeisen  model  popular  in  Germany.  Thus,  cooperatives  as 
people’s institutions have a long legacy and a rich tradition in India. The founders of Planning 
in  India  considered  cooperation  an  instrument  of  economic  development  combining  the 
advantages of private ownership with public good. 
4. Rural credit cooperatives in India were originally envisaged as a mechanism for pooling 
the  resources  of  people  with  small  means  and  providing  them  access  to  cheap  and  cost-
effective  financial  services.  Democratic  in  features,  the  movement  was  also  an  effective 
instrument for development of degraded waste lands, increasing productivity, providing food 
security,  generating  employment  opportunities  in  rural  areas  and  ensuring  social  and 
economic  justice  to  the  poor  and  vulnerable.  In  light  of  this,  the  cooperatives  occupy  an 
important position in the Indian financial system. 
Cooperatives were the first formal institutions to be conceived and developed to purvey credit 
to rural India and have been a key instrument of credit delivery to enable farmers to meet 
their production needs and so increase production and productivity in the rural areas. 
Evolution of cooperatives in India 
5. In the first Phase (1900–1930), the cooperative movement originated due to the initiative 
of the colonial government in the early 20th century. The idea of establishing cooperatives of 
the type that worked successfully in Germany was mooted in the late 19th century. These 
cooperatives  were  seen  as  a  means  to  liberate  the  poor  farmers  from  the  clutches  of 
usurious  money-lenders.  The  Government  passed  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act  in  1904 
followed  by  a  more  comprehensive  Cooperative  Societies  Act  later  in  1912.  In  1915,  the 
Maclagan Committee advocated that “there should be one cooperative for every village and 
every  village  should  be  covered  by  a  cooperative.”  The  Royal  Commission  made  the 
observation “if cooperation fails, there will fail the best hope of rural India”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. In the second Phase (1930–1950), by virtue of the provisions of the RBI Act, the Reserve 
Bank  was  given  a  mandate  to  closely  associate  with  matters  relating  to  rural  credit  and 
banking. RBI Act provided for both the establishment of an Agricultural Credit Department in 
the  bank  and  extension  of  refinance  facilities  to  the  cooperative  credit  system.  RBI 
introduced credit facilities to provincial cooperative banks for seasonal agricultural operations 
and marketing of crops from 1942. 
7. In the third Phase (1950–1990), a major initiative for pursuit of the mandate given to the 
Reserve Bank was taken with sponsoring of All India Rural Credit Survey in 1951–52. The 
study recommended an integrated approach to cooperative credit and emphasized the need 
for viable credit cooperative societies by expanding their area of operation, encouraging rural 
savings  and  diversifying  business.  The  Committee  also  recommended  government 
participation  in  the  share  capital  of  the  cooperatives.  The  National  Commission  on 
Agriculture (1976) recommended setting up of Farmers Service Cooperative Societies with 
the active collaboration of the nationalized banks. The involvement of commercial banks was 
institutionalized  through  nationalization  of  major  commercial  banks  in  1969,  causing 
unprecedented penetration of commercial banks in the rural sector. The State has used co-
operatives to channel its development schemes, particularly subsidy-based programs for the 
poor. As these institutions have a wide reach in the rural areas and also deal with finances, 
the choice was natural. 
8. By 1982, to consolidate the various arrangements made by the RBI to promote / supervise 
institutions  and  channel  credit  to  rural  areas,  NABARD  was  established  based  on  the 
recommendation  of  the CRAFICARD  (Sivaraman  Committee  1981).  The  Agriculture  Credit 
Review  Committee  (Khusro  Committee,  1989)  stressed  the  importance  of  encouraging 
members’  thrift  and  savings  for  the  cooperatives.  It  also  emphasized  the  need  for  better 
business  planning  at  the  local  level  and  for  strategies  to  enable  cooperatives  to  be  self-
sustaining.  To  this  end,  the  Committee  was  in  favor  of  serving  non-members,  if  it  made 
business sense. The 1990s witnessed more concerted attempts by both the government and 
non-official organisations and cooperators, to explore ways to revitalize the cooperatives. 
9. In the Fourth Phase (1990s and onwards), there has been an increasing realization of 
the  deleterious  impact  of  intrusive  State  patronage,  politicization,  and  the  consequent 
impairment  of  the  role  of  cooperatives  in  general,  and  of  credit  cooperatives  in  particular, 
leading  to  a  quest  for  reviving  and  revitalizing  the  cooperative  movement.  Several 
Committees were set up to suggest cooperative sector reforms during this period. 
Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) 
10. Since inception, cooperatives have made available institutional credit at affordable cost 
particularly  to  the  agricultural  sector.  The  Short-term  Rural  Cooperative  Credit  Structure 
(STCCS)  provides  mainly  short  term  and  medium-term  production  credit  besides  other 
financial services. At present, there are nearly 92,432 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS), 371 District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCB) with 13,233 branches and 32 State 
Cooperative Banks (SCB) with 992 branches. On an average, there is one PACS for every 
8 villages.  These  societies  have  a  total  membership  of  more  than  120  million  rural  people 
making  it  one  of  the  largest  rural  financial  systems  in  the  world.  60%  of  population  still 
depends upon the agricultural income. 
Performance of rural cooperative banks in extension of agriculture credit 
11. Institutional lending to agriculture and allied activities has recorded a significant growth 
during  the  last  two  decades  due  to  the  aggressive  policy  of  the  government  in  expanding 
credit to agriculture. The following figure depicts the growth in agricultural credit distributed 
by the STCCS: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
12.  Lending  by  cooperative  credit  institutions  grew  much  faster  than  that  by  other  banks 
during the 1990s. Thereafter, their share has been declining since 2007–08. Despite this fall, 
cooperatives  clearly  remain  the  major  source  of  agricultural  credit  to  small  and  medium 
farmers in terms of the number of borrowers and size of individual loans. 
 like  poor  governance 
low  borrowing  membership, 
Problems of cooperatives 
13. Despite the phenomenal outreach and volume of operations, the health of a very large 
proportion  of  rural  credit  cooperatives  has  deteriorated  significantly.  The  institutions  are 
beset  with  problems 
infrastructural  weaknesses,  operational 
inefficiencies and the consequent impairment of their financial health. Several factors such 
as 
lack  of  democratization  and 
professionalism, high incidence of overdues and almost stagnant recovery performance have 
led to the deterioration in the financial soundness of cooperatives. There is an urgent need to 
find ways for strengthening the cooperative movement to meet the credit needs of rural India, 
especially  the  resource-poor  and  resource-less  poor  farmers.  The  revitalization  and 
strengthening of cooperative institutions at all levels should therefore be considered not only 
desirable but expedient. The thrust has to be four-fold, financial, operational, organizational 
and systemic. 
low  resource  base, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Poor governance 
14.  Cooperatives  operate  within  the  legal  framework  formulated  by  state  governments. 
However, compliance with the legal provisions of the State Cooperative Societies Acts has 
not  been  ensured.  Governance,  connected  lending,  transparency  in  grant  of  loans,  audit, 
internal  checks  and  control,  recovery  of  dues,  recruitment  of  qualified  persons  are  issues 
trammeling the efficient functioning of cooperatives. 
15.  As  dominant  share  holders,  state  governments  interference  in  the  management  of 
cooperatives.  Supervision  and  guidance  by  the  elected  Boards  is  lax.  Delay  in  conduct  of 
elections,  frequent  supersession  of  the  Boards,  lack  of  participation  by  members  in  the 
management  and  decision-making  process  have  impaired  functioning  of  cooperatives  on 
sound  business  lines.  In  the  absence  of  professional  management,  accountability  and 
uncertain  tenures,  the  Board  members  are  not  able  to  provide  dynamic  leadership  to  the 
organization. Restoring and strengthening autonomy, mutual help and self governance are 
the cornerstone of the cooperatives. 
Absence of prudent interest rate policies 
16. Cooperatives have access to huge deposits from public but there is no system to ensure 
prudent deployment of these funds. They have not taken advantage of the freedom given to 
them to decide on the interest rates on deposits and advances. While deposits are accepted 
at unsustainably higher rates, loan pricing is done in imprudent manner without factoring in 
cost  of  funds.  Many  cooperatives  are  unable  to  generate  enough  revenue  or  surplus  to 
sustain  their  operations  and  boost  capital  formation  on  account  of  very  thin  or  negative 
margins. As a result, there are frequent demands for recapitalization which causes pressure 
on  the  limited  resources  of  governments  which  could  have  been  used  for  productive 
investments benefitting the society in large. 
Lack of HR policies and professionalism 
17.  The  quality  of  human  resources  is  an  important  determinant  of  the  success  of  any 
organization.  This  aspect,  however,  has  not  received  due  importance  in  the  cooperative 
institutions. The cooperative banks are headed by a committee of elected members who are 
not professionals and do not possess sound knowledge in banking functions. The Committee 
takes crucial business decisions involving sanction of loans, investments, interest rates on 
deposits and loans, etc. which require a minimum degree of skill and expertise. Often, the 
role of Chief Executive Officers in these areas is minimal. 
18. Cooperatives do not have well defined capacity building and HR policies in crucial areas 
like  recruitment,  placement, 
training,  career  progression,  succession  planning,  etc. 
Recruitments  are  done  without  any  objective  and  systematic  manpower  assessment.  All 
these have led to inefficiency and lower productivity. Though there is a system of training in 
place  in  many  cooperative  banks,  there  is  no  need-assessment  to  align  training  with  the 
current and future staff requirements. Training programs should be designed to achieve skill 
upgradation 
to  audit  and  expenditure,  management  and  aptitude 
development. It is also necessary to keep the staff sufficiently motivated through periodic job 
rotation, job enrichment and recognition of performance. 
in  areas  related 
Poor recovery performance 
19. Frequent loan waiver announcements by governments aimed to garner electoral support 
have  vitiated  the  credit  discipline  among  the  borrowers  and  affected  the  recovery 
atmosphere.  The  resultant  weak  finances,  growing  NPAs  and  poor  resource  base  have 
contributed  to  the  declining  performance  of  the  cooperatives,  particularly  at  the  grass  root 
level.  Since  these  grass  root  institutions  depend  on  liquidity  support  from  higher  financing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
agencies  like  State  and  Central  Cooperative  Banks,  non-payment  of  dues  impairs  the 
financial health of the entire chain. 
Inadequate internal control and audit 
20. Cooperatives do not pay attention to implementation of adequate and foolproof internal 
checks and control. Balancing of books and reconciliation of entries are in arrears for unduly 
long periods. As a result, there is frequent incidence of frauds involving the staff who game 
the system. Very often, these cases are held up due to protracted litigation in Courts of law 
and the guilty are not brought to book .There is absence of effective audit mechanism. There 
are delays in the conduct of audits and submission of reports. Quality of audit leaves much to 
be  desired  in  as  much  as  it  fails  to  address  the  gaps  in  the  systems  and  processes  and 
improve efficiency of operations of the cooperatives. 
Lack of member participation 
21. The cooperative structure should be member-driven. However, members having a voting 
right  do  not  take  active  part  or  show  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  cooperatives  since  the 
control and management is vested in a few members .Besides, depositors, whose money is 
intermediated by the cooperatives, have no voting right or any say in the management. 
Not keeping pace with changes 
22. Cooperatives have been unable to adapt themselves to the rapid pace of changes in the 
financial sector. Cooperatives have lagged behind in designing of new products and services 
and in adoption of technology and advanced management practices that have changed the 
face of financial sector in the post economic-liberalization era. As a result, they are unable to 
cope with the stiff competition posed by other banks in rural finance and retain their market 
share. 
Duality of control 
23. Under the Constitution, ‘Cooperation’ is a state subject governed by the respective State 
Cooperative Societies Acts. Registration, incorporation, management, election, and audit are 
governed by the State Acts. Some aspects relating to banking activities are regulated and 
supervised by the Reserve Bank of India / NABARD under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
(As Applicable to Cooperative Societies). There is an urgent need to remove the overlapping 
controls  and  endowing  functional  autonomy  and  operational  freedom  to  cooperatives. 
Banking  functions  should  be  brought  completely  under  the  Banking  Regulation  Act.  The 
provisions  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  should  override  the  provisions  of  the  State 
Acts/bye-laws/rules which run counter to it. This will lead to clear demarcation of the areas of 
activities of cooperative banks. 
Need for revival of the cooperative credit institutions 
24. It is pertinent to mention that in the first place, India is a country with a population of more 
than 110 crore, of which around 70 crore reside in a little over 6 lakh villages. As there are a 
little over ninety two thousand PACS in the country, every 8th village, on an average, has an 
existing cooperative credit outlet. It is in this context that the role of cooperatives assumes 
importance. A number of Committees were set up to suggest reforms in the sector. Based on 
the recommendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee, the Government of India rolled out in 
January 2006, a package for revival of the Short-Term Rural Co-operative Credit Structure. 
The Task Force also suggested wide-ranging reforms in the governance and management of 
STCCS  including  crucial  amendments  to  the  respective  State  Cooperative  Societies  Acts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
that  were  to  precede  the  recommended  one-time  capitalization  jointly  by  the  Central 
government, the state governments and the STCCS of the state itself. 
25. Twenty-five state governments signed the MoU with Government of India and NABARD 
to participate in and implement the package. As on December 2012, 21 states had amended 
the respective State Cooperative Societies Act. An amount of Rs. 9,002 crore was released 
by  NABARD  as  the  Government  of  India’s  share,  while  the  state  government  released 
Rs. 856  crore  as  their  share  for  recapitalisation  of  53,202  eligible  PACS  in  17  States. 
Recapitalisation  assistance  could  not  be  released  in  many  cases  as  the  states  did  not 
complete all the necessary benchmark activities within the stipulated period. 
Licensing of rural cooperative banks 
26. The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment set up by the Government of India in 
September  2006,  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan,  looked  into  the  financial 
health  of  all  the  banks  including  the  cooperative  banks  and  made  recommendations  for 
improvement of financial health and systems for attaining and maintaining financial stability. 
A major recommendation of the Committee was to prohibit unlicensed banks from functioning 
beyond March 2012. 
27.  As  there  were  a  large  number  of  cooperative  banks  (17  out  of  31  State  Cooperative 
Banks and 296 out of 371 District Central Cooperative banks) functioning without license, the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  relaxed  the  licensing  norms  to  grant  license  to  these  banks.  The 
relaxed norms were 
i) 
ii) 
Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) – Minimum 4 %, and 
Compliance  with  CRR  and  SLR  for  the  last  one  year  (default  on  one  or  two 
occasions were permitted). 
Consequent  upon  relaxation  of  licensing  norms,  50  banks  qualified  for  issue  of  license 
reducing  the  number  of  unlicensed  banks  from  73  as  on  February  29,  2012  to  43  as  on 
March 31, 2012 and further to 23 as on June 30, 2013. 
Recent policy initiatives 
Implementation of core banking solution 
28. The Reserve Bank of India has granted permission to StCBs and CCBs to participate in 
the payment system and offer RTGS/ECS/NEFT facilities to their customers/members. Since 
IT infrastructure is the prerequisite for offering these services, Core Banking Solution (CBS) 
is being implemented in StCBs and CCBs. Several banks have joined the NABARD assisted 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
project  and  made  significant  progress  in  implementation  of  CBS.  Some  banks  have 
undertaken  implementation  of  CBS  on  their  own.  Full  implementation  is  expected  to  be 
achieved by March 31, 2014. 
 Prudential norms on capital adequacy 
29.  Rural cooperative  banks  have  been kept  out  of  Capital to  Risk-Weighted  Assets  Ratio 
(CRAR) framework for a long time on the grounds that there is an in-built accretion to capital 
every time a loan is availed of by a member. In view of the high level of default characterizing 
the STCCS and the risk posed by higher concentration of loan portfolios of these banks in a 
single sector with defined areas of operation, the Vaidyanathan Task Force recommended 
for bringing all tiers of the STCCS under the CRAR framework. The Reserve Bank of India 
recently reviewed the position of CRAR in StCBs and CCBs and has introduced the minimum 
CRAR requirement for these banks. A roadmap has been laid down for achieving CRAR of 
7% by March 31, 2015 and 9% by March 31, 2017. 
30.  Since  these  banks  have  limited  avenues  of  mobilizing  additional  capital  resources, 
permission has been granted for issue of Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits and Innovative 
Perpetual  Debt  Instruments.  State  /  Central  Co-operative  Banks  (StCBs  /  CCBs)  are  now 
allowed to issue Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits (LTD) with the prior permission of the 
respective  Registrar  (RCS)  granted  in  consultation  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  LTD  can  be 
issued to members and non-members, including those outside the area of operations of the 
StCBs  /  CCBs  concerned.  There  is  no  prohibition  on  existing  shareholders  subscribing  to 
LTD. The amounts raised through LTD will be eligible to be treated as lower Tier II capital, 
subject to certain conditions. 
31. State / Central Co-operative Banks are also allowed to issue Innovative Perpetual Debt 
Instruments  (Innovative  Instruments).  The  instruments  may  be  issued  as  bonds  or 
debentures to qualify for inclusion as Tier I Capital for capital adequacy purposes. Banks are 
required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India, on a case-by-case basis, for 
issue of innovative instruments. Innovative instruments shall not exceed 15 per cent of total 
Tier  I  capital.  Innovative  instruments  in  excess  of  the  above  limits  shall  be  eligible  for 
inclusion  under  Tier  II,  subject  to  limits  prescribed  for  Tier  II  capital.  However,  investors’ 
rights and obligations would remain unchanged. 
Membership of credit information companies 
32. Under the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, all co-operative banks 
are credit institutions and every credit institution has to be a member of at least one Credit 
Information  Company  (CIC).  State  and  Central  cooperative  banks  are  required  to  take 
membership of at least one CIC. In developing economies, lending, especially to retail, has 
been made possible by credit information companies, which perform the vital task of collating 
and distributing reliable credit information to the specified users. Reports from CICs contain 
information  about  the  payment  behaviour  of  consumers  and  commercial  entities,  including 
data on timely fulfillment of or delinquency in meeting the financial obligations. It helps credit 
institutions in making an informed decision about a credit applicant. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
State cooperative banks – guiding role 
33. State Cooperative Banks are the apex level institutions in the federal structure of STCCS. 
They  accept  huge  deposits  from  the  affiliated  /  member  societies  and  also  from  non-
members.  They  provide  liquidity  support  and  financial  accommodation  to  the  member 
societies  down  the  chain.  Large  volume  of  funds  in  the  form  of  governmental  assistance 
under  various  welfare  and  subsidy  schemes,  grants  and  refinance  from  higher  refinance 
agencies are channeled through state cooperative banks to the lower tier institutions. Hence, 
it is the responsibility of the state cooperative banks to provide guidance and direction to the 
member societies and ensure that the valuable resources are not frittered away and diverted 
to investments in risky assets. Weaknesses in lower tier institutions would eventually move 
up  the  chain  and  bring  down  the  entire  edifice  of  the  federal  cooperative  credit  structure. 
Even  strong  state  cooperative  banks  would  face  threat  to  their  survival  if  the  structural 
weaknesses are not addressed in a timely manner. 
34.  State  cooperative  banks  have  a  larger  role  in  the  development  of  the  state  economy. 
They should rise above the self-interest and work for serving the economic interests of the 
society at large. It need not be emphasized that these banks should keep their own house in 
order and conduct themselves with unquestionable integrity and social responsibility. 
Way forward 
35.  Cooperatives  have  inherent  advantages  as  member-owned  and  member-controlled 
institutions.  Successive  governments  have  acknowledged  their  role  in  improving  the 
productivity  and  eradication  of  poverty  among  the  rural  masses  and  contribution  to 
development  of  rural  economy  and  provided  support  and  assistance  as  a  part  of  State-
promoted  policies.  However,  cooperatives  have  to  make  sustained  efforts  to  address  the 
constraints and inadequacies discussed above. 
36.  To  sum  up,  cooperatives  should  practice  good  corporate  governance  and  social 
responsibility. These institutions should be purely “member-driven” keeping the principle of 
cooperation  in  letter  and  spirit.  Professionalism  should  be  introduced  in  staffing  and 
adequate training opportunities should be provided to the employees of cooperatives for skill 
upgradation. They should frame sound and prudent policies for loans and investments and 
conduct  themselves  in  the  larger  interests  of  the  depositors  and  the  general  public. 
Cooperatives  should  overcome  their  inertia  and  resistance  to  change  and  emerge  as 
technology-driven, well-managed institutions to inspire confidence in the public and secure 
their survival. 
Thank you for a patient hearing. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
