  
 
K C Chakrabarty: Currency management in India – issues and challenges 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Banknote Conference 2014, Washington DC, 8 April 2014. 
 The  assistance  provided  by  Shri  B.  P.  Vijayendra,  Ms.  Kaya  Tripathi  and  Shri  Arvind  Kumar  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1.  Mr.  Tom  Ferguson,  Chairman,  Banknote  Conference  2014;  Mr.  Tim  Vigotsky,  Director, 
Banknote Conference 2014, my fellow speakers – Mr. Barna Barabas, DMD, Jura Security 
Printing Alliance; Dr. Wolfram Seidemann, Managing Director, Louisenthal; other delegates; 
ladies & gentlemen. At the outset, I thank the organizers of Banknote Conference 2014 for 
inviting me to speak at this august gathering. From the contents of the Conference Schedule 
and from the feedback that I have received from my colleagues in the Reserve Bank of India, 
who have participated in this Conference over the years, I gather that the Conference seeks 
to serve certain useful purposes, notably, providing a platform for a free and frank exchange 
of  views,  showcasing  the  latest  developments  in  the  rapidly  changing  field  of  currency 
management,  bringing together the  service  providers  and  the  service  seekers from  across 
the  world  under  one  roof  and  generally  helping  the  participants  to  chalk  out  their  future 
strategies and plans of action. 
2. Because of the sheer size of our population and the quantum of banknotes that we are 
required  to  put  into  circulation  every  year,  India  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  biggest 
consumers of the ingredients that go into production of banknotes in the world. In keeping 
with the magnitude of the banknotes that are put into circulation, the corresponding need to 
import other machinery for processing, detection and destruction of the bank notes is also 
humongous. Thus, India is a very significant market for the suppliers of all ingredients and 
equipments,  which  form  the  entire  ecosystem  of  the  banknote  production  and  destruction 
process.  As  in-charge  of  the  currency  management  function  in  the  country,  we  at  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  the  Central  Bank  of  the  country,  have  experienced  severe 
constraints, some of which can be traced, directly or indirectly to the operations of the global 
suppliers and vendors in the banknote industry. I intend to use the presence of these global 
suppliers and vendors and the opportunity to speak at this platform today to highlight some of 
these concerns, which I feel must be bothering other Central Banks which rely on imports for 
their currency management, especially in the emerging markets. I would be extremely happy 
if the suppliers /vendors could reflect on our concerns and develop some practical solutions 
to  our  problems.  However,  before  I  get  into  the  specific  issues,  let  me  begin  with  a  brief 
perspective  on  various  dimensions  of  the  Indian  currency  system  and  the  issues  and 
challenges that we face in our currency management efforts. I would also like to share some 
of  the  recent  steps  we  have  taken  in  this  area  with  a  view  to  seeking  your  views  and 
feedback for improvements. 
Introduction 
3. Currency management has a great degree of significance for Central Banks the world over 
as it is one of the most visible functions which touches the lives of every individual. Since 
people  often  tend  to  judge  the  efficacy  of  the  central  bank  from  the  ease  of  continuous 
access  and  quality  of  notes  in  their  possession,  currency  management  function  entails  a 
certain degree of reputational risk for the central bank. As is the case in most jurisdictions, 
issue of banknotes and management of currency is one of the core functions of the Reserve 
Bank of India. It is enshrined in the preamble to the RBI Act, 1934 as “…to regulate the issue 
of Bank Notes and keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and 
generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  4.  The  mandate  of  any  central  bank  is  to  protect  the  integrity  of  banknotes  through  new 
design and security features, estimate the demand for banknotes and coins, plan the supply 
and distribution of adequate quantity of banknotes and coins and ensure quality of banknotes 
in  circulation  by  timely  withdrawal  of  soiled  banknotes.  It  is  equally  important  to  maintain 
confidence in currency through improvement in systems / procedures and by raising public 
awareness by enlisting support from all associated with the design, production and supply of 
banknotes. 
the 
increased  use  of 
Some numbers 
5. There has been a steady increase in the demand for banknotes and coins over the years, 
despite 
technology-driven  non-cash  modes  of  payments/e-
currency/virtual  currency-bit  coins,  etc.  Even  internationally,  notes  in  circulation  have  been 
increasing despite the use of non-cash modes of payment. However, the large numbers in 
India present a unique situation as compared to other countries. A comparative picture of the 
Notes in Circulation (NIC) in India as compared to some major countries is indicated in the 
table given below: 
 
6. Globally, the cash in circulation to GDP ratio has ranged from 2.5% to 8% whereas in India 
it  has  been  around  13%  due  to  the  predominant  usage  of  cash  by  a  majority  of  the 
population. The world-wide growth rates of cash in circulation has varied between 6% and 
13%, with Central & South America figuring at the top end followed by Africa (12%), Middle 
East (11%), Europe (10%), Asia (7%) and finally UK and Ireland at 6%. In the year 2013, 
154 billion  banknotes  were  issued  globally,  of  which  the  maximum  banknotes,  54  billion, 
were issued by China and almost 20 billion banknotes by India. The global projections for the 
next three years have been worked out at 160 billion, 166 billion and 173 billion banknotes, 
respectively. These numbers are simply astounding. While it presents a massive opportunity 
for  the  vendors  associated  with  the  production  of  banknotes,  I  believe  it  simultaneously 
enjoins upon them certain responsibilities. For instance, the vendors need to be conscious of 
the impact of their activities on the environment. I will touch upon some of these issues later 
in my address. At this stage, I would like to mention that there needs to be more investment 
in  research  and  development  efforts  by  the  vendors  to  ensure  that  the  longevity  of  the 
banknotes  improves  and  eventually,  the  cost  of  printing  of  banknotes  for  the  society  as  a 
whole comes down. Vendors need to develop such banknote paper that can resist dirt and 
moisture, thereby increasing the life and quality of the banknotes in circulation. But while the 
focus  needs  to  be  on  bringing  down  the  cost  of  printing  banknotes,  it  cannot  be  done  by 
compromising on security. In fact, effort has to be on making the banknotes more secure with 
lesser, but stronger security features. 
Currency management in India- major challenges 
7.  Let  me  now  share  with  you  some  of  the  challenges  that  we  encounter  in  currency 
management  and  currency  distribution  in  India.  In  a  country  like  India  having  an  area  of 
approximately  3.3  mn  sq.  km.  and  a  population  of  more  than  1.2  billion,  reaching  the 
currency to the end users in far flung areas dotted with difficult terrains, poses an enormous 
challenge.  As  on  December  31,  2013,  there  is  a  network  of  110,520  commercial  bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  branches  and  137,080  ATMs.  The  notes  in  circulation  as  on  the  same  date  was 
approximately 76.47 billion pieces valued at  12, 468 billon while the coins in circulation were 
around  89.91  billion  pieces  valued  at  168  billion.  As  the  demand  for  notes  and  coins  is 
subject  to  diverse  socio-economic,  behavioural  and  other  often  unpredictable  factors,  the 
task  of forecasting  demand  for  currency  is  a  challenging  task  and  can be  subject  to  large 
variations. At present, the system poses considerable difficulties in capturing the structural 
and cyclical demands for currency and projecting demand with precision. I would, therefore, 
also  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  an  invitation  to  the  delegates  present  here  to  come 
forward and see if they can work with us for making accurate projections for the demand of 
banknotes and coins. 
8. The other challenges in currency management relates to ensuring durability of banknotes, 
ensuring  adequate  supply  of  all  denominations,  improving  operational  efficiency  in 
distribution of notes by controlling cost of handling, distribution and security in transit/storage, 
providing  last  mile  connectivity  at  reasonable  cost,  ensuring  equity  in  distribution  and 
repositioning RBI as an upstream facilitator in the fresh note/coin supply chain, rather than as 
a retailer with limited reach. Let me highlight the challenge associated with durability of the 
banknotes in India by giving some figures. We in India, withdraw more number of banknotes 
from  circulation  than the  number  of  banknotes  collectively  produced  by  all  countries  taken 
together with the exception of China. In fact, we are constrained to withdraw over 75% of all 
notes that we circulate every year as may be seen from the table below: 
 
9. Such massive withdrawal of banknotes from circulation not only means additional cost for 
printing  of  fresh  notes  but  also  additional  requirement  of  various  resources  used  in 
production  of  banknotes.  In  this  context,  it  becomes  imperative  that  efforts  are  made  to 
enhance the durability of the banknotes so that not only the wastages are reduced, but also 
resources  are  utilized  in  a  sustainable  manner,  thereby  ensuring  that  the  environmental 
footprint of our currency management operations is minimized. 
10. Mechanization of soiled note processing while augmenting capacity has also thrown up 
new  challenges  like  ensuring  standardization  of  machine  parameters,  slow  progress  in 
improvement in processing capacity by commercial banks and security risks on account of 
manual intervention. Another challenge with the likely potential to evolve into a reputational 
risk for RBI is the shortage/ “perceived” shortage of coins and the lack of understanding on 
the exact role of the central bank in its distribution. It needs to be understood that while the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  responsibility  for  issue  of  coins  is  that  of  the  Government  of  India  (GoI),  RBI’s  role  is 
restricted to putting into circulation the coins received by it. Then, there are issues arising out 
of similar shapes and sizes of coins of different denominations. Last, but not the least, is the 
growing menace of forged notes in circulation and creating public awareness about various 
aspects of banknotes. 
Recent measures in India 
Constitution of high level committee 
a)  
11.  To  address  the  significant  challenges  faced  by  us  in  India  and  other  related  issues,  a 
High  Level  Committee  was  recently  constituted  by  GoI  (Chairman:  Dr.  K.  C.  Chakrabarty) 
having members representing GoI, RBI, Note Presses & Mints. The Committee reviewed the 
forecasting methodology and studied the international best practices in cash distribution by 
other  Central  Banks.  It  made  wide-ranging  recommendations,  notably,  (i)  RBI  to  focus 
exclusively  on  management  and  planning  of  currency  system  while  passing  on  the 
responsibility for distribution of banknotes and coins entirely to commercial banks, (ii) need to 
introduce private entrepreneurs for distribution of banknotes and coins on behalf of banks, if 
last mile connectivity for distribution has to be achieved, (iii) identification of a bank willing to 
assume  leadership  of  currency  management  function  in  the  district,  etc.  All  these 
recommendations have been accepted and are at various stages of implementation. 
Distribution mechanism 
b)  
12.  The  functions  relating  to  issuance  of  currency  (both  banknotes  and  coins)  and  their 
management is performed by the Reserve Bank through its 19 issue offices and a network of 
4,209 Currency Chests and 3,966 Small Coin Depots spread across the country. Despite the 
large  number  of  currency  chests  (extended  arms  of  RBI’s  Issue  Department),  the  primary 
responsibility  for  reaching  currency  to  the  banks  rests  with  RBI  because  of  the  currency 
management structure. Every year, based on the Bank’s indent for banknotes and coins, the 
Printing Presses and Mints dispatch notes and coins to the RBI offices. From the RBI offices, 
the  notes  and  coins  are  remitted  to  currency  chests  operated  by  commercial  banks.  The 
central bank arranges for transport and police escort for transfer of treasure and bears all the 
expenditure related to it unlike other countries where the commercial banks are responsible 
for transport  of  cash. Thus,  distribution  of  cash  in  India  is  the  primary  responsibility  of  the 
central bank. The treasure held in the currency chests is the property of the central bank and 
is subject to audit/verification. Any withdrawal or deposit in the currency chest by the bank 
holding the chest is reflected as debit/credit in the bank’s account held with RBI. 
13. To improve last mile connectivity, we have decided to involve private entrepreneurs in the 
distribution  function.  The  Cash-in  Transit  (CIT)  companies/Business  Correspondents  have 
been  allowed  to  process  coin  and  banknotes,  including  packaging,  sorting  and  delivery  to 
banks’ customers and for retrieval. Banks, including urban co-operative banks and regional 
rural banks, are also being involved to ensure that last mile delivery of cash related services 
penetrates  throughout  the  country.  We  have  also  initiated  a  pilot  exercise  under  the  lead 
bank scheme for currency management and intend to upscale it going forward, based on the 
experience gained. 
Direct remittance of banknotes 
c)  
14.  At  present,  remittances  of  notes  from  printing  presses  accompanied  by  press 
representatives  and  police  escort  are  received  at  our  Issue  Offices.  After  receiving  these 
boxes, they are subjected to preliminary verification (PV) wherein the contents of the box are 
verified by the vault joint custodians in the presence of the press representative. Later, at the 
time  of  sending  remittance  to  banks,  packing  of  the  boxes  is  done  in  the  presence  of  the 
accompanying  RBI  staff  and  vault  joint  custodians.  At  the  bank,  the  RBI  staff  remains 
stationed till the verification of notes is completed by the bank officials. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15.  We  have  realized  that  the  present  process  has  some  inherent  inefficiency  as  the 
currency notes have to be transported several times before they reach the public. This not 
only  reduces  productivity  but  is  also  cost-inefficient.  Accordingly,  we  have  introduced  a 
scheme for direct remittance of banknotes from Banknote Printing Presses to the commercial 
banks instead of routing them through RBI Issue offices to save time, efforts and resources. 
The new process is being given greater impetus by the RBI. 
Pursuit of clean note policy 
d)  
16.  Since the  year  1999, the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  a “Clean  Note  Policy”  to  ensure  an 
uninterrupted  supply  and  circulation  of  good  quality  banknotes.  As  may  be  seen  from  the 
Table at para 8 above, during the last three years, 13852 million pieces (mpcs), 13771 mpcs 
and 14130 mpcs respectively of soiled banknotes were withdrawn and disposed of. While the 
objectives  of  Clean  Note  Policy  have  been  by  and  large  achieved  in  respect  of  higher 
denomination notes, the quality of lower denomination notes, especially  10, continues to be 
a cause for concern, possibly due to reluctance/constraints on the part of banks to mop up 
such notes from circulation. 
17. To ensure that genuine banknotes alone are put into circulation, high priority is accorded 
to detection of counterfeit notes in the banking system. Towards this end, banks have been 
directed to enhance the use of technology to re-align their cash management systems so as 
to  ensure  that  cash  receipts  in  the  denominations  of  100  and  above  are  not  put  into  re-
circulation without being machine processed for authenticity. Banks have also been advised 
to put in place suitable systems to ensure that counterfeit notes detected are duly impounded 
and reported by following the prescribed procedure. 
Currency processing in India -trends in expenditure 
e)  
18. The currency production costs in our country have been substantial over the years. We in 
RBI have incurred an expenditure of  23.76 billion in 2010–11,  27.36 billion in 2011–12 and 
28.72  billion  in  2012–13  on  this  activity.  The  two  note  printing  presses,  BRBNMPL  and 
SPMCIL,  exhibit  an  increasing  trend  in  their  overall  expenses  viz.  12.22  billion,  
13.09 billion and  14.23 billion in the case of the former and  26.17 billion,  27.88 billion 
and  32.82 billion in the case of the latter during the last three years respectively, with the 
cost  of  paper  and  ink  contributing  significantly  in  the  overall  costs.  Additionally,  RBI  has 
incurred  an  expenditure  of  5.23  billion  for  acquisition,  upgradation  and  overhaul  of  its 
59 CVPS machines and 28 SBS (Shredding and Briquetting system) machines employed for 
destruction of soiled notes. 
The road ahead & key messages 
19.  Currency  management  offers  significant  business  opportunities  for  the  players  as  the 
cost  of  printing  of  banknotes  is  increasing  every  year  due  to  the  increasing  demand  for 
banknotes. As I mentioned earlier, this also enjoins certain amount of responsibility on the 
part of the vendors. It is expected from them that the products offered are of high quality and 
reliability and they strictly adhere to the agreed technical specifications. In this context, I wish 
to allude to the failure of the selected bidders in meeting the technical specifications of the 
plastic banknotes in  10 denomination that we are proposing to introduce on a trial basis in 
India,  necessitating  undertaking  the  exercise  afresh,  thereby  delaying  the  process.  The 
vendors are also expected to co-operate with the national governments and Central Banks to 
avoid production of counterfeits by developing country-specific security features and bringing 
about improvisation in raw materials like paper, ink, thread, etc. Any failure of the vendors in 
this  regard  could  result  in  total  loss  of  business  with  individual  countries  making  efforts  to 
indigenize. 
20.  Let  me  now focus  your  attention  on  some  expectations  that  we  have from the  various 
vendors  present  in  the  Banknote  Conference  here.  We  all  agree  that  the  integrity  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  banknotes is the most important factor. In this context, it is also actually quite ironical that for 
the circulation of forged notes the blame is put on the central bank when, in fact, the blame 
should go to the manufacturer of the forged notes as in the case of spurious drugs, where 
the manufacturers are prosecuted. However, it is my considered opinion that the integrity of 
the banknotes is not a technology issue but more of a law and order issue. When I say this I 
feel I would be echoing the sentiments of all consumers of various products that the industry 
produces, especially the representatives of the emerging market countries, who rely heavily 
on  imports  for  currency  production  in  their  respective  jurisdictions.  I  firmly  believe  that 
upgrading the security and design features of the banknotes every few years to outsmart the 
counterfeiters  is  not  a  long-term  solution  but  only  adds  to  the  cost  of  producing  the 
banknotes. 
21. Let me elaborate what I mean. If the counterfeiters are able to do a good job of producing 
duplicate currency, they are obviously having access to good quality currency paper, printing 
ink and other components that are necessary for production of banknotes. So, the question 
is,  what  is  the  source  of  supply  for  the  fraudsters  and  what  is  the  role  of  vendors  in 
perpetration  of  these  unlawful  activities.  The  commercial  banks  the  world  over  follow 
stringent  KYC  procedures  on  their  customers.  As  counterfeiting  is  a  global  issue,  what  I 
would  like  the  vendors  present  here  is  to  similarly  do  a  proper  customer  identification/due 
diligence on all their customers. The vendors must join hands to find out who has supplied 
ink,  paper, machinery,  etc.  to  the  counterfeiters which  would  enable  the  regulators to take 
appropriate action. In a manner the banks close accounts of customers doing any doubtful 
transactions; the suppliers should be able to cut off their links with their doubtful customers. 
In fact, the need of the hour is that counterfeiting should be tackled as a criminal activity with 
active co-ordination and collective might of all stakeholders-the vendors, Central Banks, law 
enforcement  agencies,  etc.  Finding  a  long-term  solution  to  this  menace  may  also  require 
close cross-border cooperation between various countries. The global vendors have, in fact, 
the maximum stake in ensuring that these problems are countered at the earliest. Over time, 
the  vendors  have  made  significant  investments  in  building  capacities  and,  in  the  process, 
created  economies  of  scale  and  scope.  They  are  the  least  cost  producers  of  the  various 
ingredients/  components  used  in  production  of  banknotes  and  any  attempt  by  individual 
countries  at  creating  manufacturing  capacities  could  prove  inefficient  and  in  many  cases, 
wasteful  investment.  But  the  bottom  line  is  that  any  failure  to  initiate  necessary  corrective 
measures  would  push  more  and  more  countries  like  India  to  go  for  indigenization  thereby 
resulting in loss of big business for the vendors. 
22. The global banknote industry, comprising various manufacturers of machines, paper, ink, 
security features,  etc  is very  huge. I  understand  that  the  overall  market for this  industry  is 
roughly  USD  27  to  28  billion.  So,  while  the  opportunities  for  the  vendors  are  immense,  I 
would also take this opportunity to request all the manufacturers, suppliers, vendors in the 
banknote industry to put their minds together and come up with ideas on not only reducing 
the cost of paper, ink, machines, etc. but also for enhancing the durability of the banknotes 
through  technological  innovations.  The  vendors  must  realize  that  they  also  have  a 
responsibility towards the environment. These innovations are necessary to reflect that the 
vendors are conscious about promoting environmental sustainability and “green” practices. 
Thus,  it  is  extremely  significant  that  currency  production  activities  are  not  viewed  as  mere 
business proposition for the vendors but also as something which has serious implications 
for  the  reputation  of  all  stakeholders  –  the  national  governments,  Central  Banks  and  the 
vendors themselves. 
23. I once again thank the organizers for the opportunity provided to me and appreciate the 
patient hearing given by the participants. I hope that the delegates present at the Conference 
would reflect on the messages /concerns that I have tried to convey this morning. I hope the 
Conference  would  deliberate  on  these  issues  and  come  up  with  practical  solutions  to  the 
present/impending challenges. Global co-ordination and intensive efforts to ensure integrity 
of banknotes is the need of the hour and I hope that all stakeholders viz., the Central Banks, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  state, policy makers and vendors who are involved in the process of production, supply and 
distribution  of  banknotes,  would  discuss  these  issues  in  a  more  purposeful  manner. 
Ultimately, this is the prime objective of the Conference. It is our collective responsibility to 
bring  greater  efficiency  in  the  entire  currency  management  function  –  an  essential 
commitment  that  all  of  us  must  make  to  the  end  users  spread  across  regions  and 
jurisdictions. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
