Philip Lowe: Opportunities and challenges for market-based financing 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the ASIC 
(Australian Securities and Investments Commission) Annual Forum 2014, Sydney, 25 March 
2014. 
 I would like to thank Ivailo Arsov, Mitch Kosev and David Wakeling for valuable assistance in the preparation of 
this talk.  
When  I  was  invited  to  speak  at  this  conference,  the  ASIC  organisers  suggested  the  topic 
“Opportunities and Challenges for Market-Based Financing”. I was very pleased to be able to 
accept the  invitation  as  this  topic  is  an  important  one. It  is  currently  also  a  highly  relevant 
topic  given  the  Australian  Government’s  recently  commissioned  inquiry  into  the  Australian 
Financial System.  
I would like to start with a quote from the final report of the previous inquiry into our financial 
system – the Wallis Inquiry which handed down its findings 17 years ago. In particular, the 
report observed:1 
The  evolution  of  financial  systems  has  been  characterised  by  a  continuing 
struggle between financial intermediaries and financial markets. 
While the inquiry was wary about making precise predictions, there was quite a strong sense 
in the report that financial markets would inevitably win this struggle; that over time, markets 
– including the bond market – would become increasingly important in connecting savers to 
borrowers. It was thought likely that improvements in technology and access to information 
would  allow  better  and  more  differentiated  pricing  of  risk.  And  that  this,  combined  with 
increased household savings in superannuation funds and a shift in investment preferences, 
would give markets the edge over the traditional financial intermediaries, namely the banks. 
While  we  have  seen  some  steps  in  this  general  direction,  including  the  financing  of 
mortgages through residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), things have not exactly 
turned out this way. Improvements in information technology have greatly improved access 
to  information.  However,  the  challenge  turned  out  not  to  be  so  much  in  accessing  the 
information, but in using the information well. It also turned out that households’ investment 
preferences  did  not  change  that  much  and  that  to  the  extent  that  they  did  change,  it  was 
mainly  reflected  in  an  increased  appetite  for  equities.  As  a  result,  while  market-based 
financing has developed over time, it has not grabbed the upper hand as some had thought 
likely at the time the Wallis Inquiry delivered its final report. 
One  area  that  has  attracted  considerable  attention  is  the  non-financial  corporate  bond 
market.  Some  commentators  have  lamented  the  fact  that  the  Australian  market  has  not 
developed more rapidly, with most business borrowers still connecting with savers over the 
balance sheets of financial institutions. Some of these commentators have also lamented the 
fact that superannuation funds – who they see as a natural buyer of corporate bonds – seem 
to have had only a limited appetite for these bonds. 
                                                
1  See Financial System Inquiry (1997), Financial System Inquiry Final Report (S Wallis, chairperson), Australian 
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, p 159. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Given this background, I thought it would be useful to briefly discuss recent developments in 
the Australian non-financial corporate bond market as well as the role that superannuation 
funds have come to play in intermediating between borrowers and savers. I would then like 
to  discuss  the  role  that  market-based  corporate  financing  can  play  in  providing  a  form  of 
insurance against stresses in the banking system and the possibility of a lack of competition 
in the banking system. 
The Australian corporate bond market 
By international standards, the Australian corporate sector makes relatively little use of the 
bond  market,  especially  the  domestic  bond  market.  Since  the  mid  2000s,  the  available 
internationally  comparable  data  suggest  that  average  annual  bond  issuance  by  Australian 
corporations has been the equivalent of just under 1 per cent of GDP, with around two-thirds 
of total issuance taking place offshore, rather than in the domestic market (Graph 1). In most 
other countries with which we normally like to compare our financial markets, the corporate 
sector makes greater use of bond funding. 
Graph 1 
 The relatively high reliance of Australian issuers on the offshore market is evident in the data 
on  the  composition  of  corporate  bonds  outstanding  (Graph 2).  Currently,  bonds  that  were 
issued offshore account for around 80 per cent of the outstanding value of bonds issued by 
Australian-based corporations. A decade ago, this figure was considerably lower at around 
50  per  cent.  The  offshore  market  is  favoured  by  companies  that  want  to  raise  foreign 
currency  funding  as  a  natural  hedge  against  their  foreign  currency  revenue.  It  has  also 
proven easier to issue large amounts and at longer tenors in the offshore market than it has 
in the domestic market.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2 
Another perspective on recent trends can be gained from looking at the data on the number and 
credit ratings of the individual bonds that have been issued domestically and offshore (Graph 3).  
 Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 A number of observations stand out: 
1. 
The number of Australian companies issuing bonds is quite small. On average, over 
recent times, only around 30 bonds have been issued in the domestic market per 
year,  with  just  a  few  more  being  issued  in  the  offshore  market.  In  terms  of  size, 
offshore  issues  tend  to  be  substantially  larger  and  they  also  tend  to  have  longer 
maturities. 
During the global financial crisis, issuance of bonds in the domestic market all but 
ceased,  with  only  a  handful  of  companies going  to  the  market  in  2008  and  2009. 
During  this  period,  there  was  some  issuance  in  the  offshore  market  although  the 
number of bonds issued was substantially lower than in the years both before, and 
after,  the  crisis.2  This  partly  reflected  the  very  high  spreads  being  demanded  by 
investors at the time. 
There was significant issuance of AAA securities in the domestic market prior to the 
financial  crisis,  although  these  securities  were  credit  wrapped  by  bond  insurers. 
During  the  crisis  most  of  these  insurers  were  wound  down  following  large  ratings 
downgrades, and this segment of the market has subsequently disappeared. 
The publically available information indicates that not a single corporate bond with a 
credit rating below BBB- has been issued in the domestic market. In contrast, since 
2000, around 30 bonds rated below BBB- have been issued in the offshore market 
by Australian corporations. 
Recently,  there  has  been  a  pick-up  in  both  the  number  (and  value)  of  BBB-rated 
issuers  in  the  domestic  market.  Last  year,  a  total  of  16  BBB-rated  bonds  were 
issued, the highest number on record. In another positive sign, the average maturity 
of these bonds was noticeably longer than in previous years. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Putting all this together, the Australian corporate bond market is relatively small in size and is 
less  well  developed  than  corporate  bond  markets  in  a  number  of  other  countries.  Total 
outstandings  in  the  domestic  market  amount  to  around  $50  billion  compared  with  total 
corporate  debt  outstanding  of  a  much  larger  $920  billion.  Notwithstanding  this,  regular 
activity is occurring in the market across much, although not all, of the credit spectrum. And 
over  recent  times,  issuance  appears  to  have  picked  up  a  little,  particularly  by  lower-rated 
companies. 
The role of superannuation 
I would now like to turn to the issue of superannuation funds and their role in the provision of 
market based finance. This is obviously an important issue given the rising share of national 
savings being managed by these funds (Graph 4). In the late 1980s/early 1990s, a little less 
than 20 per cent of the flow of new national savings was being directed into superannuation. 
Today, the figure is almost double that. 
                                                
2  The value of issuance in the offshore market increased notably in 2009, primarily due to a small number of 
large bond issues by major diversified mining companies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 4 
According  to  the  latest  figures,  superannuation  funds  currently  hold  around  $7  billion  of 
domestically  issued  corporate  bonds  (Graph 5). This represents  around 15  per  cent  of  the 
total  outstandings  in  the  domestic  market,  with  Australian  mutual  funds  and  non-resident 
investors together holding a further 60 per cent of bonds on issue. All up, domestically issued 
corporate bonds account for less than 1 per cent of total superannuation assets.3 
 Graph 5 
                                                 
3  Superannuation  funds  also  hold  some  bonds  in  the  offshore  market  issued  by  the  Australian  companies, 
although comprehensive data are not available. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
One reason that is sometimes given for superannuation funds’ relatively limited holdings of 
corporate bonds is that these funds have a strong preference for equities – currently, around 
50 per cent of Australian superannuation funds’ assets are invested in equities, whereas in 
many other countries the comparable figure is less than 40 per cent. 
This  apparent  preference  for  equities  is,  however,  only  a  partial  explanation  at  best. 
Australian  superannuation  funds  do  hold  a  large  portfolio  of  fixed-income  securities. 
However, within this portfolio, there are just not many fixed-income securities issued by the 
corporate  sector.  In  contrast  to  only  modest  growth  in  holdings  of  corporate  bonds, 
superannuation funds have purchased very large volumes of bonds issued overseas and by 
authorised  deposit-taking 
Indeed, 
superannuation funds’ holdings of bank bonds have risen from around $8 billion a decade 
ago,  to  around  $40  billion  today.  This  suggests  that  the  issue  is  not  so  much  a  lack  of 
appetite  for  bonds,  but  rather  the  relative  risk-return  and  liquidity  characteristics  of  the 
corporate bonds on offer.  
institutions  (ADIs)  based 
in  Australia  (Graph 6). 
Graph 6 
 Interestingly,  superannuation  funds  have  also  purchased  significant  volumes  of  bank 
liabilities other than bonds, including bank equity, bank short-term debt and, most notably, 
bank  deposits  (Graph 7).  Indeed,  bank  deposits  have  been  amongst  the  fastest  growing 
asset  classes  for  the  superannuation  sector  over  recent  times.  As  a  result  of  these 
developments,  super  funds  currently  hold  $440  billion  of  liabilities  issued  by  banks, 
representing 15 per cent of the banking sector’s total liabilities.  
So  as  things  have  turned  out,  superannuation  funds,  rather  than  financing  the  corporate 
sector  directly,  have  helped  finance  the  banks,  which  in  turn  have  financed  the  corporate 
sector. In effect, we have seen a lengthening of the chain of financial intermediation – from 
savers  to  superannuation  funds  to  banks  to  borrowers.  This  is  not  quite  the  financial 
disintermediation that some had expected a decade and a half ago.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 7 
 Superannuation  funds  have,  nevertheless,  been  an  important  source  of  market-based 
funding  through  another  channel  –  namely  through  the  purchasing  of  corporate  equity 
(Graph 8). Over the past decade, superannuation funds have increased their net investment 
in  Australian  equities  by  the  equivalent  of  around  2 per cent  of  GDP  per  year,  which  in 
current dollars is equal to an annual net new investment of around $30 billion. This suggests 
that there is not a natural reluctance by the superannuation sector for corporate exposure, 
but rather that equity represents a more attractive option than debt. 
Graph 8 
In  this  context,  one  issue  that  is  worthy  of  further  analysis  is  that  of  liquidity.  Given  that 
balances in superannuation funds are essentially “at call” and can be moved at short notice, 
these funds need to ensure that they remain quite liquid at all times. This inevitably reduces 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the attractiveness of relatively  illiquid assets like corporate bonds. From one perspective it 
seems slightly curious that long-term retirement savings can be moved at short notice. Over 
time,  there  may  be  a  benefit  in  exploring  other  arrangements  that  are  more  conducive  to 
investments in illiquid assets. 
Does it matter?  
With these facts as background, I would like to pose the question of whether any of this really 
matters: does it matter whether or not we have a corporate bond market and does it matter 
what the size of that market is? After all, the Australian economy and financial system have 
performed  well  over  the  past  two  decades  and  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
systematic difficulties for the corporate sector in accessing finance. 
In  answering  this  question  it  is  useful  to  think  about  the  implications  of  the  corporate  bond 
market  for  both  the  overall  stability  of  the  economy  and  for  the  efficiency  of  financial 
intermediation. 
In terms of stability, one of the arguments for a vibrant corporate bond market is that it can 
effectively act as a “spare tyre” – if the banking system gets into difficulty, the bond market 
can take its place in providing credit to businesses and thus allow the economy to continue 
operating relatively normally. 
The  available  international  evidence  is  broadly  consistent  with  this  argument,  although the 
transition from bank finance to bond finance in times of stress is not a seamless one given 
that  the  events  that  cause  problems  for  banks  can  also  cause  markets  to  freeze  up  for  a 
time. Nevertheless, in severe downturns, markets do seem to recover more quickly than do 
banks, which because they are highly leveraged, can find it difficult and time consuming to 
get back to normal operations.4 Interestingly, the evidence also suggests that during milder 
downturns,  banks  tend  to  be  more  stable  providers  of  credit  than  are  markets.  This  partly 
reflects the tendency for banks with long-term clients to keep supporting those clients if they 
can, whereas markets can abruptly shut for a time. 
The  recent  experience  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  provides  an  illustration  of  the 
constructive role that the corporate bond market can play during times of severe stress in the 
banking  system.  Banks  in  these  areas  have  been  capital  constrained,  have  faced  higher 
costs of raising funds and have had a diminished appetite for lending. As a result, at a time 
when  bank  credit  outstanding  has  been  unchanged  or  declining,  the  outstanding  value  of 
corporate bonds on issue has been rising, particularly in the United States (Graph 9).  
In  terms  of  efficiency  of  the  financial  system,  the  bond  market  can  play  the  role  of  the 
competitive  edge:  ensuring  that  banks  do  not  charge  too  high  a  price  for  financial 
intermediation. We saw a clear example of this in the 1990s in Australia. On that occasion, 
mortgage  lenders  were  making  very  high  returns  on  new  mortgage  loans,  with  the  spread 
between the mortgage rate and the cash rate reaching around 4¾ percentage points. The 
RMBS market emerged partly in response to this and over time the extra competition led to 
mortgage  spreads  falling  considerably.  More  broadly,  the  corporate  bond  market  can 
improve  the  overall  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  through  offering  a  broader  range  of 
maturities and loan structures than banks are able, or willing, to do.  
                                                
4  See  for  example  Gambacorta  L,  Y  Jing  and  K  Tsatsaronis  (2014),  “Financial  Structure  and  Growth”  BIS 
Quarterly Review, March, pp 21–35. Available at <https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1403e.htm>. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 9 
 So, in effect, the bond market can be seen as providing a form of insurance – insuring that in 
times of banking system stress the process of financial intermediation can continue and, at 
other  times,  insuring  that  any  lack  of  competition  in  the  banking  sector  does  not  lead  to 
excessively high prices for financial intermediation. 
Importantly, to play this role the corporate bond market needs to be able to come to life when 
it  is  most  needed  –  when  it  is  needed  as  the  spare  tyre  or  when  it  is  needed  to  provide 
competition. In a perfect world, the market would be deep and liquid at all times, but I don’t 
think  this  is  required  for  the  market  to  play  this  important  insurance  role.  Instead  what  is 
needed is that we have the general infrastructure that would allow the market to respond as 
necessary. 
Here, I think Australia is relatively well placed. The legal apparatus exists to issue corporate 
bonds.  The  trading  arrangements  are  well  established.  We  have  a  reasonable  number  of 
financial institutions that are able to assist companies in issuing bonds. We have businesses 
that have experience in the market. And we have superannuation and other funds that are 
willing to purchase bonds at the right price. This financial infrastructure means that we can 
have  some  confidence  that  there  is  capacity  for  the  corporate  bond  market  to  fulfil  this 
important insurance role. 
From this perspective, the fact that over recent times the corporate bond market in Australia 
has been relatively subdued compared with the markets in Europe and North America can, at 
least partly, be explained by the different outcomes in the banking sectors. In Australia, our 
banks  are  in  sound  shape  and  have  been  willing  to  lend.  In  contrast,  many  of  the  North 
Atlantic banks have had severe difficulties and have had little appetite for new loans. Indeed, 
lending  rates  charged  by  euro-area  banks  have  often  exceeded  the  cost  of  bond  market 
finance  for  even  fairly  lowly  rated  companies  (Graph 10).  In  this  environment,  it  is  not 
surprising that bond issuance has increased. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 10 
 In contrast, in Australia, while a rise in the cost of bank funding over recent years has meant 
that some businesses have been able to raise funds in the bond market more cheaply than 
obtaining a bank loan, the number of businesses that have found themselves in this position 
is relatively small. By and large, the Australian banking system has been able to meet the 
financing needs of most of the corporate sector. 
Looking  forward,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  infrastructure  that  supports  the  bond  market 
remains  in  place  and  that  it  is  strengthened  over  time.  This  strengthening  is  a  gradual 
process  and  there  have  been  some  steps  in  this  direction  over  recent  times.  These  steps 
include:  efforts  to  simplify  prospectus  requirements  for  retail  vanilla  bonds  and  ease  the 
personal  liability  of  company  directors;  improving  market  transparency  through  the  RBA’s 
publication  of  new  measures  of  corporate  bond  yields;  the  lengthening  of  the  government 
bond  curve;  and  the  listing  of  certain  fixed-income  securities  on  the  Australian  Securities 
Exchange. These are all welcome developments. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, let me try to briefly summarise. 
Bank-based  finance  remains  the  dominant  form  of  finance  for  Australian  companies. 
Superannuation funds have been prepared to finance banks and have effectively outsourced 
the  credit  assessment  function  for  much  of  the  corporate  sector.  Partly  as  a  result,  the 
development of a deep and liquid corporate bond market is still a work in progress. 
But an equally important observation is that we do have the infrastructure that could support 
a  strong  and  very  active  bond  market  in  times  of  stress  or  inadequate  competition.  In  this 
way, this infrastructure provides a form of insurance. We need to make sure that we nurture 
this infrastructure so that we can continue to be confident that the corporate bond market will 
be there when it is most needed. Given this perspective, I think it is probably better to think of 
markets and institutions as being complements, rather than as being engaged in some type 
of struggle for supremacy. 
Thank you very much for listening.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
