  William C Dudley: Update on economic and fiscal conditions in 
Puerto Rico 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  to  the  Association  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  of 
Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 24 June 2014. 
 Good afternoon. I thank you for the opportunity to address your association. It is always a 
pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up the Second Federal Reserve 
District and it is especially gratifying to be here in Puerto Rico. 
As  with  other  parts  of  our  District,  the  New  York  Fed  is  dedicated  to  the  people  of 
Puerto Rico  and  to  their  future  growth  and  prosperity.  Our  commitment  is  reflected  in  our 
ongoing work with our many partners in Puerto Rico. Over the past several years we have 
held  three  forums  (cosponsored  with  the  local  Small  Business  Administration  office,  the 
Puerto Rico Small Business Development and Technology Center and the Federal Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation),  which  provided  technical  assistance  to  help  small  businesses 
access  capital,  procure  government  contracts,  and  export  their  products  and  services.  We 
also  continue  to  promote  financial  literacy  through  our  ongoing  partnership  with  the 
Puerto Rico Bankers Association, and we have cosponsored the Financial Awareness Video 
Festival working with students at local colleges to produce short videos highlighting aspects 
of  financial  literacy.  Let  me  just  pause  for  a  moment  to  say  congratulations  to  this  year’s 
winner: Pontificia de Ponce. 
In addition to this work, our commitment is reflected in our research on issues of concern 
to  the  Island.  Our  economists  monitor  and  analyze  local  economic  conditions.  A 
complement  to  our  internal  research  is  the  outreach  that  I  and  other  senior  bank  staff 
undertake  to  meet  with  our  stakeholders  –  the  leaders  in  the  business  community, 
members  of  professional  organizations  like  yourselves,  academics,  students,  elected 
officials and leaders of nonprofits – to hear firsthand about the issues and problems facing 
the people in our district. What we learn during these engagements also helps to shape our 
understanding of the issues facing the Puerto Rico economy and inform our efforts to support 
it. Earlier on this trip I met with leading business owners from many different sectors of the 
economy, elected officials and several agency heads. And from what I have learned so far, 
there  are  many  important  initiatives  underway  to  effect  change  and  to  address  what  are 
clearly large and complex issues. 
On my last visit to the Island in 2011, I saw examples of expansion and growth. This gave 
me  confidence  that  Puerto  Rico  has  the  capability  to  be  an  economic  success  story. 
However, my discussions with a range of stakeholders confirmed to me that conditions were 
not what we want them to be – in particular, growth and expansion were not happening either 
fast enough or broadly enough. At the urging of several business and community leaders, I 
commissioned a team at the New York Fed to analyze the challenges facing the Puerto Rico 
economy  and  to  put  forth  recommendations  on  how  to  capitalize on  the  Island’s strengths 
and restore growth. Informed by consultations with local, national and international experts 
and stakeholders on the Island, we released that report in 2012.1 
We presented five recommendations: (1) reduce barriers to labor force participation and job 
creation;  (2)  reform  the  energy  industry,  particularly,  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  electric 
                                                 
1   Report  on  the  Competitiveness  of  Puerto  Rico’s  Economy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  2012. 
in  Spanish  at 
in  English  at  http://www.newyorkfed.org/regional/puertorico/index.html  and 
Available 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/regional/puertorico/spanish.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  the 
Island’s  ongoing  weak  economic  performance.  Persistent  deficits 
utility’s  operations;  (3)  lower  the  costs  of  doing  business;  (4)  foster  partnerships  between 
industry  and  higher  education;  and  (5)  promote  independent  policy  evaluation.  These 
recommendations were not presented as simple quick fixes, but rather as important steps to 
help improve the Island’s competitiveness over time. 
Since that report was issued, positive steps toward reform have been made in some areas. 
The  recent  bill  reforming  the  energy  sector  and  related  efforts  to  expand  the  use  of 
alternative  energy  sources  should  over  time  help  to  reduce  the  Island’s  high  costs  of 
electricity.  Additionally,  the  Commonwealth’s  economic  development  strategy  is  seeking  to 
capitalize on the strong pharmaceutical presence on the Island, to promote knowledge-based 
services and, importantly, to improve the general business environment on the Island. 
More recently, though, serious fiscal challenges have surfaced that are closely interrelated 
with 
the 
Commonwealth’s fiscal accounts as well as mounting deficits in the operation of the several 
major  public  corporations  have  substantially  raised  the  Island’s  overall  level  of  public  debt 
and led to serious concerns about whether the Island’s fiscal position is sustainable. 
In light of the fiscal pressures Puerto Rico now faces, the New York Fed is undertaking an 
update  to  our  earlier  report.  In  this  new  report,  we  plan  to  focus  on  Puerto  Rico’s  fiscal 
health.  We  will  examine  the  factors  leading  to  the  sizeable  buildup  of  public  debt  on  the 
Island and the key variables that will determine its future trend. In some ways, the data on 
Puerto Rico’s public debt clearly define the fiscal problems the Island faces. But meeting with 
a  variety  of  stakeholders,  as  I  have  on  this  visit,  will  help  to  inform  our  analysis  and  will 
provide  us  with  concrete  evidence  of  how  these  issues  are  playing  out  across  the  Puerto 
Rico economy. 
The clear challenge going forward will be for the Commonwealth government to continue to 
make progress on its efforts to raise its economic growth rate while at the same time to take 
credible steps to constrain the buildup of debt. The demanding choices Puerto Rico makes 
today will affect its long-run economic prospects and the future livelihood of its residents. 
Now I would like to review recent developments in the Puerto Rico economy and then outline 
for consideration and discussion several steps to help put the Island on a path toward fiscal 
health. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
in 
Economic conditions in Puerto Rico 
Let me turn to economic conditions in Puerto Rico. As you are well aware, the news has not 
been good. Puerto Rico’s economy has been in a slump for nearly a decade. After declining 
for five straight years, real (inflation-adjusted) gross national product (GNP) rose 0.9 percent 
in  fiscal  year  2012  and  only  0.3  percent  in  2013,  rates  considerably  below  the  respective 
U.S.  mainland  growth  rates.  A  monthly  index  produced  by  the  Government  Development 
Bank  for  Puerto  Rico  paints  a  similar  picture  of  an  economy  that  has  stabilized  but  at  a 
depressed  level.  We  are  finally  beginning  to  see  some  signs  of  improvement  in  economic 
activity on the Island, though there is little evidence to suggest that the strong recovery that 
we seek has yet taken hold. 
Puerto  Rico’s  labor  market  remains  weak.  Overall  payroll  employment  fell  by  about 
10 percent  between  2006  and  2010  and  has  leveled  off  since  then.  Employment  in  the 
private sector has been increasing modestly, with some notable pockets of relatively brisk job 
creation in leisure and hospitality, professional and business services and private education 
and health services – employment in each of these sectors now far exceeds its prerecession 
levels. Cutbacks in government employment, however, have largely offset the private-sector 
gains realized over the past few years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Low labor force participation rates and high unemployment rates remain perhaps the biggest 
challenges to the Puerto Rico economy. Our earlier report cited low labor force participation 
among  younger  and  less  educated  workers  as  one  important  factor  limiting  the  Island’s 
competitiveness. Since that report, overall labor force participation has continued to decline. 
The unemployment rate on the Island has consistently exceeded the rate on the mainland by 
several percentage points. Although the rate has fallen by more than a full percentage point 
year  to  date,  the  gap  with  the  mainland  remains  wide.  Moreover,  poor  labor  market 
opportunities for many workers have contributed to a significant increase in the rate of out-
migration of Puerto Rico’s residents, accelerating the Island’s population decline. 
The  prolonged  period  of  weak  economic  growth  has  compounded  Puerto  Rico’s  fiscal 
problems: Puerto Rico’s public sector debt has been on an upward trend for a decade. The 
stagnation of the economy and persistent fiscal deficits underlie this debt buildup. The level 
of outstanding debt as a percentage of the Island’s annual GNP, a ratio used by many fiscal 
analysts, rose from about 60 percent in 2000 to more than 100 percent in 2013. Debt ratios 
in this range can inhibit economic growth in that they generally lead to higher financing costs, 
which in turn, can lead to constraints on access to further financing. The recent downgrading 
of Puerto Rico’s public debt to non-investment grade was a clear signal that the current fiscal 
situation poses serious risks to the Island’s economic future. 
Steps toward fiscal sustainability 
Next, I will discuss the buildup of Puerto Rico’s public debt and then provide some thoughts 
on ways to improve the Island’s fiscal health. To open this discussion, it is worth noting some 
key  features  of  Puerto  Rico’s  fiscal  institutional  environment.  The  Commonwealth  has  a 
close relationship with the U.S. government which, in many ways, is analogous to that of a 
mainland state. Puerto Rico shares a common market and a common currency with the U.S. 
mainland  leading  to  strong  economic  interdependencies.  Federal  aid  is  a  major  source  of 
revenue for the Commonwealth and Puerto Rican residents participate in large U.S. social 
insurance  programs  such  as  Social  Security  and  Medicare.  In  addition,  Puerto  Rican  debt 
trades as a municipal security in the U.S. capital markets, and much of the interest earned on 
this  debt  is exempt  from  local,  state  and  federal  income  taxes,  regardless  of  where  in  the 
U.S. the investor lives. And like all but one state, Vermont, Puerto Rico has a self-imposed 
requirement to balance its budget. 
In  many  ways,  however,  the  Commonwealth  operates  more  independently  than  other 
jurisdictions on the mainland. Residents of Puerto Rico, unlike those of the states, do not pay 
U.S. personal income taxes unless they are employed by the U.S. government. The many 
large  public  corporations  on  the  Commonwealth’s  balance  sheet  also  distinguish  it  from 
many  states,  although  some  states  –  New  York  is  an  example  –  also  house  a  number  of 
public  corporations  and  authorities.  Finally,  a  notable  difference  from  other  mainland 
jurisdictions  is  that  Puerto  Rico’s  balanced  budget  requirement,  while  found  in  the 
constitution  and  relatively  stringent  in  form,  appears  not  to  have  been  effective  in 
constraining the growth of the Commonwealth’s debt. 
The  debt  buildup  reflects,  in  part,  some  of  these  unique  features  of  Puerto  Rico’s  fiscal 
institutions, policies and practices. In particular, the public sector in Puerto Rico comprises 
not only the Commonwealth government but also the municipal governments and a number 
of  public  corporations.  Prominent  among  these  public  corporations  are  the  Puerto  Rico 
Electric  Power  Authority  (PREPA),  the  Puerto  Rico  Highway  and  Transportation  Authority 
(PRHTA),  and  the  Puerto  Rico  Aqueduct  and  Sewer  Authority  (PRASA).  The  public 
corporations are especially important both for the role they have played in issuing debt as 
well as the scale of the public services they provide to the Island’s population. Currently, they 
account for almost 40 percent of the Island’s total debt and have been responsible for much 
of the debt buildup – of the roughly 43 percentage point increase in the debt-to-GNP ratio 
between  2000  and  2013,  the  public  corporations  accounted  for  almost  85  percent  of  that 
increase. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Several measures put the Island’s weak fiscal condition into perspective. Total public debt in 
Puerto Rico is quite high – roughly 100 percent of GNP. This is far higher than in any U.S. 
mainland state; among the states, the highest ratio is New York at 29 percent.2 
However, since most Puerto Ricans do not pay federal income taxes, the large federal debt 
burden could arguably be considered not to be a burden to Puerto Rico, in contrast to the 
mainland states. Ranking the states and Puerto Rico with the federal debt burden added for 
the mainland states, but excluded for Puerto Rico, pushes Puerto Rico down to 14th in the 
rankings. However, even with this adjustment Puerto Rico still has a high debt burden. 
In  addition  to  the  growing  stock  of  publicly  issued  debt,  Puerto  Rico  faces  large  future 
contingent liabilities via unfunded pension system liabilities. While the Commonwealth has a 
variety  of  options  for  managing  these  liabilities,  they  are  nonetheless  obligations  that  are 
relevant in assessing the Commonwealth’s overall balance sheet. 
It seems likely that any country in a similar debt situation to Puerto Rico would have faced 
difficulty in continuing to raise money in the bond market and would have faced questions 
about the sustainability of its debt level. Debt sustainability is generally defined as a condition 
where  government  debt  is  at  a  reasonable  level  –  one  with  acceptable  risks  to  market 
confidence  and  long-term  economic  growth  –  and  is  not  on  a  path  to  increase  indefinitely 
relative to some measure of national income. Stabilizing Puerto Rico’s debt as a share of the 
Island’s income and then reducing its debt to more sustainable levels should be a key goal of 
the Island’s fiscal and economic policy. While the precise path toward lower debt burden is 
uncertain, the trend is largely determined by the interaction of three factors: the government’s 
fiscal policy, the growth rate of the economy and the interest rate on the public debt. 
Regarding  the  buildup  of  new  public  debt,  the  Commonwealth  government  has  stated  its 
intention  that  the  general  fund  budget  will  be  balanced  in  fiscal  year  2015.  This  intention, 
together with the stance of not using deficit financing to support public corporations, should 
greatly  limit  the  issuance  of  new  debt.  The  measures  put  in  place  during  this  year  have 
already had some success in cutting the projected budget gap for the current fiscal year. 
But what other steps can be taken to move the Island toward fiscal health? Let me start by 
saying  that  Puerto  Rico  is  not  alone  in  facing  fiscal  problems  like  these.  Governments 
frequently  find  that  public  sector  management  becomes  especially  challenging  when  their 
economies are undergoing major transitions of the sort that have been taking place in Puerto 
Rico  in  the  last  decade.  In  the  mainland  U.S.,  cities  like  New  York,  Washington  and 
Philadelphia  experienced  major  fiscal  stresses  as  they  adjusted  to  the  transition  from 
manufacturing to service-based economies. Those cities faced market pressures not unlike 
those facing the Commonwealth today, and when their leadership tackled the issues head-
on,  the  cities  emerged  stronger.  The  problems  that  these  cities  faced  required  the 
government  and  the  private  sector  to  work  together  to  find  solutions.  In  all  cases  that 
required  important  changes  and  sacrifices.  This  was  most  effective  when  the  necessary 
adjustments were shared broadly rather than concentrated on a single group. 
In the spirit of assisting the Commonwealth in this endeavor, I want to preview how these 
issues appear to me, and to suggest some steps for improving fiscal outcomes on the Island. 
I present these ideas in order to solicit your input, based on your deeper understanding of the 
situation.  I  present  them  not  as  quick  fixes  –  as  there  are  no  quick  fixes  to  these  fiscal 
situations – but as changes to financial practices that over the next several years can help to 
restore fiscal health to the Island. 
The first step would be for the Commonwealth government to reinvigorate its efforts to raise 
economic  growth.  While  Puerto  Rico  has  a  number  of  features  that  make  it  a  potentially 
                                                 
2   The debt figures reported for the U.S. mainland states refer to debt held by the public and exclude debt held 
by government agencies. Most Puerto Rico debt is held by the public. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  strong  economy,  economic  growth  on  the  Island  has  been  weak  for  almost  a  decade.  To 
restore growth and raise living standards, it is critically important for policymakers to expand 
efforts to marshal the Island’s considerable strengths – a bilingual and well-educated adult 
population,  an  open  economy  occupying  a  central  position  in  the  Caribbean,  a  wide 
experience  as  a  host  to  multinational  corporations,  and  close  ties  to  the  U.S.  mainland 
economy. 
While the challenges to restoring growth are clearly complex, I want to highlight some key 
areas where policies to support efficiency and growth might be strengthened. First, barriers 
to job creation and active participation in the labor market should be reduced. The current 
structure  of  labor  market  incentives  could  be  examined  to  ensure  that  firms  do  not  face 
significant hurdles in creating jobs and workers are not discouraged from entering the labor 
force. Second, policymakers should continue their efforts to create a more dynamic business 
environment,  including  the  elimination  of  unnecessary  costs  of  setting  up  and  operating  a 
business,  particularly  with  respect  to  energy  costs.  Third,  economic  development  efforts 
should consider a more proactive approach to utilizing the Island’s educated workforce and 
well-established higher education system. One possibility is to look for ways to expand the 
support for the formation of partnerships between higher education and industry, which have 
proven  to  be  effective  ways  for  regions  to  promote  innovation,  entrepreneurship  and 
economic growth. Puerto Rico has many of the ingredients in place to harness the benefits of 
these industry-education partnerships and policymakers should begin to look for promising 
opportunities for mutually beneficial collaboration. 
A  second  step  is  to  comprehensively  reform  the  Commonwealth’s  tax  system,  which  is 
heavily  dependent  on  income  taxes  and  tends  to  levy  high  rates  on  narrow  bases.  When 
rates  are  high,  it  increases  incentives  for  activities  to  be  shielded  from  taxes,  perhaps  by 
moving  activity  to  the  informal  sector,  or  perhaps  by  halting  the  activity  altogether.  Either 
way,  collecting  the  necessary  revenue  requires  rates  to  be  even  higher  on  activities  that 
remain in the base, reinforcing the problem. Typically, comprehensive reform is necessary to 
break  the  cycle  by  simultaneously  broadening  the  tax  base  and  reducing  rates  across  a 
range  of  taxes.  Such  a  reform  would  likely  produce  a  significant  bonus  in  terms  of  faster 
economic growth, particularly in the formal sector. 
A  third  step  would  be  to  improve  the  Commonwealth’s  financial  reporting.  Puerto  Rico’s 
unique  status  means  that  it  is  one  of  few  jurisdictions  whose  finances  are  not  regularly 
surveyed by a public agency. The U.S. Census Bureau reports annually on mainland state 
finances and the International Monetary Fund generally reports on the finances of nations. 
These surveys provide significant transparency into the finances of those entities, which is 
invaluable for policymakers and citizens wishing to understand, monitor and exert control and 
discipline over the fiscal policies of their governments. They may also serve the purpose of 
increasing  investor  understanding  of  how  the  Commonwealth’s  finances  compare  to  other 
governments. 
New York City’s experience in the 1970s shows the value of better financial reporting. Prior 
to  the  City’s  fiscal  crisis  in  1975  through  1977,  New  York  had  relatively  poor  financial 
reporting  practices.  As  part  of  its  recovery  from  that  crisis,  and  a  condition  of  accessing 
credit, the City’s reporting improved dramatically and has since won several awards. Along 
with those improvements, the City’s access to credit markets steadily improved. Economic 
research  indicates  that  more  transparent  budgets  are  associated  with  lower  public  sector 
funding costs. 
A fourth step would be to look for ways to strengthen the performance of public corporations. 
A  major  difference  between  Puerto  Rico’s  balance  sheet  and  those  of  the  states  is  the 
presence of large, heavily indebted, corporate-like entities that continue to lose money and 
increase borrowing. For any financial reform agenda to be successful, it must confront this 
issue head on. Key elements of a successful reform strategy might include strengthening the 
public corporations’ financial standing and controlling the future flow of liabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Puerto  Rico  could  also  seek  out  the  opportunity  to  benefit  from  outside  management 
expertise, including the wide experiences of U.S. mainland states. An independent regulator 
for  utilities  is  the  norm  throughout  mainland  states.  By  leveraging  the  expertise  and 
reputation  of  existing  independent  regulatory  agencies,  Puerto  Rico  may  improve  the 
efficiency of its public corporations while reassuring investors. 
As  a  fifth  step,  the  Commonwealth  could  benefit  from  adopting  fiscal  institutions more  like 
mainland  states.  Balanced  budget  rules  are  far  from  perfect,  but  by  following  the  states’ 
model  –  splitting  the  budget  into  an  operating  piece  that  must  be  balanced  and  a  capital 
piece that can be financed with debt – Puerto Rico could better align financing methods with 
its spending priorities. 
A sixth step is for the Commonwealth to implement a framework to help ensure that budget 
targets  are  met.  A  key  aspect  of  such  a  framework  would  require  that  the  authorities 
implement multi-year budgeting, in which revenue and expenditure plans are articulated over 
a three to five year horizon. Such a framework should also incorporate a review of the central 
government’s macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts by a non-partisan independent entity, the 
views  and  analysis  of  which  could  be  published  in  coordination  with  the  Commonwealth’s 
proposed  budget  for  any  given  fiscal  year.  New  York  City,  for  instance,  uses  this  type  of 
framework. 
The steps should be viewed as potential ways to improve Puerto Rico’s finances over time 
and I present them to you for consideration and discussion. The decisions are obviously up 
to you. Other countries, U.S. mainland states and municipalities facing similar fiscal issues 
have  been  able  to  overcome  them.  I  believe  the  Island  can  develop  a  strategy  that  will 
enable a return to fiscal health. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
