  Ignazio Visco: Accounting for the long-term costs of the recession 
Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the IEA-ISI Strategic Forum 
2014,  Final  Roundtable  “Accounting  for  the  long-term  costs  of  the  recession”,  Rome, 
23 September 2014. 
 1.  The  legacies  of  the  Great  Recession  are  many  and  multifaceted;  they  not  only  affect 
current  cyclical  developments,  but  may  also  have  permanent  bearings  on  our  economies. 
However,  today’s  difficulties  and  opportunities,  as  well  as  tomorrow’s  prospects,  are  the 
result  of  deep  underlying  forces  that  were  already  reshaping  the  functioning  of  the  world 
economy well before the Great Recession began. 
Crisis legacies for economic growth 
A. 
2. In advanced countries such as the US and the UK, GDP (imperfect an indicator as it may 
be,  especially  in  the  face  of  the  increasing  role  of  digitisation)  has  now  overtaken  its 
pre-crisis level: however, the growth rate remains lower than before 2008. In the euro area 
as a whole, current GDP still remains below its pre-crisis level, to which it might return late 
next  year.  It  should  also  be  underlined  that  the  weak  recovery  is  no  longer  confined 
exclusively to stressed countries of the area. 
3. What is more worrying is that the crisis may have left lasting scars. The high correlation 
between  the  increase  in  estimated  output  gaps  since  2007  and  the  fall  in  the  (estimated) 
growth rates of potential output suggests that lower investment and higher unemployment (or 
under-employment) may have had an impact extending well beyond the current cycle. 
4.  This  is  particularly  worrisome  for  countries  with  high  public  debts,  whose  sustainability 
requires a return to steady economic growth, and which may also suffer, as is presently the 
case  in  the  euro  area,  from  excessive  disinflation.  And  this  is  why  structural  reforms  and 
accommodative monetary policy are so much in demand these days. 
5. That the legacies of the crisis go well beyond the short term is best epitomized by ongoing 
talks about risks of hysteresis (the extent to which cyclical developments affect an economy’s 
longer-term  dynamics)  and  the  revival  (by  Larry  Summers)  of  Alvin  Hansen’s  1930s 
hypothesis of secular stagnation. In essence, this hypothesis relates to factors that generate 
permanently  higher  savings  and  lower  investment,  in  a  context  where  monetary  policy  is 
unable to reduce the real interest rate to the required (negative) equilibrium level because of 
the zero lower bound. 
6.  A  second  version  of  the  secular  stagnation  hypothesis,  more  than  focussing  on  the 
demand  side,  contends  that  the  most  productivity-boosting  innovations  have  already  been 
invented.  Critics  of  this  version  reply  by  underlining  that  the  digital  revolution  has  yet  to 
deploy  its  effects  on  productivity  or  that  the  potential  from  frontier  research  fields  such  as 
robotics and genomics is powerful. 
the  world  economy  well  before 
Technological progress and the labour market 
B. 
7. This brings us to the role of technology, and to the other major structural forces that were 
changing 
the  Great  Recession:  globalisation  and 
demographic trends. 
8. The labour market is where we can best see the intertwining between structural changes 
and  effects  of  the  crisis.  The  latter  has  resulted  in  a  dramatic  increase  in  unemployment: 
although in the US and the UK the labour market has recovered, with unemployment rates 
back  to  around  6  percent,  in  the  euro  area  unemployment  remains  only  slightly  below  its 
peak  levels,  at  11.5  percent  in  July  2014.  In  Italy  the  unemployment  rate  has  more  than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  doubled from 6 to over 12 percent since 2007. Youth unemployment has shot up from 20 to 
over 40 percent. 
9. Furthermore, there is also a broader tendency in advanced countries of employment rates 
to decrease. Between 2007 and 2013 employment has fallen in the US from 72 to 67 percent 
of the working age population; in Italy from 59 to 56 percent (from 25 to 16 percent among 
the youth). 
10. The critical point, from a policy perspective, is to what extent the rise in unemployment is 
structural rather than cyclical. In principle, fighting the former is more difficult than sustaining 
aggregate  demand,  as  it  normally  implies  the  reallocation  of  labour  across  sectors  (and 
countries): many displaced workers may find that their skills are no longer in demand in the 
aftermath of the crisis. Long-term unemployment in the euro area doubled from the pre-crisis 
level,  to  over  6  percent  of  the  workforce.  Globalisation  and  technological  progress  are 
eroding labour demand in Europe. 
11. In the last two centuries, technological progress has generated widespread wealth and 
new  employment  opportunities.  Product  innovations  and  automation  may  have  caused  job 
losses  in  the  innovative  sectors  in  the  short  term,  but  quickly  created  new  employment 
opportunities  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  in  a  virtuous  sequence  of  cost  reductions  and 
productivity increases, income growth, increased demand for new goods and services. 
12.  Today,  however,  while  recognizing  the  great  benefits  for  society  as  a  whole  that 
technological progress generates in the longer term, a distinctive property of the innovations 
triggered  by  the  digital  revolution  is  being  emphasized:  the  high  speed  with  which  new 
technologies  tend  to  reduce  the  use  of  labour,  with  a  major  impact,  both  qualitative  and 
quantitative, on employment. In other words, “technological unemployment” is placed among 
the various driving forces behind the currently high unemployment rates and sluggish wage 
and income developments. 
13. New information and communication technologies are complementary to managerial and 
intellectual  jobs  but  provide  a  substitute  for  more  routine  jobs.  The  ICT  revolution  has 
resulted, in the US and in other countries, in a polarisation of professions, with job increases 
concentrated either in the low-paying service sector or in the high-paying, highly educated 
job positions, at the expense of the middle-skilled jobs. Furthermore, there are expectations 
that automation in the future will lead to a new wave of technological revolution not only from 
areas  such  as  robotics  or  genomics  but  also  from  artificial  intelligence  developments  that 
may further challenge the demand for both lower- and higher-skilled jobs. 
14.  Given  the  country’s  specialisation  in  traditional  products,  Italy  has  so  far  suffered  the 
most from the impact of globalisation, and the ensuing surge of competition from emerging 
markets,  rather  than  from  technology.  But  Italy  is  of  course  not  immune  to  the  challenges 
posed  by  technology.  A frequently  cited  2013  study  by  Oxford  University  economists,  Carl 
Frey and Michael Osborne, estimates that 47 percent of current jobs in the US would be at 
risk of being automated possibly in a decade or two. By applying the risks of computerisation 
generated  by  this  work  to  data  on  European  employment,  estimates  have  been  recently 
extended to European countries in a recent paper by Bruegel’s fellow Jeremy Bowles. With 
all the caveats that such suggestive exercise necessarily requires, Italy finds itself among the 
countries where a larger number of jobs would be vulnerable to computerisation: 56 percent 
versus 51 percent for Germany, 50 for France, 47 for the UK. We may not yet have seen the 
full impact of technological innovation. 
Investment 
C.  
15. This consideration must be seen against the substantial slowdown in the accumulation of 
capital since the crisis erupted. Public and private real investment fell in Italy by over 30 and 
25  percent,  respectively,  between  2007  and  2013,  well  above  the  already  high  average of 
20 percent recorded for the euro area as a whole. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16.  Despite  the  low  interest  rates  allowed  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy, 
widespread  uncertainty  about  prospective  demand  growth  and  the  deleveraging  by  over-
indebted  firms  have  held  back  private  investment.  In  stressed  euro-area  countries,  these 
difficulties  have  been  compounded  by  limited  access  to  credit,  because  of  balance  sheet 
repair  in  the  banking  sector,  and  the  increased  cost  of  capital,  owing  to  financial 
fragmentation.  Fiscal  consolidation  has  often  implied  massive  cuts  in  public  investment, 
which may cast a shadow on potential future output. 
17.  Investment  is  the  linkage  between  today’s  demand  and  tomorrow’s  supply.  Reviving 
investment – public and private, national and European – would thus go a long way towards 
addressing  both  cyclical  weaknesses  and  structural  challenges  to  future  potential  growth. 
Indeed,  as  it  has  been  suggested  inter  alia  by  Barry  Eichengreen,  lack  of  investment  in 
infrastructure, education and training is another possible source of secular stagnation. 
Concluding remarks 
D.  
18. In many respects, we are travelling through unchartered territories. Refocusing economic 
policies on sustaining aggregate demand, in particular stimulating investment, is a necessity. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  forces  of  technological  progress  imply  that  much  of  capital 
accumulation may further save on labour inputs. Be it the legacy of the Great Recession or 
the  outcome  of  more  engrained  trends,  some  of  our  traditional  policy  tools  appear  to  be 
increasingly ineffective. 
19. Central banking has devised new innovative ways to respond to the crisis. Much closer 
attention is now being paid to the responsibilities of monetary policy for financial stability and, 
more generally, to interactions and possible conflicts between policies that foster price and 
financial  stability.  Macro-prudential  policies  now  feature  highly  on  the  agenda  of  financial 
authorities. With policy rates in major advanced economies virtually at the zero lower bound, 
unconventional monetary policies are increasingly considered. 
20. Yet, the main challenge is posed by the developments in the real economy. It is here that 
we must exercise our ingenuity. The business environment must be made more conducive to 
private  investment.  And investment  in  infrastructures  has to  return  to  be  high  in  the  policy 
agenda. In the euro area, policies should aim at keeping the cost of capital low, developing 
capital market sources of finance to complement bank loans, implementing structural reforms 
to  improve  expectations  of  more  favourable  aggregate  demand  going  forward,  reducing 
policy uncertainty. 
21. In Italy, the most urgent interventions are those which safeguard legality and efficiency in 
public administration. To repeat what I said last May in my concluding remarks to the Bank of 
Italy’s  meeting  of  shareholders:  “Corruption,  criminal  activity  and  tax  evasion  not  only 
undermine  the  community  but  also  distort  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents  and  market 
prices, reduce the effectiveness of government action, increase the tax burden on those who 
do  their  duty,  and  restrict  productive  investment  and  job  creation.  Well-functioning  public 
administration improves the operation of markets and competition, reduces firms’ costs, and 
is reflected in the quality and cost of public services and thus on the tax burden. The efficacy 
of the reforms depends on it.” 
22. These policy actions should not be eluded. For them to be effective, they must be seen 
as  a  part  of  a  fully-fledged  strategic  reasoning  on  the  prospective  functioning  of  our 
economies.  More  generally,  while  we  try  to  better  understand  the  challenges  posed  by 
structural  and  technological  change,  there  are questions  that  it  is fundamental  to  address. 
Among them: How should the education system adapt to enable the teaching of those skills 
essential  to  keep  up  with  new  technologies?  How  can  we  enable  displaced  workers  to 
acquire  skills  which  will  not  become,  or  are  less  likely  to  become,  redundant  through 
computerisation? How can public policy smooth the social impact of technological progress 
and allow a wider distribution of its fruits?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
