William C Dudley: Risks of wholesale funding 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the workshop on the “Risks of Wholesale Funding”, 
New York City, 13 August 2014. 
 Michael  Fleming,  Jamie  McAndrews,  Susan  McLaughlin  and  Joseph  Tracy  contributed  to  preparing  these 
remarks. 
It is a pleasure to welcome you to the New York Fed today to discuss the important issue of 
wholesale funding. 
As  you  all  know,  the  financial  system  plays  an  essential  role  in  modern  economies,  and 
liquidity  is  in  turn  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  Because  financial 
intermediation is critical to economic activity and intermediation is dependent on funding and 
liquidity, disruption to funding and liquidity can cause severe damage to the economy. The 
experience  of  recent  years  revealed  serious  flaws  in  the  system.  Risk  was  mispriced  and 
there  was  a  build-up  of  excesses  before  the  crisis.  Structural  weaknesses  in  the  financial 
system then amplified the effect of the sharp decline in U.S. house prices, and the result was 
a widespread financial crisis and a deep recession both here and abroad. 
The extensive use by financial firms of short-term wholesale funding was one critical factor in 
the crisis. Not only did this reliance on short-term funding create the potential for a firm to fail 
in an extraordinarily rapid manner when faced with a loss of market confidence, but it also 
served  as  a  channel  through  which  the  effects  of  those  failures  were  widely  propagated 
throughout the broader financial system. 
I will focus my brief remarks on describing the structural vulnerabilities associated with short-
term wholesale funding, laying the groundwork for our discussions at today’s workshop. 
As  always,  my  remarks  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
As  this  audience  knows,  in  the  two  decades  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  global 
financial system underwent a rapid transformation. During this period, there was a shift from 
bank-based financial intermediation to capital markets-based financial intermediation, and an 
increase in the scale and complexity of securitization activities. 
In  the  pre-crisis  period,  the  growth  of  securitization  was  accompanied  by  an  increasing 
reliance on short-term funds raised in wholesale markets to finance securities and activities 
essential to securitization. This ranged from the use of repo funding to finance inventories of 
securities  held  for  market-making  purposes  to  the  issuance  of  asset-backed  commercial 
paper by conduits created to acquire and hold securities. 
Both demand and supply factors drove the increased use of short-term wholesale finance. 
On  the  supply  side,  the  growth  of  savings  from  corporations  and  institutional  investors  in 
need of deposit-like products in which to place their cash balances created a plentiful source 
of funds. These products were viewed as “safe” since, after all, the funds were only exposed 
for a short period of time, and in the case of repo, they were secured by collateral. On the 
demand  side,  setting  aside  any  possible  instabilities  in  this  funding  source,  it  was  more 
profitable to use shorter-term funds to finance longer-term assets. 
In fact, the growing reliance on short-term wholesale funding to finance longer-term assets 
increased liquidity and maturity mismatch risk in the financial system. This was particularly 
dangerous  because  many  of  the  assets  being  financed  were  structured-credit  products, 
some of which were opaque, difficult to value and illiquid. In periods of market stress, these 
features increase the run risk by funding providers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1
  Short-term funding of longer-term assets is inherently unstable, especially in the presence of 
information  and  coordination  problems.  It  can  be  rational  for  a  funding  provider  to  supply 
funds  on  a  short-term  basis,  reasoning  that  it  can  exit  if  there  is  any  uncertainty  over  the 
firm’s continued ability to roll over its funding from other sources. But, if the use of short-term 
funding becomes sufficiently widespread, the firm’s roll-over risk increases. In this situation, 
there is a strong incentive for each lender to “run” early if there is any uncertainty that could 
undermine the borrower’s ability to continue to roll over its funding from other sources. This is 
the  case  even  if  the  provider  of  funds  believes  that  the  borrower  would  remain  solvent  as 
long as it retained access to funding on normal terms. The cost of running when it turns out 
to be unnecessary is small relative to the cost of not running when it turns out to be prudent. 
Of course, this insight is not a new one. Prior to the establishment of a lender of last resort 
and  retail  deposit  insurance  for  banks  –  which  came  with  the  quid  pro  quo  of  prudential 
regulation – bank runs were a regular and disruptive feature of our financial system. These 
innovations solved the coordination problem and stabilized this source of funding. 
What was new prior to the crisis was the extent to which maturity transformation and financial 
intermediation  had  migrated  outside  of  commercial  banks.  The  growth  of  what  we  call  the 
shadow banking system occurred largely without the types of safeguards – robust prudential 
regulation, deposit insurance, lender of last resort – that have safeguarded the commercial 
banking  system  from  the  types  of  widespread  panics  and  runs  that  are  capable  of 
destabilizing the financial system. The systemic risk created by this gap in coverage was not 
well recognized by regulators or the private sector prior to the global financial crisis. Market 
participants had little incentive to internalize the negative externality of the run-risk created by 
their collective choice of finance, and they made erroneous assumptions about the liquidity of 
asset markets and the capacity and willingness of banks to distribute central bank liquidity to 
the wider financial system during periods of stress. 
Because  the  boom  years  resulted  in  strong  earnings,  low  price  volatility  and  few  credit 
losses,  firms  were  able  to  operate  at  extreme  levels  of  leverage.  When  housing  prices 
started to decline, the vulnerabilities of this type of business model soon became apparent. 
Heavy  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  exposed  the  system  to  a  series  of 
intertwined downward spirals in asset and funding markets. This spread in waves. It began in 
the market for asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) issued by off-balance-sheet conduits, 
and spread via auction-rate securities to the repo, money market and financial commercial 
paper markets that formed the core financing for market-based financial intermediation. 
Initial  declines  in  asset  prices  especially  for  mortgage  related  assets  forced  leveraged 
holders  with  maturity  mismatches  to  sell  assets.  This  increased  price  volatility  and  further 
reduced the value of the assets that collateralized other firms’ borrowings. Higher volatility 
led banks and secured lenders to raise margins, while concern about counterparty risk and 
their own funding needs made banks reluctant to on-lend liquidity. 
The  resulting  higher  margins  on  repo  and  increased  collateral  calls  due  to  credit  ratings 
downgrades  reduced  the  quantity  of  assets  that  could  be  financed  in  repo  markets  and 
elsewhere, prompting further asset sales. As wholesale investors started to exit, this set in 
motion  a  bad  dynamic  –  a  fire  sale  of  assets  that  cut  into  earnings  and  capital.  This 
increased the incentives of investors to run and for banks to hoard liquidity against the risk 
that they could themselves face a run. This downward spiral of fire sales and funding runs 
was a key feature of the financial crisis. 
The  inherent  fragility  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  was  greatly  aggravated  by  certain 
institutional shortcomings in these markets, particularly in the structure of the tri-party repo 
system and the U.S. money market mutual fund business. 
Through the tri-party repo market, each day the two large clearing banks were providing a 
large amount of intraday credit to securities firms to facilitate the daily “unwind” of the prior 
day’s transactions. In the run-up to the crisis, the daily “unwind” helped make tri-party repo 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  look  like  a  very  liquid  investment  while  still  being  an  apparently  highly  durable  source  of 
funding.  This  masked  the  underlying  risks  and  contributed  to  weak  risk  management 
practices. 
As the concerns about the U.S. housing market escalated in 2007, participants in the tri-party 
repo  market  became  increasingly  concerned  about  the  liquidity  and  credit  risks  that  they 
faced. The clearing banks became uncomfortable with their large intraday exposures to their 
clients – broker-dealers, thrifts and others. If the risk that a client might fail became too high, 
a  clearing  bank  could  decide  not  to  unwind  that  client’s  trades  in  the  morning,  leaving  its 
investors  with  the  collateral.  Most  of  these  investors  lacked  the  operational  or  financial 
capacity to take possession of collateral and liquidate it in a gradual manner to recoup their 
investment; they had a strong incentive to run at the first sign of trouble to avoid getting stuck 
with the dealer’s collateral. Alternatively, if a client were to fail suddenly after the mornings 
unwind, then the clearing bank would be stuck with huge loans to these counterparties that 
could have put their own viability at risk, backed by securities that were not necessarily high 
quality and liquid. 
The “breaking the buck” by the Reserve Fund following the Lehman bankruptcy also made it 
clear that the monies provided to the money market mutual funds by their own investors were 
also inherently unstable. This made such funds, in turn, an unreliable source of finance in 
repo, commercial paper and other markets. Investors in a fixed net asset value (NAV) money 
market  fund  could  take  their  money  out  on  a  daily  basis  at  par  value,  with  no  redemption 
penalty. This could occur even if the money market fund did not have sufficient cash or liquid 
assets that it could easily sell to meet all potential redemptions. As with bank deposits prior 
to deposit insurance, this created an incentive for investors to be the first to get out whenever 
there was any uncertainty over the underlying value of the assets in the fund. By being first in 
line, they could exit while the fund could still repay at par, leaving others to bear any losses. 
The longer the investor waited, the greater the risk that the fund would be forced into the fire 
sale of assets to meet redemptions and end up breaking the buck. 
As the crisis unfolded, the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury and others took a series of 
actions to contain the spiral of funding runs and asset fire sales. First, the traditional lender of 
last  resort  function  was  strengthened  through  the  introduction  of  the  Term  Auction  Facility 
(TAF) and foreign exchange swaps with foreign central banks. 
Then,  as  the  crisis  intensified,  the  lender  of  last  resort  liquidity  provision  was  extended  to 
directly  backstop  key  wholesale  funding  markets  and  made  available  to  certain  nonbank 
firms. The Federal Reserve created a direct backstop to the tri-party repo system through the 
Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  (PDCF).  When  the  Reserve  Fund  broke  the  buck  after  the 
failure of Lehman Brothers, precipitating a run on money market mutual funds, the Treasury 
guaranteed  money  market  fund  assets  and  the  Fed  introduced  the  Asset-Backed 
Commercial  Paper  Money  Market  Fund  Liquidation  Facility  (AMLF).  The  Fed  also 
backstopped the commercial paper market (formerly funded in large part by money market 
mutual  funds)  by  introducing  the  Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  (CPFF).  When 
wholesale funding for non-residential mortgage securitizations evaporated, the Fed rolled out 
the Term Asset-Backed Lending Facility (TALF). 
These actions ultimately stabilized funding markets and crowded back in private funds. But, 
they were an emergency response, not a sustainable long-term solution. After all, because 
most of the special Fed liquidity facilities were authorized under Section 13.3 of the Federal 
Reserve Act, they were required to be temporary in nature and to end when times were no 
longer “unusual and exigent.” 
Much  has  been  done  over  the  past  few  years  to  mitigate  the  structural  flaws  that  make 
wholesale funding a point of weakness in the global financial system. The New York Fed, for 
example, has led a Federal Reserve effort to make the tri-party repo system more resilient to 
stress, while the SEC has taken steps to address risks associated with money market mutual 
funds.  Nonetheless,  some  important  issues  and  vulnerabilities  remain.  Moreover,  because 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the Dodd-Frank Act raised the hurdle for the Federal Reserve to exercise its Section 13.3 
emergency lending authority, extraordinary interventions will be more difficult to undertake, 
perhaps causing investors to be even more skittish in the future. This is why it is essential to 
make  the  system  more  stable.  To  that  end,  I  look  forward  to  hearing  the  insights  and 
suggestions that come out of today’s workshop. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
