  Vítor Constâncio: Reflections on financial integration and stability 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Joint 
ECB-EC Conference on “Financial Integration and Stability in a New Financial Architecture”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 28 April 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear colleagues and friends, 
It is indeed a pleasure to participate in this joint presentation of two important policy reports: 
the European Commission’s European financial stability and integration report 2013 and the 
ECB’s Financial integration in Europe 2014 report. 
Both  studies  illustrate  that  some  steady,  albeit  uneven,  progress  is  being  made  towards 
financial  stabilisation.  Banks  are  reducing  their  liquidity  buffers,  repaying  our  LTROs  and 
regaining  confidence  from  the  markets.  Money  market  integration  is  slowly  improving, 
particularly in the secured segment. Quantity-based indicators confirm a stabilisation in bond 
markets and improved integration in equity markets. Given where we stood barely two years 
ago – on the edge of redenomination risks – such progress is encouraging. However, it does 
not mean we are entirely out of the danger zone. 
If  we  look  at  banking  markets,  there  is  still  a  large  dispersion  of  borrowing  costs  for  non-
financial  corporations  across  euro  area  countries.  Thus,  significant  financial  fragmentation 
still remains in the euro area. This is a concern for the recovery and also for monetary and 
macro-prudential policy. 
Under  the  pressure  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro 
area, several solutions – both global and European – have indeed been adopted. Stronger 
crisis prevention mechanisms are now in place and a new crisis management framework has 
been  developed.  We  have  financial  backstops.  A  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  a 
Single  Resolution  Framework  have  been  decided.  Most  of  the  countries  in  IMF/EU/ECB 
adjustment programmes are “graduating” successfully, and several other stressed countries 
are  implementing  structural  reforms  and financial  consolidation. These are  important  steps 
forward, towards a more stable and equitable functioning economic and monetary union. 
We have certainly turned a corner and stabilised the situation. It is an important achievement 
but it is not the end of the road as it is too soon to declare that the crisis is over. The euro 
area  still  faces  large  challenges  in  terms  of  lacklustre  growth,  excessive  unemployment, 
remaining fragmentation and a low inflation period that threatens to aggravate the burden of 
the  debt  overhang  still  besetting  governments  and  private  economic  agents.  That  the 
stressed countries were able to restore fundamental equilibria, like their external accounts, 
and  to  resume  positive  economic  growth  is  of  great  importance.  However,  we  face  now 
structural medium term challenges that impair the European potential growth rate. 
In my remarks today I will concentrate on issues such as the changing financial integration 
and  financial  stability  nexus,  on  how  to  restore a  sound  and  resilient  financial  system  and 
finally on the need to improve our analytical tools and policy instruments. 
Banks mirror their environment but also contribute to shaping it in many respects 
When the crisis struck, a significant part of the banking system in several countries had to be 
kept alive by public capital injections and state guarantees; where strains on liquidity were 
present, the ECB provided a backstop in its capacity as lender of last resort. At the height of 
the  crisis  several  banks 
they  were 
undercapitalised,  had  fragile  funding  structures  and,  in  retrospect,  many  had  engaged  in 
unsound lending practices. For years, banks in creditor and debtor nations had fuelled the 
large  vulnerabilities: 
themselves  with 
found 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  imbalances that so greatly contributed to the sovereign debt crisis. Several banks had thrived 
on  complex  structured  investments  whose  risks  were  not  well-understood,  and  a  small 
number  of  banks  had  become  immersed  in  dubious  acquisitions.  This  is  the  “banking 
narrative” of the crisis.1 
It is true that in some countries banks were also victimised by their sovereign, especially after 
2010  when  the  ratings  and  access  to  market  suffered  the  contagion  from  what  was 
happening  with  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  banks  generated 
instability and are now recognised as having been part of the problem. With the completion 
of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  phasing-in  of  a  sound  banking  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework and  the  strengthening  of  banks’  governance  and  ethical  standards, 
banks can become active parts of the solution to the crisis. 
Yet, these  are  necessary  but  insufficient  conditions  to  ensure  that  the banking  system  will 
again become a vibrant financial engine of growth. Why? Because, over long periods of time, 
the  soundness  and  resilience  of  banks  also  hinges  on  the  dynamism  of the  economy  and 
society: hence the habitat of banks also has to draw itself out of the crisis. The sustainability 
of public and private finances and the health of the broader financial system are also critical 
components in securing a successful and resilient banking system. 
The crisis has left a heavy, uneven structural legacy across the euro area 
As the earlier stages of this multi-layered financial crisis unfolded, it became apparent that 
several  banks  had  grown  far  too  large  for  their  economies,  making  the  fate  of  several 
governments  and  banks  ever  more  intertwined.  Fears  of  debt  unsustainability  in  Greece 
sparked  concerns  also  about  the  public  finances  and  financial  health  of  other  euro  area 
countries.  Some  speak  of  a  twin  crisis  of  “two  debt  overhangs”.  Others  speak  of  the 
“sovereign-bank nexus”: they are all referring to the same phenomenon.2  
That was when the “doom loop” between weak sovereigns and weak banks took hold to full 
effect  and  when  the  flaws  in  the  design  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  became 
most  damaging.3 While  significant  progress  has been  made  towards rectifying governance 
failings and design flaws, the burden of the crisis on sovereigns, households and banks is 
considerable and unevenly distributed. 
Today, growth is low in many countries that are also overwhelmed by high unemployment, 
especially  among  the  youth.  The  general  situation  of  lack  of  internal  demand  when  some 
external markets start also to decelerate, explains that investment is still almost 20 per cent 
below what it was in 2007 which affects our potential growth. A declining demography and 
insufficient progress in total factor productivity, further limit Europe´s growth capabilities and 
make  it  more  difficult  the  absorption  of  the  existing  high  unemployment.  Such  dynamics 
thwart the deleveraging process of sovereigns and households, and complicate the return of 
bank balance sheets to financial health.4 
In my view, the legacy of the crisis constitutes still a vulnerability for the transition process to 
a more effective and robust EMU. It stokes scepticism, which itself impedes the solutions to 
                                                
1  Constâncio (2013), “Fragmentation and rebalancing in the euro area”, Joint EC-ECB Conference on Financial 
Integration, Brussels, 25 April 2013. 
2  See Schoenmaker and Wagner (2011), “The impact of cross-border banking on financial stability”, Duisenberg 
School of Finance – Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, TI 11–054/DSF 18. 
3  See  Shambaugh,  Reis  and  Rey,  “The  euro’s  three  crises”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Spring 
2012, pp. 157–231. 
4  See Constâncio, “Growing out of the crisis: Is fixing finance enough?”, speech delivered at the Annual Hyman 
P. Minsky Conference on the State of the US and World Economies, Washington D.C., 10 April 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  crisis.5  The  situation  had  long  required  bold  institutional  reforms  to  the  design  of 
monetary union and we should praise the European Commission for having quickly prepared 
proposals for a Banking Union in 2012. 
The banking union must be instrumental in resolving the crisis 
In my view, the banking union must be instrumental in resolving the crisis and unravelling its 
legacy. It is the crucial node to secure both financial integration and stability. The reason is 
clear. In the euro area, about 75% of the real economy’s financing needs still originate from 
the banking sector. What is more, banks are crucial counterparties in the broader system of 
financial  intermediation.  Therefore,  the  importance  of  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  creating  a  level  playing  field  for  all  banks  across  Europe  cannot  be 
overemphasized.6 
A  relevant  part  of  this  endeavour  is  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  bank´s  balance-
sheets that will precede the beginning of the supervisory tasks by the ECB/SSM. Aiming at 
completing  the  balance-sheet  repair  of  the  banks  subject  to  the  SSM  it  will  improve  their 
capital and solvency position. In spite of the recent credit negative behaviour being mostly 
the  result  of  lack  of  demand,  the  enhanced  robustness  of  banks  will  overcome  remaining 
credit supply restrictions that could hamper the recovery. 
This process of repairing the banking system is only one part of the challenge policymakers 
face  in  Europe.  The  other,  more  fundamental  part  is  to  build  a  safer  and  more  resilient 
financial  sector  that  serves  the  real  economy.  This  is  ultimately  the  objective  of  the  next 
phase  of  banking  union:  building  a  single  European  supervisor  via  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM). 
There  are  four  ways  in  particular  I  expect  the  SSM  to  make  a  difference  to  banking  in 
Europe: by improving the quality of supervision; by creating a more homogenous application 
of  rules  and  standards;  by  improving  incentives  for  deeper  banking  integration;  and  by 
strengthening the application of macro-prudential policies. 
The SSM should create the conditions and incentives for deeper integration of the European 
banking market, which should in turn make the euro area less vulnerable to fragmentation. 
Barriers  that  existed  in  the  past  to  deeper  retail  banking  integration,  for  example  opaque 
supervisory  approval  procedures,  will  no  longer  be  relevant  with  a  single  European 
supervisor. The substantial compliance costs that came from having to observe different sets 
of rules and interact with several different authorities should also be reduced. 
At  the  same  time,  the  benefits  of  cross-border  integration  should  increase.  Cross-border 
banking  groups  will  be  able  to  optimise  their  internal  management  of  capital  and  liquidity. 
Further efforts to reduce fragmentation and a drive to achieve genuine banking integration 
can help Europe exit the crisis in at least three ways. First, more integrated banking markets 
intensify  competition:  banks,  as  well  as  other  financial  market  participants,  will  have  to 
change  their  strategies.  More  competition  means  that  capital  is  allocated  more  efficiently. 
This promotes access to new funding opportunities for companies, encourages investment 
and thus contributes to higher economic growth. Small and medium-sized enterprises without 
direct access to capital markets, in particular, may benefit the most from defragmentation. 
Second, for the ECB, a re-integrated banking sector will ease the transmission of monetary 
policy impulses and thus enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
                                                
5  See Mongelli, “The mutating euro area crisis – Is the balance between “sceptics” and “advocates” shifting?”, 
Occasional Paper Series, No 144, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, February 2013. 
6  See  Draghi,  “Financial  integration  and  banking  union”,  speech  delivered  at  the  conference  for  the 
20th anniversary of the establishment of the European Monetary Institute, Brussels, 12 February 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Third, in several monetary unions, genuine financial market integration helps smooth out the 
effects of asymmetric shocks. This mechanism of risk sharing can operate through income 
insurance, for example, when a country’s residents hold claims to dividends, interest or rental 
income from  investments  in  other  countries.7  In  the  US  this  form  of  risk-sharing  has  been 
shown to be more important than federal budget transfers. In the euro area, such risk sharing 
will need to assume an increasingly more important role, especially given the absence of a 
more significant central budget.8 
On the other hand, incomplete financial integration carries significant risks. As the crisis has 
demonstrated,  financial  integration  increased  the  risk  of  contagion,  without  in  parallel 
generating  adequate  risk-sharing  arrangements  to  offset  its  adverse  effects.  For  example, 
increased cross-border interbank funding was not accompanied by a sufficient diversification 
of investment risks. As a result, banks in some jurisdictions quickly accumulated significant 
exposures to local assets (such as real estate), and when the crisis hit, cross-border funding 
was  quickly  withdrawn  and  sizeable  losses  had  to  be  absorbed  within  national  borders. 
Looking ahead, lack of genuine financial integration and low resilience will always expose us 
to systemic risks. 
The crisis has also exposed our lack of some fundamental analytical tools and policy 
instruments 
The complexity and sequencing of the crisis, as  well as its morphing over time, have also 
exposed  our  weak  understanding  of  micro-  and  macro-fundamentals.  Here,  I  am  talking 
about basic notions, not only more advanced concepts and elements. 
Few economists saw the financial crisis coming, understood the serious risks generated by 
persistent imbalances and recognised the deep changes in economic structures and financial 
markets  that  were  under  way  during  the  build-up  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  With  EMU,  the  nature  of  prevalent  shocks  has 
changed to slow moving processes that are more difficult to tackle with the few adjustment 
mechanisms at the disposal of stressed countries. Facing this crisis, we were armed with a 
toolkit that was suited to a previous era: i.e., inadequate models and limited monitoring tools 
to support EMU. 
It is thus understandable that the crisis has also heralded a “renaissance of research”, with 
both  positive  and  normative  implications.  One  of  the  least  acknowledged  outcomes  of  the 
crisis  is  the  enrichment  of  our  professional  toolkit  to  conduct  economic,  monetary  and 
financial  analyses.  Existing  databases,  models,  analytical  tools  and  forecasting  and 
projection  apparatuses  have  been  overhauled  and  enhanced,  and  new  ones  have  been 
added. 
Through  our  Department  of  Research  we  have  invested  in  all  areas  of  micro-  and  macro-
research  that  are  directly  and  indirectly  beneficial  to  our  economic  and monetary  analysis. 
We  have  launched  research  initiatives  across  European  countries  to  understand  how 
economies  work  and  what  drives 
innovation,  productivity,  competitiveness,  growth, 
employment,  equality  and  so  on.  Let  me  mention  just  a  few  examples  of  such  initiatives 
undertaken by the ECB and the Eurosystem: 
• 
There  is  the  Competitiveness  Research  Network,  known  as  CompNet.  Its 
objective is to identify what drives the dynamics of competitiveness and productivity 
across  EU  countries  and  heterogeneous  firms,  and  relate  the  findings  to  policy 
                                                
7  See  van  Beers,  Bijlsma  and Zwart,  “Cross-country  insurance mechanisms  in  currency unions:  An  empirical 
assessment”, Bruegel Working Paper, 2014/04. 
8  See  Hepp  and  von  Hagen,  “Interstate  risk  sharing  in  Germany:  1970–2006”,  Oxford  Economic  Papers  65, 
2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    outcomes.  CompNet  has  already  assembled  millions  of  data  points  and 
observations  in  order  to  capture  “non-price  competitiveness”.  This  initiative  is 
already showing that we need to augment our analyses with a global value chains 
dimension, as the internationalisation of production matters. Had we had anything 
similar prior to the crisis we would have been in a better position to anticipate the 
effects of the propagation of the crisis along the supply chain. 
There is the Household Finance & Consumption Network (HFCN). Its objective 
is  to  conduct  surveys  to  collect  household-level  data  on  households’  income, 
expenditure, assets, debt and collateral. The data can then be aggregated to gauge 
a measure of distress of individual households and to calculate credit risk indicators, 
such  as  the  probability  of  default,  exposure  at  default  or  loss  given  default.  Such 
indicators can then be subject to stress tests for which a scenario can combine an 
unemployment shock with an interest rate shock and a house price shock. Had such 
data been available prior to the crisis, it would have facilitated the identification of 
household  borrowing  and  spending  exuberance  in  several  countries  at  an  earlier 
stage. 
There  is  the  Macro-prudential  Research  Network  (MaRs).  Its  objective  is  to 
develop  core  conceptual  frameworks,  models  and  tools  that  provide  research 
support  in  order  to  improve  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  European  Union. 
The work performed under MaRs can yield more complex economic, financial and 
monetary indicators that can more adequately address the complexities inherent in 
the euro area. 
In  the  context  of  MaRs  and  also  resulting  from  work  in  our  own  Department  of 
Macroprudential  Policy  and  Financial  Stability,  we  have  developed  analytical  tools  that 
include,  for  instance,  early  warning  systems  that  can  go  to  the  level  of  individual  banks, 
decision tree risk models, structural VARs and Global VARs , contagion network models and 
top-down stress test models for banks. One of the least acknowledged outcomes of the crisis 
is the wealth of tools and models now available for conducting in-depth economic, monetary 
and  financial  stability  analyses.  Looking  at  on-going  developments,  we  are  better  able  to 
interpret the current situation and assess the fiscal and monetary stances. A good example 
of this improved understanding is the development of the SYNFINT, the Synthetic Financial 
Integration  Indicator,  presented  in  our  Report  and  that  is  based  on  measures  of  cross-
country  price  dispersion  in  the  money,  bond,  equity  and  banking  markets  in  euro  area 
countries. 
Looking  ahead,  we  are  also  better  equipped  to  warn  about  looming  systemic  risks  or 
adjustment failings, as well as to identify strengths.9 
Macro-prudential policy will have an important role to play 
One of the more important goals of the on-going research is the grounding and calibration of 
macroprudential instruments. The need for a macro-prudential perspective is one of the main 
lessons  stemming  from  the  crisis.  In  fact,  the  whole  regulatory  reform  after  the  crisis  was 
internationally  discussed  in  Basle  or  in  the  FSB  and  the  G20,  from  the  macro-prudential 
perspective. Indeed improving the design of Financial Regulation to ensure a resilient system 
is the first instrument of macro-prudential policy. 
I  see  macro-prudential  policy  as  particularly  important  for  the  single  currency,  as 
macroprudential tools can in principle allow policymakers to address financial imbalances in 
a more country-specific and granular way. 
                                                
9  See  Fecht,  Gruener  and  Hartmann,  “Financial  integration,  specialization  and  systemic  risk”,  Journal  of 
International Economics, Vol. 88, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  I acknowledge that we do not yet have a large body of evidence on the effectiveness of these 
policies,  especially  in  advanced  economies.  That  said,  the  studies  that  do  exist  tentatively 
support the conclusion that macro-prudential policy can be effective in the euro area. Asset-
side  measures  like  LTV,  LTI  and  DTI  in  particular  have  been  found  to  be  effective  in 
dampening real estate booms.10 As this was the sector at the heart of the crisis in several 
euro area countries, this is encouraging. Further research in this area is essential to help us 
better understand the impact and transmission channels of macro-prudential policies. 
Questions of effectiveness aside, where the SSM represents a major step forward in macro-
prudential policy, is in creating some centralisation of macro-prudential decision-making. The 
SSM Regulation gives the ECB the power to apply stricter macro-prudential measures than 
national authorities if it deems necessary. This allows us to take an integrated view of macro-
prudential policy – spillovers, arbitrage effects – and provides a safeguard against inaction 
bias at the national level. 
Moreover,  the  important  role  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  in  macro-prudential  decision-
making  allows  for  interactions  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  to  be 
internalised  and  synergies  to  be  exploited.  To  give  just  one  example,  several  of  the  non-
standard measures we have adopted during the crisis, such as changes in collateral haircuts 
or reserve requirements, might in certain cases overlap with macro-prudential measures like 
liquidity  ratios  and  margin  requirements.  This  suggests  that  macro-prudential  policies  can 
support us in fulfilling our mandate. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Since the launch of the euro, we have become more interconnected. Trade 
and  financial  links  have  deepened  further  and  most  companies  and  many  banks  have 
acquired a European perspective. We are, de facto, each other’s stakeholders. During the 
crisis  we  have  seen  how  what  happens  in  one  euro  area  country,  however  big  or  small, 
reverberates in all others. 
The crisis has partly reversed some integration but, as shown in the two reports, we are now 
witnessing a degree of financial market de-fragmentation and reintegration. 
We  are  also  waiting  for  more  sound  research  and  analysis  to  come  on  stream.  A  deeper 
understanding of the issues involved is paramount to making further progress on any one of 
the multitude of fronts that we still need to explore. So, to this end, it is with great pleasure 
that I now give the floor to our panellists for what I anticipate will be an in-depth and fruitful 
discussion on the state of financial integration after the experience of the financial crisis. 
                                                
10  For  a  review  see  Smets,  F.  (2013),  “Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  Interlinked?”, 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
