Deepak Mohanty: Financial regulation – which way forward? 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Economic Conclave on the theme “Indian Economy: Performance and Challenges”, Gokhale 
Institute of Politics and Economics, Pune, 15 February 2014. 
 The assistance provided by Dr. Saibal Ghosh in preparation of this paper is acknowledged. 
I  thank  Prof.  Rajas  Parchure  for  inviting  me  to  this  Economic  Conclave  at  the  Gokhale 
Institute.  The  Conclave  has  brought  together  eminent  scholars  and  policy  practitioners  to 
brainstorm on issues of contemporary relevance to the Indian economy. Such interchange of 
ideas  is  important  not  only  in  encouraging  research  but  also  in  shaping  the  contours  of 
policymaking. 
While the recent global financial crisis taught us several lessons, one key message has been 
the weaknesses in financial regulation. Greater belief on market discipline led to light touch 
regulation of financial entities. Even this was found onerous by many entities which shifted 
their activities outside the regulatory perimeter. Coupled with inadequacies in the pricing and 
measurement  of  risks,  this  led  to  the  build-up  of  substantial  risk  in  the  global  financial 
system. 
Against this backdrop, I examine the rationale for regulation in the context of the debate and 
initiatives  in  the  post-crisis  period.  I  then  discuss  the  approach  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
regulation and its interface with the new Basel standards and conclude by highlighting some 
related issues. 
Rationale of banking regulation 
Let  me  begin  by  asking  the  question:  Why  do  we  need  to  regulate  the  financial  system, 
particularly banks? This is because banks have a critical role in modern market economies. 
First, banks channel money from the ultimate savers to the ultimate users of these funds. In 
this process, they determine which projects should get credit and closely monitor borrowers. 
These are tasks, which left to a single saver, would be difficult to execute. Second, banks are 
the  backbone  of  the  payments  system.  Hence,  even  if  a  few  banks  get  into  trouble,  the 
resultant financial disruptions could be very high. Third, given the primarily short-term nature 
of banks’ deposit contracts and illiquid nature of loans, banks are susceptible to “runs”. Even 
a perceived threat of failure of a bank might induce customers to withdraw their funds from 
other healthy banks as well. This interconnectedness is much greater for banks than in other 
industries. 
In  view  of  the  above  risks,  there  is  a  justification  for  intervention  by  the  State  through 
regulation. However, there are opposing views. The public interest view which dates back to 
Pigou (1938) contends that, by addressing market failures, governments regulate banks to 
facilitate  their  efficient  functioning.1  Since  banking  crises  impose  significant  social  and 
economic  costs,  their  prevention  is  often  an  explicit  goal  of  public  policy.  The  other  view, 
often  labelled  the  private  interest  view,  accepts  the  presence  of  market  failures,  but 
conceives  regulation  as  a  product  whose  outcome  is  determined  by  the  interplay  between 
suppliers  and  demanders.2  What  this  means  is  that  different  interest  groups  compete  to 
                                                
1   A Pigou (1938). The Economics of Welfare, 4th Ed (London: Macmillan). 
2   G.  Stigler  (1971).  “The  Theory  of  Economic  Regulation.”  Bell  Journal  of  Economics  and  Management 
Science 2, 3–21. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
influence  policies  towards  banks  in  ways  that  favour  their  vested  interests,  even  if  those 
might be socially sub-optimal. 
In this context, it is interesting to observe that the importance of regulation was not lost on 
Adam Smith, arguably the greatest proponent of laissez faire, when he observed that:3  
Such regulations may, no doubt, be considered as in some respect a violation of 
natural liberty. But those exertions of the natural liberty of a few individuals, which 
might endanger the security of the whole society, are, and ought to be, restrained 
by  the  laws  of  all  governments;  of  the  most  free,  as  well  as  or  the  most 
despotical.  The  obligation  of  building  party  walls,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
communication  of fire,  is  a  violation  of  natural  liberty,  exactly  of  the  same  kind 
with the regulations of the banking trade which are here proposed. 
While there is evidence in support of both these views, the balance of argument is in favour 
of regulation which has been further reinforced by the recent global financial crisis. 
Crisis and regulation 
Before I delve into regulatory initiatives following the recent crisis, let me briefly touch upon 
the earlier initiatives following the Asian crisis in the mid-1990s. The Basel Core Principles 
for Effective Banking Supervision were expedited and initiatives such as the IMF-World Bank 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP)  took  shape.  The  Basel II  regulatory 
framework  also  saw  the  light  of  day.  These  international  efforts  were  complemented  by 
national initiatives at strengthening the supervisory architecture. 
The financial crisis that began in 2007 and morphed into a full-blown catastrophe with the 
collapse  of  Lehmann  Brothers  in  2008  served  as  a  rude  awakening  as  to  how  piecemeal 
those  efforts  towards  revamping  the  regulatory  architecture  had  been.4  A  microprudential 
approach to supervision coupled with information gaps and asymmetries limited the ability of 
supervisors to monitor risk exposures, risk transfers and threats to systemic stability. Indeed, 
a  recent  World  Bank  study  on  differences  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices  across 
143 jurisdictions comprising both advanced and emerging economies highlights the fact that 
not only did crisis countries allow for less stringent definitions of capital but they also had less 
strict exposure limits.5  
In  addition,  several  “too-big-to-fail”  institutions  remained  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter. 
The  comingling  of  rating  and  advisory  services  by  credit  rating  agencies  perhaps  gave  a 
false sense of comfort to the supervisors. Furthermore, misalignment in incentives between 
home and host supervisors impeded cross-border information sharing. Although institutions 
became  international  in  scale  and  scope  of  their  operations,  regulation  remained  pre-
dominantly national in character, eroding the efficacy of the supervisory apparatus. 
In response to these deficiencies, the leaders of the G-20 mandated the Financial Stability 
Board  (FSB)  with  enhanced  role  and  responsibilities  to  promote  effective  regulatory  and 
supervisory policies. As part of this agenda, the Basel Committee has prepared new capital 
and liquidity requirements for banks. The Basel regulatory framework rests on three pillars: 
Pillar I: minimum capital requirements; Pillar II: supervisory review and evaluation process, 
and  Pillar  III:  market  discipline.  First,  the  quality  of  capital  that  a  bank  holds  has  been 
                                                
3   Adam Smith. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations [E-book, 2009]. (Book II – Of the 
nature, accumulation and employment of stock; Chapter II: Of Money, considered as a particular branch of the 
general stock of the society, or of the expense of maintaining the national capital). 
4   R.  G.  Rajan  (2010).  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy.  Princeton  NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
5   World  Bank  (2012).  Global  Financial  Development  Report  (Rethinking  the  role of  the state  in finance).  The 
World Bank: Washington DC. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
improved along with the inclusion of two buffers: a microprudential capital conservation buffer 
designed  to  cushion  banks  during  periods  of  stress  overlaid  with  a  macroprudential 
countercyclical  buffer, to  be  applied  by  national  authorities to  smooth  cyclical  swings. This 
has been supplemented with a backstop leverage ratio requiring banks to hold a minimum 
amount of equity as proportion of their total assets. Capital surcharges have been introduced 
for market and counterparty risk, including incentives for banks to use central counterparties 
for  OTC  derivatives,  higher  capital  requirements  for  trading  and  derivative  activities, 
securitisation and off-balance sheet exposures. 
Second,  in  order  to  address  imprudent  maturity  transformation,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
introduced  two  new  liquidity  ratios:  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  requiring  banks  to 
have adequate funds to meet severe liquidity stress over a period of 30 days and the Net 
Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) requiring banks to hold an adequate amount of stable funds 
over a one-year horizon. 
Third, the stipulations under Pillar II have also been substantially strengthened with improved 
requirements  on  corporate governance  and  stress  testing. The  disclosure  standards  under 
Pillar III have also been upgraded which include a detailed description of capital instruments 
and its components. 
Fourth,  the  FSB  has  come  up  with  a  broad  range  of  proposals,  including  those  related  to 
compensation practices, credit rating agencies and dealing with too-big-to-fail issues. 
Fifth, the IMF has also raised the profile of financial stability assessments under the FSAP of 
25 jurisdictions with systemically important financial sectors which includes India. 
Let me now turn to key initiatives at the national level in major jurisdictions. Countries have 
reoriented  their  institutional  arrangements  with  an  overarching  focus  on  financial  stability. 
Three broad models of such arrangements are discernible. In the first case, the central bank 
has been assigned the role of systemic stability regulator. This approach is best exemplified 
by  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  of  the  UK.  In  the  second  case,  a  coordinated 
systemic  stability  regulatory  council,  typically  headed  by  the  chief  of  the  Treasury  and 
comprising  of  heads  of  national  financial  supervisors,  has  been  advocated.  The  Financial 
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) of the US is an example of such an approach. The third 
model is the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) arrangement. Its main focus is ensuring 
macroprudential oversight of the financial system within the European Union (EU) so as to 
mitigate systemic risks to financial stability in the EU. 
The  above  jurisdictions  are  also  contemplating  regulations  that  impose  restrictions  on  the 
scope of banking activity, or have already taken steps towards doing so. These include the 
Volcker rule in the US, the Vickers Commission in the UK and the European Commission's 
Likanen Report. Draft legislations in this regard are underway in Germany and France.6  
The  aftermath  of  the  crisis  has  also  pointed  to  a  need  for  reforms  in  the  shadow  banking 
system7. In the US and elsewhere, policymakers are engaged in debates to ensure that the 
risks inherent in shadow banking are appropriately understood and managed. The FSB has 
recently  published 
the 
interconnectedness between banks and non-banks. 
its  Global  Shadow  Banking  Monitoring  Report  examining 
                                                
6   L. Gambacorta and A van Rixtel (2013). Structural bank regulation initiatives: Approaches and implications. 
BIS Working Paper 412, BIS: Basel. 
7   The  definition  of  shadow  banking,  as  adopted  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB,  2011)  is  credit 
intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
While  several  initiatives  have  been  taken,  it  is  not  clear  how  safe  they  would  make  the 
financial sector. There are views that the Basel capital standards have become too complex 
for their own good.8 To quote from Admati and Hellwig (2013):9  
Today’s  banking  system,  even  with  proposed  reforms,  is  as  dangerous  and 
fragile  as  the  system  that  brought  us  the  recent  crisis.  But  this  situation  could 
change. 
What is important to note is that the global financial crisis has triggered a healthy discussion 
on the best approach to regulation and supervision. This will inform the regulatory process 
going  forward,  leading  to  better  future  outcomes.  Let  me  now  turn  to  our  experience  with 
financial sector reforms and regulation in India. 
The Indian approach 
In India, the financial system till the early 1990s was essentially geared towards the needs of 
planned  development,  with  an  overarching  role  for  the  government.  A  large  proportion  of 
bank deposits was pre-empted in the form of reserves. Added to this was an administered 
regime of interest rates characterized by detailed prescriptions by size, purpose and activity. 
The  penetration  of  technology  was  limited  and  the  quality  of  customer  service  was  low. 
Consequently, the banking system was characterised by low competition, insufficient capital, 
low productivity and high intermediation costs. 
Financial sector reforms since the early 1990s was premised on the idea that the competitive 
efficiency  in  the  real  sector  can  only  be  fully  exploited  when  accompanied  by  substantive 
improvements  in  the financial  sector.  Accordingly,  the  major focus  of  such  reforms  was  to 
improve the allocative efficiency of resources. Concurrently, reforms have also focused on 
developing financial markets, removal of structural bottlenecks, introduction of new players 
and  instruments,  market-determined  pricing  of  financial  assets  and  improved  clearing  and 
settlement  practices.  In  essence,  the  thrust  has  been  to  create  depth  and  liquidity  and 
promote efficient price discovery. 
Indeed, the progress of financial development is evidenced from the various financial ratios 
at the macro level (Chart 1). Illustratively, the finance ratio – the ratio of total financial claims 
in the economy to national income – has risen from 0.17 during the early 1970s to 0.61 by 
2011–12, indicating financial deepening. Similarly, the financial interrelations ratio – the ratio 
of  total  financial  claims  to  net  domestic  capital  formation  –  has  increased  from  1.38  to 
2.0 during the corresponding period. 
                                                
8   A Haldane and V. Madouros (2012). “The dog and the frisbee”. Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of  Kansas  City’s  36th  Economic  Policy  Symposium,  The  Changing  Policy  Landscape,  Jackson  Hole,  WY, 
USA. 
9   A. Admati and M. Hellwig (2013). The Bankers’ New Clothes. Princeton University Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The liquidity- and credit-based indicators also paint a similar picture. For example, the credit-
to-GDP ratio and the broad money (M3)-to-GDP ratio have both increased substantially over 
the years (Chart 2). Interestingly, while currency-to-GDP ratio declined somewhat, it is the 
sharp  increase  in  deposits-to-GDP  ratio  since  the  mid-1970s  that  pushed  up  the  money 
supply, reflecting a greater role of the banking sector in economic development. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
In terms of regulation, reforms have evolved to gradually bring the Indian norms at par with 
international  best  practices,  while  taking  on  board  the  country-specific  considerations. 
Accordingly,  prudential  norms  relating  to  capital  adequacy  income  recognition,  asset 
classification and provisioning (IRAC) were introduced early in the reforms process. 
India was one of the earliest countries that employed macroprudential measures in 2004 by 
imposing higher risk weights on bank lending to selected sectors that seemed in danger of 
over-extension. While cross-national studies on the efficacy of macroprudential policies are 
not entirely conclusive10, the balance of evidence in the Indian context appears to suggest 
that these measures were effective in moderating credit expansion. 
The  robust  regulatory  framework,  well-managed  banking  system  and  timely  and  proactive 
action by the policymakers prevented any serious contagion of the global financial crisis that 
unravelled  in  2008.  However,  the  long-drawn  global  recessionary  headwinds  and  several 
domestic  policy  uncertainties  began  to  gradually  seep  their  way  through  into  the  macro-
economy, compounding the policy challenges. 
The crisis fast-forwarded several of the reforms that were on the anvil. The time dimension of 
macroprudential  policies  were  supplemented  with  measures  that  focused  on  the  cross-
section  such  as  limits  on  cross-investments  in  capital  instruments  of  banks  and  financial 
institutions,  limits  on  aggregate  uncollateralised  inter-bank  liabilities  and  limits  on  bank 
investments  in  mutual  funds.  Recognising  that  credit  quality  concerns  could  derail  the 
stability  of  the  financial  system,  a  higher  Provisioning  Coverage  Ratio  was  stipulated  for 
banks.  This  is  proposed  to  be  replaced  by  a  more  robust  dynamic  provisioning  practice, 
which is expected to be in place with improvements in the system. 
In  addition,  guidelines  have  been  issued  for  unhedged  foreign  currency  exposures  of 
corporates,  measures  announced  for  restructuring  of  advances  by  banks  and  financial 
institutions, guidelines issued on liquidity risk management and banks’ exposures to group 
entities.  The  oversight  of  banks  is  strengthened  with  the  introduced  of  Risk  Based 
Supervision  (RBS)  process,  beginning  April  2013.  The  consultative  process  in  supervision 
has also been buttressed with the establishment of supervisory colleges and the signing of 
MoU with several overseas financial sector regulators. 
Even  before  the  crisis,  the  institutional  arrangement  in  the  financial  sector  was  already  in 
place for inter-regulatory co-ordination to monitor financial stability in the economy. A High 
Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial Markets (HLCCFM) was set up in 1992 with the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank as Chairman, and the Chiefs of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), and the Finance Secretary 
to Government of India as members. However, post-crisis, the collegial approach to financial 
stability  has  been 
the  Financial  Stability  and 
Development Council (FSDC). 
In  addition,  various  committees  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Central  Board  monitor  financial 
stability issues: the Board for Financial Supervision reviews the Reserve Bank’s supervisory 
and regulatory initiatives and the Board for Payment and Settlement Systems oversees the 
overall functioning of the payment system. 
Keeping in view the manifold requirements of finance for an ever-expanding economy, the 
Reserve  Bank  undertook  a  review  of  the  existing  banking  structure  in  terms  of  its  size, 
capacity,  ability  to  meet  divergent  credit  and  banking  services  needs,  access  and 
inclusiveness.  As  part  of  this  process,  a  Discussion  Paper  on  Banking  Structure  was 
released, taking on board the observations made by earlier committees in this regard. Two 
further  strengthened  by  constituting 
                                                
10   S. Claessens, S.R. Ghosh and R. Mihet (2013). “Macroprudential policies to mitigate financial vulnerabilities.” 
Journal of International Money and Finance 39, 153–185. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
salient features of the Discussion Paper were advocating a multi-tiered banking structure to 
cater to various niches of the society supplemented by a process of continuous authorisation 
for new banks to enhance competition, enrich product diversity and promote newer ideas in 
the  financial  marketplace.  I  might  also  mention  in  this  context  that  the  recently  released 
report  of  the  RBI-appointed  Committee  tasked  with  the  mandate  of  broadening  access  to 
finance chaired by Dr. Nachiket Mor has also advocated different categories of banks that 
can collectively meet the needs of the economy. 
Going  forward,  as  the  financial  sector  grows  in  size  and  complexity,  newer  forms  and 
dimensions  of  risk  will  emerge  that  will  need  to  be  carefully  monitored.  A  beginning  has 
already been made with issuance of guidelines on domestically systemically important banks 
(D-SIBs) and the creation of a central repository on large common exposures. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by highlighting some issues of relevance to the financial sector. 
First, the quality of loan portfolio of financial institutions is directly dependent on the health of 
the non-financial enterprise sector. However, the current weaknesses in corporate balance 
sheets partly due to subdued economic environment have been feeding into banks' balance 
sheets.  This  trend,  if  left  unchecked,  could  ultimately  impinge  on  financial  stability.  In  this 
context,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  outlined  a  corrective  action  plan  for  tackling 
delinquent loans, including incentivising their early identification, timely revamp and prompt 
steps for their recovery or sale. 
Second,  there  is  a  need  to  further  beef  up  the  levels  of  transparency  and  disclosures 
standards.  Several  countries  have  begun  publishing  financial  stability  reports  (FSRs)  to 
provide  an  objective  assessment  of  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  confronting  their  financial 
systems. However, publishing a FSR is not by itself sufficient to ensure financial stability.11 
FSRs  for  many  countries  are  less  than  comprehensive  owing  to  serious  data  gaps,  which 
impede  a  holistic  assessment  of  their  financial  sector,  particularly  the  non-banking  sector. 
While we have expanded the depth and analytical content of our FSRs, we are also looking 
into  the  data  gaps  in  the  financial  sector  that  need  to  be  addressed  to  improve  our 
assessment. 
Third,  as  we  move  along  the  path  of  stricter  and  more  comprehensive  regulation,  it  is 
important  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  pricing  mechanism,  as  determined  by  market  forces.  In 
India, we have, over time, moved away from an administered structure of interest rates, both 
on the lending and the deposit sides. These deregulations have given flexibility to banks to 
price their deposits and loans and have improved access to formal finance. Notwithstanding 
these advancements, distortions in pricing still persist which need to be addressed. 
Fourth, in an underdeveloped financial system, lenders and borrowers may be two distinct 
categories.  However,  as  the  economy  has  gathered  momentum  and  competition  among 
banks  has  intensified,  newer  areas  of  lending,  such  as  those  for  housing,  education, 
automobiles – broadly categorised under the rubric of retail loans – has emerged, blurring 
the  watertight  distinction  between 
lenders  and  borrowers.  Hence,  competitive  and 
transparent  pricing  of  both  deposit  and  loan  products  has  become  important  to  enhance 
social welfare. 
Fifth, the recent global crisis has highlighted the relevance of improving investor awareness, 
not only for ensuring orderly market conditions, but also for efficacy of regulation. However 
robust the regulatory framework might be, unless the small investor is adequately informed, it 
                                                
11   M.Cihak, S.Munoz, S.T.Sharifuddin and K.Tintchev (2012). Financial stability reports: What are they good for? 
IMF Working Paper 1. IMF: Washington DC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
is  possible  for  fly-by-night  operators  to  exploit  the  regulatory  arbitrage.  In  this  context,  the 
Reserve Bank is taking steps to improve awareness through the financial literacy campaign. 
To  sum  up,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  given  a  greater  macroprudential  orientation  to 
financial  regulation  and  emphasised  on  better  quality  capital  so  as  to  safeguard  financial 
stability. While there are differences in views on matters of details, there is broad acceptance 
of the new direction in regulation. India being a participant in global initiatives, with presence 
in various international bodies, our effort has been to adopt international best practices with 
necessary modifications to suit our local conditions. However refined the financial regulation 
might be, it cannot compensate for weaknesses in the real economy. Hence, macroeconomic 
stability characterised by fiscal prudence sustainable growth with low inflation is important to 
preserve the overall stability of the financial system. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
