  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Navigating the new rural banking landscape – 
challenges and opportunities 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  induction  ceremonies  of  the  Rural  Bankers 
Association of the Philippines’ officers for 2014–2015, Pasay City, 1 July 2014. 
 The members of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, headed by newly sworn in 
President Jose Misael Moraleda, members of the Monetary Board, PDIC President Valentin 
Araneta, colleagues from the BSP, fellow advocates of rural banking, distinguished guests, 
good evening! Once again, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate the 
new  officers  and  directors  of  RBAP  led  by  President  Moraleda.  Let  us  also  thank  the 
previous board and officers of RBAP under the leadership of Mr. Vittorio Almario. 
Rural Banking in Broad Strokes 
Ladies and gentlemen. You will be pleased to know that the Philippine rural banking sector 
continues  to  grow  and  expand  as  indicated  by  key  performance  indicators  including 
consolidated assets, deposits, and loans.  
As  of  March  this  year,  the  total  resources  of  rural  banks  stood  at  209.4  billion  pesos, 
representing a year-on-year growth of 8.8 %. At the same time, total loan portfolio increased 
by 6.5% to 138 billion pesos… while deposits climbed 10.6% to 145 billion pesos. That these 
figures  were  achieved  even  as  natural  calamities  devastated  wide  areas  in  the  Visayas  is 
unquestionably commendable.  
Indeed, the story of our rural banks has been one of resilience.  
Challenges and Opportunities 
Moving forward, what does the future hold for our rural banks. Well, we see new challenges 
as well as opportunities emerging from the ongoing changes in the environment where rural 
banks operate.  
Among others, rural banks face increasingly stiffer competition from both smaller and bigger 
players. More cooperatives and non-government organizations (NGOs) now operate in the 
countryside  with  relatively  lower  costs  than  most  rural  banks.  As  such,  these  entities  may 
acquire portions of your market – not only from frontier areas but possibly even those you 
have nurtured through time. 
We also see the increasing presence of larger financial institutions in various municipalities. 
While larger banks may have their own reasons for expanding their branching footprint, the 
net effect is that rural banks now face more competition.  
Furthermore, the passage of legislations allowing the infusion of foreign equity in rural banks 
is also bound to be a game changer.  
Ladies and gentlemen. All these call for decisions on the part of your rural banks. Do you 
want to continue operating on your own? Will you consider taking in new investors – whether 
local or foreign? Are you looking at possible mergers? Is there a good fit? 
In making your decision, it is important to remember that size is not the only determinant in 
facing  competition.  You  may  not  be  the  biggest  in  your  area,  but  you  certainly  know  the 
countryside better than anyone. Indeed, your expertise and knowledge should translate into 
a premium on efficiency, a definite advantage over your competitors. 
Let me give you an example. Compared to Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand the 
Philippine  banking  system  is  smaller.  Nevertheless,  among  72  jurisdictions  monitored  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Moody’s, a major international credit rating company, only the Philippine banking sector was 
given a “positive” outlook.  
Indeed, in assessing your rural bank or your potential partners/investors for that matter, there 
are  many  factors  to  consider.  These  are:  right-sizing  which  is  crucial,  efficiency,  risk 
management,  good  governance,  capitalization,  and  the  ability  to  adapt  to  a  constantly 
shifting environment.  
Interventions 
Given all these, it is only logical to ask this question: is the industry ready to face up to the 
challenges of a changing market landscape?  
Well, an objective assessment leads us to conclude that much has been done to prepare the 
industry. Our banking reform agenda in the past 20 years has been structured to strengthen 
our local banks and to be more responsive to the needs of stakeholders.  
In particular, our efforts to bolster risk management systems, enhance corporate governance 
standards, build-up capital and adopt international best practices are intended to improve the 
efficiency and competitiveness of our banks. 
The Bangko Sentral is mindful that in aligning ourselves with global best practices, we at the 
same time should take local conditions into consideration. Thus, while commercial banks are 
required  to  be  Basel  III  compliant  starting  January  2014,  the  BSP’s  requirement  for  rural 
banks is the less stringent Basel 1.5.  
Another  program  tailor-fit  for  rural  banks  is  the  Strengthening  Program  for  Rural  Banks,  a 
joint undertaking of the BSP and the PDIC. Launched in 2010 to strengthen rural banks and 
to minimize bank closures, the program has been extended as SPRB Plus until December 
2014 to encourage more mergers, consolidations and acquisition of eligible rural banks and 
thrift banks by strategic third party investors. 
As  of  30  June  2014,  seven  merger/consolidation  applications  involving  fifteen  (15)  banks 
have been approved by the PDIC and are being processed by the BSP. In addition, there are 
five (5) other applications for consolidation/acquisition that are in the pipeline. 
Capacity building is another area we have focused on. In particular, the BSP’s Supervision 
and Examination Sector developed a completely new four-day training program targeted for 
the Board of Directors and senior officers of rural banks which we now refer to as the Rural 
Bank Management Course. The BSP worked with RBAP on the coverage of such a program. 
After  a  series  of  pilot  and  early  runs  we  are  now  ready  to  hand  over  to  RBAP  the  course 
materials and the conduct of this well-received and highly rated course. If needed, the BSP is 
prepared to extend further assistance on this program to RBAP.  
Redefining a Strategic Direction 
While these programs are meant to enhance the operations of rural banks, we recognize that 
there is still a lot more that can and should be done.  
A  good  starting  point  is  a  fundamental  review  of  your  banks’  strengths  and  weaknesses. 
After  this  is  completed,  identify  the  needs  of  your  constituents  in  the  context  of  the 
competition that has emerged. 
Such a review is likely to show that different communities require different forms of access 
and  delivery  of  financial  products  and  services.  This  is  the  direct  result  of  having  an 
archipelago where demographic differences across localities are significant. 
This may seem like a stumbling block but this also represents opportunities for rural banks. 
For  instance,  our  experience  in  microfinance  and  financial  inclusion  shows  that  alternative 
delivery channels are viable. You can therefore find a balance between alternative delivery 
mechanisms vis-à-vis the brick and mortar approach of traditional branching.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As you move from one locality to another, you will discover that one approach is more viable 
than the other, depending on the economics of the locality itself. For other areas, it may be 
economically feasible to offer both approaches to the community. 
In the current environment, we do see a silver lining: in the face of rising competition, we see 
the  market  growing  as  the  benefits  of  development  programs  and  fresh  investments 
increasingly find their way to the countryside.  
We see for instance the positive impact of infrastructure development, tourism and even the 
conditional cash transfer program. In small communities, such inflows can serve as catalysts 
for  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth.  Microfinance  presents  another  growth  opportunity  for 
rural  banks,  with  microentrepreneurs  emerging  as  both  depositors  and  investors  who 
generate jobs.  
The Crucial Steps Moving Forward 
Ladies and gentlemen, the unfolding scenarios certainly create opportunities for those who 
are determined to pursue the path of success.  
For  rural  banks,  this  is  an  impetus  to  boost  operational  efficiency,  expand  product  lines, 
reach out to more markets, increase diversity, lower operating cost and simply right-size the 
way you do business.  
After  long  discussions  on  such  concepts  as  regionalization,  market  integration  and  global 
reforms, these buzzwords are now a reality.  
The broad strokes are evident. Now you have to decide where to take your bank and how to 
achieve your vision. You can be proactive or you can simply maintain the status quo. It is all 
up to you.  
One thing is certain. The BSP stands ready – as it always been – to be the partner of the 
rural  banking  sector  in  responding  to  the  financial  needs  of  the  Philippine  countryside  to 
reach  out to those  who remain  unserved  and to  promote  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth 
across our country.  
Maming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
