Fritz Zurbrügg: The Swiss National Bank’s investment policy – options 
and limitations 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Zurich, 27 March 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Swiss National Bank’s website 
The speaker would like to thank Dirk Faltin and Adriel Jost for their valuable support in preparing this speech. He 
is also indebted to Erich Gmür, Marco Huwiler and Sandro Streit for their insightful comments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to welcome you to our traditional Money Market Event in Zurich. I am delighted 
that so many of you have responded to our invitation. The focus of my comments today will 
be the investment policy of the Swiss National Bank (SNB), since it is now exactly ten years 
since the new National Bank Act (NBA) came into force, opening up new options for the SNB 
in the management of its foreign exchange reserves. Today I want to take the opportunity of 
presenting  an  assessment  and  acquainting  you  with  the  most  important  aspects  of  our 
investment policy. One of the most important and striking changes since 2004 has been our 
investments in equities and I will therefore focus particularly on our equity investments in my 
remarks.  Following  my  presentation,  my  colleague  Dewet  Moser  will  take  a  closer  look  at 
developments on the foreign exchange and money markets. 
Monetary policy conditions 
Our investment policy differs in a number of ways from that of other large investors, whether 
they be private sector investors or sovereign wealth funds. This is due to the SNB’s special 
role. As an independent central bank, the SNB conducts Switzerland’s monetary policy. Our 
investment policy is always subordinated to monetary policy and can only be understood in 
the  context  of  this  policy,  which  is  currently  shaped  by  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of 
CHF 1.20 against the euro. We introduced the minimum exchange rate in September 2011, 
and  since then  we  have  enforced  it  consistently.  You  will  recall  how,  at the time,  the  debt 
crisis  in  the  euro  area  was  threatening  to  deteriorate.  The  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss 
franc was immense. For the SNB, it was important to ensure price stability and avert serious 
damage  to  the  Swiss  economy.  Seen  from  the  current  perspective,  this  was  certainly 
achieved.  
Two  and  a  half  years  after  its  introduction,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  remains  a  key 
element  in  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy,  and  just  last  week,  at  our  monetary  policy 
assessment,  we  decided  that  it should  be  maintained.  Although the  recovery  of  the global 
economy  continued  in  the  fourth quarter  of  2013,  substantial  risks  remain.  In  addition,  the 
conditional inflation forecast for Switzerland has been adjusted downwards in comparison to 
December. Internationally declining inflation rates and the slightly stronger Swiss franc are 
delaying the rise of inflation into positive territory. The SNB is now expecting inflation of 0% 
in  the  current  year  and  0.4%  in  2015.  In  2016,  inflation  should  increase  to  1.0%. 
Furthermore, the value of the Swiss franc is still high. With the three-month Libor close to 
zero,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  continues  to  be  the  right  tool  to  avoid  an  undesirable 
tightening  of  monetary  conditions  in  the  event  of  renewed  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss 
franc.  
Through the minimum exchange rate, therefore, we are in a position to fulfil our price stability 
mandate.  However,  the  consistent  enforcement  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  has 
contributed to  the  substantial  increase  in  our  currency  reserves.  Slide  1  shows  that,  since 
2009,  our  currency  reserves  have  increased  by  a  factor  of  about  six,  and  the  foreign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
exchange  reserves  are  almost  ten  times  higher.  Our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  that  is, 
currency reserves excluding gold, currently amount to almost CHF 450 billion, which is over 
70%  of  Switzerland’s  annual  economic  output.  The  expansion  of  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves  means  that  our  balance  sheet  is  more  exposed  to  the  volatility  of  the  financial 
markets than  it  used  to be.  Even  slight  price  changes can  have  a  strong  influence  on  our 
investment  performance.  This  has  made  our  investment  policy  even  more  challenging. 
However, thanks to established processes and a high level of expertise, we are in a position 
to meet these demands. 
History of investment policy at the SNB 
At the SNB, the move towards a sustainable investment policy aimed at optimising risk and 
return  began  as  early  as  the  1970s.  At  that  time,  the  management  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves focused exclusively on the highest possible level of security and liquidity. Imagine a 
situation whereby, until 1978, a residual term of only three months was a legal requirement. 
As  a  result,  foreign  exchange  reserves  consisted  primarily  of  short-term  US  dollar 
investments, particularly US treasury bills. This led to considerable concentration risk. At the 
same time, the potential return was extremely low. 
Despite  narrow  statutory  provisions  and  market-related  limitations,  the  SNB  tried  to  make 
use of the existing room for manoeuvre as regards returns. However, it was not until after the 
partial revision of the NBA in 1997 that strategic importance was attached to the generation 
of returns. This became possible because of the abolition of the maximum residual term of 
one year for foreign exchange reserves, which had applied until then. 
A further important step towards a sustainable investment policy was the entry into force of 
the fully revised NBA in 2004. Although, at the time, the changes to investment policy did not 
attract much public attention, they were  very important for the SNB’s investment activities. 
Within the monetary mandate, investment policy was defined as one of the SNB’s core tasks 
for the first time. Moreover, most statutory restrictions with regard to investment instruments 
were removed. And so the foundation was laid for a modern investment policy whose aim is 
to  optimise  the  risk/return  relationship  for  assets.  However,  this  was  only  possible  to  the 
extent  allowed  by  monetary  policy,  which  has  always  had  priority  over  investment  policy 
considerations.  
In addition to expanding the SNB’s freedom of action, investment and risk control processes 
were fundamentally adapted and adjusted to the new requirements from 1997 onwards. As a 
result, the SNB frequently found itself in the role of central bank pioneer, not only as regards 
the choice of investment instruments, but also in the area of investment processes. It is with 
some  pride  that  I  can  report  how,  in  recent  years,  we  have  received  enquiries  from  other 
central banks about our investment processes. The SNB has also played a pioneering role 
with  regard  to  transparency.  The  composition  of  our  investments  is,  to  a  large  extent, 
accessible to the public. Indeed, the SNB is one of the few central banks which publishes 
both its investment allocation and the net result on foreign currency positions on a quarterly 
basis. 
Investment policy committed to security, liquidity and return 
Nowadays, therefore, when investing our currency reserves, we base our decisions on the 
criteria of security, liquidity and return. The currency reserves of a country serve primarily as 
a  means  to  prevent  and  overcome  crises.  In  order  to  fulfil  this  function,  they  must,  in 
essence, be liquid. In the past, the SNB defined liquidity by specifying the term of the bonds. 
The shorter the residual term, the more liquid the investment appeared to be. Consequently, 
until well into the 1990s, the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves consisted almost exclusively 
of government paper with very short terms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With time, the concept of liquidity has changed. For a long time now, we have been defining 
liquidity according to the potential for a rapid sale with the minimum possible impact on the 
market, rather than as a function of the terms of our bonds. In this case, minimum impact on 
the market means that, essentially, we wish to avoid significant price movements. In order to 
guarantee this, we hold a substantial portion of the currency reserves in liquid government 
bonds, in the most important global currencies. Together with our deposits at other central 
banks, these investments presently account for some three-quarters of our foreign exchange 
reserves. You can see the current breakdown of our foreign exchange reserves on the left-
hand side of slide 3. 
For the criterion of security, the focus is on limiting market and credit risk. In this case, the 
decisive  role  is  played  by  diversification  across  different  currencies  and  instruments.  We 
engage in currency diversification by holding our foreign exchange reserves in the currencies 
of  all  large  advanced  economies;  the  highest  percentages  are  accounted  for  by  the  euro 
(48%)  and  the  US  dollar  (27%),  as  you  can  see  from  the  chart  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
slide 3. Looking at the individual currencies, diversification occurs via the different investment 
instruments.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  since  the  full  revision  of  the  NBA  in  2004, 
additional bond categories such as corporate bonds and the bonds of foreign authorities, as 
well as equities, have been available. 
The diversification effect of equities versus government bonds can be seen in slide 4. For 
this chart we divided up the distribution of all daily returns on the US S&P 500 stock market 
index  since  1999  into  ten  equally  large  groups  or  deciles.  Then  we  ordered  the  deciles 
according to size of returns. The decile with the worst returns is on the left-hand side and that 
with  the  best  returns  is  on  the  right.  Subsequently,  we  assigned  the  associated  US 
government bond returns to these deciles. As you see, there was a good diversification effect 
between  equities  and  government  bonds.  This  result  is  not  hard  to  understand  intuitively. 
During the cyclical upswing, when interest rates are increasing, prices of government bonds 
come under pressure, while equity prices benefit from the improvement in the economy and 
the better profit outlook for companies. Last year, this negative correlation was very clear and 
the diversification effect between equities and government bonds was particularly strong. 
However,  these  interrelationships  apply  for  returns  in  local  currency,  while  for  us,  what  is 
critical  is  –  ultimately  –  the  return  in  Swiss  francs.  Here  the  situation  looks  somewhat 
different. This is because equity prices often correlate negatively with the external value of 
the  Swiss  franc.  You  can  see  this  relationship  in  slide  5.  The  chart  is  based  on  the  same 
approach  as  in  the  previous  slide.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  periods  of  poor  stock  market 
performance correspond to an appreciation of the Swiss franc, and vice versa. When equities 
lose value, this generally occurs in an environment of increased uncertainty in the economy 
and on the financial markets. In such situations, demand for the Swiss franc is particularly 
strong  due  to  its  character  as  a  safe  haven.  The  value  of  our  equity  positions  is  then 
subjected to a double loss, first the price loss and second the appreciation of the Swiss franc 
against the foreign currencies in which the equities are denominated. So the diversification 
effect  of  our  equity  investments  is  diminished,  to  some  extent,  by  this currency  effect. We 
cannot  safeguard  ourselves  by  hedging  an  appreciation  in  the  Swiss  franc  because  this 
would  be  tantamount  to  selling  foreign  exchange  reserves  against  Swiss  francs,  and  an 
investment  decision  could  thus  have  a  monetary  policy  effect.  This  example  shows  how 
monetary policy considerations limit investment policy’s room for manoeuvre.  
A  certain  diversification  effect  can  also  exist  between  equities  and  gold.  In  times  when 
uncertainty is high, the gold price often increases, while equity prices come under pressure. 
The  opposite  can  occur  when  uncertainty  decreases  significantly.  This  was  particularly 
evident  last  year,  when  the  gold  price  underwent  a  significant  correction  after  climbing  for 
many years. Of course we cannot rely on this kind of diversification effect always holding. 
However, when it does, it is very welcome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Returns important for preservation of real value 
That brings me to the third criterion for our investment activity – return. I would like to stress 
that  the  SNB  is  not  concerned  with  maximising  return  for  its  own  sake.  Rather,  return  is 
inextricably linked to the criterion of security. Our goal is to ensure that the purchasing power 
of the currency reserves at least is maintained over time. That, in turn, presupposes that the 
long-term return we earn on our investments is equal to or greater than the average rate of 
inflation. Bear in mind that we are aiming to preserve real value in Swiss francs, not in local 
investment currencies. This means that a certain amount of positive return in local currencies 
is needed, if only to balance out the currency losses incurred in periods when the Swiss franc 
is appreciating. 
To  improve  the  long-term  relationship  between  risk  and  return,  government  bonds  in  our 
portfolio are supplemented by the additional investment categories I have already mentioned. 
Generally,  the  potential  returns  on  equities  are  greater  than  those  on  government  bonds 
issued  by  the  major  advanced  economies.  They  can  therefore  make  a  contribution  to 
preserving the real value of the currency reserves. To be more precise, equities increase the 
probability of preserving the real value of the currency reserves. This applies, in particular, in 
view of the current low (or negative) real returns on government bonds in core markets. So it 
is  not  surprising that  equity  investments  have  become more  important for  central  banks  in 
recent years.1 
How high should the equity share be? 
I will now talk in more detail about our investments in equity. So far I have explained why the 
SNB invests in equity. In the next few moments, I would like to explore two questions: first, 
how  high  should  the  equity  share  in  our  portfolio  be,  in  rough  terms?  Second,  how  are 
investments carried out on the stock market? Slide 6 shows that, between 2005 and 2010, 
our  equity  share  was  around  10%.  Furthermore,  you  will  see  that,  since  2011,  we  have 
gradually increased the share so that it now amounts to 16% of foreign exchange reserves. 
When determining the equity share, the challenge is to optimise the risk/return relationship in 
the portfolio. As the saying goes among investors: if you want to eat well, buy shares, if you 
want  to  sleep  well,  buy  bonds.  The  idea  behind  this  old  stock  market  saying  is  that, 
compared  to  most  government  bonds,  equities  have  a  higher  potential  return  but  are 
generally more risky. Nevertheless, we need to begin by taking account of the diversification 
effect of the equity investments. The interrelationships can be seen if we look at the stylised 
efficient  frontier  path  shown  in  slide  7.  We  start  with  a  portfolio  consisting  solely  of 
government bonds (point A in the chart), and then start adding equities to the portfolio. In the 
initial  stages  the  risk  and  returns  structure  of  the  portfolio  improves.  The  expected  return 
increases  and  the  expected  risk  decreases.  However,  once  a  given  equity  share  is 
exceeded, at point B, a trade-off between risk and return begins. At this stage, each further 
increase in potential return has to be ‘bought’ at the cost of increased risk. In the extreme 
case, we reach the situation of a portfolio consisting solely of equities (point C). The equity 
share we are aiming for is obtained by weighing up additional risk against higher potential 
return. 
After potential return and risk have been weighed up in this way at the SNB, what does the 
final result look like? Fundamentally, our efficient frontier presents less attractive risk/return 
combinations  than  in  the  case  of  many  other  investors.  That  means  our  efficient  frontier 
tends to look more like the right-hand curve in slide 7. In addition, the point at which a further 
                                                
1  According to a survey published in early 2013, only eight of 60 central banks worldwide held equities as part of 
their  currency  reserves  at  that  time.  A  further  six  central  banks  stated  that  they  intended  to  diversify  into 
equities  in  the  future  (cf.  Pringle,  Robert  and  Nick  Carver,  eds.  2013,  RBS  Reserve  Management  Trends 
2013, London, Central Banking Publications). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
increase in the equity share means a rise in total risk (point B’) is reached earlier than in the 
left-hand curve. I have already talked about the reasons for this. First, we can naturally only 
hold  currency  reserves  in  foreign  currencies  and  not  in  Swiss  francs.  Second,  the  Swiss 
franc has the character of a safe haven at times of increased uncertainty in the economy and 
on  the  financial  markets.  Thus  I  have  shown  how  there  is  a  frequent  negative  correlation 
between  equity  prices  and  the  external  value  of  the  Swiss  franc. Third, I  have  also  drawn 
attention to the fact that we have to carry the currency risk against the Swiss franc, since for 
monetary policy reasons we cannot hedge it. These factors constitute significant limitations 
on the diversification effect of our equity investments. Ultimately, they mean that the SNB’s 
equity share is fundamentally lower than in the case of many other investors. The point at 
which we wish to position ourselves on the efficient frontier between B’ and C’ depends on 
how we weigh up additional risk and higher return. At present, this weighing-up produces the 
equity share of 16% which I mentioned before.  
The SNB as a passive investor 
How does the SNB carry out its equity investments? In brief, the SNB is a passive investor in 
the  stock  market.  In  other  words,  the  SNB  basically  does  not  select  individual  equities. 
Instead, we use rule-based procedures to invest in a very broad equity universe. At present, 
the SNB holds some 6,000 securities in more than ten currencies. The equity universe on 
which our equity investments is based covers some 90% of global market capitalisation. We 
mainly invest in mid and large cap companies. This makes sense, particularly in view of the 
special liquidity requirements I have already mentioned. In addition, we also place funds in 
small  cap  companies.  In  terms  of  market  capitalisation  these  holdings  only  account  for  a 
small portion of our equity portfolio, but in numbers they make up about three-quarters of all 
the securities we hold. This, too, shows the breadth of our equity universe. When selecting 
our equities, we use a benchmark. This is a combination of various commonly used indices, 
assembled  by  us.  As  soon  as  we  have  determined  the  benchmark,  equity  investment 
becomes a largely automatic process. 
Why does the SNB not make targeted investments in individual companies or sectors where 
an above-average return can be expected? In other words, why do we not engage in stock 
picking? Warren Buffett is quoted as having said, wide diversification is only required when 
investors  do  not  understand  what  they  are  doing.  I  can  assure  you  that  our  investment 
specialists have an excellent understanding of what they are doing. However, we choose to 
have recourse to a broad equity universe for the following four reasons. First, we achieve a 
greater  diversification  effect  within  the  equity  segment  by  investing  as  widely  as  possible, 
across both regions and sectors. Second, it should not be our objective to enforce strategic 
or, indeed, political interests by means of our investments in individual companies. This could 
limit our monetary policy room for manoeuvre and would also make our position vulnerable. 
Due to the size of our foreign exchange reserves, the SNB could quickly acquire large shares 
in  companies,  and  this  might  be  misconstrued  as  strategic  participations  in  the  event  of 
active management of our equity holdings and corresponding overweightings in some areas. 
Our  strategy  ensures  that  holdings  in  individual  companies  remain  low.  Third,  through  a 
passive strategy we can minimise our market influence, since our policy does not cause us to 
give  preference  to  individual  securities  or  sectors.  Fourth,  our  investment  horizon  is  very 
long-term,  that  is,  it  spans  several  business  cycles.  The  academic  literature  shows  that, 
taking account of the costs, it is almost impossible to beat a broad stock index in the long 
term and systematically.2 
                                                
2  Cf.  Carhart,  Mark  M.  1997.  On  Persistence  in  Mutual  Fund  Performance.  The  Journal  of  Finance  52  (1):  
57–82; also Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 2010. Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual 
Fund Returns. The Journal of Finance 65 (5): 1915–1947. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
However,  there  are  two  areas  in  which  we  limit  our  investment  universe  in  a  selective 
manner.  First,  we  exclude  mid  and  large  cap  banks  from  our  portfolio  in  order  to  avoid 
conflicts  of  interest.  Second,  we  do  not  include  companies  that  are  in  gross  violation  of 
ethical principles. I will explain these two points in more detail. 
Conflicts of interest with regard to investments in mid and large cap banks can come about 
because, according to its mandate, the SNB is also required to contribute to the stability of 
the  financial  system.  Under  certain  circumstances,  this  can  mean  that  the  SNB  has  an 
information edge over the market with respect to the financial situation of individual banks. In 
order  to  avoid  any  suspicion  that  the  SNB  might  make  use  of  this  information  edge  in  its 
position  as  an  investor,  we  completely  exclude  all  investments  in  equities  of  such  banks. 
Moreover, by doing so, we prevent market participants from attributing any signal effects to 
our transactions. On the question of conflicts of interest, I would also like to stress that, as a 
matter of principle, the SNB does not own equities in any Swiss companies for investment 
purposes. 
Should  equities  of  individual  companies  be  excluded  from  the  investment  universe  on  the 
basis of ethical criteria? We have been discussing this question for a considerable time and 
last  year  we  made  a  fundamental  decision.  We  do  not  invest  in  companies  that  blatantly 
infringe  certain  ethical  principles.  This  decision  was  already  implemented  in  the  fourth 
quarter  of  2013.  To  be  specific,  we  do  not  hold  equities  in  companies  which  produce 
internationally  banned  weapons,  seriously  violate 
rights  or 
systematically cause severe environmental damage. We believe that it is in the best interests 
of monetary policy if the SNB achieves sound investment returns through the widest possible 
diversification. Consequently, for us it is not a matter of excluding entire sectors or industries. 
On  the  contrary.  We  simply  wish  to  exclude  those  companies  for  which  there  is  clear 
evidence  of  a  serious  violation  against  the  principles  mentioned.  Therefore  the  number  of 
companies involved is very limited. 
How do we implement this? We are convinced that it would not be practicable for the SNB to 
examine  the  conduct  of  dubious  companies  itself.  In  our  view,  the  SNB’s  tasks  and 
competences do not include the filtering-out of such companies. For the implementation, we 
therefore use analyses by established institutions with relevant experience. These help us to 
constantly review which companies fulfil the predefined exclusion criteria. 
You  will  understand  that  we  do  not  provide  any  detailed  information  on  the  exclusion 
procedures  or  the  equities  involved.  As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  the  SNB  always 
endeavours to maintain a high degree of transparency and, in this respect, goes further than 
other central banks, especially when it comes to its investment policy. Nevertheless, it is also 
an  established  principle  that  we  do  not  reveal  any  details  about  the  various  external 
providers whose services we employ in our operations. The same applies to details about the 
indices  we  use,  or,  indeed,  the  individual  securities.  Such  information  could  trigger 
undesirable movements in the market, which would go against our principle of ensuring the 
minimum  possible  impact  on  the  market.  In  addition,  this  information  could  also  limit  our 
investment  policy  room  for  manoeuvre  and  thereby  have  a  negative  impact  on  the 
investment results. 
fundamental  human 
Final considerations 
The  NBA  of  2004  gave  the  SNB  new  options  in  investment  policy.  We  used  these  for  a 
consistent and comprehensive further development of our investment policy. In particular, we 
significantly  improved  the  risk/return  profile  of  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  through  a 
number  of  diversification  measures.  As  I  have  shown,  our  equity  investments  played  an 
important role in this process. 
However, although the SNB is a large global investor, its main task is monetary policy in the 
service  of  the  Swiss  economy.  Consequently,  monetary  policy  affects  both  the  size  of  our 
investments and the criteria and principles we apply in managing them. My comments have 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
shown that the options available to our investment policy are limited in several areas by the 
primacy of monetary policy. This includes the fact that we cannot hedge currency risks with 
respect to the Swiss franc. 
These  limitations  are  sometimes  reflected  in  the  annual  results.  Even  though  we  have 
continually extended our investment policy, thereby improving our return options, there have 
occasionally been years in the past with negative results. This may be repeated in the future. 
Given the current level of our foreign exchange reserves, a small loss in percentage terms 
can mean a high figure in Swiss francs. 
That is why it is all the more important for me to stress, once again, the SNB’s main task, 
which  is  monetary  policy.  The  success  of  the  SNB  cannot  be  measured  in  terms  of  our 
annual results but by whether we fulfil our mandate, which is to ensure price stability while 
taking account of the development of the economy. In order to fulfil this task, the minimum 
exchange rate remains necessary for the foreseeable future. And so we return to the starting 
point of my presentation. I will repeat what I said before, that only the minimum exchange 
rate can prevent an undesired tightening of monetary conditions, should the upward pressure 
on  the  Swiss  franc  increase  once  again.  Should  it  become  necessary,  we  will  therefore 
enforce the minimum exchange rate by buying foreign currency in unlimited quantities. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
