  
 
Per Jansson: The Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy – in tune or out of 
tune with the rest of the world? 
Speech  by  Mr  Per  Jansson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  at 
SEB, Stockholm, 2 June 2014. 
 Was the strategy for monetary policy that was formulated in the decades before the global 
financial  crisis  –  and  which  long  appeared  so  successful  –  actually  too  narrow?  Does 
monetary policy need to put greater effort into preventing financial imbalances from arising? 
The crisis turned many things upside down and forced both central banks and researchers 
around the world to rethink their arguments and theories.1 
Today I intend to talk about the rather lively discussion conducted among central banks and 
in  the  academic  world  on  this  issue.  This  is  a  discussion  that  is  both  interesting  and 
important, but which I feel has made very little impact on the debate in Sweden. While the 
discussion here in Sweden for the most part is based on the answer being already given, the 
attitude in the international debate is much more open and inquiring. 
Most  people  agree  that  macroprudential  policy  should  be  the  first  line  of  defence  against 
financial  imbalances.  But  an  increasing  number  have  also  begun  to  take  the  view  that 
monetary  policy  may  need  to  give  macroprudential  policy  support  by,  as  it  is  often  called, 
“leaning against the wind”. This is an idea I have considerable sympathy for in principle, and I 
shall try to explain why in my speech today. 
Lessons from the crisis: price stability is not enough to prevent financial imbalances 
The foundation for the monetary policy strategy we use today is the changeover in monetary 
policy  in  the  early  1990s,  when  some  central  banks  began  to  switch  to  explicit  inflation 
targets. This turned out to be an effective way of anchoring inflation expectations and in this 
way attaining price stability. Inflation targeting became the standard for central banks. The 
way the policy was implemented could differ slightly, but on the whole there was agreement 
on  the  fundamental  principles.  A  credible  inflation  target  also  creates  some  scope  for 
monetary policy to stabilise the real economy. Monetary policy could therefore be flexible and 
focus on attaining a good balance between on the one hand price stability and on the other 
hand the stability of the real economy, a couple of years ahead. There was also a consensus 
– sometimes referred to as the “Jackson Hole consensus” – that monetary policy would not 
try to counteract rapid increases in asset prices or credit growth.2 I shall return to this shortly. 
The  long  period  of  relatively  stable  inflation  and  robust growth  –  “the  Great  Moderation”  – 
that preceded the financial crisis was considered to be proof that the chosen monetary policy 
strategy functioned well. The experience from the crises that nevertheless arose, for instance 
the year 2000 when the dot-com bubble burst, was that one could also manage more difficult 
situations. However, the financial crisis 2007–2008 and the deep and protracted downswing 
that followed have meant that central banks have been forced to closely examine things that 
were  previously  taken  for  granted.  In  this  way,  the  situation  is  a  little  reminiscent  of  the 
situation  at the  beginning of  the  1990s  when  inflation  targeting  was  introduced. Then, too, 
there were crises that made it necessary to question the prevailing monetary policy doctrine. 
                                                
1  Many papers have been published on this theme recently. See, for instance, Bayoumi et al (2014) and the 
various contributions in the anthology by Reichlin and Baldwin (2013). 
2   See, for example, Issing (2009) for a description of the Jackson Hole consensus. The expression comes from 
the fact that the town of Jackson Hole in the United States hosts an annual conference that gathers central 
bank governors and other economic policymakers from around the world.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And then, too, it was the central banks that – of necessity – took the first steps and adjusted 
their  strategies  and  practical  policy  before  there  was  any  real  consensus  from  academic 
research to lean on. 
One of the fundamental economic policy insights from the period of “the Great Moderation” 
and the crisis years after this is that low and stable inflation, combined with robust growth, 
without  any  direct  signs  of  overheating,  is  no  guarantee  that  the  financial  side  of  the 
economy  will  be  problem-free.  In  brief:  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  prevent  financial 
imbalances.3  One  lesson  learnt  from  this  is  that  the  economic  policy  toolbox  needs  to  be 
extended. In addition to the tools already available for fiscal policy, monetary policy and the 
supervision of individual financial institutions, new tools are needed and old tools may require 
modification  to  be  more  usable  in  counteracting  the  type  of  financial  imbalances  that 
contributed to the  crisis.  There  is  broad  agreement  on  this.  And  in recent  years  there  has 
been  intensive  work  around  the  world  on  defining  and  implementing  this  so-called 
macroprudential policy. 
Does monetary policy also need to give greater consideration to financial imbalances? 
However,  the  insight  that  price  stability  does  not  prevent  financial  imbalances from  arising 
has  also  raised  a  question  of  principle  in  central  banks.  Has  the  focus  on  price  stability, 
which has been the basis for monetary policy, been too narrow? Financial imbalances can 
aggravate  economic  downswings  with  severely  negative  effects  on  unemployment  and 
economic growth. If it gets really bad, the imbalances may even result in a financial crisis. 
Should  monetary  policy  therefore  put  greater  effort  than  before  into  preventing  financial 
balances from building up? 
Even before the crisis, there was of course an insight that financial imbalances entail risks for 
macroeconomic  developments  and  for  financial  stability.  Maintaining  financial  stability  has 
traditionally  been  one  of  the  central  bank’s  main  tasks,  in  addition  to  maintaining  price 
stability.  And  analysing  financial  risks  has  been  an  important  part  of  this  work.  But  in  the 
standard  framework,  financial  risks  and  other  financial  stability  aspects  could,  and  even 
should, on the whole be kept separate from the monetary policy deliberations – at least over 
and above the impact that these factors have on the inflation forecast and economic outlook 
for the coming years.4 
There were of course arguments in favour of monetary policy explicitly taking financial risks 
into account.5 These discussions most often concerned “bubbles” on the asset markets and 
whether monetary policy should counteract their build-up – “leaning monetary policy against 
the wind” as it came to be called. However, the consensus among both practicians in central 
banks and academics was that this is difficult and that in practice it can do more harm than 
good.  Better  then  to  wait  and  to  use  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  the  economy  once  the 
bubbles had burst – to “clean up afterwards” instead. However, the financial crisis showed 
that  the  effects  of  financial  imbalances  and,  in  some  cases,  financial  instability  could  be 
enormous  and  that  the  “cleaning  up”  could  require  massive  and  prolonged  efforts  from 
economic policy. The earlier consensus has thus been increasingly brought into question. 
                                                
3   Perhaps  a  more  commonly-used  concept  in  this  context  is  financial  stability.  However,  I  consider  it  more 
appropriate  to  talk  about  financial  imbalances.  Problems  with  financial  stability  are  often  associated  with 
shocks to the credit supply and with banks defaulting. Financial imbalances can in a worst case scenario lead 
to this type of situation, but they can also cause major problems for the economy without creating financial 
instability.  One  example  is  that  households  find  they  have  borrowed  too  much  and  thus  reduce  their 
consumption over a long period of time to adjust their balance sheets. This can lead to widespread problems 
of macroinstability in the form of a very deep and prolonged recession. 
4   See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001) and Greenspan (2002). 
5   See, for example, Blanchard (2000) and Borio and White (2003). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  An  excellent  status  report  on  this  debate  can  be  read  in  a  jubilee  issue  of  the  Riksbank’s 
Economic Review, published in November last year. It is a paper by Frank Smets, adviser to 
the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  he  also  presented  at  a  conference 
organised  by  the  Riksbank  last  summer.6  Mr  Smets  argues  that  after  the  crisis  one  can 
discern three different views  with regard to the question of to what extent monetary policy 
should deal with financial imbalances. 
“Modified Jackson-Hole consensus” 
The first view is in principle based on the same monetary policy strategy as I have described 
earlier and called the standard prior to the crisis, but with a few small additions. Smets calls 
this  view  a  “modified  Jackson-Hole  consensus”.  According  to  this  view,  there  is  indeed  a 
need to prevent financial imbalances, that is, it is not enough to wait until afterwards and deal 
with  the  problems  caused  by  the  imbalances.  But  the  preventive  work  should  be  entirely 
done by macroprudential policy, while monetary policy should have the same role as before.7 
The monetary policy strategy as such thus does not need to be changed very much. 
The  most  common  argument  in  favour  of  this  view,  according  to  Smets,  is  that  monetary 
policy  is  a  blunt  instrument  and  has  limited  effects  on  the  financial  risks  one  wishes  to 
counteract. The macroprudential policy tools, on the other hand, are regarded as much more 
effective  for  this  purpose.  The  interaction  between  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary 
policy can thus be kept to a minimum, and it is perfectly simple to keep the objectives and 
tools separate from one another. 
“Leaning against the wind vindicated” 
Characteristic of the second view is that one is more doubtful that macroprudential policy will 
always manage to prevent financial imbalances on its own. It could, for instance, be because 
the macroprudential policy tools are not as effective in practice as many people believe and 
hope.  If  this  were  the  case,  macroprudential  policy  would  need  support.  And  despite  the 
central bank’s policy rate not being an ideal tool in this context, it may nevertheless play a 
useful role, together with macroprudential policy, when it comes to preventing imbalances. 
Leaning against the wind is therefore vindicated – an expression Smets uses as an overall 
term for this view. Preventing financial imbalances should thus be included in the tasks of 
monetary policy, in addition to price stability. This means that the central banks have more 
deliberations to make and that monetary policy becomes more complicated than it was prior 
to the crisis. But it is nevertheless not a completely different framework.8 
“Financial stability is price stability” 
The third view goes even further. According to this, the objectives of financial stability and 
price stability are so closely linked that they cannot really be separated – financial stability is 
price stability, to use Smets’ expression.9 It is therefore not appropriate to separate monetary 
policy  and  macroprudential  policy.  Traditional  monetary  policy  can  also  be  regarded  as 
stabilising  the  financial  system  in  the  sense  that  it  oils  the  wheels  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  and  counteracts  financial  markets  that  are  functioning  poorly. 
Taken to an extreme, this view probably means that the standard monetary policy strategy 
would need to change on a more fundamental level. 
                                                
6   Smets (2013). 
7   One example of this view is Svensson (2012). 
8   See Woodford (2012) for an example of this view. 
9   Smets takes the so-called I Theory of Money as an example of this view. See, for instance, Brunnermeier and 
Sannikov (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I think that the division into these three main views provides a good reflection of the current 
debate.  But  there  are  of  course  no  sharp  dividing  lines  between  them,  rather  the  dividing 
lines  are  relatively  fluid.  And  where  one  finds  oneself  on  the  scale  ultimately  depends  on 
which argument or arguments one allocates the greatest significance. It will probably come 
as no surprise to those of you who follow the monetary policy debate in Sweden that I myself 
have great sympathy for the principle that monetary policy needs to support macroprudential 
policy. I would therefore place myself fairly close to the second view in Smets’ description. 
So what has led me to this view? Allow me to begin by giving my interpretation of what a 
monetary policy that leans against the wind entails. 
What does it mean that monetary policy leans against the wind? 
There are different ways of illustrating how and why financial imbalances and risks should be 
included  in  the  monetary  policy  deliberations.  Essentially  it  is  a  question  of  avoiding 
scenarios  where  the  imbalances  will  lead  to  very  negative  effects  on  GDP,  unemployment 
and  inflation.  So  in  principle  it  is  a  question,  as  usual  in  monetary  policy,  of  stabilising 
inflation and the real economy. 
An outline: trade-off between target fulfilment in the short and long term 
Last year the Riksbank published an article with an outline for how financial imbalances can 
be included in the monetary policy deliberations.10 The point of departure was that a central 
bank  now  needs  to  have  a  more  long-run  focus  than  was  traditionally  the  case.  The 
reasoning  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  monetary  policy  should  be  regarded  as  a  trade-off 
between  target  attainment  in  the  coming  years,  that  is,  the  period  for  which  central  banks 
normally  make  forecasts,  and  target  attainment  in  the  longer  run,  beyond  the  forecast 
horizon.11 The idea is that a monetary policy that solely focuses on target attainment a couple 
of  years  ahead  could  miss  the  fact  that  financial  imbalances  are  building  up,  which  risk 
leading to very poor macroeconomic outcomes in the longer run. So according to this outline, 
central banks need to balance target attainment in the shorter run against target attainment 
in the longer run.12 
Inflation target still the foundation, but may take longer to attain 
The  first  important  thing  to  note  is  that  this  trade-off  does  not  mean  throwing  away  the 
inflation  target.  Attaining  the  inflation  target  thus  remains  the  foundation  for  monetary 
policy.13 However, one consequence of conducting a policy that tries to counteract financial 
                                                
10   Sveriges Riksbank (2013). 
11   Mervyn King, the former governor of the Bank of England, has used a closely-related means of illustrating why 
monetary policy should give consideration to financial imbalances, where he instead uses the so-called Taylor 
curve – a curve that illustrates a central bank’s trade-off between stabilising inflation around an inflation target 
and stabilising the real economy (GDP, unemployment, employment and so on) around a long-run sustainable 
level. See King (2012). 
12   This  reasoning  is  thus  based  on  the  notion  that  risks  linked  to  financial  imbalances  can  be  taken  into 
consideration in monetary policy by incorporating their effects in the longer-run forecasts for inflation and the 
real economy (for instance, measured in terms of GDP). There are also arguments in favour of the central 
bank having the stabilisation of financial imbalances as an explicit objective for monetary policy. The financial 
frictions that give rise to the imbalances could, for instance, entail welfare costs for society, over and above 
the  effects  on  inflation  and  GDP,  which  the  central  bank  may  have  reason  to  counteract  directly,  see  for 
instance, Cúrdia and Woodford (2009). Monetary policy would then have three factors to weigh against one 
another:  stabilisation  of  inflation  around  the  target,  stabilisation  of  GDP  around  a  sustainable  level  and 
stabilisation of some relevant measure of financial imbalances. Regardless of the theoretical argument, this 
way  of  including  financial  imbalances  in  the  deliberations  could  have  practical  benefits,  for  instance  by 
reducing the need to incorporate the risks in the forecasts for inflation and GDP. There could therefore be a 
point to following both these lines in the internal analyses. 
13   Woodford (2012) illustrates this in a formal model analysis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  imbalances – that leans against the wind – could be that it takes longer for inflation to attain 
the target than it would have if the central bank had not included financial imbalances in its 
deliberations.  Although  this  policy  can  be  justified  in  ensuring  a  good  development  in  the 
longer-run  perspective,  in  practice  there  are  of  course  limits  as  to  how  much  and  for  how 
long inflation can be allowed to deviate from the target. This has been a very important point 
in my own monetary policy deliberations and I will return to this at the end of my speech. 
The dividing line in the debate: how effective are the respective policy areas? 
Another important thing to note is that a monetary policy that leans against the wind is not 
intended to replace macroprudential policy measures. This could of course be necessary if 
there is no macroprudential policy in place or during a period when macroprudential policy is 
being  organised.  But  once  it  is  in  place,  macroprudential  policy  shall  be  the  first  line  of 
defence against financial imbalances. This is definitely my opinion and as far as I can see it 
is  shared  by  most  of  those  participating  in  the  debate,  that  is,  even  those  who  think  that 
monetary policy should be able to lean against the wind. 
The dividing line is instead at the question of whether monetary policy may need to support 
macroprudential  policy  to  counteract  imbalances.14  Which  side  of  the  line  you  end  up  on 
depends on what you believe about the effectiveness of the tools for macroprudential policy 
and monetary policy respectively. How well do they counteract specific imbalances and what 
consequences do they have for the rest of the economy? 
If one believes that the instruments available to macroprudential policy can effectively keep 
the  imbalances  in  check,  and  that  monetary  policy  is  too  blunt  an  instrument  and  mostly 
affects the rest of the economy – well, then one probably ends up in the “Modified Jackson-
Hole-consensus”, to return to Smets. On the other hand, if one is more uncertain about the 
effectiveness  of  the  macroprudential  instruments  and  believes  that  monetary  policy 
nevertheless has some sting, then there is a greater probability that one will have the view 
that monetary policy may need to lean against the wind. If one is very uncertain about the 
effects of both policy areas, one probably also prefers monetary policy to be used parallel to 
macroprudential policy, at least until more is known about the effects. 
Monetary policy may need to support macroprudential policy 
Those who are sceptical about a monetary policy that leans against the wind often state, as I 
mentioned earlier, that the policy rate is a blunt and ineffective instrument in counteracting 
financial imbalances. But even if this were the case, it would not automatically lead to the 
conclusion that macroprudential tools are significantly more effective. Some of the tools are 
new, some have been around for a while but used partly for other purposes. The practical 
experiences  gained  so  far  are  thus  fairly  limited  and  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any  conclusions 
from  them.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  a  number  of  questions  should  be  raised  as  to  how 
effective  macroprudential  policy  will  be  in  practice  and  whether  it  may  need  support  from 
monetary policy.15 
Uncomfortable measures may be difficult to implement 
One question concerns their feasibility – will measures be taken in time, or even at all? Some 
of the macroprudential policy measures have a direct impact on households’ finances, similar 
to fiscal policy measures. They can be perceived to create relatively major changes in the 
                                                
14   As  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  the  President  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  has  put  it, 
monetary policy needs to deal with the “residual risk” that remains. See Kocherlakota (2013, 2014). 
15   Critical  discussions  on  the  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  policy  tools  and  the  implications  for  monetary 
policy can be found, for instance, in White (2009, 2013), Mishkin (2011), Borio (2011a), Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia 
and Mauro (2013), IMF (2013) and Davies (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  economic playing-field and thus risk obtaining little acceptance from households, which could 
make it difficult to implement such measures. In addition, imbalances risk being aggravated 
in  economic  upswings,  which  means  that  some  measures  need  to  be  implemented  in 
situations where there is probably a general resistance to them – what is usually compared 
to “taking away the punchbowl just as the party gets going”.16 Thus, the measures may also 
be  politically  difficult  to  implement  in  some  cases.  The  extent  to  which  this  affects 
macroprudential policy in practice will of course depend on the institutional set-up chosen. 
Difficult target to define and assess 
The inherent difficulty in defining concrete targets for macroprudential policy may affect the 
ability  to  implement  various  measures.  A  common  formulation  for  the  objective  of 
macroprudential  policy  is  “to  counteract  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole”,  or 
something similar. Regardless of the exact formulation, it is difficult to specify what the target 
actually  entails  in  practice.  When  has  it  been  attained?  Let  us  say  that  macroprudential 
measures are implemented over a couple of years and that no problems arise in the financial 
system. Have the measures then been justified or unnecessary? The only thing the general 
public can observe is a  lack of problems, and there could thus be a risk that the need for 
macroprudential measures is questioned.17 
Measures could be circumvented 
It  could  also  prove  difficult  to  design  a  system  for  macroprudential  policy  that  functions 
efficiently enough, and which inventive market participants are not able to circumvent. In this 
situation, monetary policy may need to support macroprudential policy. The policy rate is a 
blunt  instrument  in  counteracting  financial  imbalances,  as  it  has  a  broad  impact  on  the 
economy. But at the same time, it can be a strength compared with macroprudential tools 
exactly because it is difficult not to be affected by a policy rate increase – monetary policy 
“gets in all of the cracks”, to use an expression minted by Jeremy Stein, previously on the 
Federal Reserve Board of Governors.18 
Low interest rates over a long time can contribute to imbalances 
Macroprudential  policy  may  also  need  support  if  monetary  policy  is  actually  a  contributory 
factor  to  the  imbalances  the  macroprudential  policy  is  trying  to  counteract.  This  is  an 
argument that has arisen both with regard to “the Great Moderation” and the origins of the 
financial crisis, and to the period that followed. If monetary policy is very expansionary over a 
long  period  of  time,  it  may  contribute,  despite  being  justified  with  regard  to  the  prevailing 
economic situation, to the build-up of imbalances on the financial side of the economy – for 
instance,  the  formation  of  distorted  expectations  of  how  high  interest  rates  will  be  in  the 
future and of how the housing market will develop, and so on. In this type of environment 
monetary  policy  may  need  to  support  macroprudential  policy,  by  contributing  less  to  such 
imbalances building up in the first place. 
                                                
16   Goodhart  (2013)  argues  that so-called  countercyclical measures  will  need  to be  introduced  at  a time  when 
they  are  likely  to  be  opposed  by  many  politicians,  most  borrowers  and  lenders,  and  many,  probably  most, 
commentators in the Press. He also doubts that the measures will be implemented with sufficient vigour and 
aggression  to  have  any  mitigating  effect,  as  they  would  be  operating  against  the  prevailing  trend  of  the 
financial market.  
17   This objection of course applies to all policy areas trying to counteract financial risks, including a monetary 
policy that leans against the wind. But while this objection is often made against monetary policy, it has so far 
only been discussed to a minor extent with regard to macroprudential policy.  
18   Stein (2013).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Little acceptance for this view in the Swedish debate 
To summarise: in my view, macroprudential policy should be the first line of defence against 
financial imbalances.19 But it is possible, and even quite probable, that in some situations it 
may need support from monetary policy. And there is thus, at least as I understand it, good 
reason to extend the strategy for monetary policy and allow greater consideration to be given 
to financial imbalances than was the case prior to the financial crisis. 
One of the main arguments against this view in the Swedish debate is that monetary policy in 
practice  has  little  effect  on  the  risks  linked  to  financial  imbalances.  So  the  gain  in  leaning 
monetary policy against the wind is small  in relation to the relatively  large costs of such a 
policy in terms of inflation undershooting the target and negative effects on the real economy. 
Ultimately,  the  size  of the gains  and the costs  is  an  empirical question, as  is  the question 
about the effectiveness of macroprudential policy. But judging by the debate in Sweden, both 
of these questions appear to have been decided already, and it would appear that the only 
correct point of view is a modified Jackson-Hole consensus, to return to Smets. 
My impression is that the debate in Sweden has to a large extent been coloured by the few 
existing quantifications of the costs of leaning against the wind and of the effects of monetary 
policy  on  the  risks  linked  to  household  indebtedness.  This  is  despite  all  of  these 
quantifications  being  very  uncertain.  This  uncertainty  should  also  permeate  the  policy 
conclusions drawn from the quantifications. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  estimates  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  indebtedness.  One 
argument  in  the  debate  has  been  that  the  relationship  between  debt  and  interest  rates  is 
actually the opposite of what the Riksbank believes – in actual fact, both real debt and the 
debt  ratio  should  decline,  not  increase,  if  the  policy  rate  is  cut.20  Earlier  this  year,  the 
Riksbank  presented  the  results  from  an  empirical  study,  which  estimated  the  relationship 
between  interest  rates  and  indebtedness  during  the  period  1995–2013  with  the  aid  of  a 
commonly-used  empirical  method.21  The  estimates  show  the  reverse,  that  there  is  clear 
support that both the debt ratio and real debt increase when the policy rate is cut, even if the 
effect is not so great.22 
But it is also important to emphasise that these estimates are not the final word and that the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  may  very  well  be  greater.  For  instance,  the  effects  have  been 
calculated  for  a  temporary  change  in  the  policy  rate.  A  lasting  change  would  have  quite 
different and much greater effects.23 One risk with holding the policy rate low over a long time 
is  that  it  can  distort  households’  expectations  of  future  interest  rates,  so  that  they  act  as 
though it were a lasting change in interest rates. Also, the empirical method used does not 
capture specific circumstances, such as the fact that the Riksbank has conducted extensive 
communication  to  make  households  aware  of  the  risks  linked  to  high  and  growing 
                                                
19   Of course, the best thing is always to remedy the direct causes of the imbalances. In the specific Swedish 
case,  with  rapidly-rising  housing  prices  and  credit  growth,  it  is  a  question  of  remedying  the  fundamental 
structural problems on the demand side and, perhaps most of all, the supply side of the housing market. This 
is quite essential to achieve a lasting solution, but it is beyond the theme of this speech. See also Jansson 
(2013). 
20   See, for instance, Svensson (2013). 
21   Sveriges Riksbank (2014). 
22   It  has  been  claimed  in  the  debate  that  the  calculated  effect  is  not  statistically  significant  from  a  classical 
statistical  perspective.  However,  the  calculations  were  made  using  a  so-called  Bayesian  method  and  it  is 
therefore misleading to use a classical approach to test the hypothesis that the effect is positive. Moreover, it 
is important to note that here we are talking about a systematic relationship. Of course, one cannot rule out 
the possibility that under special circumstances the debt ratio or real debt might decline when the policy rate is 
cut. But it appears very improbable that this is the case on average. 
23   See, for instance, Sveriges Riksbank (2014) and Alsterlind et al (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  indebtedness. This type of communication could in itself affect households’ behaviour on top 
of the effects of the actual interest-rate policy. 
Greater openness for a change in monetary policy strategy abroad 
While  in  Sweden  one  seems  to  assume  that  the  answers  are  given,  the  attitude  in  the 
international debate is less “dead certain”, at least this is my experience from meetings and 
conferences  and  from  the  discussions  pursued  on  economic  blogs  and  in  academic 
research.  Although  no  clear  majority  has  emerged  in  favour  of  any  of  Smets’  views,  my 
impression  is  nevertheless  that  many  economists  who  study  monetary  policy  issues  have 
increasingly moved toward the view that a monetary policy that leans against the wind may 
be justified. Smets himself, for instance, reaches this conclusion and economists at policy-
oriented institutions such as the IMF, the OECD and the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS) have also expressed support for this point of view.24 
The  argument  in  favour  of  monetary  policy  possibly  needing  to  counteract  financial 
imbalances  has  also  made  an  impact  on  other  central  banks.  Unsurprisingly,  the  most 
obvious  examples  of  this  can  be  found  in  countries  struggling  with  roughly  the  same 
problems  with  indebtedness  and  the  housing  market  that  we  have  in  Sweden.  The  exact 
formulations differ somewhat of course, but there are clear similarities. 
For instance, Norges Bank (2012) writes: “At the same time, interest rate setting should be 
robust and counter the buildup of financial imbalances in the economy.” The Reserve Bank 
of  New  Zealand  (2012)  has  the  following  wording:  “In  addition,  the  PTA’s  [Policy  Targets 
Agreement] stronger focus on financial stability makes it clearer that it may be appropriate to 
use monetary policy to lean against the build-up of financial imbalances, if the Reserve Bank 
believes  this  could  prevent  a  sharper  economic  cycle  in  the  future.”  The  Bank  of  Canada 
(2012) makes  it  clear that  these  deliberations  can  imply  that  it  takes  longer for  inflation  to 
attain  the  target:  “[A]  tighter  monetary  policy  that  keeps  inflation  below  target  longer  than 
usual  could  help  to  prevent  excessive  borrowing  and  a  broader  buildup  of  financial 
imbalances.”25 
In countries where the housing market collapsed in connection with the financial crisis, and 
where  housing  prices  have  already  fallen  heavily,  the  deliberations  have  of  course  been 
somewhat  different.  There,  the  monetary  policy  discussion  has  mainly  concerned  ways  to 
stimulate the economy and get out of the deep recession. But the idea that monetary policy 
may need to be used in support of macroprudential policy and contribute to preventing new 
imbalances arising on financial markets is nevertheless a question that is climbing higher up 
the  agenda  in  these  countries,  too,  as  the  economy  and  the  housing  market  recover.26  A 
clear example is the United Kingdom, where the most recent remit for the Bank of England’s 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  states  that  circumstances  may  arise in  which  the  MPC 
                                                
24   One  recent  example  is  Lagarde  (2014):  “But  where  macroprudential  policies  fall  short,  monetary  policy  will 
have a larger role than in the past to maintain financial stability.” Other examples include White (2009), OECD 
(2010), Caruana (2010), Borio (2011b), IMF (2013), BIS (2013), Bayoumi and Habermeier (2014). See also 
Mishkin (2011) and the Committee on International Economic Policy Reform (2011). 
25   It should be noted that the central banks in these countries have not necessarily made the assessment that 
there was motivation for leaning monetary policy against the wind in practice. The point is that they consider 
such deliberations as important to include in monetary policy as a question of principle. 
26   Examples  in  the  US  Federal Reserve  are  Hoenig  (2010), Bernanke  (2011),  Kocherlakota  (2013)  and  Stein 
(2014).  Within  the  ECB  it  has  been  noted  that  the  strategy  of  a  so-called  “second  pillar”  that  focuses  on 
developments in monetary aggregates implicitly contains an element of leaning against the wind. See ECB 
(2010) and Stark (2010). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  may  choose  to  temporarily  deviate  from  the  inflation  target  to  support  the  target  of  the 
committee with responsibility for macroprudential supervision.27 
Riksbank’s strategy well in line with international debate 
Let  me  conclude  by  returning  to  the  question  in  the  title  of  my  speech  today.  Is  the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy in tune or out of tune with the rest of the world? Right 
now there is an international debate on potential changes in the strategy for monetary policy 
that was common prior to the crisis. One of the most central questions is whether monetary 
policy  should  give  greater  consideration  to  financial  imbalances.  Most  people  agree  that 
macroprudential  policy  should  be  the  first  line  of  defence.  But  an  increasing  number  have 
also  begun  to  take  the view  that  monetary  policy  may  need  to  provide  support  by  leaning 
against the wind. 
Given this, it is difficult to understand the critics who try to claim that the monetary policy the 
Riksbank has conducted in recent years is strange and our own invention. On the contrary, I 
would  say  that  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  strategy  has  been  well  in  line  with  the 
international  debate.  To  be  sure,  this  claim  may  seem  strange  to  someone  who  has  only 
followed the Swedish debate on monetary policy. And this worries me somewhat. It is not a 
good thing if the debate in Sweden is not as open and inquiring as the debate going on in the 
world around us. 
For me, it is quite simply a question of which strategy provides the best conditions for the 
Swedish economy to develop in the best possible way. A policy that leans against the wind 
essentially  entails  avoiding 
to  very  negative  effects  on  GDP, 
unemployment and inflation. This does not mean abandoning the inflation target – this is still 
the foundation of our monetary policy. But the result of such a policy could be that it takes 
longer for inflation to attain the target than it would have done otherwise. There are thus both 
gains and losses with such a policy, which need to be weighed against one another. 
My  own  stance  has  always  been  guided  by  this  deliberation.  The  recent  low  inflation 
outcomes have meant, for instance, that I have placed greater emphasis on the more short-
term  outcome  for  inflation.  At  our  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  I  said  that  my 
tolerance  for  further  downward  revisions  of  inflation  prospects  in  the  near  term  has  now 
reached its lower bound and that I will not vote for a repo-rate increase until CPIF inflation 
picks up and rises above 1.5 per cent. 
Does this mean that I am in effect contradicting myself? Not at all. What I have talked about 
today  concerns  principles  for  monetary  policy  –  arguments  that  the  strategy  needs  to  be 
flexible and allow financial risks to be included in the monetary policy deliberations. But this 
does  not  mean  that  the  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  self-evident.  There  are  always 
several aspects to be taken into account and the question of which scale weighs the heaviest 
will depend on the specific situation at the time of each repo-rate decision. And the further 
inflation is from the target, and the longer it remains so, the greater the weight this scale will 
carry, despite the remaining risks linked to household indebtedness and the housing market. 
imbalances 
leading 
                                                
27   HM Treasury (2014): “Circumstances may also arise in which attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target 
could exacerbate the development of imbalances that the Financial Policy Committee may judge to represent 
a potential risk to financial stability. The Financial Policy Committee’s macroprudential tools are the first line of 
defence against such risks, but in these circumstances the [Monetary Policy] Committee may wish to allow 
inflation to deviate from the target temporarily, consistent with its need to have regard to the policy actions of 
the Financial Policy Committee.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  References 
Alsterlind,  Jan,  Holmberg,  Ulf,  Jönsson,  Kristian,  Lagerwall,  Björn  and  Winstrand,  Jacob 
(2013),  Risks  to  the  macroeconomy  and  financial  stability  from  the  development  of 
household  debt  and  housing  prices.  Memo  6  of  the  analysis  group  of  the  Council  for 
Cooperation on Macroprudential Policy. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Bank of Canada (2012), Backgrounders – Monetary Policy. 
Bayoumi,  Tamim,  Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni,  Habermeier,  Karl,  Mancini-Griffoli,  Tommaso, 
Valencia, Fabián and the IMF Staff Team (2014), Monetary Policy in the New Normal. IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 14/3, IMF. 
Bayoumi, Tamim and Habermeier, Karl (2014), The Evolution of Monetary Policy: More Art 
and Less Science. Post on the IMF’s blog iMFdirect, available at blog-imfdirect.imf.org. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2011), The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and 
Practice.  Speech  at  the  56th  Economic  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston 
18 October 2011. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  and  Gertler,  Mark  (1999),  Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Volatility.  In 
Economic  Symposium  Conference  Proceedings:  New  Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy. 
Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank. 
Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark (2001), Should Central Banks Respond To Movements 
in Asset Prices? American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91, pp. 253–257. 
BIS  (2013),  VI.  Monetary  policy  at  the  crossroads,  83rd  Annual  Report,  1  April  2012–31 
March 2013. Bank for International Settlements. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  (2000),  Bubbles,  Liquidity  Traps,  and  Monetary  Policy.  In  Mikitani  and 
Posen (eds) Japan’s Financial Crisis and its Parallels to the US Experience, Special Report 
13. Institute for International Economics. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2013), Rethinking Macro Policy 
II: Getting Granular. IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/03. the IMF. 
Borio, Claudio (2011a), Implementing a Macroprudential Framework: Blending Boldness and 
Realism. Capitalism and Society 6 (1). 
Borio,  Claudio  (2011b),  Central-banking  post-crisis:  What  compass  for  uncharted  waters? 
BIS Working Papers No 353. Bank for International Settlements. 
Borio,  Claudio  and  White,  William  (2003),  Whither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes. In Economic Symposium Conference Proceedings: 
Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing  Economy.  Kansas  City  Federal 
Reserve Bank. 
Brunnermeier, Markus and Sannikov, Yuli (2013), Reviving “money and banking”. In Reichlin 
and Baldwin (eds) Is Inflation Targeting Dead? Central Banking After the Crisis. Vox eBook. 
Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Caruana,  Jaime  (2010),  Macroprudential  policy:  what  have  we  learned  and  where  are  we 
going?  Keynote  speech  at  the  Second  Financial  Stability  Conference  of  the  International 
Journal of Central Banking, Bank of Spain, 17 June 2010. Bank for International Settlements. 
Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  (2011),  Rethinking  Central 
Banking. Brookings. 
Cúrdia, Vasco and Woodford, Michael (2009), Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy. 
Working paper. Department of Economics, Columbia University. 
Davies,  Gavyn  (2014),  Macro  pru  is  no  panacea.  Post  on  the  Financial  Times  blog  on 
11 May. Available at www.ft.com. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  Economic  Symposium  Conference 
ECB  (2010),  Asset  price  bubbles  and  monetary  policy  revisited.  Article  in  ECB  Monthly 
Bulletin November 2010. 
Goodhart, Charles (2013), Lessons for Monetary Policy from the Euro-Area Crisis. Journal of 
Macroeconomics 39, pp. 378–382. 
Greenspan,  Alan  (2002),  Opening  Remarks. 
Proceedings: Rethinking Stabilization Policy. Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank. 
HM  Treasury  (2014),  Monetary  policy  remit:  2014.  Letter  from  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer to the Governor of the Bank of England.  
Hoenig,  Thomas  M.  (2010),  What  About  Zero?  Speech  at  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico  April 7. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
IMF (2013), The Interaction of Monetary and Macroprudential Policies. IMF Policy Paper. 
Issing, Otmar (2009), Asset Prices and Monetary Policy. Cato Journal 29 (1), pp. 45–51. 
Jansson, Per (2013), How do we stop the trend in household debt? Work on several fronts. 
Speech at SvD Bank Summit, Stockholm, 12 March, Sveriges Riksbank. 
King,  Mervyn  (2012),  Twenty  years  of  inflation  targeting.  The  Stamp  Memorial  Lecture, 
London School of Economics 9 October 2012, Bank of England. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2013), Low Real Interest Rates. Speech at the 22nd Annual Hyman 
P. Minsky Conference April 18 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2014), Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. Presentation at the 
2014  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy  March  21  2014.  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis. 
Lagarde,  Christine  (2014),  Navigating  Monetary  Policy  in  the  New  Normal.  Speech  at  the 
ECB Forum on Central Banking 25 May 2014. IMF. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2011),  Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Lessons  From  the  Crisis.  In 
Jarocinski, Smets and Thimann (eds) Approaches to Monetary Policy Revisited – Lessons 
from the Crisis. Sixth ECB Central Banking Conference 18–19 November 2010. ECB. 
Norges Bank (2012), Monetary Policy Report 2012/1. 
OECD  (2010),  Counter-cyclical  economic  policy.  OECD  Economics  Department  Policy 
Notes, No. 1, May 2010. OECD. 
Reichlin, Lucrezia and Baldwin, Richard, (eds), (2013), Is Inflation Targeting Dead? Central 
Banking After the Crisis. Vox eBook, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  (2012),  News  release  announcing  2012  Policy  Targets 
Agreement, 20 September. 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  interlinked? 
Economic Review 2013:3. Jubilee issue. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Stark, Jürgen (2010), In search of a robust monetary policy framework. Keynote speech at 
the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches to monetary policy revisited – lessons 
from the crisis”, 19 November 2010. ECB. 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2013),  Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement  and  Policy 
Responses. Speech at the research symposium Restoring Household Financial Stability after 
the  Great  Recession:  Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
St. Louis. 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2014),  Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary 
Policy  Framework.  Speech  at  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
21 March 2014. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2012),  Comment  on  Michael  Woodford  “Inflation  Targeting  and 
Financial Stability”. Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2012:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O. (2013), The  Riksbank  is wrong  about  the  debt  –  a  higher  policy  rate 
increases (not reduces) the household debt ratio. Post on the blog Ekonomistas, 26 August 
2013. Available at ekonomistas.se. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2013), Financial imbalances in the monetary policy assessment. Article 
in Monetary Policy Report, July 2013. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2014),  The  effects  of  monetary  policy  in  household  debt.  Article  in 
Monetary Policy Report, February 2014. 
White,  William  (2009),  Should  Monetary  Policy  “Lean  or  Clean”?  Working  Paper  No. 34, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute. 
White,  William  (2013),  The  prudential  regulation  of  financial  institutions:  Why  regulatory 
responses to the crisis might not prove sufficient. SPP Research Papers 6 (33). 
Woodford,  Michael  (2012),  Inflation  Targeting  and  Financial  Stability.  Economic  Review 
2012:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
