  Sayuri Shirai: Recent monetary policy trends in advanced economies 
and the Asia-Pacific region 
Keynote address by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, to 
the National asset liability management conference, Singapore, 23 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great honor to visit Singapore and have the opportunity to give a keynote address at 
the  National  Asset-Liability  Management  conference.  I  have  been  a  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ) 
Policy  Board  member  since  2011,  and  am  responsible  for  making  decisions  on  monetary 
policy conduct with Governor Haruhiko Kuroda and other  Policy Board members. Today,  I 
would like to talk about the recent monetary policy trends in advanced economies and the 
Asia-Pacific  region.  In  early  January  this  year,  I  had  the  opportunity  of  giving  a  speech  in 
Singapore  on  recent  monetary  policy  developments  in  advanced  economies  and  their 
relationship  with  emerging  economies.  Immediately  after  that,  I  was  pleasantly  surprised 
when Central Banking Publications, the organizer of today’s conference, kindly asked me to 
extend this line of thinking in the context of the Asia-Pacific region and give a speech today. 
While it is a challenging task to review the developments in this diverse region, I hope that 
my  speech  will  provide  a  useful  background  to  foster  active  discussions  during  this 
conference.  
I will begin with an overview of recent monetary policy in advanced economies (covering the 
United States, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom). I will then focus on the Asia-
Pacific  region  by  summarizing  the  features  of  monetary  policy  conduct  and  its  related 
challenges  over  the  past  decade  –  covering  nine  economies  (Australia,  China,  Indonesia, 
Malaysia,  New  Zealand,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  and  Thailand).  Finally,  I 
will  present  my  views  on  the  region’s  inflation  performance  and  the  direction  of  future 
monetary policy conduct. 
Recent monetary policy conduct features in advanced economies 
II. 
Since  the  outset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  monetary  policy  conduct  has  changed 
dramatically  in  advanced  economies.  Let  me  highlight  four  features  commonly  observed 
among such economies: (1) adoption of a 2 percent inflation target; (2) stabilizing inflation 
expectations at around 2 percent; (3) unconventional monetary policy under the zero interest 
rate lower bound; and (4) an emphasis on financial stability and its relation to monetary and 
macroprudential policies. I will explain these features by discussing four central banks: the 
U.S. Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB), the BOJ, and the Bank of England 
(BOE), as shown in Chart 1. 
Adoption of a 2 percent inflation target 
A. 
First,  all  four  central  banks  have  adopted  a  medium-term  inflation  target  or  a  numerical 
definition  of  price  stability  with  a  2  percent,  or  close  to  2  percent,  convergence:  their 
monetary  policy  mandates  all  include  price  stability.  These  central  banks  use  headline 
inflation as a reference to their inflation targets (the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
[HICP] for the ECB; the consumer price index [CPI] for the BOJ and the BOE; and the price 
index for personal consumption expenditures [PCE] for the Federal Reserve). The Federal 
Reserve, the ECB, and the BOJ also officially use the core PCE deflator, the core HICP, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  the  core  CPI,  respectively,  as  operational  guides  to  examine  the  underlining  price 
movements in monetary policy conduct.1 
The BOE and the ECB were frontrunners in adopting price stability targets, and the current 
numerical targets were adopted in 2003, prior to the global financial crisis, while the Federal 
Reserve and the BOJ did so after the crisis in 2012 and 2013, respectively. Regardless of 
whether an inflation-targeting framework is officially implemented, the practices adopted are 
similar  for  each  of  the  four  central  banks.  These  practices  include  adopting  a  numerical 
inflation target with clear mandates, the release of medium-term forecasts on future inflation 
and  economic  growth  (generally  for  about  three  years),  the  presence  of  a  committee  that 
independently  determines  monetary  policy,  and  various  accountability  requirements  on 
achieving the target. 
These  central  banks  all  make  policy  decisions  to  align  their  inflation  forecasts  with  their 
specific inflation target over the medium term (or medium to long term). In other words, they 
conduct a so-called “flexible inflation-targeting framework” that is defined by Professor Lars 
E.O.  Svensson  as  monetary  policy  conduct  that  attempts  to  stabilize  inflation  around  the 
inflation  target  and  to  stabilize  the  output  gap  around  the  sustainable  level.  Namely, 
monetary policy should be conducted flexibly with the aim of achieving the inflation target by 
taking  into  account  various  possible  disturbances  and  their  impacts  on  economic  growth. 
This means conducting monetary policy so that a central bank’s inflation forecast gradually 
approaches its target in the medium term and inflation meets the target as a medium-term 
average.  This  approach  is  embedded  in  the  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  Federal 
Reserve because of its explicit dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. 
In recent years, the realized inflation rates in some of these economies have been below the 
relevant  target  for  some  time  (Chart  2).  This  seems  to  reflect  declining  energy  prices, 
excessive  employment  and  capital  stock,  exchange  rate  appreciation,  and  continued 
headwinds  caused  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  Those  headwinds  include  strengthened 
financial regulations, banks’ tight lending standards, the deleveraging process by firms and 
households, and the moderate pace of global economic recovery. As a result, some central 
banks seem to be finding it necessary to conduct monetary easing for longer periods than 
originally expected. 
Stabilizing inflation expectations at around 2 percent 
B. 
To achieve price stability, a central bank needs to stabilize the public’s inflation expectations 
at around its price stability target. If such expectations are well anchored, there is a tendency 
for  inflation to  converge  to  the  target  even  after  a  deviation.  In  general,  long-term  inflation 
expectations are more important than short-term expectations, with the latter tending to be 
more volatile and sensitive to both commodity prices and the prices of frequently-purchased 
goods and services. The Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the BOE all claim that their long-
term inflation expectations (e.g., five years ahead) remain well anchored at around 2 percent. 
This is confirmed for the United States and the euro area by economic forecaster data on 
long-term inflation expectations (Chart 2). On the other hand, long-term inflation expectations 
have  exceeded  the  target  for  over  five  years  in  the  United  Kingdom  because  of  various 
factors  including  exchange  rate  depreciation,  energy  price  increases,  a  hike  in  the  value-
added  tax,  and  rises  in  various  administered  and  regulated  prices.  However,  its  inflation 
expectations have started to fall recently since the highlighted effects have dissipated. 
                                                 
1  These central banks have different “core” index definitions. The Federal Reserve defines it as “all items less 
food  and  energy,”  the  ECB  defines  it  as  “all  items  less  energy,  food,  alcohol,  and  tobacco,”  and  the  BOJ 
defines it as “all items less fresh food.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Situation in Japan and a conundrum regarding inflation expectations 
The BOJ adopted its 2 percent price stability target in January 2013, followed by the launch 
of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  of  the  same  year.  These 
initiatives are aimed at overcoming the mild deflation that has lingered for 15 years in Japan. 
A  distinct  feature  of  the  QQE  is  that  it  aims  not  only  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation  at  the 
earliest possible time, but also to raise long-term inflation expectations from the current low 
level of around 1 percent to around 2 percent, and then stabilize them at around 2 percent. In 
this  sense, the  BOJ’s  monetary  easing  objective  differs  from  those  of  other  central  banks. 
These  banks  aim  to  increase  aggregate  demand  and  thereby  support  economic  recovery, 
while  maintaining  the  current  situation  where  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  already 
stable at around 2 percent. 
Japan’s  long-term  inflation  expectations  (e.g.,  five  years  ahead)  have  averaged  about 
1 percent from 1995 to early 2014. This is somewhat perplexing since both realized inflation 
and  short-term  inflation  expectations  (e.g.,  one  year  ahead)  remained  consistently  below 
long-term  inflation  expectations  and  often  faced  mild  deflation.  Relatively  higher  long-term 
inflation  expectations  may  be  attributable  to  the  public’s  long-held  belief  that  prices  will 
eventually  rise;  this  is  particularly  relevant  for  those  who  experienced  the  oil  crisis  in  the 
1970s  and  the  bubble  period  in  the  1980s.  Chart  2  also  indicates  that  Japan’s  inflation 
expectations are more volatile than those in the United States, the euro area, and the United 
Kingdom (before the global financial crisis). This suggests that Japan’s inflation expectations 
have not yet been anchored. 
Against  this  backdrop,  QQE  was  meant  to  produce  a  regime  change  in  monetary  policy 
thereby raising realized inflation and inflation expectations toward 2 percent. This approach 
is similar (but conducted in a reverse manner) to that adopted by the then Federal Reserve 
Chairman  Paul  Volcker  in  1979–1983.  The  recent  rise  in  the  realized  inflation  in  Japan  is 
largely  attributable  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  from  5  percent  to  8  percent  in  April  2014 
(Chart  2).  Even  excluding  this  temporary  effect,  inflation  is  now  around  1¼  percent  and 
shows a steady rise from the recent bottom of minus 0.5 percent recorded in March 2013. 
The BOJ projects that inflation is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time, and thereafter 
follow a rising trend again from the second half of this fiscal year. Similarly, a sharp rise in 
short-term inflation expectations (e.g., one year ahead) during 2013 mainly reflects this tax 
effect.  Thus,  a  drop  in  expectations  from  over  2  percent  to  below  2  percent  in  April  2014 
reflects  an  evaporation  of  the  tax  effect.  On  the  other  hand,  since  long-term  inflation 
expectations (e.g., five years ahead) do not incorporate this tax effect, the recent signs of an 
increase  are  encouraging.  Based  on  various  indicators  related  to  inflation  expectations  of 
households,  firms,  and  market  participants,  the  BOJ  judges  that  long-term  inflation 
expectations are generally on a moderate rising trend; however, whether this trend continues 
should be closely monitored, as these indicators show some different movements. 
It  is  clear  that,  since  the  QQE  adoption,  Japan’s  economy  has  shown  positive  signs  of 
moving out of deflation (Chart 2). Some firms seem to be increasingly confident about raising 
their  sales  prices  by  providing  innovative  products  and  services  and  thereby  tapping 
demand.  An  increasing  number  of  households  appear  to  be  enjoying  employment  and 
nominal  income  growth.  Transforming  the  public’s  deflation-oriented  mindsets  and  their 
resultant risk-averse economic behavior will take some time, but positive developments are 
gradually  but  steadily  spreading  in  the  economy.  Going  forward,  monetary  policy  should 
continue  to  support  the  transformation  process  and  economic  recovery.  The  government’s 
growth  strategy  to  strengthen  the  potential  of  Japan's  economy  combined  with  firms’ 
initiatives mean that it is possible to first achieve the 2 percent price stability target and to 
subsequently sustain the 2 percent inflation in a stable manner. The expression “sustain the 
2 percent inflation in a stable manner” is considered equivalent to the idea of stabilizing long-
term inflation expectations at around 2 percent. In other words, in such a situation, inflation of 
around  2  percent  would  be  realized  as  a  medium-term  average,  as  observed  in  other 
advanced economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Unconventional monetary policy under the zero interest rate lower bound 
C. 
In the face of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, the four central banks have 
actively  conducted  “unconventional”  monetary  easing  measures  such  as  (1)  large-scale 
purchase  of  various  financial  assets,  (2)  forward  guidance  over  the  future  monetary  policy 
stance, (3) longer-term liquidity provision facility, (4) long-term conditional lending, and (5) a 
negative interest rate charge on reserves (Chart 3). In what follows, I will briefly touch on the 
current initiatives taken by these four central banks. 
Measure (1): Large-scale purchase of various financial assets 
The Federal Reserve, the BOJ, and the BOE have performed large-scale asset purchase 
operations  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  their  longer-term  interest  rates  that  remain  in 
positive  territory  despite  the  policy  rate  reaching  nearly  zero.  This  policy  is  sometimes 
referred to as quantitative easing. While sovereign bonds are the major assets purchased, 
the  Federal  Reserve  also  purchases  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBSs),  and  the 
BOJ  purchases  diverse  assets  (treasury  discount  bills  [T-Bills],  corporate  bonds,  CP, 
exchange-traded  funds  [ETFs],  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  [J-REITs]).  The 
Federal Reserve is currently reducing the amount of asset purchases at a measured pace, 
while the BOJ continues to purchase assets based at a pre-determined annual pace (a pace 
currently clarified until the end of 2014). The BOE is maintaining its outstanding asset holding 
amounts.  Meanwhile,  the  ECB  has  taken  a  different  approach  by  purchasing  a  limited 
amount of financial assets and sterilizing the amount of sovereign bonds purchased under its 
securities market program (SMP). In June 2014, the commitment to sterilizing those bonds 
purchased was suspended because inflationary concerns had dissipated. Moreover, the ECB 
decided  to  intensify  preparatory  work  related  to  the  outright  purchases  of  asset-backed 
securities (ABSs) as a credit easing policy, rather than as a quantitative easing policy. 
Measure (2): forward guidance 
All  four  central  banks  have  adopted  forward  guidance:  this  refers  to  a  communication 
strategy undertaken by central banks to provide information to the markets and the public on 
their future monetary policy stances. Of the four, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the 
BOE apply forward guidance mainly to their respective short-term policy interest rates – the 
operational target for monetary policy – and provide guidance to the markets and the public 
about  how  long  they  expect  to  keep  the  current  low  interest  rates.  In  contrast,  the  BOJ 
applies forward guidance to its QQE as a package, and not on its policy interest rate. This is 
because its operational target was shifted from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the 
monetary base. Once the size of the annual pace of increase in the monetary base is set, the 
approximate 
is  decided 
accordingly;  hence,  there  is  a  close  link  between  the  monetary  base  and  the  amount  of 
assets purchased. The BOJ then uses forward guidance to inform the markets and the public 
of  its  intention  to  maintain  the  monetary  base  increase  and  thus  asset  purchases  in  the 
future. 
Measure (3): Longer-term liquidity provision facility 
The  ECB  and  the  BOJ  currently  have  longer-term  liquidity  provision  facilities  to  assist  the 
funding  of  financial  institutions  and  to  foster  their  lending  activities  to  promote  economic 
activity.  The  ECB  is  conducting  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  with  a  fixed 
interest rate and a full allotment. The ECB previously offered LTROs with three year maturity 
terms in December 2011 and February 2012: currently, LTROs are available under a three 
month maturity term until December 2016. Meanwhile, the BOJ conducted several one-year 
liquidity operations during April and May 2013 to cope with the volatile JGB market. While 
liquidity operations with maturity levels of up to one year are still available, the BOJ currently 
mainly provides three-month operations. 
in  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  purchases 
increase 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Measure (4): Long-term conditional lending 
The BOJ was the first central bank, under the zero interest rate lower bound, to introduce a 
long-term lending facility where the amount of lending to financial institutions is conditional on 
the  increased  lending  by  these  institutions  to  the  private  sector.  The  aim  is  to  promote 
lending activities by financial institutions. The BOJ currently operates two programs: (1) the 
fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth 
(the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility)  introduced  in  2010  (provision  of  funds  at  a  0.1 
percent  fixed  interest  rate  for  up  to  four  years,  based  on  the  increased  lending  and 
investment  realized  by  the  financial  institutions  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth);  and  (2)  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank  lending  (the 
Stimulating Bank Lending Facility) introduced in 2013 (provision of funds for up to four years 
and  of  up  to  twice  the  net  increase  in  the  financial  institutions’  lending  without  a  limit). 
Subsequently, the BOE adopted the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) in 2012, allowing 
financial institutions  to borrow  U.K.  Treasury  bills  at  a  low cost  in  exchange  for  all  eligible 
collateral  depending  on  their  realized  net  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs). Moreover, in June 2014, the ECB newly introduced Targeted LTROs by providing 
long-term funds (for a maximum of three to four years) to financial institutions up to a total of 
three  times  the  net  increase  in  private-sector  lending  excluding  mortgages,  with  a  fixed 
interest  rate  at  10  basis  points  plus  the  prevailing  interest  rate  of  the  main  refinancing 
operations (MROs). 
Measure (5): Negative interest rate charge on reserves 
The ECB introduced a negative interest rate (negative 0.1 percent) on excess reserves and 
lowered deposit facility interest rates to the same negative rate in June 2014, in conjunction 
with  a  cut  in  other  policy  interest  rates.  Meanwhile,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  BOJ 
maintain a positive respective 0.25 percent and 0.1 percent interest rate on excess reserves. 
The  BOE  applies  a  positive  0.5  percent  rate  on  total  reserves.  In  general,  central  banks 
maintain  positive  interest  rates  on  (excess)  reserves  for  various  reasons,  including 
maintaining the proper functioning of the interbank markets. If interest rates on reserves are 
negative,  the  interbank  markets  could  shrink,  and  this  could  generate  a  situation  where 
financial institutions are unable to promptly raise funds from the markets when most needed. 
Since  the  interest  rate  on  reserves  provides  the  floor  for  interbank  market  interest  rates, 
keeping this rate in positive territory could mitigate large fluctuations in the interbank market 
rates. This enables a central bank to smoothly provide sufficient liquidity and to expand its 
balance sheet as a quantitative easing policy.  
Meanwhile, some expect positive aspects from introducing a negative interest rate, such as 
tackling  exchange  rate  appreciation  and  lowering  the  bank  lending  rate.  For  example,  in 
Denmark, Danmarks Nationalbank applied a negative interest rate on its certificate of deposit 
(CD) facility from July 2012 to April 2014 to fight massive capital inflows and to defend its 
peg against the euro under the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II). As a result, a positive 
effect  was  observed  in  leading  to  currency  depreciation  and  maintenance  of  the  peg. 
However,  the  lending  rates  were  largely  unaffected  and  the  amount  of  lending  actually 
dropped. 
D. 
Emphasis on financial stability and its relation to monetary and 
macroprudential policies 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  led  each  country  to  place  increased  importance  on 
macroprudential  policy,  given  that  stability  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  may  not  be 
achieved  solely  through  the  existing  microprudential  policies.  This  arises  from  the  globally 
shared  view  that  the  “Great  Moderation”  period  –  which  continued  until  the  mid-2000s  – 
successfully achieved general price stability but failed to prevent the global financial crisis. 
Macroprudential  policy  focuses  on  financial  institutions  and  the  markets  (and  their 
relationships) as major constituents of the financial system, as well as on the effects of the 
relationship between economic activity and the financial system. In this regard, central banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  closely  monitor  macroeconomic  and  financial  market  developments,  collect  information 
regarding  financial  transactions,  and  function  as  the  lenders  of  the  last  resort  to  individual 
financial institutions with the aim of ensuring financial system stability. Thus, the use of these 
specific skills, knowledge, and functions is considered effective in optimizing the  effects of 
macroprudential policy. As a result, there is a growing consensus that central banks have an 
increasing role in macroprudential policies to maintain financial stability. 
However, there is an open question on the correct balance between macroprudential policy 
decisions  and  monetary  policy  decisions  for  a  central  bank.  For  example,  monetary 
tightening, such as an interest rate hike, is generally an appropriate policy option, particularly 
when there are signs of heightened inflationary pressures or when rapid credit growth and 
asset price bubbles are emerging across sectors. This is even true in the case of containing 
an  increasing  risk  of  financial  imbalances  when  the  realized  inflation  has  already  been 
sustained at the target level or when long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
However,  problems  may  arise  when  a  central  bank  is  conducting  monetary  easing  over  a 
long period in a protracted downturn phase of the economy. In this circumstance, inflation 
may remain below the target for an overly long time and long-term inflation expectations may 
have  begun  to  decline,  while  financial  imbalances  such  as  bubbles  may  have  started  to 
appear. In such a situation, a central bank needs to continue monetary easing to both fulfill 
its  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  avoid  a  loss  of  credibility  by  failing  to  meet  the 
inflation target. The problem arises because such a policy may increase the risk of further 
credit growth and amplify asset bubbles and may thus create a dilemma. These issues are 
becoming relevant in recent years. Some advanced economies including Belgium, Norway, 
Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the  United  Kingdom  appear  to  be  facing  a  rapid  increase  in 
housing prices, while their CPI inflations remain low and/or below the inflation targets. 
Greater focus on macroprudential policy by the central bank community  
The above tradeoff between price stability and financial stability suggests that assigning too 
many  objectives  to  monetary  policy  without  allocating  sufficient  policy  tools  may  be 
potentially  problematic.  Thus,  the  active  use  of  macroprudential  policy  by  central  banks  is 
widely  considered  as  a  first  line  of  defense  against  emerging  financial  imbalances. 
Macroprudential policies are measures that affect the behavior of financial institutions, and 
the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) considers that they can be classified 
into (1) capital-based measures, (2) liquidity-based measures, and (3) asset-side measures.2 
Capital-based measures include countercyclical capital buffers (CCBs) that are incorporated 
in the Basel III framework and sector-based capital buffers. Liquidity-based measures include 
a liquidity ratio, a limit on net open positions in foreign currencies, and a reserve requirement. 
Asset-side  measures  include  credit  volume  controls,  a  loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio  (mainly 
applied for housing and real estate loans), a debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, and various taxes 
related  to  real  estate  transactions.  Of  these,  there  is  a  focus  on  CCBs  as  a  practical 
macroprudential measure in some advanced economies. While CCBs are scheduled to be 
applied in each country in 2016, Switzerland took thelead by instituting their activation from 
July  2012,  where  the  Federal  Council  makes CCB  decisions  based on  the  Swiss  National 
Bank recommendations. The CCBs can either be applied as aggregate based and/or sector 
based;  and  the  sector-based  capital  buffers  of  1  percent  was  applied  for  residential 
mortgages in February 2013, and subsequently doubled to 2 percent in June 2014. 
On the institutional aspect of conducting macroprudential policy, the United Kingdom has 
made a substantial institutional reform. Its Financial Policy Committee (FPC) was established 
within  the  BOE  to  conduct  macroprudential  policy,  while  its  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC)  continues  to  engage  in  monetary  policy.  The  FPC  seems  to  be  currently  seeking 
                                                 
2  The  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  “Operationalising  the  Selection  and  Application  of 
Macroprudential Instruments,” CGFS Papers, No. 48, 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  specific means to encourage coordination with the MPC. The MPC has recently expressed 
increasing  concerns  over  the  surge  in  housing  prices  and  the  expansionary  trend  in 
mortgages  in  the  low  interest  rate  environment,  and  considers  that  macroprudential  policy 
should be used as a first line of defense to mitigate the related systemic risks. The CCBs are 
considered to be important macroprudential measures, and in May 2014, the FPC was given 
responsibility for setting the CCB rate by the government. In line with its new responsibility, 
the FPC decided to set the rate at zero percent in June 2014. In the same month, the FPC 
also  made  recommendation  to  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA)  to  apply  a 
DTI-ratio-like measure on residential mortgages. 
Meanwhile, the European Union (EU) has learned the lesson that the lack of a cross-border 
banking monitoring and management system resulted in a delayed, inadequate response to 
the  crisis.  This  promoted  the  move  toward  the  Banking  Union.  In  a major  step,  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) will commence operations in November 2014, with the ECB 
playing  a  supervisory  role  in  monitoring  the  soundness  of  major  banks.  Moreover,  the  EU 
established  a  union-level  body  known  as  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  in 
2010, where the president of the ECB serves as the head of the Board and other members 
include governors of national central banks, a representative of the European Commission, 
and  senior  officers  of  relevant  regulatory  institutions  in  the  region.  The  ESRB’s  task  is  to 
identify  risks  related  to  the  financial  system  and  to  provide  recommendations  to  national 
regulatory authorities when necessary. 
In the United States,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  –  whose members 
include  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  –  was  established  in  2010  as  an  institution 
responsible  for  monitoring  the  potential  risks  related  to  financial  stability  and  for  making 
recommendations  to  the  Federal  Reserve  on  prudential  regulations  and  supervision.  In 
Japan,  the  Financial  Services  Agency  (FSA)  –  the  primary  financial  regulatory  authority  – 
and the BOJ decided in June 2014 to hold a semi-annual joint meeting to exchange views on 
financial  stability.  This  move  reflects  the  coordinated  efforts  to  promote  financial  system 
stability by making contributions in their respective fields of responsibility. In this regard, the 
BOJ conducts on-site examinations and off-site monitoring of individual financial institutions, 
and thereby carries out various analyses on financial system stability and related risks from 
macroprudential  perspectives.  The  BOJ  also  publishes  a  semi-annual  Financial  Stability 
Report. 
Use of liquidity-absorbing operations to maintain financial stability 
While macroprudential policies are generally considered as the first line of defense against 
financial imbalances, there has recently been an increasing focus on the application of an 
interest rate on excess reserves and/or reverse repurchase agreements as another possible 
method of containing the ample liquidity circulating in the money market.3 As a central bank 
is able to set such an interest rate on its own, it may be able to control bank reserves and 
thus,  can  possibly  affect  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  by  encouraging  financial 
institutions  to  hold  ample  liquidity  with  the  central  bank.  Importantly,  a  central  bank  can 
implement  this  measure  while  retaining  the  ability  to  affect  the  short-term  interest  rate,  so 
that  a  tradeoff  in  terms  of  price  and  economic  stabilization  goals  can  be  limited.  The 
application of these tools is actively debated in the United States recently in the context of a 
smooth  exit  policy  to  normalize  market  interest  rates  while  maintaining  abundant  liquidity 
within the Federal Reserve. At the same time, using these tools to maintain abundant excess 
reserves  for  long  periods  is  also  considered  to  be  potentially  useful  to  contain  excessive 
investment and lending by banks and thus prevent asset price bubbles. 
                                                 
3  See,  for  example,  Joseph  E.  Gagnon  and  Brian  Sack,  “Monetary  Policy  with  Abundant  Liquidity:  A  New 
Operating Framework for the Federal Reserve,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Briefs 
No. 14–4, January 2014; and John C. Williams, “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: Happy Marriage or 
Untenable Union?,” a presentation to the Deutsche Bundesbank Conference in Germany, June 5, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Changes in monetary policy conduct in the Asia-Pacific region 
III. 
Now, I would like to turn to the Asia-Pacific region covering nine economies. Following the 
East  Asian  economic  crisis  of  1997–1998,  many  central  banks  in  the  region  shifted  away 
from the rigid dollar peg system and at the same time, their monetary policy frameworks also 
changed.  As  a  result,  there  is  some  degree  of  convergence  with  regard  to  their  monetary 
policy  conduct,  although  there  is  still  considerable  diversity.  I  would  like  to  highlight  five 
common features: (1) a growing emphasis on price stability; (2) the highly-flexible inflation-
targeting framework; (3) allowing greater movements in the exchange rates; (4) a low policy 
interest  rate  in  the  face  of  large  capital  inflows;  and  (5)  extensive  use  of  macroprudential 
policy to maintain financial stability. 
Growing emphasis on price stability 
A. 
All of the region’s central banks emphasize price stability or, in other words, the maintenance 
of  low  and  stable  inflation  as  their  monetary  policy  objective.  The  central  banks  in  New 
Zealand,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  and  Thailand  specify  price  stability  as 
their  monetary  policy  mandate.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  (RBA)  encompasses  three 
mandates (stability of the domestic currency, full employment, and the economic prosperity 
and welfare of the Australian people), with these objectives being expressed in practice by 
the inflation target. The Bank Indonesia (BI) defines rupiah stability as the stability of general 
prices; in practice, maintaining low and stable inflation is considered the primary monetary 
policy  objective.  Similarly,  the  mandate  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (BNM)  is  to  maintain 
monetary  stability  or  ringgit  stability  that  is  thought  to  be  preserved  by  price  stability.  The 
objective of monetary policy in China is to maintain renminbi stability. 
Regardless  of  differences  in  terms  of  how  to  express  the  mandate,  all  nine  central  banks 
equally emphasize the importance of achieving price stability. Six economies (Australia, New 
Zealand,  South  Korea,  Thailand,  the  Philippines,  and  Indonesia)  attempt  to  achieve  price 
stability  by  officially  adopting  an  inflation-targeting  framework  that  will  be  explained  later 
(Chart  4).  China  pursues  price  stability  through  its  monetary  aggregate  target  (M2)  and 
Singapore uses an exchange rate anchor. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) classifies 
Malaysia in a category with no explicitly-stated nominal anchor but rather monitors various 
indicators  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  All  central  banks,  with  the  exception  of  those  in 
Malaysia and Singapore, provide numerical inflation targets. China sets an inflation target for 
each  year  in  approximately  March  of  the  relevant  year,  with  the  target  for  2014  being 
3.5 percent.  Other  central  banks  provide  inflation  targets  under  the  inflation-targeting 
framework that will be explained next. 
The highly-flexible inflation-targeting framework 
B. 
In the Asia-Pacific region, six central banks have adopted an inflation-targeting framework. 
New  Zealand  and  Australia  were  regional  frontrunners,  adopting  it  after  experiencing  high 
inflation  rates  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s.  New  Zealand  was  the  first  to  develop  the 
framework  in  1988,  subsequently  followed  by  Canada  (1991),  the  United  Kingdom  (1992) 
and  Australia  and  Sweden  (1993).  These  moves  were  motivated  by  two  considerations: 
(1) ensuring that the inflation that had started to decelerate in the second half of the 1980s 
would continue to be contained; and (2) the statistical relationship between monetary stock 
(or exchange rates) and inflation had become unstable, making it necessary for these central 
banks to adjust their monetary policy frameworks. 
In  East  Asia,  South  Korea  was  the  first  to  adopt  the  inflation-targeting  framework  in  1998, 
followed  by  Indonesia  and  Thailand  (2000),  and  the  Philippines  (2002)  (Chart  5).  In 
particular, South Korea, Indonesia, and Thailand were forced to abandon the de facto U.S. 
dollar  peg  policy  because  of  massive  speculative  attacks  during  the  East  Asian  economic 
crisis,  providing  them  with  an  opportunity  to  review  their  monetary  policy  frameworks.  The 
Philippines shifted from monetary-targeting to inflation-targeting, following global trends and 
based on the need to demonstrate a firmer commitment to controlling inflation to the public. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Main features of the inflation-targeting framework 
Of  the  six  central  banks  that  have  adopted  the  inflation-targeting  framework,  five  use  the 
headline  CPI  as  reference  to  inflation  targets,  with  Thailand  using  the  core  CPI  (Chart  6). 
Many central banks assess the underlying inflation trend by monitoring the core CPI as well. 
Each of the six relevant central banks now places importance on short-term policy interest 
rate and uses it as the main operational target for monetary policy. 
As a first mover, New Zealand initially adopted a relatively rigid framework and attempted to 
meet price stability within a short time span. However, such a tight monetary policy led to a 
sharp appreciation of the New Zealand dollar and forced substantial adjustment burdens on 
the export and import substitution sectors. Consequently, New Zealand decided to increase 
flexibility over time by allowing a deviation from the inflation target range of 1–3 percent and 
meeting the target range on average over the medium term. Its 1–3 percent target range has 
been fixed since 2000. In addition, since 2012, its inflation target definition has been clarified 
further by adding the expression “with a focus on keeping future average inflation near the 
2 percent  target  midpoint”  to  the  existing  1–3  percent  target  range.  Similarly,  Australia’s 
inflation target range of 2–3 percent is also defined as a medium-term average. 
In  East  Asia,  South  Korea  set  its  inflation  target  range  for  2013–2015  at  2.5–3.5  percent 
under a medium-term inflation-target setting system adopted in 2004 (prior to that, it set an 
inflation  target  annually).  In  2012,  Indonesia  set  its  inflation  target  range  at  4.5  percent 
±1 percentage point for 2012–2014, and 4 percent ±1 percentage point for 2015. Thailand 
narrowed  its  inflation  target  range  from  0.0–3.5  percent  to  0.5–3.0  percent  in  2009,  and 
thereafter  has  maintained  this  target,  although  its  validity  is  examined  every  year.  The 
inflation target range in the Philippines is set at 4 percent ±1 percentage point for 2011–2014 
and  at  3  percent  ±1  percentage  point  for  2015–2016  under  a  medium-term  inflation-target 
setting system adopted in 2010 (prior to that, it set an inflation target annually). 
Why is the inflation-targeting framework more flexible than in advanced economies? 
The  above  observations  suggest  that  the  inflation-targeting  frameworks  in  the  Asia-Pacific 
region are more  flexible than those adopted in the advanced economies described earlier. 
Particularly, greater flexibility is demonstrated by (1) an adoption of an inflation target range 
rather than an inflation target point, (2) the acceptance of relatively large deviations from the 
inflation target, and (3) the use of relatively frequently-reviewed inflation targets – rather than 
fixed inflation targets – in South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, and the Philippines. The greater 
flexibility  in  the  region  relative  to  advanced  economies  may  reflect  several  factors:  (1)  the 
difficulty in pinpointing an optimal inflation rate, partly due to the rapid structural changes and 
the  evolving  stages  of  economic  developments;  (2)  a  greater  fluctuations  in  the  economy 
caused by volatile commodity prices and exchange rates; and (3) the need to use the target 
range to prevent the public from forming the impression that meeting the inflation target is 
prioritized at the expense of economic growth. 
Allowing greater movements in the exchange rates 
C. 
Since  the  East  Asian  economic  crisis,  South  Korea,  Indonesia,  and  Thailand  have 
abandoned the rigid U.S. dollar peg system. Other economies in the Asia-Pacific region have 
also increased flexibility in their exchange rate arrangements. Overall, their exchange rates 
have become more volatile and it now seems that none of the economies in the region target 
specific levels of exchange rates against the U.S. dollar (Chart 6). 
Shifting toward more flexible exchange rate arrangements 
In the inflation-targeting economies, IMF classifications consider that Australia and Japan 
are  adopting  free-floating  exchange  rate  arrangements  with  no  foreign  exchange  market 
interventions, similar to the United States, the euro area, and the United Kingdom (Chart 4). 
The exchange rate arrangement in New Zealand was generally regarded as free floating, but 
was  reclassified  as  floating  because  small  interventions  were  made  to  dampen  the  sharp 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  since  2012.  The  arrangements  in  South  Korea, 
Thailand, and the Philippines are also classified as floating with each having more frequent 
interventions than New Zealand. Meanwhile, Indonesia is regarded as having a less flexible 
arrangement  than  these  economies.  It  is  classified  as  having  a  so-called  crawl-like 
arrangement  because  the  rupiah  has  followed  a  depreciating  trend  against  the  U.S.  dollar 
within  a  margin  of  less  than  2  percentage  points  since  June  2012.  The  IMF  regards  the 
Indonesian arrangement as a de facto exchange rate anchor to the U.S. dollar. Indonesia’s 
preference for a stable exchange rate may reflect the need to stabilize the prices of imported 
and exported commodities, as well as to preserve the value of foreign debt denominated in 
the  U.S.  dollar.  Some  studies  point  out  that  the  inflation-targeting  frameworks  in  South 
Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines have resulted in higher volatilities in the exchange rates. 
Moreover,  the  degree  of  volatility  in  these  economies  was  found  to  be  larger  than  that  in 
advanced economies.4 
Regarding  economies  without  an  inflation-targeting  framework,  Singapore  and  China 
have adopted a crawl-like arrangement (Chart 4). In Singapore, the Singapore dollar follows 
an appreciating trend against a basket of currencies within a 2 percent band since 2011. This 
arrangement is often referred to as a BBC (basket, band, and crawl) targeting; the content of 
the BBC is regularly adjusted. Because of its country-specific features (the small economic 
size,  the  high  degree  of  trade  and  financial  openness,  and  the  high  degree  of  import 
penetration),  the  BBC  targeting  is  considered  to  work  better  than  the  short-term  policy 
interest rate targeting to achieve price stability in Singapore. Meanwhile, China has gradually 
enhanced  the  flexibility  in  its  exchange  rate  policy  and  has  widened  the  interbank  trading 
fluctuation band of the renminbi exchange rate against the U.S. dollar. For example, the most 
recent  move  was  a  widening  of  the  band  from  ±0.5  percentage  point  of  the  daily  central 
parity released by the China Foreign Exchange Trade System to ±1 percentage point in April 
2012 and further to ±2 percentage points in March 2014. In addition, in early July 2014, the 
State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) announced that it will permit banks to set 
their own exchange rates for the renminbi against the U.S. dollar in deals with their clients. 
Malaysia shifted from a rigid U.S. dollar peg to a more flexible arrangement in 2005 that does 
not belong to a specific exchange rate arrangement and is now categorized by the IMF as 
other  managed  arrangement.  The  flexibility  in  Malaysian  exchange  rate  policy  has  been 
enhanced remarkably (Chart 6). 
Low policy interest rate in the face of large capital inflows 
D. 
Since the early 2000s, capital inflows to the Asia-Pacific region have increased rapidly in the 
form  of  bond  investments  with  a  wide  range  of  entities  increasing  their  bond  issuance. 
Particularly, local-currency denominated bonds saw a remarkable increase, helping to offset 
a slowdown in bank loans. This increase partly reflected the active issuance of government 
bonds to finance the post-crisis expansionary fiscal policy. The maturity of both government 
and corporate bonds has lengthened, even during and after the global financial crisis. These 
developments are partly attributable to the initiatives by the governments and central banks 
in the region to foster local currency-denominated bond markets – such as the Asian Bond 
Markets Initiative (ABMI) and the Asian Bond Fund (ABF). 
Greater linkages between local bond markets and global bond markets 
The  development  of  local  currency-denominated  bond  markets  help  to  improve  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  This  supports  the  increasing  use  by  central 
banks in the region of short-term policy interest rates as major operational targets in open 
market  operations  –  shifting  away  from  the  traditional  tool  of  controlling  aggregate  credit 
                                                 
4  Siok K. Sek, Cheau P. Ooi, and Mohd. T. Ismail, “Investigating the Relationship between Exchange Rate and 
Inflation Targeting,” Applied Mathematical Sciences, Vol. 6, No. 32, 2012, pp. 1571–1583. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  volume  and  the  frequent  use  of  reserve  requirements.  As  financial  markets  develop,  it  is 
likely  that  a  cut  in  the  short-term  interest  rate  will  affect  longer-term  interest  rates  more 
smoothly  and  thereby  enhance  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  The  development  of  local 
currency-denominated  bond  markets  has  also  enabled  the  region  to  reduce  double 
mismatches  (maturity  and  currency  mismatches  between  assets  and  liabilities),  thereby 
improving  the  balance  sheets  of  the  bond  issuers  –  i.e.,  governments,  firms,  and  financial 
institutions. 
The development of bond markets has also strengthened linkages with global financial and 
capital markets. As a result, the region has become more susceptible to movements in global 
market interest rates and the herding behavior of foreign investors. Some foreign investors 
tend  to  adjust  their  long  positions  relatively  quickly  by  selling  their  holdings  of  securities 
issued  by  economies  in  the  region  when  interest  rate  volatility  suddenly  rises.  Moreover, 
some foreign investors take short positions over exchange rates to hedge their positions over 
securities. As a result, it is sometimes the case that the exchange rates depreciate suddenly 
without  accompanying  large-scale  actual  capital  outflows  and  that  the  rate  fluctuations 
expand.  The  fostering  of  domestic  bond  markets  with  an  increased  number  of  domestic 
institutional investors may help to enhance the resilience of the economy to various shocks, 
but this will probably take some time. 
Low policy interest rate and “follow-the-leader behaviour” 
Large-scale  capital  inflows  are  often  motivated  by  interest  rate  differentials.  This  move 
seems to have been amplified by the aforementioned cross-border money market and bond 
market  linkages.  While  bringing  various  favorable  effects  to  the  region,  capital  inflows  put 
their central banks in a trade-off regarding the decision to set short-term policy interest rates. 
That is, on the one hand, an increase in the short-term policy interest rates (either as a result 
of tight monetary policy or of foreign exchange market intervention followed by sterilization) 
helps to lower inflationary pressures, but may invite a new round of capital inflows by foreign 
investors in search of higher yields. Such an increase may also damage exporting sectors 
through a sharp appreciation of their domestic currencies. On the other hand, a decline in the 
short-term policy interest rates (either as a result of monetary easing or of unsterilized foreign 
exchange market intervention) helps exporting sectors through the lower volatility of foreign 
exchanges  and  the  limited  appreciation  of  their  domestic  currencies.  However,  such  a 
decline  may  increase  inflationary  pressures  and  cause  real  estate  bubbles  and  financial 
imbalances. 
Taking this trade-off into account, some economies in the region tend to choose the latter 
option  –  namely,  a  decline  in  the  policy  interest  rates  –  reflecting  concerns  over  volatile 
exchange  rates  and  an  excessive  appreciation  (or  misalignments).  This  is  because  high 
exchange  rate  volatility  often  leads  to  heightened  volatility  in  output  that  in  turn  may  well 
amplify  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy.  A  volatile  exchange  rate  also  results  in  financial 
institution balance sheet fluctuations, thereby possibly destabilizing the financial intermediary 
functions. Consequently, some central banks that face large capital inflows tend to set lower 
short-term policy interest rates than normal – or lower than the interest rates that would have 
been adopted on the basis of certain monetary policy rules (such as the Taylor rule).5 This 
phenomenon  is  referred  to  as  “follow-the-leader  behaviour”  in  terms  of  setting  short-term 
policy  interest  rates,  since  central  banks  in  the  region  tend  to  set  their  short-term  policy 
interest  rates  in  line  with  the  low  interest  rates  set  by  major  central  banks  in  advanced 
economies – even if such policy interest rates may not necessarily be in line with domestic 
inflationary developments. This may lead to negative short-term interest rates in real terms. 
Chart 7 shows that some economies in the Asia-Pacific region maintained positive interest 
                                                 
5  See Dong He and Robert N. McCauley, “Transmitting Global Liquidity to East Asia: Policy Rates, Bond Yields, 
Currencies and Dollar Credit,” BIS Working Papers, No. 431, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  rates in real terms before the global financial crisis, but have shifted to negative interest rates 
in real terms after the crisis. The shift is likely to be a response to a lower global interest rate 
and large capital inflows. 
Implications for the inflation-targeting economies 
In  relation  to  the  six  inflation-targeting  economies  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  Australia  and 
New  Zealand  have  generally  maintained  positive  short-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms, 
except  for  some  periods.  In  Australia,  the  real  short-term  interest  rate  has  recently  been 
negative.  Meanwhile,  in  South  Korea,  Thailand,  the  Philippines,  and  Indonesia,  real  short-
term interest rates have occasionally become negative, and these rates have been at a low 
level  as  a  trend  since  around  2010  when  large  capital  inflows  began  to  take  place.  Some 
studies  show  that  the  policy  interest  rates  in  Australia,  Indonesia,  Thailand,  and  the 
Philippines  have  been  lower  than  the  interest  rates  derived  by  the  Taylor  rule  over  the 
period.6 A similar relationship was observed after the global financial crisis in New Zealand 
and South Korea. These results imply that, depending on the situation, price stability might 
sometimes  be  compromised  over  exchange  rate  stabilization.  As  a  domestic  interest  rate 
tends to be adjusted in response to a foreign interest rate, a central bank may be prevented 
to some extent from performing an independent monetary policy, which is suggested by the 
international finance trilemma. 
Extensive use of macroprudential policy to maintain financial stability 
E. 
Central  banks  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  pay  particular  attention  to  financial  stability.  In 
Australia, the Governor of the RBA chairs the Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) that was 
established  in  1998,  and  discusses  macroprudential  issues  with  other  regulators.  In  South 
Korea,  the  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Committee  (MFC)  was  established  in  2012,  with 
the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Korea (BOK) participating as a committee member. The 
MFC exchange views regarding the implementation of macroprudential policy with relevant 
regulatory  authorities.  In  Malaysia,  BNM  established  the  Financial  Stability  Executive 
Committee  (FSEC)  at  the  bank  in  2010,  as  a  monitoring  and  coordinating  committee  on 
financial stability with all relevant supervisory agencies. 
In contrast to advanced economies, some economies in the Asia-Pacific region have been 
using  macroprudential  policy  long  before  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  is  because  such 
policy  has  been  considered  necessary  to  contain  volatile  capital  inflows  and  the  resultant 
financial imbalances. As mentioned earlier, macroprudential measures can be classified into 
(1)  capital-based  measures,  (2)  liquidity-based  measures,  and  (3)  asset-side  measures. 
Some  economies  in  the  region  use  a  mixture  of  the  three  measures,  and  while  they  are 
potentially  useful  when  capital  inflows  are  intermediated  through  cross-border  banking 
activities, they might be less effective if capital flows take place through unregulated financial 
institutions.  Despite  the  availability  and  use  of  a  wide  range  of  tools  in  the  region,  as  yet 
there is no international consensus regarding their effectiveness. 
Inflation performance in the Asia-Pacific region and future policy issues 
IV. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  examine  inflation  performance  in  the  region  and  touch  on  the  future 
direction of monetary policy conduct. 
                                                 
6  See Andrew Filardo, “Ensuring Price Stability in Post-Crisis Asia: Lessons From the Recovery,” BIS Working 
Papers, No. 378, 2012. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Performance of realized inflation and inflation expectations 
A. 
The Asia-Pacific region shows a more moderate inflation compared with the 1990s. In recent 
years,  inflation  has  declined  somewhat  in  some  of  these  economies  owing  to  a  decline  in 
global energy prices, the slack in global economies, and weak domestic demand. 
Inflation performance in the inflation-targeting economies 
Regarding the inflation-targeting economies, realized inflation underwent an occasional large 
deviation  from  the  inflation  target  range  over  the  period  (Chart  8).  In  New  Zealand  and 
Indonesia,  the  deviation  tended  to  exceed  the  upper  range  of  the  target,  suggesting  the 
presence of high upward inflationary pressures. Australia, South Korea, and the Philippines 
experienced  deviations  both  from  the  upper  and  lower  ranges,  while  Thailand  had  few 
deviations except for some periods. 
Since 2012, inflation in New Zealand and the Philippines has sometimes declined below the 
bottom of their respective target ranges, and inflation in South Korea has continued to stay 
below  the  bottom  range  of  the  target.  By  contrast,  inflation  in  Indonesia  has  recently 
exceeded the upper range of the target – reflecting temporary factors such as a cut in fuel 
subsidies,  upward  inflationary  pressures  in  food  products,  and  new  regulations  related  to 
imported foods. Some studies have pointed out that the inflation volatility in Indonesia further 
increased  subsequent  to  the  adoption  of  the  inflation-targeting  framework.7  This  is  partly 
explained  by  the  extensive  use  of  administered  prices  to  contain  inflation  prior  to  the 
adoption of the inflation-targeting framework. Overall, an examination of the six economies 
shows that inflation tends to eventually converge to the target range even after experiencing 
a deviation from it for some time (Chart 8). 
To judge the progress in the monetary policy conduct under the inflation-targeting framework, 
one  way  is  to  examine  whether  their  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  stabilized  and 
remain within the inflation target range. In general, long-term inflation expectations (e.g., five 
years) have become more stabilized than short-term expectations (e.g., one year) for all six 
economies that adopt the framework (Chart 8). Short-term inflation expectations have been 
more  volatile  in  general  and  often  deviate  from  the  target  range  since  they  tend  to  reflect 
global commodity and food prices as well as the prices of frequently-purchased goods and 
services.8 Long-term inflation expectations have become stabilized at around 2–3 percent in 
Australia, New Zealand, South Korea, and Thailand. While inflation expectations of the first 
three  economies  remain  within  the  target  range,  those  of  Thailand  have  risen  moderately 
since  2010  and  have  slightly  exceeded  the  upper  range  of  the  target  since  end-2010. 
Inflation expectations in the Philippines and Indonesia have been higher than in these four 
economies,  but  have  stabilized  at  around  4  percent  and  around  5  percent,  respectively, 
within the target range. Their relatively high inflation expectations may be due to a persistent 
supply  shortage  in  foods,  beverages,  and  energy.  On  the  whole,  the  inflation-targeting 
economies appear to have succeeded in anchoring their inflation expectations. These results 
suggest that inflation tends to converge to the long-term inflation expectation level, so that 
any deviations from the target range are not sustained. 
Another way to judge the effectiveness of the monetary policy conduct under the inflation-
targeting framework is to examine whether a decline in inflation persistence (or the extent of 
dependence  of  current  inflation  on  past  inflation)  is  observed.  Some  studies  point  out  that 
such declines are actually observed among five of the inflation-targeting economies (with the 
                                                 
7  Andrew  Filardo  and  Hans  Genberg,  “Targeting  Inflation  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific:  Lessons  from  the  Recent 
Past,” in The International Financial Crisis and Policy Challenges in Asia and the Pacific, BIS Papers, No. 52, 
2010. 
8  See,  for  example,  Jun  II  Kim  and  Jungick  Lee,  “How  Important  Are  Inflation  Expectations  in  Driving  Asian 
Inflation?” in Globalisation and Inflation Dynamics in Asia and the Pacific, BIS Papers, No. 70, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  exception  of  Indonesia),  compared  with  the  1990s.  Such  a  decline  in  inflation  persistence 
has not materialized for the non-inflation-targeting economies; hence, the results may imply 
the  effectiveness  of  the  inflation-targeting  framework  in  the  region.  Other  studies  highlight 
that  inflation  persistence  in  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  South  Korea  is  lower  than  in  the 
other inflation-targeting economies in the region, and that such low inflation persistence in 
these  three  countries  could  be  attributable  to  the  relatively  large  sizes  of  their  economies, 
their relatively developed financial systems, and/or the high degree of policy priority given to 
price stability.9 
Inflation performance in the non-inflation-targeting economies 
Inflation performance has also improved in the non-inflation-targeting economies (Chart 8). 
China’s inflation dropped drastically in the late 1990s, and has thereafter maintained a more 
stable level than previously. Malaysia’s inflation performance has somewhat stabilized with 
the exception of the period immediately subsequent to the global financial crisis. The inflation 
environment  became  somewhat  volatile  in  Singapore  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial 
crisis, shifting from low inflation or mild deflation to somewhat higher inflation. 
Regarding  long-term  inflation  expectations,  in  China  these  have  stabilized  at  around 
3 percent  with  both  short-  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  stabilizing  and  becoming 
closer in recent years. In Malaysia, long-term inflation expectations have stabilized at around 
2–3  percent.  Singapore’s  inflation  has  fluctuated  somewhat  largely,  but  its  inflation 
expectations  have  remained  stable  at  around  2  percent.  The  relatively  stable  inflation 
expectations of these economies may imply that their monetary policy conducts are placing a 
higher priority on price stability. 
Differences between inflation-targeting and non-inflation-targeting economies 
The  six  inflation-targeting  economies  regard  short-term  policy  interest  rates  as  their 
operational target for monetary policy. This is confirmed by the observation that the policy 
interest  rates  are  relatively  responsive 
inflation  developments  (Chart  7). 
Nevertheless, the policy interest rates tend to remain low after the global financial crisis or 
during massive capital inflows. This may reflect the follow-the-leader price setting behavior 
mentioned earlier. 
Meanwhile, China and Malaysia, the two non-inflation-targeting economies, also use short-
term policy interest rates. However, these economies do not adjust their policy interest rates 
as frequently as inflation-targeting economies and therefore, such rates in these economies 
have remained flat. Thus, inflation and real policy interest rate movements frequently tend to 
exhibit an inverse movement like a mirror image. This may be because China and Malaysia 
also  use  various  tools  other  than  policy  interest  rates.  For  example,  both  countries  often 
adjust the reserve requirements to control inflation, while China also uses window guidance, 
credit  volume  controls,  and  deposit-to-loan  ratio  requirements.  The  reserve  requirement  is 
regarded as a liquidity-based measure under macroprudential policy and is frequently used 
by many emerging economies as a counter-cyclical measure against business and financial 
cycles. Regardless of the measures used, all of the economies in the region have generally 
managed  to  stabilize  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Thus,  it  can  be  said  that  these 
economies have been more or less successful in terms of achieving price stability. 
to  actual 
                                                 
9  Stephan Gerlach and Peter Tillmann, “Inflation Targeting Matters in Asia,” Column published on VoxEU.org, 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, 2010; Andrew Filardo and Hans Genberg, “Targeting Inflation in Asia 
and the Pacific: Lessons from the Recent Past,” in The International Financial Crisis and Policy Challenges in 
Asia and the Pacific, BIS Papers, No. 52, 2010. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Future possible direction of monetary policy conduct 
B. 
As mentioned earlier, one issue regarding monetary policy in the Asia-Pacific region is how 
to mitigate the business cycles that are amplified by the monetary policy conduct. Some of 
the monetary policy conduct of the region could occasionally be pro-cyclical – i.e., monetary 
policy strengthens economic cycles, with accommodative monetary policy during a period of 
capital inflows and high economic growth, and with tight monetary policy during a period of 
capital outflows and sluggish economic growth. This could possibly be a source of deviation 
from the inflation target for a longer period than anticipated. 
As a potential way to address this problem, the inflation-targeting economies in the region 
may increasingly align their frameworks to those of advanced economies, in terms of target 
flexibility  and  design.  In  this  regard,  should  they  wish  to  consider  a  shift  from  an  inflation 
target range to a target point, the experience of the United Kingdom could provide a useful 
guide.10 The country shifted from a target range – which it had introduced in October 1992 – 
to a target point in 1995, primarily to eliminate any ambiguity relating to the inflation rate (and 
inflation  expectations)  at  which  a  central  bank  should  conduct  monetary  policy.  There 
appeared to be a “range bias” in 1992–1995 when there was an inflation target range of 1–4 
percent: inflation expectations derived from the yield curve were stuck at the top of the range. 
It appears that there were increasing concerns over a possible misunderstanding, as if policy 
makers considered any level within the range to be indifferent. After the shift to an inflation 
target point, inflation expectations fell steadily as range bias was ironed out. 
New Zealand has already moved in this direction by emphasizing the midpoint of 2 percent in 
their inflation target range. Elements of an inflation-targeting framework, such as (1) whether 
the inflation target should be expressed in a target range or a target point, (2) whether the 
target should be reviewed relatively frequently or fixed, and (3) whether the inflation target is 
set to be achieved within a pre-fixed term or the (fixed) inflation target is set to be achieved 
over the medium term on average, should be determined by each economy based on their 
specific economic and financial market circumstances. Economies in the region may wish to 
consider  whether  the  changes  in  their  inflation-targeting  framework  design  may  lead  to 
smaller and shorter deviations from the inflation targets and to more stable long-term inflation 
expectations. In this regard, the previous experience of the inflation-targeting economies in 
the  region  may  provide  a  guide  for  the  non-inflation-targeting  economies  to  tackling  the 
various issues they may face. These initiatives may require adjustments in the economy and 
the financial markets and thus will take some time. On this point, one of the key necessary 
adjustments includes development of hedging tools to deal with exchange rate fluctuations in 
the region, as well as of deeper financial and capital markets. 
In  addition,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  some  economies  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  have 
reduced their vulnerabilities to exchange rate movements, and thus gradually mitigated their 
need to stabilize exchange rates.11 Moreover, as the national income levels of these regional 
economies  increase,  the  weight  of  consumption  (particularly  in  services)  rises,  and  thus 
these economies become less affected by exchange rate fluctuations. In some Asia-Pacific 
economies,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  and  financial  institutions  are  becoming 
multinationals. Firms and financial institutions are diversifying their settlement currencies for 
economic  transactions  and  their  funding  sources,  and  are  mitigating  impacts  from  the 
exchange  rate  fluctuation.  In  such  economies,  price  stability  may  be  steadily  achieved 
                                                 
10  See  Andrew  Haldane,  “Targeting  Inflation: The  United  Kingdom  in  Retrospect,”  a  presentation  made  at  the 
IMF Seminar held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on May 3–5, 1999. In the United Kingdom, moreover, not reaching 
the 2 percent target is considered to be equally as bad as exceeding the target, and in cases where the actual 
inflation is not in the 1–3 percent range, the Governor of the BOE must send a public letter to the Chancellor 
of Exchequer to explain the reason and to give the planned means of addressing the situation. 
11  See,  for  example,  Michael  B.  Devereux  and  James  Yetman,  “Globalisation,  Pass-Through  and  the  Optimal 
Policy Response to Exchange Rates,” BIS Working Papers, No. 450, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  through  reviewing  their  inflation-targeting  framework  based  on  the  accumulated  lessons  of 
other economies. 
Conclusions on the monetary policy conduct in the Asia-Pacific region 
V. 
Let me now summarize my views on the monetary policy conduct in the Asia-Pacific region. 
• 
First,  central  banks  of  the  region  have  focused  more  on  price  stability  than  on 
exchange  rate  stability  in  the  aftermath  of  the  East  Asian  economic  crisis. 
Specifically, six central banks took the lead on this by adopting an inflation-targeting 
framework with a clear numerical inflation target. The realized inflation and inflation 
expectations  of  these  economies  have  gradually  shown  a  downward  trend  in  line 
with  their  targets  compared  with  the  1990s.  While  there  are  occasional  large 
deviations from the inflation target range, these have not been sustained for a long 
period.  This  suggests  that  inflation  has  a  tendency  to  converge  to  the  long-term 
inflation expectation level, which has remained largely within their target ranges. In 
most economies, their long-term inflation expectations appear to be converging to 
around 2–3 percent. 
Overall,  the  monetary  policy  conduct  in  the  region  shows  some  degree  of 
convergence,  and  increasingly  entails  the  elements  commonly  observed  in 
advanced economies. Going forward, the region’s inflation-targeting economies may 
possibly  share  more  common  features  with  advanced  economies  through  further 
alignments. The design of an inflation-targeting framework, such as (1) whether the 
inflation target should be expressed in a target range or a target point, (2) whether 
the  target  should  be  reviewed  relatively  frequently  or  fixed,  or  (3)  whether  the 
inflation target is set to be achieved within a pre-fixed term or over the medium term 
on average, should be determined by each economy based on its specific economic 
and financial market circumstances. Nevertheless, the experiences accumulated in 
other economies may provide some useful guidelines. 
Second,  the  region  allows  greater  exchange  rate  movements  compared  with  the 
1990s. However, the degree of flexibility varies widely -- ranging from free floating to 
a de facto exchange rate anchor to the U.S. dollar. Like many non-inflation-targeting 
economies, some inflation-targeting economies continue to intervene in the foreign 
exchange market. 
Third,  the  region  often  faces  large  capital  inflows  partly  owing  to  the  interest  rate 
differentials.  Developments  in  domestic  bond  markets  have  generated  many 
benefits  for  the  region,  but  have  also  enhanced  linkages  with  global  financial  and 
bond  markets,  thereby  inducing  changes  in  capital  flows.  The  resultant  greater 
volatility  of  exchange  rates  and  overvaluation  of  the  currency,  and  their  adverse 
impacts on the economy have been pointed out as serious concerns. As a result, 
some economies occasionally set a low policy interest rate in response to a decline 
in the global interest rate. 
This,  however,  might  lead  to  a  greater  positive  output  gap  in  the  economic 
expansionary phase, thereby overheating the economy and promoting rapid credit 
growth and increasing inflationary pressures. This may not only amplify the boom-
bust business and financial cycles, but also deteriorate the current account balance. 
It may also incur the risk of undermining a central bank’s credibility by failing to fulfill 
its  price  stability  mandate  in  the  inflation-targeting  economies.  Going  forward, 
economies  in  the  region  may  need  to  prepare  for  more  volatile  interest  rate 
movements in the face of global interest rate hikes as the global economy gradually 
recovers. This in turn may provide these economies with more room to conduct an 
independent monetary policy. 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Fourth,  to  cope  with  excessive  capital  flows  and  associated  accumulation  of 
financial  imbalances,  economies  in  the  region  frequently  use  a  wide  range  of 
macroprudential  policy  measures.  Their  effectiveness  depends  largely  on  country-
specific  economic  and  financial  market  circumstances.  Questions  such  as  what 
macroprudential  measures  should  be  taken  to  cope  with  financial  imbalances,  or 
what  is  the  correct  balance  between  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy, 
remain unsettled, and an international consensus has not yet been formed. 
Going  forward,  further  discussions  are  expected  among  central  banks,  regulatory 
institutions, and other policy makers on the issue of how to achieve price stability, 
sustainable economic growth, and financial stability. I hope that such discussions, 
through sharing each other’s experiences and lessons learnt from the past, will lead 
to some useful insights into monetary policy conduct implications. 
This concudes my speech. Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
     18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
    20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   21
    22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   23
    24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   25
     26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   27
  28 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   29
