Már Guðmundsson: The financial crisis in Iceland and Ireland – what are 
the lessons five years later? 
Opening address by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 
half-day Central Bank of Iceland conference “The financial crisis in Iceland and Ireland: What 
are the lessons seen to be five years later?”, Reykjavík, 28 November 2013. 
 President of Iceland, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, 
On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  morning 
meeting,  held  five  years  after  the  collapse  of  Iceland’s  three  cross-border  banks,  the 
enactment  of  the  emergency  legislation,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Icelandic  authorities’ 
economic programme with the IMF. And incidentally, it is exactly five years ago today that 
Iceland’s Parliament, Alþingi, passed legislation on comprehensive capital controls. 
At this short conference, which we call The financial crisis in Iceland and Ireland: what are 
the lessons five years later? the focus is on the situation that faced these and other small 
countries with big banks in the autumn of 2008, how we managed the first phase of the crisis, 
and the policies that were put in place to mitigate the effects of the shocks that were hitting 
us. Joining us today are three highly distinguished speakers who will take the floor after my 
opening remarks. First is Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, who took 
office in September 2009 and has played a key role in dealing with the crisis in Ireland. Then 
we will hear from Geir Haarde, Prime Minister of Iceland in the autumn of 2008, who oversaw 
both  crisis  management  during  the  banking  collapse  and  the  design  of  the  economic 
programme with the IMF. Our final speaker is Franek Rozwadowski, who until recently was 
the resident representative of the IMF in Iceland. 
It is well known, both in this country and among scholars of the international financial crisis 
around  the  world,  that  almost  90%  of  Iceland’s  banking  sector  failed  in  the  first  week  of 
October 2008. What is probably less well known is that at that point, Iceland was already on 
its  way  into  a  recession  after  an  unsustainable  boom  and  serious  overheating  during  
2005–2007  and  a  currency  crisis  in  the  first  half  of  2008.  The  banking  collapse  and  the 
associated  wealth  loss  and  further  currency  depreciation  made  the  recession  significantly 
worse, of course, as did the recession that hit the global economy in the fourth quarter of 
2008.  
That  autumn,  two  separate  but  interrelated  sub-stories  of  the  recent  Icelandic  saga 
converged in a tragic grand finale. These are: 
1. 
Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic management in small, 
open, and financially integrated economies. This is a story that has played out many 
times around the globe, and many of its elements have been seen before in Iceland. 
It  might  have  been  somewhat  more  extreme  this  time  around,  but  it  wasn’t 
fundamentally different. 
The rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of EU legislation 
(the European “passport”). This story was much more unique, as it involved the first 
banking crisis in Europe since the EU single market was formed in the early 1990s. 
2. 
The  combined  balance  sheet  of  these  banks  was  10  times  Iceland’s  GDP,  and  their 
combined  bankruptcy,  measured  by  the  size  of  balance  sheets,  ranks  third  in  size  in  the 
international history of corporate failures. And this happened in a country that ranks among 
the smallest in the world! We are still dealing with the repercussions of it, as can be seen in 
our overblown and unbalanced IIP and the controls on capital outflows.  
Before  the  collapse,  the  banking  system  had  expanded  very  rapidly,  growing  in  just  five 
years from a combined balance sheet of less than 2 times GDP at the end of 2003 to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
aforementioned 10 times GDP. Most of this expansion was cross-border, and a significant 
part  of  it  was  really  off-border,  having  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both  financing  and 
investment  took  place  abroad.  Around  two-thirds  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  three  cross-
border banks was denominated in foreign currency. As is typical for banks, the FX part of the 
balance sheet had a significant maturity mismatch. However, there was no safety net of the 
type that we have in a national setting to back it up. This turned out to be the fatal flaw in the 
whole  setup,  although  we  now  know  that  these  banks  were  also  undercapitalised,  which 
might  have  done  them  in  at  a  later  stage.  But  so  were  also  several  European  banks  that 
were considered solid at the time! 
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
Iceland’s big banks were faced with a wholesale run on their foreign currency liabilities and 
were  therefore  heading  towards  a  default  on  those  liabilities  in  the  absence  of  LOLR 
assistance in foreign currency. However, given their size, it was impossible for the Icelandic 
authorities to provide such assistance on their own.   
Liquidity risk was generally underestimated in the build-up to the crisis, both by the financial 
industry and by supervisors. This applied even more to FX liquidity risk, which can be more 
lethal due the lack of backstops and safety nets. For example, before the crisis, European 
banks  had  built  up  huge  USD-denominated  balance  sheets  that  were  balanced  to  a  large 
extent – except, of course, in terms of maturity. This became a major problem when there 
was a run on such dollar-denominated bank liabilities post-Lehman, and many big European 
banking names might not be with us today had it not been for the USD swap lines granted to 
the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank.  
When I was still at the Bank for International Settlements, I gave a speech here in Iceland on 
financial  globalisation  to  an  audience  of  high-level  European  bankers.  In  that  speech  I 
discussed 
internationalisation  of  banking  and  said: 
“ … emergency liquidity assistance will be complicated or even impossible for central banks 
to deliver when internationally active banks face liquidity problems in currencies other than 
that of their home country. Iceland is a case in point”.1 That is essentially what happened in 
the  autumn  of  2008.  But  this  was  in  May  2007,  before  the  international  financial  crisis 
emerged in August that same year. Then it became gradually more obvious and the Icelandic 
authorities tried to build defences and seek international support, but with limited success. 
Given the lack of international cooperation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to consider 
radical solutions. Although they were probably not articulated fully at the time, these solutions 
entailed several goals: preserving a functioning domestic payment system, ring-fencing the 
sovereign in the case of bank failures, limiting the socialisation of private sector losses, and 
creating the conditions for the reconstruction of a domestic banking system.  
In essence, the adopted solution saved the domestic operations of the banking system and 
let  the  international  part  to  go  into  a  resolution  process.  The  new  banks  were  created  by 
carving  the  domestic  assets  and  liabilities  out  of  the  old,  failing  banks.  The  new  banking 
system amounted to 1.7 times GDP. 
On  the  whole,  these  measures  were  successful,  which  was  a  key  factor  in  mitigating  the 
effect of the banks’ failure on the economy. The domestic payment system functioned more 
or  less  seamlessly  throughout,  and  there  was  continuous  access  to  deposits  and  basic 
banking  services  in  Iceland.  International  payment  flows  were  seriously  affected,  however, 
not least because of the freezing order imposed by the British authorities on Icelandic banks, 
but also because of a general distrust among foreign counterparties. Normal payment flows 
were restored through a concerted effort by the Central Bank in the ensuing months. 
the  risks  associated  with 
the 
                                                 
1   See  :  “Financial  globalisation  and  challenges  for  prudential  policies  and  macroeconomic  management“, 
18 May 2007, http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp070525.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I have painted the banking crisis and the immediate policy responses with a broad brush, but 
I expect that Geir will give you a fuller story. It will also be interesting to hear from Patrick 
what  the  essential  features  of  the  Irish  banking  crisis  unfolding  around  the  same  time  are 
seen to be now, five years later.   
Let me turn now to the macroeconomic part of the saga. I do not have time to discuss the 
macroeconomic build-up to the crisis, as the focus of this short meeting lies elsewhere. But 
to set the stage, let me say very briefly that all the usual suspects were present: very strong 
capital inflows fuelling a credit and asset price boom that subsequently turned into a bubble 
at  the  same  time  as  the  economy  overheated  and  an  unsustainable  external  position 
developed, as could be seen in a double-digit current account deficit. And macroeconomic 
and prudential policies were not up to the task. Quite the contrary: there was a policy conflict 
between  monetary  policy  and  the  demand  levers  pulled  by  the  Government,  and  the  risks 
inherent  in  capital  flows,  FX  balance  sheets,  and  credit  and  asset  price  booms  were  left 
under-regulated and insufficiently supervised. 
But as so often before in this country, we dealt more effectively with the crisis than the build-
up. There were two key elements to this. The first was crisis management vis-à-vis the failing 
banks,  as  embodied  in  the  Emergency  Act  submitted  by  Prime  Minister  Geir  Haarde  to 
Parliament  shortly  before  the  banks  failed.  The  second  was  the  economic  programme 
developed  by  the  Icelandic  authorities  in  co-operation  with  the  IMF.  The  programme  had 
three key goals: stabilisation of the exchange rate, fiscal sustainability, and reconstruction of 
the  financial  sector.  Comprehensive  capital  controls  were  an  important  element  in  the 
programme, but their rationale was to help to stabilise the exchange rate in a situation where 
the currency had fallen more than 50% in 2008, where foreign króna positions that were a 
legacy of carry trade and capital inflows amounted to around 40% of GDP, and where a large 
fiscal  deficit  that  had  to  be  financed  in  the  domestic  market  had  developed.  The  capital 
controls therefore gave monetary policy more scope to help stabilise and turn around the real 
economy once inflation came down.  
 
 
Franek will discuss the IMF programme in more detail, but I would like to make one more 
remark regarding fiscal consolidation, as it is such an important part of the story. The crisis 
hit Government finances hard, as can be seen from this slide. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It  was  therefore  of  vital  importance  that  Government  debt  was  relatively  low  immediately 
before  the  crisis.  However,  fiscal  consolidation  was  needed  earlier  than  some  considered 
optimal at the time from a demand management perspective, in order to regain internal and 
external confidence and open market access.  
The  effort  was  huge,  as  can  be  seen  from  this  slide,  but  back-loaded,  as  automatic 
stabilisers were mostly allowed to work in 2009. And it did not derail the recovery that began 
around the middle of 2010. 
The  policy  responses  mitigated  the  recession  but  could  not  stop  it  from  becoming  the 
deepest in Iceland’s post-war history and a severe one in international comparison, as can 
be seen from this slide.  
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
But Iceland was not the hardest hit, as can also be seen from the slide, and this would be still 
clearer if we were to look at the labour market. Iceland lost 12% of GDP from peak to trough, 
slightly more than Ireland. However, as was probably also the case in Ireland, that peak was 
unsustainable  and  was  associated  with  a  significant  positive  output  gap.  Iceland  has 
regained  7½%  since,  which  is  significantly  more  than  Ireland  but  less  than  Latvia,  which 
suffered a much deeper recession. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  mention  selected  lessons  that  I  think  can  be  drawn  from  this 
experience. 
First,  dealing  with  failing  big  banks  in  small  countries:  Guaranteeing  the  entire  banking 
system  in  Iceland’s  case  would  probably  have  resulted  in  sovereign  default  and  the 
bankruptcy of the country. In general, taking such a step with big banks in small countries is 
risky,  especially  if  a  significant  part  of  their  balance  sheets  are  in  foreign  currencies.  The 
alternative  is  to  save  only  key  infrastructure  elements,  such  as  the  domestic  payment 
system. 
Second, dealing with volatile capital flows: Deal with the inflows if you want to avoid having to 
take  drastic  measures  to  deal  with  the  outflows.  That  includes  adopting  correctly  aligned 
macroeconomic  and  macroprudential  policies,  leaning  into  the  wind  by  buying  part  of  the 
inflows  into  foreign  exchange  reserves  and,  in  the  limit,  deploying  selective  capital  inflow 
management tools. The FX risks of banks and private sector entities need close monitoring 
and prudential limitations. 
Third, the design of the financial sector in small, open economies: The financial sector has to 
be  smaller  than  it  has  been  in  countries  like  Iceland,  and  international  activities  must  be 
restricted as long as such countries are not part of a credible multilateral safety net. The idea 
of building international financial centres in countries like Iceland and Ireland is dead – for the 
time being, at least – as it is not safe under the current framework. 
Fourth,  the  EU  framework  for  cross-border  banking:  It  was  very  much  this  framework  that 
facilitated the cross- and off-border expansion of the Icelandic banks through the so-called 
European passport. It was and is deeply flawed, and it contributed in a significant way to both 
the  Icelandic  banking  crisis  and  the  crisis  in  the  eurozone.  The  basic  problem  is  that  the 
freedoms are not matched by public action and frameworks at the EU and EEA level. Bank 
size relative to country size was tacitly assumed to be a matter of no concern, and FX risk 
was  largely  ignored.  Based  on  the  Icelandic  experience,  a  banking  union  makes  perfect 
sense, but only fully for the eurozone, and even then it has to include all three elements in 
order  to  break  the  deadly  embrace  of  banks  and  sovereigns.  In  the  interim,  I  think  small 
countries will have to impose their own prudential measures in order to defend themselves 
against the risks they face. 
Let me conclude here and give the floor to Patrick Honohan.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
