  Donald Joshua Jaganathan: Nailing down the winning strategies in 
bancassurance 
Keynote address by Mr Donald Joshua Jaganathan, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank 
of  Malaysia,  at  the  15th  Asia  Conference  on  Bancassurance  &  Alternative  Distribution 
Channels: “Nailing Down the Winning Strategies in Bancassurance”, Kuala Lumpur, 6 May 
2014. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  15th  Asia  Conference  on  Bancassurance  & 
Alternative  Distribution  Channels.  This  conference  takes  place  at  an  exciting  time  for  the 
insurance  industry  in  Asia.  After  decades  of  strong  growth  and  modernisation,  Asia  has 
achieved remarkable standards of living, with hundreds of millions lifted out of poverty and a 
middle-class population of over half a billion. Structural reforms following the Asian financial 
crisis  have  enabled  the  region  to  remain  resilient  throughout  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2008/2009. Post-crisis, the vibrant economies in Asia have continued to be a pillar for global 
recovery,  with  this  year’s  GDP  for  developing  Asia  projected  by  the  IMF  to  grow  6.7%1. 
Insurance markets have also grown in tandem with the economy. Over the past decade, total 
premium  in  emerging  Asia2  increased  by  10%  per  annum  for  life  business  and  13%  per 
annum for non-life business on average3 and is projected to grow 11% this year and 10%4 in 
the  next.  The  insurance  industry,  however,  cannot  be  complacent  and  take  this  story  for 
granted.  Our  past  successes  have  been  as  much  a  result  of  foresight  in  pursuing  new 
opportunities  as  a  firm  resolve  in  confronting  new  challenges.  Even  as  insurance  markets 
continue  to  mature  in  Asia,  forces  of  change  are  already  underway  that  will  transform  the 
landscape in which insurers operate and drive the development of new business models and 
delivery channels. 
In the coming decade, insurance business in Asia will be profoundly shaped by social and 
economic transitions. I will briefly touch on five areas: (i) demographic shifts, (ii) increasing 
affluence, (iii) greater connectivity from new technologies, (iv) more intense competition and 
(v) a renewed focus on financial inclusion. 
Firstly,  while  countries  in  Asia  are  at  different  stages  of  demographic  transitions,  what  is 
unique  to  Asia  is  the  speed  at  which  populations  are  ageing.  For  example,  the  US  took 
72 years  for  the  population  over  age  65  to  double  from  7%  to  14%.  Most  countries  in 
Southeast Asia are expected take 20 to 25 years, while Korea and Singapore are expected 
to take less than 20 years5 Asia will have a much shorter timeframe to ensure an adequate 
social  safety  net  is  in  place  to  support  an  aged  society.  Greater  reliance  will  therefore  be 
placed on the insurance sector to keep pace with the growing demand for old age protection 
and healthcare funding. 
Secondly, increasing affluence and a growing middle-income population will be a key driver 
of demand both in terms of quantity as well as quality. With greater affluence, households will 
also  become  more  empowered  in  expressing  preferences  and  more  discerning  in  making 
                                                
1  
2   Emerging Asia definition: South and East Asia excluding advanced countries (Hong Kong. Singapore, South 
IMF- World Economic Outlook 2014 Update. 
Korea, Taiwan). 
3   Swiss Re- Sigma World Insurance in 2004 – 2012. 
4   Swiss Re- Global Insurance Review 2013 and Outlook 2014/15. 
5   Why Does Population Aging Matter So Much for Asia (Lee et al 2011), Aging, Economic Growth, and Old-Age 
Security in Asia (ADB 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial decisions. Insurers will need a more tailored approach in ensuring their distribution 
capabilities are able to effectively deal with different customer segments. 
Thirdly, advancements in information and communication technology (ICT) have given rise to 
an  era  of  instantaneous  connectivity.  According  to  certain  estimations,  Internet  and 
smartphone  penetration  rates  in  Asia  have  reached  32%6  and  43%  respectively  in  20137 
Beyond offering new channels for delivery of products and services, ICT has opened up new 
ways of doing business. The Internet has evolved from being merely a  tool for insurers to 
provide information on products into a competitive marketplace and platform for exchange. In 
more  advanced  economies,  for  example,  aggregators  have  intensified  price  competition  in 
personal  lines  insurance  business.  The  advent  of  “big  data”,  encompassing  technologies 
ranging  from  social  media  to  telematics,  will  significantly  augment  insurers’  analytical 
capabilities  to  enable  a  more  responsive  and  personalised  customer  experience,  foster 
process innovation and provide strategic agility through quicker time-to-market. 
Fourthly, with globalisation and progressive liberalisation of insurance markets in Asia driving 
increased competition, the search for growth through new customer segments and improved 
margins from efficient operations will continue to intensify. In certain markets, players have 
shifted away from expensive face-to-face channels towards offering simple products through 
more cost efficient direct marketing channels. Such channels have also enabled insurers to 
make inroads into previously uninsured segments thereby going beyond just winning market 
share towards expanding the insurance marketplace. 
Finally, there is a renewed focus on financial inclusion to ensure that all segments of society 
benefit from economic growth. This includes ensuring that everyone is adequately protected 
from  catastrophic  events  and  other  adverse  shocks.  Swiss  Re  has  estimated the  mortality 
protection  gap  in  South  and  East  Asia  to  be  around  USD32  trillion8.  Closing  these  gaps 
would  require  a  clear  vision  to  which  all  stakeholders,  from  the  insurance  industry  to  the 
Government  and  financial  regulators,  must  aspire  through  stronger  collaboration  and 
coordinated  initiatives.  In  this  regard  the  Bank  aims  to  increase  the  insurance  and  takaful 
penetration rate in Malaysia, defined as number of policies per population, to 75% by 20209 
supported by other measures to promote the long-term sustainable growth and development 
of  the  industry  as  outlined  in  the  Life  Insurance  and  Family  Takaful  Framework  (LIFE 
Framework). 
In  the  environment  I  have  just  described,  insurers  can  no  longer  afford  to  rely  solely  on 
traditional business models and delivery channels. Instead, insurers must be aligned to the 
broad  diversity  of  consumer  needs  and  preferences,  while  also  being  flexible  to  adapt  as 
these needs and preferences change over time. Such a market will see the emergence of a 
diversity of business models from multi-channel strategies to specialised players focused on 
single  channels  such  as  direct  marketing, financial  advisers  or  bancassurance.  Still  others 
will realise the fortune at the bottom of the pyramid10 through microinsurance. Specialisation 
is  also  expected  to  occur  along  the  supply  chain  with  new  players,  including  from  non-
insurance sectors such as retailers, adding greater value with innovations in areas ranging 
from branding and marketing to data enrichment. 
International Telecommunication Union- ICT Facts and Figures 2013. 
                                                
6  
7   Nielsen quoted by Media Research. 
8   Swiss Re- Sigma No.6/2013 Life insurance: focusing on the consumer. 
9   Based on the target set under the Economic Transformation Programme (ETP). 
10   C.K. Prahalad “Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty through Profits”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Bancassurance, financial advisers and direct channels 
While the possibilities for alternative distribution channels are extensive, I will address three 
areas  that  are  already  showing  great  promise  for  our  markets  here  in  Asia,  namely: 
bancassurance, financial advisers and direct channels. 
Bancassurance  presents  a  unique  proposition  for  insurers  to  widen  their  outreach  while 
maintaining acquisition costs at manageable levels. By leveraging on banks’ existing branch 
network  and  customer  base,  which  are  well  established  throughout  most  markets  in  Asia, 
insurers are able to scale up very quickly into geographical areas and customer segments 
that  might  not  be  accessible  by  existing  channels.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that 
bancassurance is the fastest growing global channel for insurance. In China, bancassurance 
sales increased by 415% within 5  years from 2004 to 200911. In Malaysia, bancassurance 
accounted  for  36%12  of  new  life  insurance  business  premium  and  39%13  of  gross 
contributions  for  Takaful  business  in  2013.  At  the  current  penetration  level  of  5%  of  the 
banking population, there remains significant room for growth. Under the LIFE Framework, 
the Bank has envisaged a bancassurance penetration target of 10%14 as part of the move 
towards  diversification  of  insurance  distribution  channels  in  Malaysia.  Rationalization  of 
incentive  structures  proposed  under  the  framework  are  aimed  at  improving  persistency 
through  more  widespread  adoption  of  needs-based  selling,  product  strategy  reviews  and 
quality  post-sales  service.  These  measures  are  also  expected  to  shift  the  mix  towards 
protection  and  savings products from  credit-related  insurance  that  currently  dominates this 
channel in particular for bancatakaful15.  
Financial advisers on the other hand have the advantage of providing advice to consumers 
on overall financial planning by growing, managing and protecting personal wealth to meet 
specific  financial  goals.  With  increasing  affluence,  a  growing  segment  of  consumers  with 
more complex financial needs and goals will require the sort of comprehensive service that is 
delivered by financial advisers. In addition, financial advisers may be perceived to be more 
independent  than  tied  agents,  which  will  be  important  as  consumers  become  more 
discerning.  As  a  relatively  new  channel  in  most  of  Asia,  the  primary  focus  is  to  establish 
public  confidence  through  raising  professional  and  ethical  standards  of  financial  advisers. 
This is a key focus under the LIFE Framework for Malaysia. In addition, the Bank will reduce 
paid-up capital requirements for financial advisors to encourage new entrants. 
Previously consisting mainly of tele-marketing and direct mailing, direct distribution is today 
considered an important channel by most insurers, in view of the new possibilities enabled by 
the  high  levels  of  internet  penetration  and  proliferation  of  mobile  devices  such  as 
smartphones and tablets. Social media has become a vital platform for business to engage 
with consumers and build their brand as well as being a rich data source in its own right on 
today’s fast moving consumer trends. The availability of instantaneous information has tipped 
the balance of power in favour of consumers. One such innovation is the aggregator, which 
has  seen  an  increase  in  utilisation  of  44%  and  50%  for  motor  and  home  insurance 
respectively in just a short period from July 2012 to April 201316 according to a report on the 
insurance market in Asia-Pacific. In Malaysia, the high levels of internet banking and mobile 
                                                
11   25th Pacific Insurance Conference 2011- Plenary Session 1 – Bancassurance and Its Impact on Consumers 
and the Insurance Industry. 
12   BNM IFAS System. 
13   BNM TOSS System. 
14   BNM Financial Sector Development Department (FSD) – Based on number of bancassurance/bancatakaful 
policies with regular premium/contribution to the number of savings account in Malaysia (August 2013). 
15   FSD – Annual submission by insurers to the Bank on Bancassurance data. 
16   EY- 2014 EY Asia-Pacific Insurance Outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
banking  penetration  of  52.2%  and  12.7%  respectively17  augurs  well  for  direct  insurance 
models.  In  fact,  in  the  general  insurance  and  takaful  sector,  direct  channels  already  have 
achieved significant market shares of 10% and 14% respectively18. For the life insurance and 
family takaful sector, the LIFE Framework envisions greater adoption of direct channels such 
as internet platform and walk-ins for pure protection products. 
Safeguarding consumer interests 
The global ﬁnancial crisis has shown that rapid financial sector innovation without due regard 
to  business  conduct  can  result  in  large-scale  losses  to  consumers  and  cause  widespread 
disruption to ﬁnancial institutions and markets. As a result, there has been a renewed focus 
on consumer protection and market conduct, with new institutional arrangements for conduct 
regulation being established in some jurisdictions and strengthened enforcement frameworks 
in  others.  Of  importance  in  a  conduct  regulation  framework  is  an  emphasis  on  financial 
institutions’ having effective oversight arrangements to ensure that business is conducted in 
a responsible manner. 
With the Financial Services Act 2013 and Islamic Financial Services Act 2013, which came 
into  force  in  June  2013,  the  Bank  has  a  clear  mandate  to  foster  fair,  responsible  and 
professional business conduct among all financial service providers. The new legislation also 
strengthens the protection of policyholders against disproportionate actions by providers to 
void  contracts  in  cases  where  misrepresentation  by  consumer  was  unintentional.  In  this 
regard,  greater  responsibility  will  be  placed  on  insurers  to  pose  specific  questions  for 
consumer insurance contracts, to obtain information for underwriting purposes. Against this 
backdrop, the Bank has recently issued a Concept Paper on Prohibited Business Conduct 
outlining  practices  that  are  assessed  as  providing  misleading  or  deceptive  information, 
exerting undue pressure when marketing products and collusive business practices that may 
result in unfavourable outcomes to consumers. The Bank is also developing standards of fair 
and  responsible  business  conduct  that  will  require  the  board  and  senior  management  to 
ensure high standards of fair dealing and professional conduct. While regulations governing 
business  conduct  is  applicable  to  all  areas  of  an  insurer’s  business,  new  distribution 
channels will likely require a heightened vigilance in view of the potential for new types and 
sources of risks. 
In  addition  to  strengthening  business  conduct  practices,  securing  public  confidence  in  a 
market with diverse distribution channels will also require building the financial capability of 
consumers. While this applies to all consumer segments, particular emphasis will need to be 
placed  on  empowering  lower  income  households  and  other  groups  that  are  currently 
uninsured  so  that  they  are  able  to  make  informed  decisions  on  the  products  and  services 
they need. Financial education initiatives must aim to increase consumer understanding of 
insurance, including how to navigate in an environment with multiple delivery channels and 
how to seek avenues for redress where products and services fall short of expectations. 
Governance and risk management 
Insurers  pursuing  new  distribution  strategies  will  need  appropriate  governance  and  risk 
management  to  ensure  that  emerging  sources  of  financial  and  operational  risks  are  well 
contained.  Insurers’  strategic  planning  process  must  take  into  account  their  competitive 
positioning, the target risk / reward trade-off and financial capacity to absorb losses. Prior to 
introducing  a  new  distribution  channel,  insurers  must  ensure  they  have  the  capacity, 
including  the  appropriate  expertise  and  resources,  to  adequately  manage  and  control  the 
                                                
17   BNM Payment Systems Policy Department. 
18   BNM IFAS and TOSS System. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  implemented  across 
the  whole  value  chain, 
risks  associated  with  that  channel  and  possible  spillovers  onto  existing  business.  Policies 
and  procedures for managing  and mitigating  new  types  of  risks  will  need  to  be  developed 
and 
including  product  development, 
authorisation,  pricing,  marketing,  sales,  post-sales  servicing  and  portfolio  management. 
These will need to be designed to ensure that the insurer continues to operate within its pre-
determined risk appetite and limits. 
Success 
internal 
communication  flows  to  ensure  that  the  governance  and  risk  management  across  all 
distribution channels are fully integrated with the insurers’ operations and control functions. 
New policies and procedures must be communicated in a timely manner to all relevant parts 
and  levels  of  the  organisation  and  periodically  reviewed  in  the  light  of  changing 
circumstances. In addition, more complex IT infrastructures that are central to many of the 
new channels will require commensurate attention to IT-related risks, which include strategic, 
compliance and business continuity risks. 
landscape  will  require  strong 
insurance  distribution 
the  new 
in 
Conclusion 
The Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter described “creative destruction” as “process … 
that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the 
old one, incessantly creating a new one”19. As Asia transforms and replaces old social and 
economic structures with new ones, so must the insurance industry revolutionise its business 
models and paradigms. The challenges for insurers are significant, yet great rewards await 
those who seize the opportunities presented by the new environment. In so doing, not only 
will  the  industry  benefit from growth  but  the  public,  who  are  the  ultimate  stakeholders,  will 
continue to enjoy rising standards of living and protection from adversity. With many in Asia 
still not adequately insured, the imperative is clear – insurers must rise to the challenge and 
chart new pathways towards success. 
With that, I congratulate Asia Insurance Review for organising this most timely and relevant 
Asia Conference on Bancassurance & Alternative Distribution Channels. To all the speakers 
and participants, I wish you all a productive conference and thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                
19   Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (1942) by Joseph Schumpeter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
