Amando M Tetangco, Jr: A responsive capital market – a step on the 
road beyond investment grade 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippines  Investment  Forum,  organised  by 
Euromoney, Manila, 18 February 2014. 
 I am pleased to join you for this Philippines Investment Forum. Events such as this organized 
by  Euromoney  bring  together  the main  stakeholders  of  our  economy. Through  the  various 
panel sessions, we are able to hear and exchange views, giving us a good sense of where 
the market pulse lies. 
It was certainly a privilege for all of us to have listened to no less than the President deliver 
the official Keynote Address. This shows you how serious the country’s policy makers are in 
reaching out to you who are among our economy’s main stakeholders. Your work is central 
in enabling the public sector to effect true, broad-based and lasting change that supports the 
country’s continued development. 
The President’s address and the session before this one laid the groundwork for us to set our 
sights “Beyond Investment Grade”. 
Investment grade – how did we get here? 
Indeed,  we  have  seen  that  the  road  to  Investment  Grade  was  not  easy...  it  was  long  and 
marked  by  reforms.  Reforms  which  include,  first,  a  critical  diversification  of  our  growth 
sources and drivers to exploit and take advantage of our favourable demographics... Second, 
a purposeful shoring up of our external position and strengthening of our banking system… 
knowing that a robust external position and strong bank balance sheets  would allow us to 
ride out the turbulence from external financial shocks... And third, a resolute management of 
our  fiscal  house  by  steadily  reducing  our  external  debt,  maintaining  a  healthy  government 
debt  profile,  and 
to  meet  our 
intergenerational needs. 
that  would  allow  us 
firmly  committing 
to  reforms 
Investment grade – the near-term challenges 
Our current operating environment continues to be very sensitive to global developments. Of 
late, we have witnessed what some analysts called the “rout” in Emerging Markets, following 
uncertainty  in  the  next  steps  of  the  Fed.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  investors  have 
indiscriminately sold EM debt, and the Philippines was not spared. We saw the peso decline, 
the stock market index drop and government securities yields rise in the secondary market. 
Alongside  the  fear  of  contagion  from  EM  sell-offs,  some  analysts  are  also  beginning  to 
wonder if the Philippines isn’t already overheating. 
Let me address the overheating concern first. Looking behind the numbers, current trends in 
liquidity  and  credit  growth  do  not  appear  to  be  worrisome.  The  strong  growth  in  domestic 
liquidity  has  been  due  mainly  to  the  operational  adjustments  in the  BSP’s  Special  Deposit 
Account  (SDA)  facility  which  were  completed  in  November  2013.  This  rapid  growth  is 
therefore seen as only temporary and is not expected to translate into significant inflationary 
pressures  or  asset  price  misalignments.  The  growth  in  bank  credit,  on  the  other  hand, 
continues  to  be  channelled  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  higher  bank 
lending growth rates are reflective of the economy’s higher growth trajectory and increased 
financial deepening. In addition, there is fundamental support for the growth in the real estate 
sector with real demand from end-users including from the growing young professionals and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the BPO sector. Finally, data from Colliers International Philippines Research (Colliers) as of 
Q4 2013 show that property prices are not significantly out of line with their long-term trends. 
As  for  the  rout  in  the  financial  markets,  I  would  say,  some  calm  has  returned  with  the 
market’s  better  appreciation  of  the  forward  guidance  from  the  Fed.  Our  view  has  always 
been  that  after  the  initial  nervousness,  markets  would  regain  their  bearing  and  distinguish 
between economies with good fundamentals (such as the Philippines) and those with more 
structural concerns. In the case of the Philippines, we have actually observed some funds 
returning to our financial markets. 
At the beginning of each new calendar year or each Chinese new year, I am often asked for 
my “fearless” economic forecasts. There are those who ask me with such earnestness that I 
sometimes  feel  they  think  I  have  an  infallible  crystal  ball!  Friends,  I  don’t  have  one.  And 
neither am I one to pursue luck. Although before this forum, someone told me that in the year 
of the Chinese Wooden Horse, the numbers 2, 3 and 7 are considered lucky… Interestingly, 
today is the 2nd day of the 3rd week of the Year of the Horse and 7th full week of the year 
2014! What a coincidence, right? 
Thankfully,  we  don’t  have  to  leave  things  to  coincidences.  We  can  instead  have  the 
confidence  to  weather  hiccups  in  market  sentiment  by  planning  judiciously  and  working 
earnestly. 
More specifically, the gains we have achieved on the run up to investment grade have taken 
root.  Above-trend  growth,  low  and  stable  inflation  within  target,  current  account  surpluses 
funded  by  structural  inflows,  fx  reserves  that  are  more  than  adequate  against  traditional 
standards, a sound banking system, banking sector regulations that are line with global best 
practices and comprehensive fiscal consolidation. 
These  are  all  expected  to  continue…  and  that,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  not  wishful 
thinking… neither is it a matter of luck… Because the reform agenda and the policy focus to 
support these are clearly in place. The Philippines’ track record has shown that even in good 
times, reforms have been sustained. 
Beyond investment grade: does it matter? 
But  is  going  beyond  investment  grade  a  goal  we  should  pursue?  Clearly,  going  beyond 
investment grade of itself would truly matter if it translates to real investments. 
For our ultimate stakeholder, investment-led economic transformation is necessary not just 
for  sustainable  growth,  but  also  to  develop  a  competitive  middle-class  group  that  further 
boosts  our  domestic  demand.  Recognizing  this,  the  NG  has  accelerated  the  bidding  and 
awarding  of  crucial  infrastructure  projects  and  raised  public  investment.  In  addition,  the 
government’s targeted social spending, especially in education, is expected to yield broader 
growth in the long run by improving our human capital. These initiatives should help both our 
investment to GDP ratio and our national income to continue their upward trend. 
Beyond investment grade: role of capital markets 
To move beyond investment grade requires deliberate steps, just as we saw on the road to 
investment grade. One of the critical steps on this road is creating a thriving capital market in 
an environment of stable prices. 
The latest numbers tell us that our economy remains to be bank-centric, rather than a capital 
market-oriented financial system. The distribution of total assets suggests that 80 percent are 
held  by  banks.  In  2013,  some  Php84  billion  in  corporate  securities  were  issued  and  listed 
while  loans  outstanding of the  banking system  increased  by  Php663  billion  over  the  same 
period. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Being  heavily  dependent  on  one  funding  vehicle  to  raise  needed  capital  can  present 
challenges. For example, as global interest rates are expected to normalize and trend higher, 
those who have relied on bank credit to raise long-term funding face increased pressure on 
their cashflows to handle the requirement of higher debt servicing. In addition, with limited 
private sector securities plying the market, savers do not have sufficient means to migrate 
themselves into investors, keeping available funding to the shorter-term tenors. Short-tenors 
are not the natural match for the longer-term funding needs of entrepreneurs and corporate 
borrowers. 
Our idea of capital market reform is not a question of the dominance of one product over the 
other. Also, we do not expect an overnight shift in the funding structure from bank credit to 
market securities. There are good reasons why we would like to see more securities issued 
relative to loans just as there are reasons why the system is currently heavily reliant on bank 
loans over any other funding source. 
What we wish to underscore, instead, is that having the right balance between bank credit 
and access to capital markets is essential in order to properly manage systemic risks. This 
has been the key lesson from the recent global crisis. The new prudential norm of financial 
stability requires that we take a holistic view of how and where risks develop, keeping in mind 
that markets are all inter-connected. 
To help create that healthy balance between bank lending and capital market as a source of 
funding for the corporate sector, the BSP has been working towards the development of a 
benchmark  yield  curve  that  has  depth  and  breadth.  Related  initiatives  also  cover,  among 
others,  price-related  initiatives  such  as  the  Overnight  Index  Swap  (OIS),  the  calculation  of 
implied  zero  rates,  the  oversight  of  repos  and  the  introduction  of  STRIPS.  We  are  also 
looking at the financial infrastructure requirement for the capital markets. From data capture 
within  a  price  discovery  function  to  the  repository  of  all  trade  transactions  and  to  auxiliary 
services such as central counterparties, securities settlement, trading platforms and central 
securities depository. These initiatives are but a portion of a long “to-do” list. 
The  capital  market  reform  agenda  is  huge  and  the  barriers  are  formidable…  but…  as  the 
characters  in  the  Broadway  play,  Wicked,  would  sing,  we  must  go  beyond  our  limitations 
and… “defy gravity.” 
Concluding thoughts 
Moving  ahead  does  not  happen  on  its  own.  Progress  has  to  be  moulded,  packaged  and 
timed.  If  we  are  to  sustain  the  momentum  of  growth  and  expansion  in  our  bid  to  move 
beyond investment grade, capital market reform must be integral to this strategy. 
If  tomorrow  is  to  be  better  and  brighter,  we  must  ensure  that  we  have  the  overall  support 
system to reap future rewards. We have to instil real change. Only then can we really obtain 
the benefits of going “beyond Investment Grade”. 
On that note, I wish everyone a productive conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
