  Gill Marcus: The outlook for the South African economy in a challenging 
global environment 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the 
Distinguished  Speakers  Seminar,  European  Economics  and  Financial  Centre,  London,  8 
April 2014. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to address you this afternoon. Today’s discussion takes place 
at a time when the UK is one of the advanced economies that is showing signs of sustained 
recovery from the global financial crisis. This is good news not just for the UK, but also for 
South Africa, which still has strong trade and investment links with your country. However, 
after nearly seven grueling years, we need to recognise that the global financial crisis is not 
yet over. Rather, we have entered a new phase, one which is moving in the right direction, 
but  one  that  is  no  less  uncertain  and  risky  than  previous  phases,  and  which  poses  new 
challenges  for  emerging  economies  in  particular.  The  unwinding  of  the  extraordinary 
monetary policy actions of the past by the US Fed is taking us all into unknown territory, and 
there  is  no  history  or  precedent  to  guide  us.  Emerging  economies  had  to  deal  with  the 
spillover effects of monetary accommodation in the advanced economies, and the challenges 
to be faced by their reversal will be no less daunting. However, while the adjustment will be 
difficult,  I  believe  that  emerging  economies  in  general,  including  South  Africa,  are  more 
resilient and better equipped to respond to such challenges than was the case in the past. 
One of the consequences of the unconventional monetary policies adopted in a number of 
the advanced economies in response to the global financial crisis was a significant change in 
the pattern of global capital flows. As the search for yield became more intense, emerging 
economies  had  to  contend  with  large  capital  inflows.  Although  these  flows  presented 
opportunities, they also brought challenges in the form of appreciating exchange rates and 
lower  interest  rates,  which  had  the  potential  to  cause  a  buildup  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances,  including,  in  some  instances,  excessive  credit  extension,  asset  price  bubbles 
and widening fiscal and current account deficits. The appreciating currencies also made the 
products  of  these  economies  less  competitive,  with  significant  consequences  for  domestic 
manufacturing, for instance. 
The announcement by the US Fed in May last year that a reduction of asset purchases was 
likely  to  commence  at  some  stage  later  in  the  year  had  a  marked  impact  on  these  global 
capital  flows,  amid  initial  uncertainty  about  the  timing  and  quantum  of  the  tapering.  The 
widely  expected  commencement  of  tapering  in  September  did  not  occur,  and  markets 
overscrutinised every bit of data coming out of the US for possible indications of the start of 
the  process.  An  extremely  volatile  period  of  “risk  on”  and  “risk  off”  episodes  ensued, 
particularly for those countries that had been the previous beneficiaries of the capital inflows. 
Indications of slowing employment growth in the US were seen as good news for emerging 
markets,  as  it  implied  a  delay  of  either  tapering  or  normalisation.  As  a  result,  emerging 
market exchange rates, including the rand, experienced a high degree of volatility in the face 
of  these  changing  flows.  As  shown  in  a  recent  paper  by  Eichengreen  and  Gupta,  the 
countries  most  affected  were  those  with  large  current  account  deficits  and  those  with 
relatively large and liquid financial markets which allowed for investors to be better able to 
rebalance  their  portfolios.  The  issue  was  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  markets 
initially  conflated  tapering,  which  related  to  the  slowdown  of  Fed  asset  purchases,  with 
monetary policy tightening or normalisation of short-term policy rates. 
It appears now that the financial markets generally accept that tapering by the US Fed will 
proceed at a steady pace. However, the next phase of normalisation, that of the timing and 
extent of the US policy rate cycle, is now the subject of intense speculation. Already we have 
seen the market reaction to the Fed statements following the most recent FOMC meeting, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  when  there  were  indications  that  the  timing  of  the  first  policy  rate  adjustment  may  occur 
sooner than previously believed. 
There is little doubt that this process will not proceed in a linear fashion: the outlook for the 
coming interest rate cycle is likely to keep changing and be affected by the ebbs and flows of 
data coming out of the US. The outlook may also be complicated by the monetary policy exit 
strategies  of  the  UK,  Japan  and  the  ongoing  challenges  faced  by  the  Eurozone.  While 
emerging markets, including South Africa, are likely to experience periods of relative stability, 
as is the case at the moment, we do expect volatile periods ahead. Thus while a sustained 
recovery in the US is critical to ending the global financial crisis, and is good news, in the 
short  run  it  introduces  increased  risks  and  volatility  with  consequences  for  growth,  capital 
outflows,  commodity  prices,  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  inflation  in  many  emerging 
markets. 
But this volatile global financial market environment is not the only challenge facing us. The 
possibility of a slowdown in China poses further risks, not only to the growth recovery in the 
advanced  economies,  but  also  to  emerging  markets  in  general.  Trade  and  investment 
linkages  with  China  have  increased  markedly  in  recent  years,  and  a  slowdown  could 
adversely affect these trends. An important channel of transmission of a slowdown is already 
being  felt  by  commodity  exporters  through  the  impact  on  commodity  prices,  particularly 
industrial  commodities.  The  nature  of  the  reaction  function  of  the  Chinese  authorities  and 
possible  stimulus  packages  is  still  uncertain.  Complicating  the  outlook  are  the  challenges 
faced by the Chinese banking sector, in particular the shadow banking sector, which has the 
potential to reinforce the slowdown. 
More  positively,  the  outlook  for  the  advanced  economies  appears  to  be  improving,  but 
already some doubts have arisen regarding the strength of the recovery following a generally 
disappointing first quarter. From a South African perspective, although the recovery in the UK 
appears to be sustained, we are particularly concerned about the slow pace of recovery in 
the  rest  of  Europe,  which  remains  an  important  destination  for  our  manufactured  exports. 
The outlook for emerging markets, by contrast, has deteriorated in recent months, and there 
is a risk that a generalised slowdown in these economies could undermine the recovery in 
the advanced economies. 
How  has  South  Africa  fared  against  this  challenging  backdrop?  Following  the  initial 
announcement  by  the  US  Fed  regarding  possible  tapering,  the  rand  was  one  of  the 
currencies most negatively affected. The rand was at around R9,00 against the US dollar at 
the beginning of May 2013, and depreciated to around R10,00 against the  dollar following 
the initial tapering announcement. It then followed a volatile depreciating trend, reaching its 
weakest  point  of  R11,39  against  the  dollar  immediately  after  the  January  MPC  meeting. 
Since then it has followed an appreciating, but volatile trend, to reach a recent high of around 
R10,50 in early April. We expect this pattern of volatility to continue, as the hesitant move 
towards US monetary policy normalisation proceeds, with markets being overly sensitive to 
any  data  coming  out  of  the  US.  For  example,  last  week’s  non-farm  payrolls  data  came  in 
slightly lower than expected. This disappointing news for the US was seen as good news for 
emerging markets, and the rand, along with the Brazilian real, appreciated by over one per 
cent in response. 
Underlying  these  volatile  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  was  the  changing  pattern  of 
capital  flows.  During  2012,  net  purchases  of  South  African  government  bonds  by  non-
residents  totaled  R88,6  bn,  influenced  in  part  by  South  Africa’s  inclusion  in  the  Citibank 
World  Government  Bond  Index  during  the  year.  These  flows  became  more  volatile  during 
2013, in line  with the on-off nature of the move towards tapering. As the markets became 
more  certain  that  tapering  would  begin,  portfolio  outflows  proceeded  at  a  significant  rate. 
Between November 2013 and January 2014, net sales of bonds by non-residents amounted 
to  R46  bn  while  net  equity  sales  amounted  to  R25  bn.  Since  then,  however,  the  outflows 
have abated, and in February and March net purchases of equities to the value of R13,3 bn 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  were recorded, alongside a small net inflow into the bond market of R250 m. While to date 
the  current  account  deficit  has  been  adequately  financed  through  other  forms  of  capital 
inflows and without recourse to selling reserves, it could create a challenge going forward. 
However,  the  rand  has  also  been  affected  by  a  number  of  other  idiosyncratic  and  global 
factors. These include a series of protracted strikes in the motor vehicle and mining sectors 
in particular; a decline in the terms of trade of just over 4 per cent in 2012 and 2013, largely 
in response to the slowdown in China; and a widening of the deficit on the current account of 
the balance of payments, which, in conjunction with the fiscal deficit of around 4 per cent of 
GDP is seen to have contributed to the vulnerability of the economy to the possibility of a 
sudden stop in capital flows. The current account deficit widened from 2,3 per cent of GDP in 
2011 to 5,8 in 2013, with the trade account accounting for about half of this number.  
This deterioration has occurred despite the significant depreciation of the nominal effective 
exchange rate of the rand of over 22 per cent since the beginning of 2012. Apart from the 
usual adjustment lags and J-curve effects there are a number of factors that could explain 
the slow response. First, to the extent that the depreciation is an adjustment to the declining 
terms  of  trade,  it  is  cushioning  the  mining  sector,  rather  than  being  a  stimulus  to  further 
output  and  investment.  Second,  the  pass-through  to  consumer  prices  has  been  relatively 
constrained  to  date,  and  ironically  this  impedes  the  adjustment  process  as  the  required 
relative  price  changes  have  not  taken  place.  While  this  muted  pass-through  does  help  to 
ensure that the depreciation is real, the competitive advantage of manufacturers has been 
eroded by sharp increases in a number of key inputs in recent years, particularly electricity. 
Third,  our  traditional  trading  partner  countries,  particularly  in  Europe,  are  still  experiencing 
slow  growth.  While  Africa  has  now  overtaken  Europe  as  the  main  destination  for  our 
manufacturing  exports,  the  capacity  of  these  countries  to  import  could  also  be  negatively 
affected by the reversal of capital flows and declining commodity prices. 
Fourth,  protracted  domestic  labour  disputes  have  impeded  output  and  exports  in  the 
manufacturing  and  mining  sectors,  while  at  the  same  time  uncertainty  regarding  proposed 
mining  legislation  had  dampened  new  investment  in  this  sector.  In  addition,  structural 
infrastructural  constraints,  particularly  relating  to  electricity  supplies  as  well  as  transport, 
have negatively affected our ability to get goods to, and out of, the ports. Finally, there is the 
relatively inelastic nature of import demand with respect to capital equipment for the ongoing 
much-needed infrastructure expenditure, which we must not cut back on. 
There  are  tentative  signs  that  we  may  have  reached  the  turning  point  with  respect  to  the 
adjustment process. The current account deficit narrowed to 5,1 per cent of GDP in the final 
quarter  of  2013,  down  from  6,4  per  cent  in  the  previous  quarter,  and  although  the  trade 
deficit widened further in January to R16,9 bn, February saw a surplus of R1,7 bn, following 
a R6,1 bn increase in the value of exports, and a R12,5 bn decline in imports. Net exports 
made  positive  contributions  to  GDP  growth  in  both  the  third  and  fourth  quarters  of  2013, 
contributing  1,6  and  7,8  percentage  points  in  these  two  quarters  respectively.  The  fourth 
quarter  outcome  was  the  highest contribution  to  quarterly  growth  since  the final  quarter  of 
2007, and although net exports were still a drag on annual growth in 2013 at –0,5 percentage 
points,  this  was  significantly  lower  than  the  –1,7  percentage  points  recorded  in  2012. 
Furthermore, the Bureau for Economic Research’s indicators for manufactured export sales 
and orders rose to its highest level in 10 years in the first quarter of this year. At the same 
time,  declining  new  motor  vehicle  sales,  amid  weakening  consumer  demand,  could 
contribute to a reduction in imports. There has also been a response on the services account 
where tourism receipts have increased markedly, and we expect this trend to continue. So 
despite the ongoing challenges to platinum exports, we are cautiously optimistic that we may 
be seeing a sustained improvement in the current account. 
While  the  exchange  rate  has  been  an  important  shock  absorber  for  the  South  African 
economy, some concern has been expressed regarding its volatility. We have not attempted 
to  intervene  directly  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  as  we  do  not  believe  that  such 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  intervention would be effective, given the size of South Africa’s foreign exchange market, and 
our relatively low level of foreign exchange reserves of around US$50 billion. Fortunately we 
do not suffer some of the negative balance sheet effects that have led to a “fear of floating” in 
a number of emerging economies: we do not have significant currency mismatches and our 
corporates,  banks,  households  and  government  have  relatively  small  net  foreign  currency 
exposures. However, volatility does make it difficult to plan and make long term investment 
decisions.  From  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  our  focus  is  not  to  try  and  influence  the 
exchange rate, but rather to focus on preventing the second round effects of the depreciation 
from impacting on the overall inflation rate. As I will touch on later, the exchange rate has 
had an impact on inflation, and remains a significant risk to the inflation outlook. 
South Africa’s growth performance in the post-crisis period has been disappointing, having 
averaged 2,8 per cent since 2010. This can be attributed in part to the slow recovery in our 
major trading partners. In 2013, growth averaged 1,9 per cent, well below potential growth 
currently estimated to be between 3,0 and 3,5 per cent. The Bank’s forecast for growth in 
2014 and 2015 is 2,6 per cent and 3,1 per cent for these two years respectively. While this is 
an improvement, it is still below potential, and likely to have a minimal positive impact on the 
unemployment rate, which currently stands at 24,1 per cent. Employment growth has been 
slow, and what growth there has been has mainly been in the public sector. For example, in 
the  year  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  2013,  non-agricultural  formal  sector  employment  grew  by 
0,5 per cent or about 41,000 jobs, of which 39,000 were in the public sector. 
The constraints to growth are mainly structural in nature, but in the near term there are two 
main  risks  to  the  growth  outlook.  The  first  is  the  uncertainty  of  electricity  supply.  South 
Africa’s electricity supply has been constrained for some time, and has no doubt impacted on 
investment decisions in the economy. The current tight conditions on the grid are likely to be 
stretched  going  into  winter,  imparting  a  near-term  downside  risk  to  our  growth  outlook. 
However, this constraint should be relieved during 2015 due to a significant new power plant 
build programme that has been in place over the past few years. New capacity is expected to 
come on stream late in 2014, and as this gets added to the grid, the shortage should ease. 
A further challenge arises from the protracted strike in the platinum sector, which is now in its 
12th week, with no resolution in sight. To date exports have been temporarily cushioned by 
the  depletion  of  stockpiles,  but  it  will  affect  the  GDP  growth  outcome. Whether  or  not  this 
strike has longer term ramifications will depend on its persistence, the nature of the ultimate 
settlement, and any knock-on effect on other sectors and wage settlements. However, the 
dispute is indicative of an urgent need to address industrial relations not only in the mining 
sector but in the broader economy, and requires a change in mindset from both workers and 
employers. We are hopeful that an acceptable settlement can be achieved soon that satisfies 
all  parties.  But  in  the  meantime  the  cost  to  workers,  financially  and  in  terms  of  human 
suffering, and to the mining companies is enormous. 
There are also a number of positive developments, in addition to the significant infrastructure 
build programme that is already well advanced, that will underpin growth in the longer term. 
Last year parliament unanimously adopted the National Development Plan as the long term 
vision for growth and employment creation. While this is not a rigid blueprint, it provides a 
framework  which,  if  largely  implemented,  should  change  the  South  African  economy 
fundamentally. The key points in the NDP are to promote faster and more inclusive economic 
growth, to build a capable state, to promote good governance and an active citizenry and to 
promote  collaborative  partnerships  across  society,  including  between  government  and 
business. 
The key economic policy recommendations are to promote exports, raise competitiveness, 
lower the cost of living for the poor, improve skills development and improve the functioning 
of the labour market. Critical actions required for faster economic growth include investing in 
economic infrastructure to lift the potential growth of the economy and removing regulatory 
barriers to newer firms to promote easier entry and greater competitiveness. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  South Africa has already made significant strides in improving the lives of millions of people. 
Without  going  into  too  much  detail,  a  report  released  by  Stats  SA  last  week  showed  that 
poverty levels in the country have dropped from 57,2 per cent in 2006 to 45,5 per cent in 
2011. As of 2011, 32,3 per cent of the population were  living below the National Planning 
Commission’s  lower  bound  poverty  line,  compared  with  42,2  per  cent  in  2006.  The  Gini 
coefficient, which reflects income inequalities remains high but declined from 0,72 to 0,69. 
The focus on economic infrastructure expenditure in the NDP is key. The recent government 
budget provides for capital expenditure by the major state-owned companies of almost R400 
billon  to  be  spent  on  infrastructure  during  the  coming  three  years,  the  bulk  of  this  on 
electricity and transport infrastructure. This should have a positive impact not only on current 
growth during the build phases, but also on future growth as infrastructure bottlenecks are 
eased. The investment outlook from the government and state-owned enterprises therefore 
looks positive, and should help with the crowding in of private sector investment. We are also 
seeing favourable signs in the construction sector, particularly in civil construction. 
The outlook for private sector fixed investment is also more positive, despite relatively low 
levels  of  business  confidence.  Having  been  relatively  subdued  during  the  past  few  years, 
growth in gross fixed capital formation by the private sector increased from 3,9 per cent in 
2012 to 5,5 per cent in 2013. Part of this increase was related to green energy investment. 
This  indicates  that  if  the  near-term  constraints  can  be  eased  and  business  confidence 
improves,  there  is  scope  for  further  growth  in  fixed  investment,  and  this  could  allow  for  a 
rotation  away  from  consumption  expenditure  towards  investment  as  the  main  driver  of 
growth. In 2013, the contribution of consumption expenditure to GDP growth had declined to 
1,7  percentage  point,  compared  with  2,3  in  the  2012,  while  the  contribution  of gross fixed 
capital formation was unchanged at 0,9 percentage points. 
In  contrast  to  the  mining  sector,  the  manufacturing  sector  also  shows  tentative  signs  of 
having  turned  the  corner  following  particular  strike-related  challenges  during  2013, 
particularly in the motor vehicle sector. The manufacturing PMI had been below the neutral 
level  of  50  index  points  for  the  second  half  of  2013  and  early  2014,  has  now  returned  to 
above 50. We are hopeful that these green shoots will lead to a sustained recovery in the 
sector amid a recovery in motor vehicle exports in particular. 
There are also significant opportunities for South Africa at the regional level. According to the 
latest  World  Economic  Outlook,  economic  growth  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  is  expected  to 
average 6,1 per cent in 2014 and 5,8 per cent in 2015. As I noted earlier, there has been a 
significant shift in South Africa’s trade patterns in recent years. In 2007, 38 per cent of South 
African manufactured exports went to Europe, with 25 per cent going to Africa. By 2012 the 
picture had reversed, with 25 per cent going to Europe, and 38 per cent going to Africa. The 
impact of the recession in Europe, for example, was felt particularly hard in the motor vehicle 
export  sector.  However  the  decline  in  vehicle  exports  to  Europe  in  2012  was  more  than 
compensated for by a 19 per cent increase in vehicle exports to Africa in that year. 
The focus of South Africa’s regional interactions has not only been on the trade side. Foreign 
Direct Investment in the region grew from less than US$1 bn in 1990 to almost US$40 bn in 
2012. South African companies have been very active in this respect and have increasingly 
made  their  presence  felt  on  the  continent  in  mining,  the  retail  sector,  construction, 
telecommunications, agri-business and banking in particular. There is enormous potential for 
regional infrastructure development which will enhance the growth potential of South Africa 
and its neighbours. 
The current environment has created a difficult context for monetary policy. For some time 
now  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  had  to  face  the  dilemma  of  a  relatively  subdued 
growth  environment  and  a  rising  trend  in  inflation.  Apart  from  a  temporary  breach  of  the 
target  in  July  and  August  2013,  inflation  has  remained  within  the  target  range  since  early 
2012,  and  the  repurchase  rate  had  been  unchanged  at  5,0  per  cent  since  July  2012. 
Notwithstanding the unusually low level of pass-through to inflation, the exchange rate has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  posed the biggest upside risk to the inflation outlook. Adverse exchange rate and food price 
developments  resulted  in  a  deterioration  of  the inflation outlook  in January  2014  when  the 
forecast suggested that inflation was likely to breach the upper end of the band during the 
second quarter of 2014, and to peak at an average of 6,6 per cent in the final quarter of the 
year.  Inflation  was  expected  to  average  6,0  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015  and 
remain close to the top of the band for the remainder of the year. 
With the risks to the inflation outlook seen to be on the upside, this trajectory suggested the 
need for  some monetary  policy  tightening.  However,  the  difficulty  facing  the  MPC  was  the 
slow  pace  of  economic  growth,  the  lack  of  clear  demand  pressures  as  seen  in  the  tepid 
growth in consumption expenditure by households, amid subdued growth in credit extension. 
In  the  event,  the  MPC  decided  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  embark  on  a  moderate 
tightening cycle, starting with a 50 basis point increase of the repurchase rate in January. It 
was  indicated  that  the  speed  and  intensity  of  the  cycle  would  be  dependent  on  unfolding 
data,  and  would  be  consistent  with  our  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  At  the  most 
recent  meeting  in  March,  the  inflation  forecast  had  improved  slightly,  particularly  for  2015, 
and the MPC kept the repurchase rate unchanged. Nevertheless we re-emphasised that we 
are in a moderate tightening cycle, but that it does not necessarily mean that rates will be 
changed at every meeting or by the same amount. An important consideration for the MPC 
was that failure to react could have an adverse impact on inflation expectations which until 
now have been relatively stable and anchored, albeit at the upper end of the target range. 
Despite the increase in the repo rate in January, the real policy rate is still slightly negative, 
and  well  below  what  could  be  considered  the  neutral  rate. While  such  an  accommodative 
stance  has  been  considered  appropriate  given  the  developments  in  the  real  economy, 
pressures  from  the  exchange  rate  and  capital  flows,  and  the  possible  normalisation  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  US  imply  that  this  stance  cannot  be  maintained  indefinitely.  At  this 
stage we do not have a clear view of what the longer term post-crisis “new normal” neutral 
interest rate will be, either in South Africa or at a global level. This is a subject of debate in 
most  countries.  We  do  know  that  some  adjustment  will  be  required,  but  the  nature  of  the 
adjustment needs to be sensitive to the context that we find ourselves in. And the context will 
determine how pre-emptive or reactive we will be. 
This does not mean that we blindly follow US monetary policy. The impact of Fed tapering 
and  associated  capital  outflows  has  been  felt  on  the  long  term  bond  yields,  which  at  one 
stage had increased by about 200 basis points, but have since moderated somewhat. This is 
not surprising, as tapering has more to do with the long end of the yield curve than the short 
end. Central banks can indirectly influence long term rates, but do not have the same direct 
control over them as they do with short term rates. 
As noted in a recent article in the FT by Charles Goodhart, long-term interest rates are more 
correlated across countries than short-term rates, and countries with flexible exchange rates 
are  more  able  to  set  policy  rates  independently  of  the  Fed  funds  rate.  However,  this 
independence is not complete. Exchange rate pressures may lead to inflation pressure that 
may require a monetary policy response. But this partial independence does mean that short 
term rates can be more related to domestic cyclical considerations. 
In  conclusion,  South  Africa,  along  with  many  of  its  emerging  market  peers,  is  facing  a 
challenging period ahead. We are facing a difficult global context, which will have significant 
and uncertain spillover effects on us. While the advanced economies will pay lip-service to 
mitigating  these  effects,  the  reality  is  that  they  are  likely  to  conduct  their  policies  with 
domestic consideration in mind. South Africa also faces a number of domestic challenges. 
The  solutions  are  there,  but  we  need  the  community  of  purpose  to  implement  these 
initiatives.  Education  and  infrastructure  are  key  elements  in  the  much  needed  structural 
reform agenda, but this investment takes time and there is no quick fix. It is going to be a 
difficult road ahead, but it needs to be done and can be done. Monetary policy will play its 
role,  but  it  cannot  solve  the  underlying  structural  problems.  We  will  continue  to  ensure  a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  a  well-regulated  financial  sector,  within  a  flexible 
inflation targeting environment. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
