  Carlos da Silva Costa: Increasing the resilience of the Portuguese 
financial system 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  to  the 
COFAP committee regarding Banco Espírito Santo, Lisbon, 18 July 2014. 
   Background on supervisory activity since 2011 
I.  
To increase the resilience of the Portuguese financial system, Banco de Portugal designed 
an action plan which began before the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme and 
continued under that programme and thereafter, involving the following horizontal exercises: 
The  Special  Inspections  Programme  (SIP),  launched  in  2011,  which  aimed  at 
• 
validating  the  key  components  for  calculating  institutions’  solvency  levels  by 
analysing  three  aspects  (review  of  impairment,  RWA  calculation  and  stress  test 
methodology); 
The  On-site  Inspections  Programme  (OIP),  conducted  in  2012,  which  aimed  at 
validating impairment levels for exposures in specific sectors deemed high-risk; 
The  Horizontal  Review  of  Credit  Portfolio  Impairment  (ETRICC)  in  2013,  which 
assessed individual impairment in the credit portfolio, and was followed by a second 
phase  (ETRICC  2),  which  assessed  impairment  from  exposures  to  12  economic 
groups selected using risk criteria; 
Finally, also in 2013, the Special Assessment Programme (SAP), which assessed 
the institutions’ procedures and processes in managing distressed credit. 
The results of the SIP were disclosed in a press release on 16 December 2011. The 
credit  assessment  estimated  that  EUR  838  million  was  needed  to  reach  robust 
impairment  levels  for  the  set  of  eight  banking  groups  as  at  30  June  2011.  This 
corresponded  to  9.1%  of  total  impairment  constituted  for  credit  covered  by  the 
inspection work and 0.3% of the overall amount of this credit. All the banking groups 
strengthened  their  impairment  levels  in  accordance  with  Banco  de  Portugal’s 
request. 
 The  SIP  followed  an  innovative  methodology  in  terms  of  supervision,  simultaneously 
covering the eight major banking groups (over 80% of the assets and credit in the financial 
system)  and  used  independent  audit  firms  that  assessed  the  credit  portfolio  against 
benchmarks defined by Banco de Portugal. Despite the complexity and  wide scope of the 
exercise,  which  involved  a  significant  number  of  human  resources  (350  people,  including 
auditors,  consultants  and  Banco  de  Portugal  staff)  and  a  very  demanding  timeframe,  the 
internal  governance  mechanisms  adopted  by  Banco  de  Portugal  led  to  timeliness,  quality 
and consistency in the results. 
A Steering Committee was set up to monitor execution of the programme, chaired by Banco 
de  Portugal  and  comprised  of  experts  designated  by  the International Monetary  Fund,  the 
European  Commission,  the  European  Central  Bank,  three  European  Union  supervisory 
authorities  –  Banco  de  España,  Autorité  de  Contrôle  Prudentiel  (France)  and  Banque 
Nationale de Belgique – and also by Banco de Portugal. 
Following this exercise, Banco de Portugal decided to include horizontal periodic inspections 
of the overall credit portfolio or of asset classes most exposed to macroeconomic or market 
developments as part of regular banking system supervision. 
In this context, Banco de Portugal ran new checks and assessments in 2012 under the OIP 
on  the  credit  portfolios  serving  the  construction  and  real  estate  promotion  sectors,  using 
independent auditors. The results were disclosed in a press release on 3 December 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 for 
impairment 
levels  recorded 
 
 
The total exposure of the eight banking groups assessed together came to EUR 69 billion 
(61%  corresponding  to  the  construction  and  real  estate  promotion  sectors,  39%  to  other 
related  entities).  This  total  represented  about  40%  of  the  companies  segment.  For  the 
purposes  of  analysing  the  impairment  amounts  recorded,  a  sample  of  2,856  entities  was 
taken from that universe, with an aggregate exposure of EUR 39 billion, representing 56% of 
the total. 
The 
the  sample’s  exposure  were  assessed  using 
conservative  criteria,  with  an  emphasis  on  treating  all  those  participating  in  the  OIP  in  a 
homogeneous  way.  For 
the  eight  banking  groups  as  a  whole,  reinforcement  of 
EUR 861 million was estimated as necessary for the value of impairments recorded for the 
exposures analysed as at 30 June 2012, in order to reach robust provisioning levels (about 
2.2% of the overall amount of the exposures assessed). 
All the banking groups strengthened their impairment levels in line with the conclusions of the 
exercise. 
In  the  first  half  of  2013,  Banco  de  Portugal  conducted  a  new  horizontal  assessment  of 
impairment  levels  for  the  credit  portfolio,  resulting  in  an  effective  strengthening  of 
impairments that has already been recognised in the consolidated accounts of June 2013. 
The results of the exercise were disclosed in a press release on 2 August 2013. 
Total  credit  for  the  eight  banking  groups  as  a  whole  under  this  exercise  reached 
EUR 92.6 billion,  which  also  included  off-balance-sheet  exposures  such  as  guarantees 
conceded  and  irrevocable  credit  lines.  For  the  purposes  of  analysing  the  impairment 
amounts  recorded,  a  sample  of  2,206  entities  was  taken  from  that  universe,  with  an 
on-balance-sheet  exposure  of  EUR  44.2  billion,  and  an  off-balance-sheet  exposure  of 
EUR 8.9 billion. 
Using  particularly  conservative  assessment  criteria,  a  EUR 1.1 billion 
impairment 
reinforcement  was  estimated  as  necessary  for  the  exposures  analysed  among  the  eight 
banking groups as a whole as at 30 April 2013, in order to reach robust provisioning levels 
(about  2.1%  of  the  overall  amount  of  the  exposures  assessed).  This  level  was  set  in  a 
context  of  very  unfavourable  economic  developments  and  took  into  account  the  events 
taking place up to the present. 
The  impairment  reinforcements  made  in  the  interim  by  the  banking  groups  as  at  30  June 
2013 covered all the reinforcement needs for impairment identified in this exercise. 
While  the  two  first  exercises  were  conducted  by  independent  auditors,  this  horizontal 
operation was carried out by each banking group’s external auditor, based on benchmarks 
and  guidance  adopted  by  Banco  de  Portugal.  In  parallel,  the  exercise  made  use  of  an 
independent  external  auditor,  which,  jointly  with  Banco  de  Portugal,  was  responsible  for 
horizontal consistency, through the harmonised application of the benchmarks and guidance, 
thereby minimising the risk of divergent conclusions. 
In September 2013, Banco de Portugal decided to deepen its assessment of the criteria used 
to calculate impairments for a set of Portuguese and foreign economic groups, for whom the 
capacity to recover credit granted depended on their medium-term business plans creating 
sufficient  cashflow  for  debt  repayment.  Therefore,  an  independent  auditor  assessed  how 
conservative the economic and financial models used by the banks were, and looked at the 
robustness  and  adequacy  of 
the 
reasonableness of the main assumptions used. Further, sensitivity testing was carried out on 
the  results,  using  where  necessary  alternative  assumptions  to  those  used  by  the  banking 
groups. 
As  a  result  of  this  exercise,  a  €1  billion  overall  reinforcement  of  the  impairment  and 
provisions  levels  was  estimated  as  necessary  as  at  30  September  2013.  This  amount, 
already reflected in the institutions’ accounts, aims to ensure that the risks associated with 
the  economic  groups  involved  are  adequately  addressed.  The  exercise  confirmed  the 
these  models  and 
the  support 
information 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
soundness of the national banking system at 30 September 2013. ETRICC 2 brought to a 
close a series of horizontal inspections carried out by Banco de Portugal since 2011 which 
have contributed to making the Portuguese banking system more solid. 
The  results  of  these  exercises  were  duly  incorporated  into  the  institutions’  financial 
statements. At the same time, recommendations were issued to correct insufficiencies found 
in the internal procedures and processes of the institutions in these areas. 
The extension of the measures taken and the adoption of additional supervisory instruments 
further advanced the intrusive and forward-looking approach to supervision. 
Banco de Portugal deems it necessary to ensure that Portugal’s banking institutions continue 
their efforts to adapt their balance sheet structures, their business and internal governance 
models and necessarily their risk management processes, while ensuring adequate solvency 
levels that incorporate all the relevant risks to which they are or may be exposed. 
Among other measures, the situation has led to various  initiatives from the Bank recently, 
including  the  publication  in  May  of  a  circular-letter  with  guidance  on  capital  planning, 
designed to strengthen levels of own funds in all their forms (Core Tier 1, Tier 1 and total), 
above  the  minimum  regulatory  ratios  in  force,  in  order  to  create  capital  buffers  that  can 
withstand unforeseen events. 
Banco Espírito Santo Group 
Banco Espírito Santo Group structure and activity 
1.  
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (BES) is the third largest banking group in Portugal, with assets 
of  EUR  76.6  billion  as  at  March  2014,  deposits  of  EUR  37.3  billion,  liabilities  of 
EUR 13.7 billion  in  the  form  of  securities,  and  funds  from  other  credit  institutions  of 
EUR 4.2 billion. 
The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio (CET1) (phasing-in) in March 2014, with the effect of the 
capital increase of June included, came to 11.3% (CET1 capital reaching EUR 7.1 billion). It 
was  thus  434  basis  points  above  the  regulatory  minimum  (which  corresponds  to  a 
EUR 2.1 billion  capital  buffer).  BES  Group’s  total  capital  ratio  is  12.8%  under  the  same 
assumptions. 
BES Group’s activity covers the most important business segments, such as retail, corporate 
and  institutional  clients,  offering  a  variety  of  financial  products  and  services  through  a 
diversified distribution network. BES Group is present on four continents and in 25 countries, 
and employs around 10,000 staff. In Portugal, BES Group has around 650 branches and a 
network  of  22  Private  Banking  centres.  In  the  corporate  segment,  BES  has  a  domestic 
market share of 25.5% and operates through a network of 25 Corporate Centres, that serve 
the medium-sized enterprises subsegment and a group of teams split between Lisbon and 
Porto dedicated to the large enterprises subsegment. 
Most  of  BES  Group’s  international  activity  is  carried  out  directly  by  BES  and  comes  from 
Angola (with BES Angola – BESA), Spain (where BES has a network of 20 branches), the 
United Kingdom, Brazil, the USA, Macao, Poland, Cape Verde and Ireland. All the banking 
subsidiaries  held  directly  by  ESFG  are  located  in  countries  outside  the  European  Union: 
Dubai  (ES  Bankers  Dubai),  Panama  (ES  Bank  Panama)  and  Switzerland  (Banque  Privée 
Espirito Santo). 
Overview of recent supervisory activity regarding BES Group 
2.  
Based on the permanent risk profile assessment of this banking group, Banco de Portugal 
identified  certain  vulnerabilities  that  led  to  the  implementation  of  various  prudential 
measures. These measures were designed to: (i) effectively reduce the (direct and indirect) 
exposure to the non-financial arm of GES, (ii) increase own funds to create a capital buffer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
with  regard  to  the  regulatory  minimum  (8%  Common  Equity  Tier  1,  phasing-in),  and 
(iii) strengthen governance and internal control procedures and processes. In order to ensure 
an  appropriate  and  timely  adoption  of  these  corrective  measures,  Banco  de  Portugal  has 
monitored their execution and has met the institution’s management and the audit committee 
regularly, along with BES’s external auditor. 
In  the  light  of  the  conclusions  reached  in  Banco  de  Portugal’s  horizontal  supervisory 
initiatives, namely the Horizontal Review of Credit Portfolio Impairment (ETRICC) of the main 
Portuguese banking groups, Banco de Portugal decided to deepen its assessment of a set of 
economic groups where the capacity to recover their debt and the inherent impairment are 
analysed through the creation of financial flows (ETRICC 2). 
The  sample  of  entities  to  be  assessed  included  in  a  first  stage,  the  non-financial  GES 
companies, the analysis extending thereafter to financial entities too. Given the nature of this 
assessment, PricewaterhouseCoopers & Associados – Sociedade de Revisores de Contas, 
Lda (PwC) was invited to undertake it under Article 116 of the  Legal Framework of Credit 
Institutions  and  Financial  Companies  (Regime  Geral  das  Instituições  de  Crédito  e 
Sociedades Financeiras). In parallel, Banco de Portugal formulated a comprehensive set of 
information  requests,  with  a  view  to  deepening  its  assessment  of  the  financial  position  of 
GES’s non-financial companies. 
As  a  result  of  these  initiatives  promoted  by  Banco  de  Portugal,  a  serious  situation  was 
identified  in  the  ESI’s  individual  accounts  at  the  end  of  November  2013,  caused  by  an 
unusual and extremely significant increase in its financial liabilities. Banco de Portugal thus 
requested  ESI  to  prepare  proforma  consolidated  accounts  immediately  with  reference  to 
30 September 2013, accompanied by an external auditor’s opinion. The audit work to issue 
this  opinion  was  awarded  to  KPMG  &  Associados  –  Sociedade  de  Revisores  Oficiais  de 
Contas, S.A (KPMG). 
In  parallel,  as  the  developments  affecting  ESI’s  financial  position  took  on  a  considerable 
scale with potentially serious reputational risks for the banking group, on 3 December 2013, 
Banco  de  Portugal  requested  the  implementation  of  the  measures  needed  to  ensure  an 
appropriate segregation of BES Group from the risks arising from GES’s non-financial arm, 
so-called  “ring-fencing”.  In  particular,  Banco  de  Portugal  determined  (i)  the  elimination  of 
ESFG  Group’s  exposure  to  Espirito  Santo  International  not  covered  by  contractual 
obligations  and  guarantees  assessed  conservatively  and  (ii)  the  creation  of  an  escrow 
account with a minimum reserve equalling the remainder of the debt issued by Espírito Santo 
International  and  placed  with  BES  customers,  to  be  supported  by  cashflows  from  entities 
outside the ESFG Group perimeter. 
Banco de Portugal also announced that failure to implement these measures would lead to 
the  compulsory  constitution  of  a  provision  with  reference  to  31  December  2013,  which 
reflected the conclusions of the external auditor. 
Since the measures in question were not implemented in the terms specified by Banco de 
Portugal, a provision of EUR 700 million was recognised in ESFG’s consolidated accounts 
for the 2013 fiscal year. The level of this provision was determined by KPMG and confirmed 
by PwC, after taking into account the economic assessment of ESI’s business plan and the 
identified execution risks. 
The level of this provision was based on a deleveraging plan for ESI, involving the sale of 
assets and holdings, which presented high execution risks. Consequently, Banco de Portugal 
imposed  a  successive  strengthening  of  the  ring-fencing  measures  between  the  banking 
group and GES’s non-financial arm, to mitigate risks of contagion between GES’s two arms. 
Given the adverse developments in the capital markets resulting from uncertainty over BES’s 
financial position, Banco de Portugal asked BES to disclose its overall exposure to all GES 
entities. According to the information disclosed by BES on 10 July 2014, BES Group’s direct 
exposure to other GES entities as at 30 June 2014 amounted to EUR 1.2 billion, of which 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 on 
 
 
EUR  927  million  related  to  loans  extended  to  ESFG  and  its  financial  subsidiaries. 
Furthermore,  BES  reported  a  total  of  EUR  853  million  of  debt  securities  issued  by  GES 
entities and held directly by BES retail customers, as well as a total of EUR 2 billion held by 
institutional  clients,  considered  qualified  investors.  ESFG  issued  an  unconditional  and 
irrevocable guarantee of EUR 700 million to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations related to 
the debt instruments issued by various non-financial GES entities and placed by BES Group 
among  its  retail  customers.  Detailed  information  on  these  exposures  was  released  to  the 
market 
website 
(http://web3.cmvm.pt/sdi2004/emitentes/docs/FR51235.pdf). 
In this context, Banco de Portugal requested BES to prepare a contingency plan based on 
three pillars (liquidity, capital and communication), with a view to mitigating risks arising from 
a scenario of default in GES’s non-financial entities. In particular, Banco de Portugal asked 
BES to identify and duly quantify the various contagion channels to BES Group based on 
multiple contingency scenarios and including any impact arising from customers common to 
the two arms of GES (BES and GES’s non-financial arm). Banco de Portugal also requested 
the analysis of any losses and other possible effects arising from reputational risk, as a result 
of  a  default  event  in  GES’s  non-financial  arm.  A  quantification  was  also  requested  of  the 
impact foreseen on the liquidity and capital position of BES Group, as well as the measures 
to be adopted to reduce the risks arising from the materialisation of the risks identified. 
available 
CMVM 
July 
and 
the 
on 
10 
is 
to  accommodate  any 
BES Group’s capital and liquidity position 
3.  
Based  on  the  information  disclosed  and  the  impact  quantified  by  the  institution  and  the 
external  auditor,  BES  has  an  adequate  capital  buffer  to  accommodate  possible  negative 
impacts arising from exposure to GES’s non-financial arm, without compromising fulfilment of 
minimum capital ratios (8% CET1 phasing-in). 
Banco de Portugal does not foresee a significant negative impact on BES’s capital position 
resulting  from  the  financial  situation  of  its  subsidiary  BES  Angola  (BESA).  Given  that  the 
Guarantee from the Angolan State covers a substantial part of the credit portfolio and that 
there  is  close  collaboration  between  the  Authorities  of  both  countries,  Banco  de  Portugal 
hopes that this subsidiary’s position is clarified in the near future and without material impact 
on BES. 
Nevertheless,  Banco  de  Portugal  ordered  BES  to  present  additional  recapitalisation 
measures,  namely  measures 
the 
Comprehensive Assessment that ECB is currently undertaking. In order to assuage doubts 
and ensure the review of BES Group’s accounts is complete and clear, Banco de Portugal 
also ordered that an independent audit be conducted in addition to the credit portfolio review 
being  carried  out  under  the  Comprehensive  Assessment.  In  addition,  Banco  de  Portugal 
requested  a  forensic  audit  to  confirm  full  compliance  with  all  the  prudential  ring-fencing 
orders issued regarding GES’s non-financial entities. 
The preliminary interactions between BES and international investment banks, as well as the 
interest  shown  by  various  entities  (investment  funds  and  European  banks)  in  taking  up 
reference holdings in BES, showed that a private solution to strengthen its capital is feasible. 
However,  if  necessary,  EUR  6.4  billion  are  available  from  the  public  recapitalisation  line, 
created  under  the  Economic  and  Financial  Assistance  Programme,  and  may  be  used  to 
support any capital need of a Portuguese bank, under the relevant legal framework and State 
aid rules. 
Despite having solvency levels above the regulatory minimum, the media impact of the GES 
situation, BES’s rating downgrade and the performance of the CDS spread have put BES’s 
shares under great pressure and high volatility. In terms of liquidity, Banco de Portugal will 
remain available to support any needs should its liquidity position deteriorate. 
insufficiency  arising 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Changes to internal governance and restructuring of senior management 
4.  
As  mentioned  above,  hand-in-hand  with  successive  requests  to  ring-fence  BES  from  the 
non-financial  arm  of  GES,  and  more  recently  from  ESFG  and  its  subsidiaries,  Banco  de 
Portugal ordered BES to strengthen its internal governance model, with particular regard to 
independence and prevention of conflict of interests, and to restructure its management body 
to eliminate situations in which management roles in other GES entities accumulate and lead 
to harm to BES Group. 
The  restructuring  of  BES’s  management  body  began  shortly  after  the  end  of  the  capital 
increase,  with  the  resignation  of  the  board  members  that  also  had  senior  roles  in  ESFG 
and/or entities of the non-financial arm. Following that, Banco de Portugal recommended that 
the  dialogue  between  shareholders,  above  all  between  the  two  principal  qualified 
shareholders, was broadened to include presentation of a consensual proposal on replacing 
the  resigning  board  members.  Banco  de  Portugal  led  this  process  in  accordance  with  the 
principle that the new board members be independent, credible and the result of consensus 
of at least the two principal reference shareholders (ESFG and Crédit Agricole), and also that 
the  members  of  the  Espírito  Santo  family  –  due  to  their  accumulation  of  roles  –  resign 
immediately upon appointment of the new board members. 
On 5 July, a consensual proposal was reached between ESFG and Crédit Agricole over the 
decision to co-opt the new CEO and CFO. This decision was later complemented on 11 July 
with  a  proposal  from  both  shareholders  to  choose  a  new  Deputy  CEO  for  the  Executive 
Board. Based on the shareholders’ consensus, on 13 July Banco de Portugal ordered that 
the  co-optation  process  be  accelerated,  and  on  the  same  day,  the  new  members  be 
co-opted, replacing the members of the Espírito Santo family. A new Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors,  also  proposed  through  shareholder  consensus,  will  be  chosen  by  the 
Extraordinary General Meeting to be held on 31 July. 
The  shareholder  consensus  reached  in  the  meantime  also  allowed  proposals  for  statutory 
amendments  to  be  submitted  at  the  next  Extraordinary  General  Meeting,  designed  to 
strengthen  BES’s  internal  governance.  These  proposals  address  Banco  de  Portugal’s 
concern  that  credit  institutions’  senior  management  is  independent  and  acts  in  strict 
compliance  with  sound  and  prudent  management  criteria,  safeguarding  in  particular  the 
funds  entrusted  to  the  institutions  and  ensuring  that  institutions  have  internal  governance 
models conducive to sound and prudent management. 
Perimeter of supervision 
5.  
On 30 June 2014, Banco de Portugal was the supervisory authority of Espírito Santo Group 
on  a  consolidated  basis,  based  on  the  consolidated  position  of  Espírito  Santo  Financial 
Group, S.A. (ESFG), the holding company with head office in Luxembourg, which took the 
role of parent undertaking as defined under the legal framework in force. 
Recently, as a result of various events that led to the reduction of ESFG’s stake in BES and 
the changes to the bank’s internal governance structure and above all the announcement on 
20  June  2014  of  the  resignation  of  the  board  members  designated  by  ESFG,  Banco  de 
Portugal deems that the requirements needed for BES to qualify as a subsidiary of ESFG 
within the meaning of Article 4 (1) (16) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 are no longer met, 
leading to a change to the perimeter of supervision on a consolidated basis, which will now 
only include BES, effective 30 June 2014.  
For supervisory purposes, the change to the consolidation perimeter has marginal impact. 
Indeed,  ESFG’s  banking  activity  was  focused  on  BES  and  its  subsidiaries:  BES  Group 
represents  around  96%  of  ESFG’s  banking  assets,  95%  of  the  regulatory  capital 
requirements,  96%  of  the  banking  turnover  and  92%  of  the  operating  expenses. 
Furthermore, ESFG does not make use of any Eurosystem refinancing operation, except the 
operations to provide liquidity to BES Group. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
