William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York, 7 March 2014. 
 Good  afternoon  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me.  It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  speak  with  the 
different  communities  that  make  up  our  region,  and  it  is  especially  gratifying  to  have  the 
opportunity to talk with you, our future leaders. 
I am especially pleased to be here at Brooklyn College, given the relationship that we at the 
New  York  Fed  have  developed  with  The  City  University  of  New  York  (CUNY).  As  an 
example,  we  collaborated  this  year  on  the  College  Fed  Challenge,  our  yearly  competition 
where  teams  of  students  from  area  universities  take  on  the  roles  of  the  members  of  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  and  debate  the  appropriate  next  steps  for  U.S. 
monetary  policy.  A  number  of  CUNY  schools  competed  and  professors  served  as  judges. 
Also, several CUNY schools had a strong showing in our annual Savvy Credit Video Festival 
which I’ll speak more about later. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the  grassroots  level  of  our  economy  and  to  share  what  we  are  seeing.  At  the  Federal 
Reserve,  we  try  to  meet  with  a  diverse  array  of  people  in  order  to  get  a  comprehensive 
picture  of  economic  conditions  in  the  regions  we  serve  and  a  fuller  understanding  of  the 
major issues. Earlier today, I met with developers and local community leaders to learn about 
the redevelopment of the Atlantic Yards, was welcomed to a roundtable breakfast meeting 
with  members  of  the  Brooklyn  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  then  traveled  to  Brownsville  to 
learn about the challenges faced by that community. Following this visit to Brooklyn College, 
I’m headed to Bush Terminal in Sunset Park to meet with city officials and learn about an 
important redevelopment project and then I’ll end the day at Etsy – a successful innovative 
start-up and a major private-sector employer here in Brooklyn. 
These trips are only one of the many ways in which we seek to engage with the people and 
businesses  in  our  region.  We  also  reach  out  to  our  local  communities  through  web 
resources,  workshops  and  conferences.  To  assess  the  performance  of  the  regional 
economy, we monitor economic activity on a monthly basis, we tap into the insights of the 
members  of  our  Small  Business  and  Agriculture  Advisory  Council  and  Upstate  Advisory 
Board, and we have constructed a consumer credit panel that allows us to better understand 
the  financial  condition  of  homeowners  and  students  at  the  local  level.  We  conduct  two 
monthly surveys – the Empire State Manufacturing Survey and the Business Leaders Survey 
of service firms – which help us monitor regional business conditions in close to real-time. 
We’ve also developed a “Regional Mortgage Conditions” analysis at the county and zip code 
level. In addition, we conduct a biannual poll of small businesses to understand their credit 
needs and availability. It is noteworthy that our most recent poll found that cash flow issues 
replaced credit availability as the number one concern of small companies. 
We also have worked to support better financial decision-making by young consumers. Every 
year  the  Bank  conducts  two  competitions  in  which  college  students  are  challenged  to 
produce a 30-second video promoting wise credit use. The two contests, one held in Puerto 
Rico and the other in the tri-state region, provide students the opportunity to learn about the 
importance  of  personal  finance  while  showcasing  their  filmmaking  creativity.  The  winning 
video  is  then  shown  at  numerous  local  movie  theaters,  helping  promote  the  value  of  the 
smart  use  of  credit.  This  year  the  judges,  including  Maria  Bartiromo  from  Fox  Business, 
Tamir Muhammad from the Tribeca Film Institute and Jim Rosenberg from UNICEF, selected 
a Brooklyn College entry, entitled “Elevate Your Credit” as the winner. I am pleased to again 
congratulate  Rasa  Partin,  Ben  Remetz  and  Andrew  Roder,  and  their  coach,  Jay  Kim,  for 
creating the winning video. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Now I would like to review recent developments in the local and national economies, and at 
the end of my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Regional employment and economic trends 
First,  let’s  talk  about  economic  trends  in  New  York  City.  The  City’s  economy  showed 
resilience both during and after this last severe recession. Payroll employment fell sharply in 
2008 and 2009; it bounced back, slowly at first, but by July of 2011, the City’s economy had 
recovered to its pre-recession employment peak and, in November, it eclipsed its previous 
all-time  peak  of  1969.  Since  then,  employment has  continued  to grow  strongly,  rising  at  a 
roughly 2 percent annual pace and outpacing the national growth rate. The demand for labor 
has  been  driven  by  start-ups,  tech,  health  care  and  business  services.  While  Superstorm 
Sandy  caused  substantial  damage  to  homes  and  the  region’s  infrastructure  and  severe 
economic disruptions in late 2012, the local economy as a whole bounced back quickly. 
Despite  the  robust  job  growth,  the  unemployment  rate  among  City  residents  has  been 
persistently high – though it did fall to 8.0 percent in December, nearly a 5-year low. Potential 
workers  are  not  counted  as  unemployed  unless  they  are  actively  looking  for  work,  so  this 
relatively  high  rate  of  unemployment,  in  part,  reflects  the  relative  strength  in  labor  force 
participation, as the City’s residents remain engaged and looking for work. In contrast, at the 
national level, the picture is quite different – job growth has been slower and proportionately 
more people have dropped out of the labor force. 
Perhaps surprisingly, while historically a key driver of the local economy, the finance sector 
has  not  been  a  leader  in  terms  of  job  growth  recently.  Instead,  employment  in  New  York 
City’s finance sector and the securities industry specifically, has been essentially flat over the 
past two years. The city’s job gains in this expansion have been broad-based across other 
sectors, indicating a healthy diversification within the economy. 
Conditions in Brooklyn 
Now let’s focus on Brooklyn. The borough’s economy has been particularly strong in recent 
years. Compared with the other boroughs, Brooklyn has seen generally stronger job growth, 
a stronger housing market, and stronger trends in wage and salary earnings. This strength is 
exemplified by the transformation of industrial neighborhoods – such as DUMBO, Red Hook, 
Greenpoint,  East  Williamsburg,  Gowanus  and  Bushwick  –  into  increasingly  diversified 
residential and commercial neighborhoods; and the recent development of the Atlantic Yards 
and Brooklyn Navy Yard. This changing landscape has helped spur economic activity which 
has created many new jobs in the borough. 
Indeed, employment held up well during the recession, declining by less than 2 percent over 
a  brief  period  in  early  2009,  and  has  averaged  a  nearly  3  percent  annualized  growth  rate 
since then. Job growth has been particularly strong at retailers, hotels and restaurants, and 
also service firms ranging from advertising to engineering. That said, the employment picture 
does  have  some  difficulties.  For  example,  there  is  concern  over  some  well-paying  health 
sector jobs given the financial strain at Long Island College Hospital and Interfaith Medical 
Center and the pressure to close those institutions. 
Brooklyn’s economic vitality is also reflected in the commercial real estate market, as both 
office  and  retail  vacancy  rates  have  fallen  steadily  over  the  past  few  years.  In  fact,  office 
vacancy  rates  are  now  lower  in  Brooklyn  than  in  Manhattan.  The  strength  in  the  housing 
market is also evident, with the median home price up by roughly 10 percent in each of the 
past two years, and the rental market has shown similar strength. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However,  these  increasing  prices  also  raise  two  other  issues  that  acutely  afflict  many  in 
Brooklyn  and  New  York  City  more  broadly:  housing  affordability  and  poverty.  Despite 
Brooklyn’s  economic  renaissance  and  growing  affluence,  a  large  swath  of  the  Borough’s 
population – one in four residents – still lives in poverty, and many struggle to pay their rent 
or mortgage. Even with the strong pace of job creation, Brooklyn’s unemployment rate has 
remained high, averaging more than 9 percent in 2013. 
There are also continued financial challenges for families here as indicated by the New York 
Fed’s measures of credit conditions. As of the end of 2013, average debt per person was 
about  $42,000  in  Brooklyn  –  little  changed  over  several  years.  At  the  same  time,  the 
Borough’s  delinquency  rate  on  that  debt  is  now  11.6  percent,  much  higher  than  the  state 
average  and  more  than  double  the  national  average.  What’s  more,  the  mortgage  crisis 
continues to take a toll on local homeowners. As of the end of 2013, more than 11 percent of 
mortgage debt in Brooklyn was 90-plus days delinquent, again significantly higher than the 
New York State and national delinquency rate. 
I also want to make a few comments about the impact of Superstorm Sandy. While areas of 
the  New  York  City  metropolitan  region  were  hard  hit  by  the  storm,  the  devastation  was 
particularly severe along the waterfronts of Brooklyn – and in particular in southern Brooklyn 
and  neighborhoods  like Red  Hook. We saw  and  heard  about  the  devastation  of the  storm 
from  many  of  those  affected,  including  a  number  of  our  own  employees  as  well  as  other 
residents  we  met  at  a  series  of  assistance  clinics  we  organized  in  response  to  the  storm. 
Those  already  living  close  to  the  edge  financially  were  particularly  vulnerable  as  were  the 
City’s  public  housing  residents.  Still,  Brooklyn’s  economy  showed  resilience:  while 
employment  did  drop  in  November  2012,  it  bounced  back  strongly  the  next  month  and 
accelerated during the spring of 2013, reaching new highs. 
Sandy  was  a  catastrophe  for  many  in  our  region  and  significant  challenges  remain  in  the 
years  ahead.  Recently,  the  Federal  Emergency  Management  Agency  issued  preliminary 
Flood  Insurance  Rate  Maps  that  show  a  much  larger  number  of  Brooklyn  residents  and 
businesses at risk of a future storm. While a once-in-a-hundred-year risk of flooding may not 
appear worrisome, many within this expanded zone may be required to purchase insurance. 
The  expanded  flood  zones,  coupled  with  federal  government  efforts  to  have  insurance 
premiums accurately reflect the risk, could create a serious affordability problem in the years 
ahead. The New York Fed has created maps of community-level flood risk in Brooklyn. 
Now I would like to turn my attention to recent developments in the national economy. 
National economic conditions 
From the end of the Great Recession in mid-2009 through mid-2013, real Gross Domestic 
Product,  or  the  aggregate  value,  after  adjusting  for  inflation,  of  all  the  goods  and  services 
produced within the borders of the U.S., grew at a rather tepid 2 1/4; percent annual rate. 
Then,  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  the  pace  of  growth  moved  notably  higher,  reaching  an 
annual  rate  of  3 1/4  percent.  Nonetheless,  despite  this  pickup  in  the  growth  pace,  the 
average monthly gains in nonfarm payroll employment were somewhat lower in the second 
half of the year compared to the first half. 
At the same time, both total and core inflation, as measured by the Personal Consumption 
Expenditures (PCE) deflator, slowed in the second half of 2013 relative to the first half, and 
the overall PCE deflator index is currently running well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 
2 percent for total inflation. 
Combined  with  the  still-elevated  unemployment  rate  and  the  drop  in  the  labor  force 
participation  rate,  these  conditions  suggest  that  there  continues  to  be  a  substantial 
underutilization  of  both  labor  and  capital  resources.  This  implies,  in  turn,  that  the  current, 
highly-accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable 
time to come. Let me elaborate on these points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
While the timing and magnitude of the pickup of growth were earlier and somewhat stronger 
than  our  internal  forecast,  in  qualitative  terms  the  economy  has  performed  much  as  we 
expected. First, by several measures, households’ balance sheets are in much better shape, 
and this has led to faster growth of consumer spending, particularly for durable goods. Key 
measures  of  household  leverage  have  declined  and  are  now  near  the  lowest  levels  they 
have  been  in  well  over  a  decade.  Reflecting  rising  equity  and  home  prices  and  declining 
debt, household net worth relative to disposable income has climbed back to its average of 
the  previous  decade.  Recently,  banks  have  eased  credit  standards  somewhat  after  a 
prolonged  period  of  tightening.  In  fact,  our  own  Consumer  Credit  Panel,  a  representative 
sample of the liability side of the U.S. consumer balance sheet derived from consumer credit 
reports,  indicates  that  total  household  liabilities  increased  last  quarter  on  a  year-over-year 
basis, the first rise since mid-2008. 
In addition to the firming in consumer spending, growth of exports was quite strong over the 
second half of last year. Following a few years of lackluster performance, growth among our 
major  trading  partners  improved,  providing  a  boost  to  employment  and  output  in  our 
manufacturing sector. Moreover, the important advances made in oil drilling technology have 
boosted U.S. energy production, cutting oil imports and boosting petroleum product exports 
and  this  is  also  leading  to  steady  improvement  in  our  trade  balance.  The  economy  also 
received an important boost from quite strong inventory accumulation, which added nearly a 
full  percentage  point  to  the  annualized  second  half  growth  rate.  This  inventory  investment 
was broad-based across sectors and types of goods. In fact, all four quarters of 2013 saw a 
positive growth contribution from inventory accumulation, something that typically only occurs 
as  the  economy  first  emerges  from  recession.  I  interpret  this  as  a  sign  of  increased 
confidence about the economic outlook within the business community. 
Finally,  federal  fiscal  restraint  lessened  over  the  second  half  of  2013.  This  is  in  sharp 
contrast  to  the  first  half  of  the  year,  when  the  payroll  tax  cut  expired,  tax  rates  on  higher 
income households were raised, a series of taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act 
took effect, and spending was reduced due to the sequester and the gradual winding down of 
foreign military operations. Moreover, the sustained contraction in spending and employment 
by state and local governments appears to be nearing an end. 
I  wish  that  I  could  report  that  the  improved  pace  of  growth  of  economic  activity  led  to  a 
corresponding increase in the rate of improvement in labor market conditions. But such was 
not the case. As I noted earlier, the average monthly change of nonfarm payroll employment 
over the second half of the year, at 184,000 per month, was somewhat below the 204,000 
average monthly increase of the first half. In addition, growth of aggregate hours worked by 
private  sector  employees  was  somewhat  slower  in  the  second  half  than  in  the  first.  The 
source of this apparent anomaly is the fact that labor productivity, or output per hour worked, 
rose rapidly over the second half of the year after being essentially unchanged over the first 
half. This is a perfect example of the double-edged sword of productivity growth. In the long-
run,  sustained  strong  productivity  growth  is  what  boosts real  living  standards.  However,  in 
the short-run it can depress job creation. 
While overall labor market indicators for the second half of 2013 were not particularly strong, 
the overall trend in unemployment showed some improvement with the unemployment rate 
falling  sharply  over  that  period,  from  7.5  percent  in  June  to  6.7  percent  in  December. 
However, as has been the case since October of 2009 when the unemployment rate peaked 
at 10 percent, this decline in the unemployment rate was driven in large part by a decline in 
the labor force participation rate. Much has been written about the forces that are causing 
this decline of the labor force participation rate. Researchers have shown that the aging of 
the population is playing a role, as are changes in behavior. But our own analysis suggests 
that the cyclical weakness of demand for labor is an important contributing factor. As a result, 
I conclude that the decline of the unemployment rate significantly overstates the degree of 
improvement in the labor market. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Looking  forward,  I  believe  that  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  U.S.  economy  have 
improved to the point where we can expect sustained growth above the roughly 2 1/4 percent 
annual pace that prevailed from mid-2009 through mid-2013. Also, the amount of fiscal drag 
continues  to  diminish.  Another  good  piece  of  news  is  that  Congress  has  raised  the  debt 
ceiling until March 2015. This lessens the risk that political brinkmanship in Washington could 
harm consumer and business confidence. 
That said, I expect that growth, over the near term, will slow somewhat from the pace we saw 
during the second half of last year. In particular, during the current quarter, unusually cold 
and snowy weather will undoubtedly depress activity somewhat – especially with respect to 
construction  activity,  but  also  to  a  lesser  extent  in  areas  such  as  retail  spending.  Also,  as 
mentioned above, some special, one-time factors, such as very rapid growth of exports and 
sustained  inventory  building,  are  unlikely  to  be  repeated  over  the  first  half  of  this  year. 
Moreover,  while  there  is  now  a  much  better  balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the 
housing  market,  that  market  is  still  adjusting  to  the  roughly  100  basis  point  increase  in 
mortgage interest rates that occurred in mid-2013. 
I  do  expect  that  growth  will  be  strong  enough  to  lead  to  continued  improvement  in  labor 
market  conditions.  I  must  caution,  however,  that  the  outlook  for  the  unemployment  rate  is 
unusually uncertain. If our assessment is correct, at some point an improving labor market 
should  cause  the  labor  force  participation  rate  to  stabilize  or  rise  a  bit  as  currently 
discouraged  workers  begin  looking  for  work.  Such  developments  could  result  in  a  more 
muted rate of decline of the unemployment rate despite the faster growth. 
Finally, as the expansion continues, I expect inflation to gradually rise toward the FOMC’s 
objective  of  2  percent  as  measured  by  the  PCE  deflator.  This  forecast  is  based  on  the 
projected gradual increase in the levels of resource utilization, a firming in global demand, 
and  the  upward  pull  exercised  by  stable  inflation  expectations  on  actual  inflation. 
Underpinning the latter assumption is the broad stability of long-term inflation expectations 
across different financial and survey measures, combined with ongoing moderate growth of 
wages and unit labor costs – all observations consistent with anchored inflation expectations. 
Overall,  I  would  characterize  the  outlook  as  reasonably  favorable.  But  I  would  very  much 
prefer faster economic growth and more rapid progress towards our dual mandate objectives 
of  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  price  stability.  Hence,  the  continued  need  for 
monetary  policy  to  remain  highly  accommodative  to  support  the  economic  recovery  to  the 
fullest. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
