  Benoît Cœuré: Investing in Europe – towards a new convergence 
process 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Panel  “The  big  rethink  for  a  stronger  Europe”,  The  Economist  Roundtable  with  the 
Government of Greece, Athens, 9 July 2014. 
 I would like to thank Lucas Guttenberg, Jean-Francois Jamet and Marion Salines for their contributions. I remain 
solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Summary 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a political triathlon. It requires resilience and resolve 
to perform well at all times in the three disciplines of a currency union: fiscal policy, economic 
policy and financial policy. EMU is a team effort. Only if every participant performs well can 
the euro area team be strong. This is the most important lesson from the crisis. 
The  European  economy  is  undergoing  a  moderate  recovery,  but  complacency  would  be 
unwarranted. To really overcome the crisis, there are some remaining major challenges still 
to be faced. The euro area is not in a financial crisis anymore, but it must still contend with 
high debt, low growth and unacceptably high unemployment. These are reason enough to 
remain alert and continue acting. In recent years, economic policy-making rightfully focused 
on  re-establishing  the  most  important  necessary  condition  for  growth:  stability.  For 
companies  to  invest,  for  firms  to  hire,  for  households  to  consume,  a  stable  economic 
environment is tantamount. 
There  are  three  relevant  dimensions  of  economic  stability:  price  stability,  financial  stability 
and macroeconomic stability, including the health of public finances. In all these areas, we 
have  made  substantial  progress  in  recent  years.  During  the  crisis,  the  ECB  took  all 
appropriate measures to ensure that price stability provided an anchor in an uncertain and 
volatile economic environment. As for financial stability, the establishment of the European 
Stability Mechanism and the launch of banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism 
and  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  have  been  milestones  in  this  respect.  As  a  third 
dimension, the crisis has shown us the kind of existential threat to monetary union that can 
be  brought  about  by  the  build-up  of  excessive  imbalances,  i.e.  by  the  lack  of  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic  stability.  New  growth  will  not  be  generated  by  new  debt.  Sound  fiscal 
policies are essential for growing out of debt. Therefore, the existing rules should be applied 
in a credible manner. 
That said, we cannot claim “mission accomplished”. What has been achieved so far is not 
enough.  The  answer  to  the  remaining  challenges  could  take  the  form  of  a  “convergence 
process 2.0”, which should have an agreed timeline and milestones. But convergence can 
only be sustainable if it is associated with a commensurate deepening of integration, if it is a 
race  towards  best  practice  institutions  and  policies  rather  than  towards  mere  nominal 
outcomes. In this context, structural reforms, if properly designed, lead to greater prosperity 
in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of EMU as a whole, thereby 
contributing  to  economic  and  social  stability.  Growth  and  stability  are  therefore  mutually 
reinforcing. 
The convergence process should consist of two legs: on the one hand, it should underpin the 
convergence of economic policies and structures at the national level. On the other hand, it 
should facilitate joint action. 
At  the  national  level,  convergence  implies  that  euro  area  governments  need  to  step  up 
structural  reforms,  in  particular  those  which  have  the  greatest  efficiency  gains  given  the 
relative distance to best practices. And policy-makers should pay due attention to ensure that 
the burden of the adjustment effort is shared fairly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to 
the 
level 
increase 
investment  and  by 
The  convergence  in  national  structures  could  be  complemented  by  joint  action  at  the 
European 
transfer  of  certain  budgetary 
responsibilities  to  the  European  level  with  a  view  to  strengthening  risk-sharing  within  the 
currency union. But joint action can only occur once trust has been restored across countries 
and  within  countries,  and  the  convergence  process  has  advanced  successfully.  The  level 
and  the  form  of  budgetary  responsibilities,  and  how  they  are  matched  by  appropriate 
democratic arrangements, should emanate from the political process. 
The biggest threat to the Single Market is not euro area integration: it would be euro area 
stagnation. The challenge of making the EMU work is far from over. Let’s get ready for the 
next stage of the race. 
Intro 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first of all thank The Economist for inviting me to this distinguished panel. 
Almost exactly ten years ago, the Olympic triathlon took place here in Vouliagmeni. On race 
day,  the  weather  was  as  hot  and  as  dry  as  it  is  today.  The  athletes  needed  to  have  two 
important attributes in order to be able to compete in a triathlon in these conditions: resilience 
to withstand the heat and commitment to endure all three disciplines with equal passion. 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a political triathlon. It requires resilience when the 
heat is on and it requires commitment and resolve for participants to perform well at all times 
in the three policy disciplines that mark a currency union: fiscal policy, economic policy and 
financial policy. But there is one important difference with a triathlon: EMU is a team effort. 
Only if every participant performs well can the euro area team be strong. This is the most 
important lesson from the crisis. 
Today, I want to discuss what this means in terms of the policy efforts that could be part of 
–  as  the  panel  title  calls  it  –  “the  big  rethink  for  a  stronger  Europe”.  I  will  start  with  an 
analysis of the outstanding challenges – or the heat – that the euro area still faces. I will 
then outline what has already been achieved to bring stability and confidence back to the 
euro  area.  And  third,  I  will  argue  that  we  need  a  credible  long-term  path  towards  more 
convergence and stronger resilience in the euro area so as to foster durable growth and 
ensure that the return of confidence is long-lasting; this is about the commitment to perform 
right up to the end. I refer to this long-term policy effort – not to qualify for participation in 
EMU, but to maintain successful participation in EMU – as “convergence process 2.0”, as I 
will explain in a moment. 
The state of the euro area 
The  European  economy  is  undergoing  a  moderate  recovery,  but  complacency  would  be 
unwarranted. To really overcome the crisis, there are some remaining major challenges still 
to be faced. 
First, the euro area’s debt has stabilised, but remains at high levels.1  
Second, euro area unemployment is still high and the youth are suffering disproportionately.2 
                                                
1 
In  2013  public  and  private  sector  debt  reached  respectively  95.1%  and  168.0%  of  GDP.  The  debt  level  is 
especially  high  in  some  Member  States:  for  instance,  public  debt  stood  at  175.1%  of  GDP  in  Greece  and 
132.6% in Italy, while private sector debt amounted to 319% of GDP in Ireland and 252% in Portugal.  
2  Euro area unemployment rose to 12.0% in 2013. Youth unemployment reached 24.0% in the euro area and 
increased dramatically in Greece and Spain to 58.3% and 55.5% respectively.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Finally, growth is only resuming at a slow pace.3 Investment has been too low in Europe over 
the  last  15  years,  and  the  crisis  has  exacerbated  this trend.  At the  same time,  total factor 
productivity, which forms the basis of long-term growth, has also been disappointing.4  
If this trend continues over the long term, the euro area will not generate enough wealth to 
sustain  the  standard  of  living  of  its  citizens  and  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  its  social 
model, which is a defining feature of its identity. 
We sometimes ask ourselves how to keep the reform momentum going without the pressure 
of the financial crisis.5 We would like to believe that what has been achieved since 2010 to 
strengthen  EMU  is  enough  to  make  it  strong  and  sustainable  and  we  can  therefore  claim 
“mission  accomplished”.  But  the  challenges  I  have  just  outlined  provide  enough  of  an 
answer. What has been achieved so far is not enough. The euro area is not in a financial 
crisis  anymore,  but  it  must  still  contend  with  high  debt,  low  growth  and  unacceptably  high 
unemployment. These are reason enough to remain alert and continue acting. 
Stability – a precondition for growth 
For  companies  to  invest,  for  firms  to  hire,  for  households  to  consume,  a  stable  economic 
environment is tantamount. If uncertainty reigns, economic activity suffers. In my view, there 
are  three  relevant  dimensions  of  economic  stability:  price  stability,  financial  stability  and 
macroeconomic stability, including the health of public finances. In all these areas, we have 
made substantial progress in recent years. 
During the crisis, the ECB has taken all appropriate measures to ensure that price stability 
provided an anchor in an uncertain and volatile economic environment. Consistent with this 
principle, our recent decisions have aimed at addressing the risk of too long a period of low 
inflation and at ensuring that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored. 
As  for  financial  stability,  the  crisis  has  shown  us  how  the  functioning  of  an  economy 
becomes impaired without a well-functioning, robust financial system. This requires striking 
the  right  balance  between  insuring  against  crises,  curbing  risk-taking  behaviour  and 
mitigating  moral  hazard  with  a  strong  incentive  framework.  The  establishment  of  the 
European Stability Mechanism and the launch of banking union, with its Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  have  been  milestones  in  this  respect.  The 
stabilisation and ongoing repair of the Greek banking system is another example. 
As a third dimension, the crisis has shown us the kind of existential threat to monetary union 
that can be brought about by the build-up of excessive imbalances, i.e. by the lack of fiscal 
and macroeconomic stability. The lesson drawn from this existential threat was that there 
was a need to reform economic governance. We should be very careful now not to roll back 
this achievement, in particular in the fiscal domain. New growth will not be generated by new 
debt. On the contrary: sound fiscal policies are essential for growing out of debt. Therefore, 
the existing rules should be applied, and they should not be stretched to a point where they 
would  lose  their  credibility.  There  is  built-in  flexibility  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  to 
account for the cost of major structural reforms – but it cannot be based on empty promises. 
The sequencing should be clear. First, reforms need to be adopted and implemented. Then, 
                                                
3  Euro area GDP is expected to recover at a pace of 1% in 2014 and 1.7% in 2015 according to the latest ECB 
staff projections.  
4  Total investment in the euro area has shrunk by almost 20% since the peak in economic activity in 2008. In 
addition, total factor productivity has also been disappointing in the euro area since 2000: it grew by 0.45% 
annually  from  2000  to  2007  before  receding  by  0.47%  annually  between  2007  and  2012  (source:  Ameco 
database, European Commission).  
5  See Barroso, J.M., “Remarks by President Barroso on the Country Specific Recommendations 2014”, speech 
given in Brussels on 2 June 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the cost of such a reform, independently assessed, could be taken into account under the 
Stability and Growth Pact, with due attention to the limited fiscal space provided by the high 
debt levels. 
Economic  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  growth,  but  is  not  sufficient  alone.  For  our 
economies to grow out of high debt and unemployment, and thereby ensure social stability, 
we need to do more. 
Racing to the top: “convergence process 2.0” 
The challenges I outlined a minute ago call for an answer that goes beyond the necessary 
application  of  the  existing  rules  of  EMU.  An  answer  that  not  only  fosters  stability  and 
confidence today, but also in the future. An answer that gives EMU the institutional shape it 
needs to be a successful project in the long run. This answer could in my view take the form 
of  what  I  call  “convergence  process  2.0”,  which  should  have  an  agreed  timeline  and 
milestones. 
To run the political triathlon of EMU and perform well in all three disciplines, there needs to 
be  a  convergence  of  economic  policies  and  structures.  Moreover,  joint  action  is  of  the 
essence. 
Let me be clear on what I mean by convergence. The crisis has shown the fragility of the 
convergence of economic outcomes; it can unravel quickly in the face of exogenous shocks. 
Convergence can only be sustainable if it is associated with a commensurate deepening of 
integration, if it is a race towards best practice institutions and policies rather than towards 
mere  nominal  outcomes.  In  this  context,  structural  reforms,  if  properly  designed,  lead  to 
greater prosperity in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of EMU 
as  a  whole,  thereby  contributing  to  economic  and  social  stability.  Growth  and  stability  are 
therefore mutually reinforcing. 
With regard to convergence in economic structures and policies, the starting point has to 
be  decisive  action  at  national  level.  Euro  area  governments  need  to  step  up  structural 
reforms,  in  particular  those  which  have  the  greatest  efficiency  gains  given  the  relative 
distance to best practices.6 Policy-makers should pay due attention to ensure that the burden 
of the adjustment effort is shared fairly. The perception of fairness of reforms in the national 
context is a key ingredient in their success. Fighting tax evasion, rent seeking and corruption 
as well as increasing transparency are key examples. 
These  efforts  at  the  national  level  should  be  complemented  by  structural  reforms  at  the 
European  level,  aimed  at  deepening  the  Single  Market,  the  cement  that  holds  all  our 
economies together. This is particularly true of the Single Market for capital, where a lot can 
still be done to enhance both risk-sharing and allocative efficiency.7  
Structural reforms at the national level could also go beyond the country-specific perspective 
in  the  areas  of  direct  relevance  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  EMU.  In  these  areas, 
convergence could be embedded in a binding European effort, based on benchmarks to be 
met  by  all  euro  area  Member  States.  This  process  would  be  a  race  to  the  top  and  would 
close the gap to the frontier in terms of competitiveness and resilience.  
For this process to be fully effective and legitimate, it would have to entail the gradual pooling 
of  sovereignty  in  these  policy  areas  and  be  based  on  the  Community  method  with  due 
involvement of the European Parliament.  
                                                
6  Cheptea, C. and Velculescu, D., “A Disaggregated Approach to Prioritizing Structural Reforms for Growth and 
Employment”,  in  Schindler,  M.,  Berger,  H.,  Bakker,  B.  and  Spilimbergo,  A.  (eds.),  Jobs  and  Growth: 
Supporting the European Recovery, IMF, 2014.  
7  See Cœuré, B., “Ein Binnenmarkt für Kapital”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 30 June 2014.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  convergence  in  national  structures  could  be  complemented  by  joint  action  at  the 
European level in two respects. 
Complementing  regulatory  initiatives,  there  could  be  a  joint  European  effort  to  increase 
investment  levels  by  better  channelling  private  savings  to  investment  and  by  coordinating 
available  public  investment  programmes.  Beyond  this,  one  could  envisage  joint  European 
investment  in  public  goods  such  as  network  industries  and  R&D,  as  a  way  to  bolster 
Europe’s  growth  potential  and  to  even  out  drops  in  public  investment  in  economies  hit  by 
shocks.  Yet,  this  should  be  achieved  by  prioritising  spending  and  should  not  undermine 
efforts that remain necessary to bring down debt levels. 
In  the  longer  term,  the  convergence  process  could  culminate  in  the  transfer  of  certain 
budgetary  responsibilities  to  the  European  level  with  a  view  to  strengthening  risk-sharing 
within the currency union. But let me add an important note of caution. This can only occur 
once  trust  has  been  restored  across  countries  and  within  countries,  i.e.  after  growth  has 
resumed,  unemployment  and  inequalities  have  receded,  and  economies  have  sufficiently 
converged. What we are talking about is a new social contract among European countries. 
This  can  only  be  agreed  under  the  veil  of  ignorance,8  i.e.  under  the  expectation  that 
participating economies, in their diversity, have comparable strengths and weaknesses. And 
that is why such a new  social contract can only happen at the end of a new convergence 
process. 
As to which level which budgetary responsibilities are allocated, and how they are matched 
by  appropriate  democratic  arrangements,  I  believe  this  is  ultimately  a  political  decision.  It 
should  emanate  from  a  political  process,  and  I  note  that  other  federations  with  more 
developed forms of political union such as Switzerland or the United States have found very 
different answers to this question. 
Further integration within the euro area raises the difficult issue of the relationship with the 
“outs”. Adequate safeguards have to ensure full consistency with the Single Market, which is 
the European Union’s most valuable achievement. However, while such safeguards will have 
a  bearing  on  the  design  of  euro  area  integration,  they  cannot  change  its  direction.  The 
biggest  threat  to  the  Single  Market  is  not  euro  area  integration:  it  would  be  euro  area 
stagnation.9  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  triathlon  competitions  here  in  Vouliagmeni  ended  a  decade  ago.  The  challenge  of 
making EMU work is far from over. In fact, we are now just out of the water. Let’s get ready 
for the bike race and not forget about the running that will come later. 
Many thanks for your attention, and I am now looking forward to our debate.  
                                                
8  See Rawls, J., A Theory of Justice, Harvard University Press, 1971.  
9  See Cœuré, B., “Is Eurozone governance fit for purpose?”, speech at a dinner organised by the Centre for 
European Reform, London, 30 January 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
