  Juyeol Lee: Bank of Korea’s 64th anniversary 
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony 
of the Bank of Korea’s 64th anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 12 June 2014. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, 
Today marks the 64th anniversary of the foundation of the Bank of Korea. On this occasion I 
should like to express my sincere gratitude to those who served in the Bank of Korea before 
me, devoting themselves over many years to our Bank’s development, and also to those who 
have  been  unstinting  in  their  encouragement  and  sage  counsel.  I  wish  in  addition  to 
commend  all  members  of  our  staff  for  their  hard  work  in  faithfully  carrying  out  the  duties 
entrusted to them. 
The Korean economy is showing signs of slowing down in its recovery, due to weakening to 
some extent of consumption under the influence primarily of the recent Sewol ferry accident, 
while exports remain buoyant owing to the modest growth in the world economy. 
During the second half of this year we expect the Korean economy to maintain its trend of 
improvement as exports continue their steady movements, and consumer price inflation to 
gradually rise from its current low level. However, together with external risk factors including 
changes in the US Fed’s monetary policy stance, there are downside risks to growth present 
domestically  as  well,  including  the  after-effects  of  the  Sewol  ferry  accident  and  the 
appreciation  of  the  Korean  won,  and  there  is  thus  a  need  to  closely  monitor  the  trends of 
these conditions. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, 
The  recent  domestic  and  foreign  economic  environments  are  giving  us  much  cause  for 
concern. 
First, the uncertainties concerning the external economic environment are still very high and 
have become more complex. In terms of growth, worries are increasing about a weakening 
of growth momentums in emerging market countries. On the prices front, we have not  yet 
ascertained clearly whether the current low level of global inflation is a phenomenon that has 
emerged in the course of the business cycle, or a structural change. International financial 
market  conditions  are  also  growing  increasingly  complex  due  to  the  divergent  monetary 
policy stances of the major advanced countries. 
Our domestic difficulties are also by no means trivial. Above all, we cannot but worry about 
the possible weakening of our economy’s growth potential caused by population aging and 
the  delay  in  improvement  of  investment  conditions.  And  resolving  the  imbalances 
accumulated  across  various  sectors  of  the  economy  –  such  as  our  economy’s  heavy 
structural dependence on exports rather than domestic demand, the polarizations of income 
between  large  companies  and  SMEs  and  between  regular  and temporary  employees,  and 
the buildup of household debt – is a task that cannot be delayed any longer. 
In order for the Bank of Korea to carry out its proper role of leading the national economy in 
the correct direction under these conditions, an accurate judgment of the situation and timely 
implementation of the appropriate policies are above all important. I would like to emphasize 
once  again  that  we  should  be  unsparing  in  our  endeavors  to  closely  analyze  the  shifts  in 
international  and  domestic  economic  conditions  and  their  influences,  and  to  formulate  the 
optimal policies in response. 
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
I would like now to discuss the matters that the Bank of Korea should focus and concentrate 
on from the second half of this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our interest rate policy operations will need to comprehensively take into account not only 
the economic situation in the second half of the year but also the situations in the medium to 
long term beyond next year. Within the scope of maintaining price stability, we must provide 
support to sustain the recovery of Korea’s economic growth trend. In doing so we will need to 
scrutinize very closely the changes in major advanced countries’ monetary policies and their 
influences,  the  pace  of  the  recovery  in  domestic  economic  activity,  and  the  effects  arising 
from continuation of the accommodative monetary policy stance. 
We must also strive to do our utmost for the stability of our financial and foreign exchange 
markets. We will have to enhance our capacities for early detection of and prompt response 
to  factors  posing  risks  to  financial  stability,  through  the  establishment  of  a  comprehensive 
framework  for  the  monitoring  of  macroprudential  conditions.  To  prepare  for  a  possible 
increase in financial market volatility triggered by the emergence of risk factors at home and 
abroad,  measures  to  more  effectively  utilize  open  market  operations  should  be  explored. 
Additionally, we will need to continue our efforts to enhance the qualitative development of 
the foreign exchange market, so as to strengthen its capacity for autonomous absorption of 
external  shocks.  In  the  management  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves,  we  will  place  our 
emphasis  on  securing  their  safety  and  liquidity  as  external  payment  reserves  of  the  last 
resort. 
We  will  have  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  strengthen  the  central  bank’s  credibility  with  the 
general  public  and  with  the  markets,  through  constant  dialogue  with  the  markets.  While 
maintaining policy consistency, we should at the same time improve our methods and tools 
of communication so as to better convey to the market the substance and background of our 
policy decisions. 
Nor should we neglect efforts to prepare for the day when unification comes. We must carry 
out  detailed  analyses  of  the  major  issues  pertaining  to  finance  and  the  economy  during 
unification, including currency integration, and explore effective policy options. 
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea staff, 
We must above all brace ourselves anew to carry out our duties, so that the Bank of Korea 
can develop further as a policy institution enjoying public confidence in the current situation 
where our economy is facing difficulties and policy conditions are shifting rapidly. 
As a first step, it will be desirable for us all to carry out our tasks with active and progressive 
attitudes. Recently the public’s expectations regarding expansion of the role of the Bank of 
Korea have been gradually growing larger. And before being told what to do by the public, 
we must ourselves actively examine the best ways of contributing to the development of our 
national economy, and incorporate them into our policy operations. 
We will also need to strive harder to enhance our expertise. It is no exaggeration to say that 
a  central  bank’s  competitiveness  lies  in  its  acquisition  of  high  degrees  of  expertise  in  the 
research and policy fields. We need to examine objectively whether our economic analysis 
and  forecasting  techniques  and  methods  of  operating  our  policy  instruments,  which  were 
evaluated highly in the past, are still as effective in this transformed economic environment. 
We will be called upon to act boldly to carry out any related improvements, as and where 
needed. 
Last but not least, we will need to foster mutual trust and harmony. We should bear firmly in 
mind that it is the creation of the sense of unity among our staff that drives the development 
of the Bank. Even while competing in good faith with other departments and colleagues, we 
must never lose a spirit of mutual regard and cooperation. 
My dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea staff, 
The  recent  tragic  Sewol  accident  has  come  as  a  painful  lesson  to  us  all,  of  the  type  of 
tragedy that can occur if each member of society does not fulfil his or her given duties and 
responsibilities. We should take this opportunity to look back objectively, to see whether we 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have  been  fully  carrying  out  the  tasks  entrusted  to  us  as  members  of  an  important  policy 
institution charged with one major aspect of the national economy. 
I would urge you all to do your very best in carrying out the duties entrusted to you, imbued 
with a sense of duty to contribute to the development of our national economy and  with a 
spirit of public service dedicated to the stability of people’s lives. Please bear firmly in mind 
also  that  high  standard  of  moral  virtue  and  legal  compliance  are  required  of  you  as 
employees of the central bank, and thus steady your minds and adhere to the straight and 
narrow path of virtue in selflessly carrying out your duties. 
To draw my remarks to a close, I should like to voice my gratitude to all of those involved in 
the  preparation  of  this  commemorative  event,  and  wish  you  all  and  those  whom  you  hold 
dear the very best of good health and the greatest of happiness. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
