  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Gazeta Wyborcza 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Gazeta Wyborcza, conducted by Mr Leszek Baj on 16 May 2014. 
 Gazeta Wyborcza: Is there a recovery in Europe? On the one hand, the growth of the 
German economy exceeds 2%. On the other, in several countries GDP is contracting, 
and some of the larger economies, such as the French, Spanish or Italian economies, 
are still lagging behind. 
Benoît Cœuré: We are definitely looking at a recovery. This is good news. But the latest GDP 
figures have confirmed that this recovery is moderate and uneven. At the same time, inflation 
is low. 
Is there a risk of deflation in the euro area? 
We consider the risk of deflation to be very low. But the rate of inflation – 0.7% in the euro 
area in April – is rather far from our inflation objective consistent with price stability, which is 
about 2%. 
For us at the ECB, there are two key questions at the moment. First, what are the risks to 
economic growth and is there a risk that this growth won’t be sustainable? Second, it will be 
important to know whether this period of low inflation won’t be excessively prolonged. These 
are the elements that we will consider when setting our monetary policy. 
Can the ECB take action then? Is it going to support the European economy and try to 
push inflation up a little? 
If the uneven pace of economic recovery in the euro area is confirmed and if we see a risk of 
inflation being too low for too long, we can take action in June. We can act in various ways, 
depending  on  the  situation.  At  present,  however,  it  is  too  early  to  say  what  exactly  we’re 
going to do. A lot depends on the forthcoming economic data and on our staff growth and 
inflation projections, which are to be released in June. 
Your room for manoeuvre is limited as interest rates are already very low: the key rate 
is only 0.25%. 
They are low but they can still go lower. 
Are negative interest rates in the euro area possible? 
Negative  rates  are  one  of  the  instruments  available  to  us.  They  have  been  discussed 
extensively  by  the  Governing  Council. We  are  technically  and  legally  prepared  for  such  a 
possibility. And market participants are well aware that we are contemplating such a move. 
Wouldn’t negative rates discourage people from keeping their money in banks? 
This  depends  on  how  negative  they  would  be.  Indeed,  rates  that  fall  deep  into  negative 
territory could have an impact on depositors. But a deposit rate slightly below zero does not 
necessarily imply that depositors would be affected, while still providing incentives for banks 
to lend more. 
In recent years, the ECB has used a number of non-standard monetary policy tools. It 
has  purchased  bonds  on  the  market,  pumped  hundreds  of  billions  of  euro  into  the 
market in the form of cheap loans for banks. 
The  ECB  has  had  to  use  different  instruments  at  different  stages  of  the  crisis.  Now  the 
economic and financial situation in Europe is significantly better. Financial fragmentation has 
receded, Member States have made significant efforts towards economic convergence and 
the governance of the euro area has been strengthened. We are gradually moving out of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  crisis  phase  into  a  different  environment,  with  the  focus  shifting  from  solving  the  crisis  to 
ensuring stable economic growth and inflation close to 2%. It requires a different approach 
and different instruments. 
The developments beyond our eastern border are the big topic of debate in Poland at 
the moment. Could the conflict between Russia and the Ukraine affect Europe and its 
economy in any way? 
The impact on trade or the financial system has thus far been limited. But this situation does 
give rise to uncertainty, so it can be regarded as a potential negative factor that could hinder 
economic growth in Europe, and that is part of our risk assessment. 
What about the strong euro? Aren’t you worried it could cause problems for European 
exporters and hinder the recovery? 
The ECB doesn’t target the exchange rate. Our primary mandate is price stability, and within 
this  mandate,  the  exchange rate  of  the  euro  is among the factors  determining the  level  of 
inflation.  And  indeed,  the  strong  euro  is  contributing  to  the  current  low  inflation. 
Consequently,  any  further  strengthening  of  the  euro  strengthens  the  case  for  more  policy 
action by the ECB aimed at bringing inflation closer to 2%. 
Is there a risk of global currency wars? Each country wants to overcome the crisis as 
quickly as possible and the easiest way is to weaken its currency and thus improve 
the position of its exporters. 
These issues have been discussed many times, including among the G20. Countries have 
agreed that the exchange rate should not become a target for monetary policy. As long as 
the  exchange  rates  are  driven  by  the  various  countries’  internal  situations  and  domestic 
monetary policy actions, this is not a currency war but an adjustment of exchange rates to 
the  current  policy,  stemming from their  economic  developments. This  assumes,  of  course, 
that exchange rates will adapt in a flexible way to the changes in economic conditions and 
monetary policy. 
It was thanks to the weakening of the zloty – among other things – that Poland has 
come out of the 2009 crisis unscathed. For many people, this is an argument against 
the joining the euro area. 
Poland’s future is linked to the euro area and the future of the euro area is linked to Poland. 
The euro area without Poland – one of the largest EU countries – will not be complete. That 
is why Poland is welcome to join. But it is up to you to meet the entry criteria, laid down in EU 
law, and, in doing so, decide when to join. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
