Takehiro Sato: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing – 
importance of fiscal consolidation 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan 
Society, New York, 19 March 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you,  Mr.  Harris,  for  your  kind  introduction.  Distinguished  guests  and  members  of 
Japan Society. It is my great honor and real pleasure to speak to you today. 
As a member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, I myself voted for quantitative and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE) last April. It is my strong desire to ensure that it succeeds. 
At the same time, in the process of overcoming deflation, the Japanese government’s efforts 
for  fiscal  consolidation  play  a  vital  role.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  I  will  talk  about  fiscal 
consolidation today. 
Today, I will first explain the current developments in Japan’s economy. I will focus on the 
meaning of the price stability target and stress the importance of flexibility in monetary policy. 
I will also talk about the effects of the price stability target on financial markets. Next, I will 
explain  the  importance  of  fiscal  consolidation  from  a  range  of  perspectives,  including 
potential changes in the balance of payments and a saving and investment balance in Japan. 
In my speech, I will often refer to an optimistic scenario and a pessimistic scenario. The latter 
is intended to highlight the importance of the government’s efforts to ensure fiscal discipline. 
It is by no means intended to get bogged down in pessimism. I will then close my speech 
with some notes about the QQE and fiscal consolidation. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
I. 
It has been almost a year since the Bank introduced the QQE last April (Chart 1). Economic 
activity  and  prices  have  been  broadly  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  presented  in  the 
Outlook Reports and interim assessments (Chart 2). In short, Japan’s economy is steadily 
pursuing  its  path  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  Looking  ahead,  the 
effects of the consumption tax hike from 5 to 8 percent in April will be closely monitored. In 
my judgment, Japan’s economy is entirely different from that in 1997, when the consumption 
tax was lifted from 3 to 5 percent. Japan’s economy has become much more resilient against 
tax hikes. 
On the price front, the Bank’s policy board has made the following judgment. Excluding the 
direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI, 
which excludes volatile food, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. Thereafter, it is 
expected to reach the price stability target of 2 percent from the latter half of fiscal 2014 to 
fiscal  2015,  as  the  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  pace  above  its  potential  growth  rate. 
Based on such an outlook, the policy board has judged it appropriate to steadily pursue the 
QQE under its current guidelines of asset purchases. 
II. 
Price stability target and QQE 
Price stability target as a flexible framework 
A. 
Next,  I  will  explain  what  we  mean  by  the  price stability  target,  introduced  in  January  2013 
(Chart 3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Under the QQE, the Bank aims to achieve this target at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years. 
The policy framework of the price stability target is flexible, just like that adopted by major 
central  banks  overseas.  Specifically,  monetary  policy  requires  long  and  variable  time  lags 
before  its  effects  permeate  the  economy,  and  thereafter  prices.  To  achieve  a  sustainable 
growth  path  in  the  context  of  price  stability,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  flexible.  In  other 
words, we examine the current conditions and the outlook for economic activity and prices. 
We also analyze various risk factors including the accumulation of financial imbalances. We 
take account of all these developments when we decide on monetary policy. That is what I 
mean  by  being  flexible.  Flexibility  in  monetary  policy  has  been  widely  shared  with  other 
countries.  Particularly  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  major  overseas 
economies  have  become  increasingly  attentive  to  the  flexibility  of  monetary  policymaking. 
From  that  viewpoint,  the  price  stability  target  is  by  no  means  a  rigid  and  superficial 
framework which calls for the inflation rate to reach 2 percent with surgical precision. It is a 
flexible  and  practical  framework  that  accommodates  the  needs  arising  from  economic 
developments. Put differently, what the price stability target aims to achieve is not a situation 
in  which  only  prices  will  rise.  Rather,  it  aims  to  achieve  an  environment  in  which  the 
improvement of the overall economy results in higher wages and then higher prices. In my 
view, in such an environment, some degree of latitude to the price stability target – both on 
the  upside  and  downside  –  is  naturally  required.  Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an 
analysis from broader perspectives when assessing the extent to which the Bank has come 
close to achieving the target. That includes examining the recent developments in wages as 
well as the core CPI, an indicator that the policy board presents in its assessments. 
QQE and long-term interest rate 
B. 
I will now talk about the effects of the price stability target on financial markets. 
Under  the  QQE,  the  Bank  puts  strong  downward  pressure  on  nominal  long-term  interest 
rates  through  the  massive  purchases  of  JGBs.  It  also  tries  to  raise  people’s  inflation 
expectations  via  the  accumulation  of  the  monetary  base.  The  combination  of  the  two  will 
lower real long-term interest rates. That is an unprecedented challenge. There are different 
views  on  the  extent  to  which  the  massive  supply  of  the  monetary  base  can  have  a  real 
impact on people’s inflation expectations. Nevertheless, lifting inflation expectations is one of 
just  a  few  remaining  policy  options  under  these  circumstances.  After  nearly  15  years  of 
deflation, the medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been around 1 percent and 
stayed  low,  compared  to  those  in  other  advanced  economies.  Moreover,  Japan  has  been 
faced with a zero boundary of nominal interest rates. 
Here, let me recap on how the QQE will work on nominal long-term interest rates through its 
transmission mechanism. Nominal long-term interest rates combine two elements: one is the 
average  of  future  short-term  rates;  the  other  is  premiums  (Chart  4).  Based  on  that 
understanding, the Bank has specified its forward guidance in order to produce these effects. 
First it will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target, as long as it is 
necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. That in effect will exert downward 
pressure on the average of future short-term rates. In addition, premiums will be prevented 
from widening through the massive purchases of JGBs with relatively longer maturities. The 
QQE thus relies on the  mechanism in which the combination of the forward guidance and 
asset  purchases  will  maintain  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  at  low  levels.  That  is  not 
different  from  what  happens  at  other  central  banks,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Bank of England, which also depend on similar unconventional monetary policy. 
Under such unconventional policy, nominal interest rates are likely to rise as the effects of 
the policy start to occur, preceding the improvement in the economy and prices. Referring to 
the elements that I have just explained, future short-term rates are likely to rise if the market 
judges  that  an  exit  from  current  easing  policy  is  at  hand.  Admittedly,  we  need  to  follow  a 
narrow path to achieve the objective under the QQE, but it is a challenge that we must meet. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As I will explain shortly, there is a limit to the extent to which a central bank can control the 
nominal long-term interest rates. Therefore, the government’s efforts for fiscal consolidation 
are vital. They will become even more vital when deflation comes to an end and an eventual 
exit from deflation occurs. 
III. 
Importance of fiscal consolidation 
Overcoming deflation and change in environment surrounding fiscal policy 
A. 
Let me now explain why fiscal consolidation is important in order to overcome deflation. 
From an optimistic viewpoint, if the medium- to long-term growth expectations rise as a result 
of overcoming deflation, the fiscal structure remains solid despite a pick-up in nominal long-
term rates. That is because tax revenue will increase as the nominal growth rate rises. The 
elasticity  of  tax  revenue  is  generally  high  at  the  initial  phase  of  economic  expansion,  and 
corporate tax is likely to contribute to a higher revenue. On the expenditure side, the pace of 
increase in the government’s interest payment costs will remain subdued for some time. That 
is due to the government’s debt management policy in which the average maturity has been 
extended,  and  the  government  has  taken  advantage  of  current  easy  monetary  conditions. 
For reference, the average maturity of JGBs issued in fiscal 2014 will be eight years and five 
months.  In  light  of  weak  credit  demand  under  deflation,  the  government  is  now  building  a 
fiscal structure which is resilient against possible rate rises. Coupled with the effects of the 
QQE,  the  government’s  borrowing  costs  have  stayed  stably  at  around  1  percent.  By 
extending the maturity of JGBs, the government in effect has been able to buy time on the 
liability side (Chart 5). 
Such an optimistic view may entail a risk. The aging population will continue to put pressure 
on  additional  fiscal  expenditure,  such  as  increasing  social  security  benefits. The  aging  will 
constrain  the  labor  supply  on  the  supply  side,  and  change  the  demand  structure  of  the 
economy as a whole. Unless the economy responds to a change in the demand structure, it 
will  reduce  the  potential  to  grow.  If  growth  expectations  do  not  rise  materially  due  to  the 
aging,  the  fiscal  structure  will  remain  vulnerable.  Taking  account  of  such  demographic 
changes,  it  is  better  to  be  conservative.  In  my  judgment,  the  fiscal  issue  will  remain  even 
after we manage to overcome deflation. 
Recent developments in balance of payments 
B. 
Now, I will talk about Japan’s balance of payments. The current account surplus registered 
3.3 trillion yen last year. In the years for which a comparison can be made, it was the lowest 
figure recorded after 1985 (Chart 6). Behind that, the trade surplus in electronic appliances 
almost  disappeared  and  fuel  imports  increased  materially  after  the  suspension  of  nuclear 
power plants. On a quarterly basis, the current account balance registered a deficit for the 
first time in the October–December quarter last year, and is expected to remain in deficit in 
the January–March quarter. Having said all that, the deficit in the quarterly current account 
balances fundamentally reflects solid imports thanks to resilient domestic demand due to the 
front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike this April. Therefore, I do 
not expect the current account deficit to persist after the consumption tax hike. The deficit we 
see most recently is taking place under those somewhat unique circumstances. 
By contrast, according to the “balance of payments development stage theory”,1 the current 
account  balance  changes  from  a  surplus  to  a  deficit  in  the  long  run  as  a  result  of  the 
demographic change. It looks as though the recent increase in fuel imports is accelerating 
                                                
1  Crowther’s  “balance  of  payments  development  stage  theory”  explains  long-term  patterns  of  change  in  a 
country’s  balance  of payment  structure  as  the economy  advances  from  a debtor  to  a creditor country,  and 
eventually to the one that liquidates its overseas assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the change in the current account balance. The state of the economy – be it a trade surplus 
or deficit, or a current account surplus or deficit – is ultimately the result of people’s rational 
decision-making.  It  is  irrelevant  from  the  social  welfare  perspective.  That  leads  me  to 
conclude that it is not appropriate to say that a surplus is a good thing while a deficit is bad. 
Nonetheless,  if  the  current  account  deficit  continues,  meaning  that  a  domestic  saving  and 
investment  balance  will  shift  from  a  surplus  to  a  deficit,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the 
advantage  Japan  has  achieved  by  financing  its  deficits  through  ample  domestic  savings 
might change in the long run. 
Overcoming deflation, and saving and investment balance 
C. 
Let  me  now  elaborate  on  the  nexus  between  the  saving  and  investment  balance  and  the 
overcoming of deflation. 
I will start with the saving and investment balance under deflation. In Japan, excess savings 
have  been  decreasing  in  the  household  sector,  whereas  they  have  been  increasing  in the 
corporate sector (Chart 7). Putting those trends together, excess savings in the private sector 
as a whole have remained intact. Behind that, companies have made it a priority to downsize 
their  balance  sheets  by  repaying  debts  in  light  of  harmful  deflationary  expectations.  Put 
differently, deflation has led to excess savings in the private sector, and that has enabled the 
government  to  finance  its  debts  with  subdued  borrowing  costs.  Thus,  “deflationary 
equilibrium” has prevailed. The equilibrium is subject to change once the QQE succeeds and 
Japan’s economy overcomes deflation. 
Admittedly,  it  is  not  easy  to  predict  what  the  saving  and  investment  balance  in  the  private 
sector will look like before and after deflation. In general, however, the propensity to import 
will  rise  by  stimulating  investment  and  spending.  That  will  lead  to  an  outflow  of  income 
overseas.  Under  such  circumstances,  domestic  excess  savings  in  the  private  sector  are 
likely to shrink, if not a reversal from excess savings to excess investment. 
Looking at the corporate and household sectors separately, excess savings in the corporate 
sector  will  likely  show  a  clear  decline.  That  is  because,  after  overcoming  deflation,  it  will 
become rational for companies to change their strategies and increase their external debts to 
finance  their  investment.  As  for  the  household  sector,  economic  theory  says  that  the 
household savings rate will go down in an aging population. I note that it may not be the case 
if we take account of transfers from the government and the corporate sector (Chart 8). 
In my view, we should be mindful of a possible decline in domestic excess savings when the 
QQE succeeds and Japan moves out of the deflationary equilibrium. In light of the decline in 
excess savings, if the fiscal deficit does not change, the current account balance will register 
a deficit. We might no longer be able to finance all government debts with domestic savings. 
Then,  overseas  investors  will  ask  for  a  higher  premium,  possibly  driving  the  government’s 
borrowing costs even higher. 
To  avoid  being  trapped  in  such  a  situation,  or  to  mitigate  the  shock  associated  with  that 
situation, it is vital that the government will continue with its sound fiscal management. That 
is  important  in  terms  of  preventing  the  problem  associated  with  shrinking  excess  savings 
from surfacing. Put differently, the government needs to show its firm commitment to fiscal 
consolidation.  Moreover,  the  government  needs  to  implement  its  path  toward  such 
consolidation  in  order  to  avoid  leaving  an  impression  with  the  market that  it  is  not  serious 
about  the  issue.  The  scenario  that  I  have  laid  out  contains  a  number  of  assumptions.  In 
practice,  the  end  of  deflation  will  generate  higher  tax  revenue  as  the  nominal  growth  rate 
rises. That  is  obviously  good for fiscal  consolidation. Thus, I repeat  that  it  is  best  to  avoid 
getting trapped by pessimism. 
Domar’s theorem 
D. 
Fiscal sustainability generally means that the future outstanding amount of the government’s 
debts relative to GDP will not reach an unmanageable level. In theory, it can be summarized 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as  the  current  outstanding  amount  of  the  government’s  debts  relative  to  GDP  being 
equivalent to the discounted value of the current and future primary balances. However, we 
cannot derive a threshold value of the outstanding amount of the government’s debts relative 
to GDP and say that the fiscal situation is no longer sustainable beyond that value. After all, 
whether or not the fiscal situation is sustainable depends much on what the future primary 
balance  looks  like  and  how  a  wide  range  of  economic  entities  expect  such  balance  to 
change.  Here,  let me  come  back  to the  equation  for  determining fiscal  sustainability.  If  an 
economy grows at rates above the interest rates, the government will be able to issue bonds 
forever despite the conditions specified in the equation. That is called Domar’s theorem. This 
theorem is often referred to when doing a back-of-the-envelope calculation to assess fiscal 
sustainability. In practice, the interest rates are likely to stay above the growth rates, and it 
has  become  common  today  to  assess  fiscal  sustainability  on  the  condition  that  Domar’s 
theorem does not hold. 
In my view, when assessing fiscal sustainability, the interest rates that should be compared 
with the growth rates are not in terms of long-term bond yields but rather the average cost of 
the government’s borrowing. The cost could be higher or lower than the growth rates of the 
economy. Indeed, the government’s borrowing costs have consistently been declining since 
the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  when  long-term  bond  yields  began  trending  downward.  Most 
recently, those costs are around 1 percent, well below the nominal growth rates (Chart 1). 
Under such circumstances, the government has benefitted from an “interest rate bonus”. 
Looking at those situations from a pessimistic viewpoint, we may face “an interest rate onus”, 
where the government’s borrowing costs remain higher than the nominal growth rates. The 
Japanese government has already started taking measures to extend the average maturity of 
its debts. We will still have some time before the interest rate onus takes place, and in the 
meantime the government can make its efforts for fiscal consolidation. 
Overcoming deflation and the bank’s response 
E. 
The  next  topic  concerns  what  policy  response  the  Bank  might  take  when  we  see  the 
overcoming of deflation start to have an effect on long-term interest rates. 
After the success of the QQE, people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations will be 
anchored  at  around  2  percent,  and  the  Bank  might  possibly  start  moving  toward  an  exit. 
Market  participants  will  notice  signs  of  change  in  economic  activity  and  monetary  policy. 
Under  those  circumstances,  nominal  long-term  rates  might  start  to  adjust,  well  before  the 
actual changes in policy. 
From a purely macroeconomic perspective, a change in nominal rates can be considered as 
the  result  of  a  change  in  people’s  inflation  expectations.  Such  a  change  may  not  be 
detrimental as long as real rates remain more or less the same. More optimistically, a higher 
tax  revenue  after  the  overcoming  of  deflation  can  be  expected,  and  that  will  improve  the 
fiscal situation. 
From  a  pessimistic  viewpoint,  an  abrupt  change  in  nominal  rates  might  make  the  fiscal 
situation severer and possibly have an effect on the financial system. Somewhat ironically, 
the  success  in  overcoming  deflation  might  produce  unfavorable  spillover  effects, given  the 
significant  size  of  the  government’s  debts.  In  an  extreme  case  where  there  is  a  grave 
negative  impact  on  financial  stability,  a  central  bank  might  have  to  choose  either  financial 
stability  or  price  stability,  no  matter  how  strongly  it  is  committed  to  price  stability.  Once  a 
central bank can no longer pursue price stability in fear of fiscal sustainability, it might fall into 
a situation, known as “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”.2 
                                                
2  See Sargent and Wallace (1981) for details regarding “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In my view, we must avoid such a pessimistic scenario from unfolding. To that end, the Bank 
has  been  stress-testing  the  robustness  of  Japan’s  financial  system,  taking  into  account 
possible  changes  in  the  interest  rate  environment.  Furthermore,  it  has  urged  financial 
institutions to reinforce their risk management and take measures to enhance profitability. 
In terms of its relationship with the government, the Bank pursues monetary policy to achieve 
the 2 percent price stability target. That includes the process through which it will eventually 
exit from the current easing policy. We simply cannot accept a situation in which a monetary 
policy decision is affected by the consideration of fiscal policy. There is no question about it. 
Once the financial environment changes, it is possible that people will  pay attention to the 
relationship  between  the  government  and  the  central  bank.  Expectations  for  the  central 
bank’s operation to support bond prices might rise. However, under free capital mobility, the 
central  bank’s  involvement  will  not  solve  the  problem.  To  be  concrete,  even  though  the 
central bank increases its operation in the government bond market in order to suppress the 
government’s borrowing costs, the premiums might possibly rise according to the mechanism 
that I laid out today, when it is judged by market participants that the central bank’s operation 
will weaken fiscal discipline. Furthermore, if the market thinks that the rapid increase in the 
central bank’s balance sheet might cause inflation beyond the level judged appropriate, then 
the anticipated future short-term interest rates might rise. In short, it is the market judgment 
that matters rather than the central bank’s intention. Down the road, social security spending 
is expected to rise due to the aging. That spending in Japan is not significantly high relative 
to that in other economies at this moment. However, it is vital that the government makes 
seamless  and  tireless  efforts  to  make  sure  that  fiscal  discipline  remains  firmly  intact  and 
there is no doubt in the market concerning the government’s intention toward fiscal discipline 
(Chart 9). 
Plausibility of financial repression 
F. 
Despite the government’s determination to achieve fiscal consolidation, it appears that there 
is still a view stating that the central bank should conduct monetary policy in consideration of 
the fiscal situation. 
Those  who  are  obsessed  with  such  a  view  claim that the central  bank should  continue  its 
massive  bond  purchase  operations  in  order  to  avoid  the  problem  of  fiscal  concern.  They 
insist that the central bank should be involved in such operations when long-term rates start 
to pick up around the time of an exit. Often referred to as “financial repression”, the intention 
here  is  to  contain  a  possible  pick-up  in  nominal  rates  through  the  central  bank’s  massive 
bond purchases in order to maintain fiscal sustainability. 
That reminds me of the “fiscal theory of price level (FTPL)”.3 The FTPL states that a fiscal 
stimulus is effective for price stability. However, it is implicitly based on the assumption that a 
central bank does financial repression. In other words, it supposes that the bond prices will 
be  maintained  despite  an  increase  in  government  debts  as  a  result  of  fiscal  expansion. 
Otherwise, the private sector, which holds government bonds, will reduce its spending due to 
the adverse wealth effect and hence offset an increase in demand stemming from additional 
fiscal measures. Under such circumstances, the output gap will not improve and prices will 
not rise. 
That said, whether or not a central bank can control bond prices depends not on its intention 
but on market judgment. It is for that reason too that I emphasize the importance of fiscal 
consolidation. 
                                                
3  See Sims (1999), Christiano and Fitzgerald (2000a, b), Leeper (1991), Cochrane (2000), and Woodford (1996, 
2001) for details regarding the fiscal theory of price level. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
Government’s commitment for fiscal consolidation 
A. 
Now, let me sum up. In my speech today, I have repeatedly emphasized the importance of 
fiscal consolidation. Indeed, the Japanese government has already said that it will halve the 
deficit in the primary balance relative to GDP by fiscal 2015 from the level registered in fiscal 
2010. Furthermore, it is committed to turning the primary balance from a deficit to a surplus 
by fiscal 2020. Those moves constitute an important part of the government’s commitment to 
fiscal  consolidation  and  are  now  widely  accepted  by  the  international  community. 
Accordingly,  the  government  decided  to  raise  the  consumption  tax  from  5  to  8  percent  in 
April; moreover, the tax rate is scheduled to be raised to 10 percent in October 2015. Down 
the  road,  we  may  hear  more  discussion  concerning  whether  the  consumption  tax  of 
10 percent is enough to make the fiscal structure sustainable. Whatever the discussion might 
be,  it  is  important to  acknowledge  that  the government  will  take  a  crucial  first  step toward 
fiscal  consolidation,  given  mounting  social  security  spending.  There  is  no  question  about 
that, and financial markets understand the government’s intention on that. 
QQE based on fiscal consolidation 
B. 
Recent long-term rates have been stable in light of signs of overcoming deflation. That is not 
just due to the effects of the Bank’s JGB purchases. It also hinges on the fact that market 
participants and businesspeople have full confidence in the government’s strong commitment 
to  fiscal  consolidation.  That  enables  the  Bank  to  conduct  massive  JGB  purchases  without 
being  trapped  in  fiscal  dominance.  The  Bank  offers  full  support  to  the  government’s 
commitment.  The  commitment  for  fiscal  consolidation  by  the  government  is  imperative  so 
that the QQE – which is designed to overcome deflation – should not be perceived as the 
means for “financial repression”. 
At the same time, a problem will arise if the government creates a fiscal cliff, as epitomized 
by  the  enforcement  of  the  Fiscal  Structure  Reform  Act  in  the  mid-1990s.  In  practice,  a 
balanced approach may be required between a medium- to long-term commitment for fiscal 
consolidation and the short-term flexibility in policy. Even so, the government should ensure 
that it will not lose sight of the importance of fiscal consolidation and that it will reinforce its 
medium- to long-term commitment on that front. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Christiano,  Lawrence  J.  and  Terry  J.  Fitzgerald,  “Price  Stability:  Is  a  Tough  Central  Bank 
Enough?”, Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2000a. 
Christiano,  Lawrence  J.  and  Terry  J.  Fitzgerald,  “Understanding  the  Fiscal  Theory  of  the 
Price Level”, Economic Review, 36 (2), Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2000b. 
Cochrane, John H., “Money as Stock: Price Level Determination with No Money Demand”, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 7498, 2000. 
Leeper, Eric M., “Equilibria under Active and Passive Monetary and Fiscal Policies”, Journal 
of Monetary Economics, 27, 1991. 
Sims, Christopher A., “The Precarious Fiscal Foundations of EMU”, De Economist, 147 (4), 
1999. 
Sargent,  Thomas  J.  and  Neil  Wallace,  “Some  Unpleasant  Monetarist  Arithmetic”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (3), 1981. 
Woodford, Michael, “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability?”, NBER 
Working Paper, No. 5684, 1996. 
Woodford, Michael,  “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 33, 2001.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
