  R Gandhi: New-gen urban cooperative banks – some musings 
Address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference 
of Urban Co-operative Banks in Gujarat, Ahmedabad, 8 June 2014. 
 Assistance by Shri Sushanta Kumar Kar, General Manager is gratefully acknowledged 
1. Dear Shri Jyotindra Mehta, Chairman, Gujarat Urban Cooperative Banks Federation, Shri 
V  S  Das,  Director,  Centre  for  Banking  Research,  Development  &  Excellence,  other 
dignitaries  and  delegates.  I  feel  specially  privileged  to  address  this  Conference  of  urban 
co-operative banks, which is very aptly titled “Sahakar Setu-2014” focusing on the theme of 
“Next-Gen Co-operative Banks”. I am also happy to note that a Centre for Banking Research, 
Development & Excellence is being set up here as a hub for training and capacity building in 
the  urban  banking  sector  and  also  to  promote  research  relevant  to  the  functioning  of 
co-operative banks. 
2. Talking to all of you in Gujarat is also of very special significance, not only because of the 
origin and proliferation of cooperative banks here but also it is the birth place of M.K. Gandhi, 
father of the nation, who propounded the Theory of Trusteeship. Putting it in Gandhiji’s words 
“Supposing I have come by a fair amount of wealth – either by way of legacy, or by means of 
trade and industry – I must know that all that wealth does not belong to me; what belongs to 
me is the right to an honourable livelihood, no better than that enjoyed by millions of others. 
The  rest  of  my  wealth  belongs  to  the  community  and  must  be  used  for  the  welfare  of the 
community.” 
3.  If  you  notice,  cooperatives  are  also  based  on  the  same  principles  of  community 
camaraderie,  –  mutual  help,  democratic  decision  making  and  open  membership. 
Cooperatives  represent  a  new  and  alternative  approach  to  organisation  as  against 
proprietary firms, partnership firms and joint stock companies, which represent the dominant 
form  of  commercial  organisation.  As  you  may  be  aware,  cooperatives  around  the  world 
generally  operate  according  to  the  seven  core  principles  and  values,  adopted  by  the 
International  Co-operative  Alliance  (ICA)  in  1995.  Cooperatives  trace  the  roots  of  these 
principles  to  the  first  modern  cooperative  founded  in  Rochdale,  England  in  1844.  The 
principles cover various aspects of cooperatives beginning from its membership to concern 
on community. 
Evolution of the urban bank sector 
4.  Urban  Cooperative  Banks  (UCBs)  started  in  India  back  in  18891  exactly  a  century  and 
quarter ago here in Gujarat and India has one of the oldest community-banking movements 
in the world. However, the real growth and proliferation began after this sector was brought 
under  the  purview  of  Banking  Regulation  Act  in  1966.  The  evolution  thereafter  may  be 
broadly divided into three phases, Growth phase, crisis phase and Consolidation phase. 
Growth phase (1966–2003) 
5.  In  1966, there  were  about  1100  UCBs  with  deposits  and  advances  of  ₹1.67  billion  and 
₹1.53  billion  respectively.  Since  then  there  has  been  phenomenal  growth  in  terms  of  their 
numbers, size and scale of operations. The Reserve Bank pursued a liberal licensing policy 
especially  pursuant  to  the  recommendations  of  the  Marathe  Committee,  which  had 
suggested  dispensing  the  “one-district,  one-bank”  approach  and  to  shift  the  stance  of  the 
                                                
1  Anyonya Sahkari Mandali in Gujarat 1889. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  policy to assess the “need and potential” in an area for mobilizing deposits and purveying of 
credit  for  a  new  UCB.  In  the  year  1993,  before  the  liberalisation  of  bank  licensing  policy, 
there  were  1311  UCBs  having  deposits  and  advances  amounting  to  ₹111.08  billion  and 
₹87.13  billion,  respectively,  which  increased  to 1926  UCBs  with  deposits  and  advances of 
₹1020.74 billion and ₹649.74 billion, respectively2 by end-March, 2004. This is because after 
the liberalisation of licensing norms in May 1993, up to June 2001, 823 bank licences were 
issued. 
Crisis phase (2003–2008) 
6.  However,  it  was  observed  that  nearly  one-third  of  these  newly  licensed  UCBs  became 
financially unsound within a short period. RBI, therefore, constituted a screening committee 
consisting  of  outside  experts  in  June  2001  to  examine  the  applications  for  licences.  The 
Committee recommended that it should be made mandatory for all newly proposed UCBs to 
come through a process of graduation from a co-operative credit society on the strength of 
demonstrated and verifiable track record. 
7.  However,  in  the  light  of  the  experience  and  the  prevailing  financial  health  of  the  UCB 
sector after the Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative Bank episode, it was announced in the 
Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  year  2004–05  that  the  Reserve  Bank  would  consider 
issuance  of  fresh  licences  only  after  a  comprehensive  policy  on  UCBs,  including  an 
appropriate  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  the  sector,  is  put  in  place  and  no  fresh 
licences have been issued thereafter for organizing new UCBs. 
8. The number of UCBs declined from 1926 as at end-March 2004 to 1770 by end-March 
2008. The deposits and advances of urban banks increased only marginally during the same 
period  from  ₹1020.74  billion  and  ₹649.74  billion  to  ₹1398.71  billion  and  ₹904.44  billion,3 
respectively, posting an average annual growth of 9% in deposits and 10% in advances.4 
9.  Reserve  Bank  took  several  steps  to  strengthen  the  sector  during  this  period.  Most 
important  among  them  is  the  Memoranda  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with  all  State 
Governments and the Central Government. In order to improve the financial soundness of 
the  UCB  sector,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  entered  into  Memoranda  of  Understanding  (MoU) 
with all State Governments and the Central Government since 2005. The MOUs facilitated 
coordination  of  regulatory  policies  and  actions  through  the  mechanism  of  TAFCUBs,  a 
comprehensive set of capacity building initiatives and measures to bring in efficiency through 
adoption of technology. This phase also ushered in voluntary consolidation in the sector by 
merger of non-viable UCBs with financially sound and well-managed UCBs. 
Consolidation phase (2008 onwards) 
10. As a result of the new initiatives and sustained efforts by RBI, the number of financially 
weak banks in the UCB sector declined and consequently the total number of UCBs declined 
from  1770  as  end-March  2008  to  1606  by  end-March  2013.  However,  the  deposits  and 
advances  of  urban  banks  increased from  ₹1398.71  billion  and  ₹904.44  billion  to  ₹2769.41 
billion  and  ₹1809.60  billion,  respectively,  during  the  same  period.5  Thus,  there  was  an 
                                                
2  ₹15785 billion and `8643 billion, respectively, for scheduled commercial banks. 
3 
In  2008  deposits  and  advances  were  ₹33201  billion  and  ₹24770  billion,  respectively,  for  scheduled 
commercial banks. 
4  The  average  annual  growth  growth  in  deposits  and  advances  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  during  the 
period was 28% and 47% respectively. 
In 2013 deposits and advances were `74295 billion and `58797 billion, respectively, for scheduled commercial 
banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
5 
2 
   
 
average  annual  growth  of  20  percent6  in  deposits  and  in  advances,  which  is  more  than 
double of the previous phase growth. Further, the number of financially sound7 banks also 
increased  from  248  as  on  March  31,  2010  to  684  as  on  March  31,  2013.  Incidentally, 
mergers of as many as 116 UCBs have been effected till date after 2005. 
11.  Against  this  backdrop,  with  a  view  to  increasing  the  coverage  of  banking  services 
amongst  local  communities,  the  Malegam  Committee  was  set  up  in  2010  for  studying  the 
advisability  of  granting  new  urban  co-operative  banking 
licences.  After  elaborate 
deliberations, the Committee recommended that UCBs play a useful role and there is need 
for a greater presence of UCBs in unbanked districts and in centers having population of less 
than 5 lakh. It is necessary to encourage new entrants to open banks and branches in States 
and  Districts  which  are  unbanked  or  inadequately  banked.  It  is  equally  necessary  to 
discourage  new  entrants  from  opening  branches  in  Districts  and  population  centers  which 
are  already  adequately  banked.  Further,  the  Committee  suggested  that  the  existing  well-
managed  co-operative  credit  societies  meeting  certain  financial  criteria  should  be  given 
priority for granting licenses. The Committee’s recommendations are under examination by 
RBI. 
Issues for discussion 
12. As we have observed from the trend and pattern of growth in this sector so far, we have 
left Madhavpura long behind and moved ahead by fostering organic and inorganic growth. 
With higher degree of CRAR8 and less NPAs,9 the system has more or less stabilized, while 
the process of consolidation is still on. The first question that rises now is what next. Where 
do we go from here? Have we reached a plateau where we need to maintain and strengthen 
the  healthy  consolidation  achieved  or  should  we  allow  further  growth?  Given  the  fact  that 
UCBs  are  an  important  segment  of  the  banking  system,  play  a  vital  role  in  mobilizing 
deposits  and  purveying  credit  to  the  people  of  small  means  thereby  enhancing  financial 
inclusion  and  facilitate  payment  and  settlement,  it  will  only  be  appropriate  to  support  their 
growth and proliferation further. 
13. That brings us to the second question. If we allow further growth, in what form should that 
be? It again can be addressed in two ways. We either allow them to grow in the existing set 
up or UCBs above a certain threshold may assume a new corporate identity. 
14. As an implication of this, for large UCBs who have reached certain threshold in the size 
and complexity of business, enabling their graduation into commercial banks can be thought 
of,  so  that  their  further  growth  is  facilitated.  It  is  important  to  mention  here  that  once 
cooperative banks reach a certain threshold level, they are also expected to follow a regimen 
like  large  banks  and  standardized  global  practices,  which  may  not  be  possible  within  the 
existing  legal  structure  of  cooperative  banks.  Thus,  before  we  move  forward,  the  existing 
legal and regulatory framework need to be revisited to enable smooth transition. Specifically, 
we need to debate the needed legal framework that will facilitate conversion of cooperatives 
into joint stock companies, conversion of deposit holders into shareholders etc. 
15. The other alternative could be to allow the UCBs to grow and sustain themselves in the 
existing  set-up.  In  that  event,  the  obvious  question  that  comes  to  mind  is  what  are  the 
existing restrictions that can be liberalised and what further measures can be envisaged for 
                                                
6  Around 25% average annual growth in deposits and advances for the scheduled commercial banks.  
7  Broadly defined at CRAR of 10%, net profit for last three years, Gross NPA<7% and Net NPA≤3%.  
8  88.2 per cent of the total UCBs have reported a CRAR of 9 per cent or more as on March 31, 2013.  
9  The gross and net NPA ratios as on March 31, 2013 stood at 6.0 per cent and 1.4 per cent respectively.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  smooth  non  –  disruptive  growth  of  the  sector?  I  hope  the  delegates  will  deliberate  on 
these issues and suggest possible measures. 
The next phase – next generation cooperative banks 
16.  Since  the  theme  of  the  Seminar  is  “Next-Gen  Co-operative  Banks”  let  me  now  briefly 
dwell  on  the  subject.  To  begin  with  let  us  analyse  some  of  the  best  global  practices  in 
cooperative  banking  and  their  implications  for  next-gen  cooperative  banks  in  India,  before 
moving forward to what is our expectation from these banks. 
European co-operative business model 
17.  As  you  may  be  aware,  the  co-operative  banking  sector  contributes  significantly  to  the 
growth,  stability  and  competitiveness  of  the  European  banking  industry  at  a  local  and 
regional level. Ordinary citizens can become members / owners of co-operative banks with 
relatively  small  investments.  As  a  result,  they  have  a  direct  say  in  the  business  and  are 
involved in the governance, strategy and risk management processes. The core business of 
co-operative banks is value creation for their members and a long term relationship of trust, 
opposed to the profit maximization approach of mainstream banks. 
18.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  their  performance  is  a  result  of  their  central  focus  on  retail 
banking,  solid  capitalisation  and  their  high-quality  credit  portfolios.  In  fact,  in  Italy,  France, 
Germany and Netherlands where co-operative banks’ market share in loans range between 
25%  and  45%,  SMEs  represent  between  20%  and  50%  of  the  total  client  portfolio  of 
co-operative banks. They are able to face the challenges of the new post crisis environment 
because their business model responds to the present needs and expectations. 
19.  Further,  across  Europe,  Cooperative  banks  exceed  the  minimum  legal  capital  ratio 
requirement of 8%, with an average ratio of about 9%. Credit ratings reflect this very well, 
ranging  between  AA  and  AAA  for  the  largest  co-operative  banking  groups  in  Western 
Europe. 
20.  With  their  roots  in  the  Europe,  the  Rabobank  Group,  DZ  Bank  Group,  Credit  Agricole 
Group, etc have grown in recent decades into an international financial services provider that 
has activities in the field of banking, asset management, leasing, insurance and real estate. 
The strong points of the cooperative structure became evident during the financial crises of 
recent years. They did not have to ask for state aid and were able to keep financial results 
well  up  to  standard.  Measured  according  to  Tier  1  capital,  these  Groups  are  the  world’s 
largest financial institutions. All rating agencies continue to give them high ratings. 
21. Their cooperative identity stems back to the early twentieth century. The local member 
cooperatives  continue  to  be  the  collective  owner  of  these  groups  to  this  day.  The  groups 
support  the  member  cooperatives  and  oversee  the  subsidiaries  and  affiliated  companies. 
The members not only benefit from banking and non-banking advantages, they also have the 
opportunity  to  join  in  the  discussion  and  co-decide  on  the  bank’s  course.  Local  member 
banks  serve  millions  of  retail  and  wholesale  customers  with  a  comprehensive  range  of 
financial services. The groups are leaders in nearly all customer and product segments, from 
youth to start-ups and from mortgages to corporate enterprises. 
22.  I  feel  Indian  cooperative  banks  can  gain  from  the  business  matrix  of  their  European 
counterparts  to  cope  up  with  the  competition  and  pressure  from  bigger  commercial  banks 
and maximize value creation while not undermining the importance of solid capitalization and 
high-quality credit portfolio. 
Asian cooperative business models 
23. If we look eastward, we observe a considerably large presence of co-operatives in Asia 
Pacific also. In Asia-Pacific alone there were 22,212 credit unions in 2012 which were more 
than double of the 10,051 figure of North America and Europe put together. In terms of the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  underlining focus also, it is observed that the co-operatives in Asia were basically formed to 
bring  about  socio-economic  development,  particularly  with  respect  to  agriculture  and  rural 
development. 
24. In Asia itself, there have been many success stories to emulate. An exemplary initiative 
which  the  Co-operative  Development  Authority  (CDA)  of  the  Philippines  has  taken  is  the 
launch of the Co-operative Information System. The CDA in association with the US Agency 
for  International  Development  and  another  technology  partner  developed  this  web-based 
database  of  co-operatives,  to  be  accessed  in  real-time  at  any  of  the  CDA’s  extension 
counters. The information on each cooperative’s annual organizational and financial status 
through the Co-operative Annual Performance Report is also integrated with this database, 
thereby  providing  a  platform for the  co-operatives  to  exchange  information  readily.  Further 
and  more  importantly,  the  main  aim  of  the  system  is  to  help  the  Government  in  creating 
performance  standards,  policies,  regulations  and  development  programmes  for  the  overall 
benefit of the sector. Perhaps, the creation of such technology information system will also 
help our cooperative sector by providing a platform to them to exchange information readily 
for performance oriented and integrated development. 
Cooperativeness among cooperative banks 
25.  Cooperatives  also  need  cooperation  among  themselves  to  support  and  promote  their 
growth and expansion. As you might be aware, the V.S. Das Working Group constituted by 
RBI  to  study  these  umbrella  organization  of  cooperative  banks  internationally  found  that 
there are two broad approaches in this regard. 
26.  In  European  countries,  the  Umbrella  Organization  is  generally  in  the  form  of  a  strong 
apex level entity. All the local cooperative banks are generally members of the apex entity. 
Each  member  exercises  its  voting  rights  under  the  “one  member  one  vote”  principle.  The 
apex  entity  supports  and  advises  the  individual  member  banks  in  areas  such  as  customer 
services, ALM, IT, Mutual Funds, product development, etc. 
27. In the case of Australia, USA and, Canada, the Umbrella Organization is not part of any 
group,  but  is  a  distinct  entity  where  the  credit  unions  are  its  members.  In  US  there  is  an 
“Umbrella” of Umbrella Organizations. The Umbrella Organization in US provides extensive 
investment,  liquidity,  and  cash-management  products  and  services;  risk-management  and 
analytic capabilities; settlement, funds transfer and payment services; and safekeeping and 
custody  services.  However,  in  Australia  the  emphasis  has  been  on  payment  clearing 
services and emergency liquidity support. 
28.  These  organizations  are  serving  the  sector  well  and  have  not  only  resulted  in  greater 
efficiency  of  operations  of  their  members  at  the  grassroots,  but  have  also  contributed 
significantly in augmenting financial stability and safeguarding depositors’ interests. This has 
given comfort to the regulators. Notably, in Australia all credit unions adhere to the Basle II 
norms and their average CRAR is 16 percent. 
29. It is in this context I will like to touch upon the need for an umbrella organization for the 
UCB  sector  in  India  that  will  be  the  beginning  of  the  next  part  of  my  address,  viz.,  our 
expectation from the next-gen UCB sector in India. 
Expectation from next-gen UCBs 
Umbrella organisation for UCBs in India 
30.  UCB  sector  in  India  needs  to  have  the  benefit  of  an  Umbrella  Organization  of  its  own 
customized  to  the  legal  framework  in  India  and  the  challenges  of  the  sector.  In  India  only 
scheduled  UCBs  have  direct  access  to  liquidity  support from  RBI  in  the form  of  refinance. 
Other UCBs are dependent on District Cooperative Banks / State Cooperative Banks for their 
liquidity needs. Some District Cooperative Banks / State Cooperative Banks are themselves 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  financially  not  well.  There  is  also  a  need  to  provide  the  management,  IT  and  training  and 
other services which the UCB sector needs. 
31.  For  our  UCB  sector,  the  V  S  Das  Group  had  recommended  the  requirements  of  the 
provision  of  payment  and  settlement  services;  the  provision  of  other  services,  which  are 
mainly in the region of management or outsourced services; the provision of liquidity support 
through  state  level  schemes;  and  the  provision  of  solvency  support  through  state  level 
schemes.  The  Group  further  recommended  that  there  should  be  two  separate  Umbrella 
Organizations.  First  one  is  a  national  level  organization  which  provides  payment  and 
settlement services and other services as also liquidity support to its members. The second 
could  be  state  level  organizations  or  outside  agencies,  which  provide  the  management, IT 
and training and other services. 
32. The proposals are being examined by RBI in consultation with urban bank federations 
and  other  stake  holders.  In  this  context,  I  feel  that  the  Centre  for  Banking  Research, 
Development  &  Excellence  that  is  being  set  up  here  as  a  hub  for  training  and  capacity 
building in the UCB sector is a good initiative in that direction. 
Technology-savvy UCBs 
33. It is heartening to note that leveraging on technology is being taken up for discussion in 
this Conference. In today’s technology driven world, one cannot ignore the role of technology 
in providing competitive banking services and all UCBs must exhibit the keenness to adopt 
technology in a time-bound framework. Presently, only 32% (510 out of 1589 as on March, 
2014)  of  UCBs  have  adopted  Core  Banking  Solution  (CBS).  Delay  in  adopting  technology 
has  resulted  in  UCBs  losing  their  customers  to  commercial  banks.  They  also  become 
vulnerable to frauds due to use of applications that are outdated or lacking security features, 
etc. Also manual book-keeping system has led to arrears in reconciliation of accounts and 
made them vulnerable to frauds. 
34. RBI has advised UCBs to adopt CBS in a graduated framework: large UCBs by Dec 31, 
2013, tier I banks by June 30, 2014 and unit banks by Dec 31, 2014. In future, Reserve Bank 
will definitely look forward to more technology-savvy UCBs competing with commercial banks 
for customer spaces. 
Cooperative character of UCBs 
35. Apart from the cooperativeness among cooperative banks, the next issue to ponder over 
is  the  cooperativeness  inside  a  cooperative  bank.  We  observe  that  over  the  years,  many 
UCBs  have  lost  their  cooperative  character  and  have  been  reduced  to  almost  family  run 
institutions.  To  ensure  cooperative  membership,  RBI  has  prescribed  that  the  proportion  of 
borrowing nominal members should be limited to 20% of regular members. Some large multi-
state UCBs have aligned their business models and goals with those of commercial banks 
while availing the concessions to the sector. 
36. In this context, a study  was undertaken by  the RBI on cooperativeness of cooperative 
banks. The study found that the cooperative business model has withstood the test of times 
in several countries in the world and also weathered the recent financial crisis in the most 
non-disruptive  manner  while  commercial  entities  have  struggled  to  stay  afloat.  What  has 
seen  them  through  is  the  cooperativeness  in  their  character,  which  is  somehow  getting 
diluted in the Indian UCBs. The assessment of the study establishes that “Cooperativeness 
of Cooperative banks” in India is on the decline. 
37. RBI, therefore, conducted a Seminar on this subject in September last year to sensitize 
the  cooperative  banks  on  this  crucial  issue.  Some  of  the  steps  to  enhance  the 
cooperativeness in UCBs in India could be increasing member awareness to strengthen the 
democratic  character,  focus  on  member  education  and  rekindle  members’  interest  in  the 
principles of cooperation. Steps can be also taken to increase in the quorum requirement for 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Annual  General  Body  meetings,  make  provision  of  electronic  and  secure  remote  voting 
facility and cap the tenure/term of the Directors of UCBs in the Board. 
Strengthening capital standards 
38.  In today’s  globalised  world  it  is  difficult  to  insulate  our  institutions from  the  best global 
regulatory practices. 
39. In India UCBs can raise capital only from their members. Recognising this limitation, RBI 
has  prescribed  share-linking to  borrowing. The matter  was further  examined  by  a Working 
Group appointed by RBI and based on their recommendations. UCBs were permitted in 2008 
to  raise  capital  through  innovative  instruments  like  Perpetual  Non-Cumulative/Cumulative 
and Redeemable Preference Shares as also Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits. RBI has 
issued  several  guidelines  for  financial  restructuring  of  less  capitalised  UCBs  such  as 
conversion of deposits into equity, guidelines for merger including that with DICGC support, 
guidelines for transfer of asset & liabilities of weak UCBs to commercial Banks with DICGC 
support, etc. 
40.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  adopted  a  calibrated  and  gradual  approach  towards 
application of Basel standards for various regulated entities keeping in view their systemic 
importance  and  availability  of  skill  sets.  As  of  now,  UCBs  have  been  subjected  to  Basel I 
requirements for computation of capital. Certain elements of market risk management have 
been made applicable for bigger UCBs conducting forex transactions. 
41.  However,  it  may  be  worth  mentioning  in  this  context  that  keeping  in  view  the  risk 
management structure of cooperative banks, internationally Basel II norms are applicable for 
Co-operative banks in many of the advanced countries. Although in view of the heterogeneity 
in  size  and  sophistication  of  Indian  UCBs  RBI  has  taken  a  considered  view,  the  next-gen 
banks must gear up for adopting global best practices in prudential regulations. 
Role of financial inclusion by UCBs 
42. Our next issue for deliberation could be the important expectation from Government, RBI 
and people in general from the banks, i.e. promoting financial inclusion. I am happy to note 
that this issue is also included for discussion in this Conference. The organizational structure, 
local clientele and easy access are UCBs’ strengths in this regard. RBI has taken a number 
of measures in this direction for UCBs by prescribing introduction of No-frills account with nil 
or low minimum balance, relaxation of Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements for small 
accounts, liberalising norms for opening of new branches and off-site ATMs and permitting 
use of Business Correspondents (BCs) and Business Facilitators (BFs), etc. 
43.  UCBs  are,  to  some extent,  already  into  financial  inclusion  as  their  client  profile  mainly 
consists  of  priority  sector  segments  viz.  small  business  establishments,  SSI,  retail  traders, 
self-employed  etc.,  who  do  not get  easy  access  to  commercial  banks. There  still  remains, 
however,  a  huge  hidden  potential  to  be  tapped,  given  the  large  number  of  small  urban 
co-operative  banks.10  UCBs  need  to  capitalise  on  their  advantage  and  reap  the  business 
opportunity.  In  semi-urban  and  rural  areas,  there  are  a  number  of  unbanked  and  under-
banked  districts  inhabited  by  people  like  artisans,  migrant  labour,  small  businessmen  and 
retailers, etc. These people find it difficult to join the formal financial sector. UCBs can take a 
lead in bringing these people into the ambit of banking. 
44. UCBs should re-design their business model in this regard and integrate their financial 
inclusion  plan  into  their  annual  business  plans.  UCBs  should  give  wide  publicity  to  their 
                                                
10  Out of total 1589 banks as on date 1167 are Tier 1 banks, i.e., deposits below ₹100 crore.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  services  to  connect  with  large  population  segments.  It  is  also  important  that  the  service 
provided should be at an affordable cost and here technology will play a big role. 
Corporate governance and management structure 
45. Before I conclude let me touch on the final issue of importance in the next-gen UCBs that 
is corporate governance. The concept of corporate governance is not much different than the 
internationally  accepted  principles  of  co-operation.  One  of  the  cardinal  principles  of 
co-operation as accepted by International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) is “member economic 
participation” indicating contributing equitably to, and controlling democratically, the capital of 
co-operative by the members. 
46.  Many  of  the  problems  faced  by  the  UCBs  are  due  to  governance  issues  and  lack  of 
professionalism. 
47. RBI has also prescribed that at least two directors with suitable banking experience or 
with  relevant  professional  qualification  in  the  fields  of  law,  accountancy  or  finance  are 
co-opted  on  the  Board.  The  Malegam  Committee  has  even  recommended  creation  of  a 
professional Board of Management structure in between the Board of Directors and the CEO 
as  a  pre-condition  for  licensing  of  new  urban  co-operative  banks.  However,  there  are  still 
many governance gaps that need to be addressed for the UCBs of future. There can hardly 
be  a  debate  on  the  desirability  of  a  higher  degree  of  professionalism  in  the  governance 
structure of co-operative institutions. We will like to look forward to having a highly efficient 
and professional management structure in next-gen cooperative banks. 
48.  Another  issue  with  regard  to  governance  is  that  today  it  is  typical  of  our  cooperative 
banks where the creditors have a big say in the governance; depositors have very little stake 
and  they  need  to  be  empowered  appropriately.  This  will  ensure  that  they  have  a  direct 
bearing on how well their moneys are managed. 
Conclusion 
49.  I  am  sure  all  these  issues  are  being  addressed  by  the  distinguished  panelists  and 
participants during this two-day conference which has technical sessions in the form of panel 
discussions on important topics relevant to this theme and other important issues. I sincerely 
thank the Conference organizers for their efforts and wish this Conference all success. 
50. I thank all of you for your patient attention. 
 Annual Report (2012–13) – European Association of Co-operative Banks 
Cosma, S. – The impact of Basel II on Co-operative Banking 
Chakrabarty, K.C. (2011), “Financial Inclusion – A road India needs to travel”, Article 
published in www.livemint.com on Oct 22, 2011 
Malegam Committee Report on Licensing of New UCBs 
Sinha, Anand (2012) – Perspectives on Co-operation: Address at the International 
Conference on Cooperatives – College for Agriculture Banking, Pune 
http://www.icba.org 
http://www.globalcommunities.org 
Sources: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
 Gandhi, M.K. – Trusteeship, compiled by Ravindra Kelkar, Navajivan Mudranalaya, 
Ahmedabad 
Statistical Report – World Council of Credit Unions (2012) – http://www.woccu.org 
Mellore, John W. (2009) – New Challenges and Opportunities in Low and Middle-
Income Countries, Measurements for Tracking Indicators of Co-operative Success 
(METRICS),  United  States  Overseas  Co-operative  Development  Council,  United 
States Agency for International Development 
Reports on Trends and Progress of Banking in India 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
