Charles I Plosser: Monetary policy and a brightening economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at Lyons Companies, the University of Delaware’s Center for 
Economic  Education  and  Entrepreneurship,  and  Alfred  Lerner  College  of  Business  and 
Economics, Newark, DE, 11 February 2014. 
 President  Plosser  presented  similar  remarks  at  the  Simon  Business  School  in  Rochester,  NY,  on  5  February 
2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Highlights 
• 
President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook for 2014 and reports that 
the decision of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to reduce the pace of 
asset purchases was a step in the right direction. 
President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He also expects the 
unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by 
the  end  of  2014.  Inflation  expectations  will  be  relatively  stable,  and  inflation  will 
move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. 
Based  on  the  economic  progress  that  has  been  made  and  his  economic  outlook, 
President  Plosser  believes  it  is  appropriate  to  end  asset  purchases,  and  he 
supported  the  FOMC’s  decision  in  January  to  continue  to  reduce  the  pace  of 
purchases. 
A  case  can  be  made  for  ending  the  current  asset  purchase  program  sooner  to 
reflect  the  improvement  in  the  economic  outlook  and  to  lessen  some  of  the 
communications problems the FOMC will face with its forward guidance. 
   Introduction 
I  am  delighted  to  return  once  again  to  the  University  of  Delaware  to  speak  at  this  annual 
event. This is a great event for the region and I am pleased to see it grow year after year. 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  remarks  this  morning  with  a  bit  of  history.  We  are  observing  the 
100th anniversary of the Federal Reserve and that gives me the opportunity, or the excuse, 
to offer a perspective on this important, but sometimes misunderstood, institution. I should 
note that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve 
System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed the act that created the Federal 
Reserve System, and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks opened their doors on November 16, 
1914. I have often described the Federal Reserve as a uniquely American form of a central 
bank  –  a  decentralized  central  bank.  To  understand  why,  we  need  to  consider  two  earlier 
attempts  at  central  banking  in  the  United  States.  Just  a  few  blocks  from  the  Philadelphia 
Fed’s present building on Independence Mall, you will find the vestiges of both institutions, 
dating back to the early years when Philadelphia was the major financial and political center 
of the country. 
Alexander  Hamilton,  our  first  secretary  of  the  Treasury,  championed  the  First  Bank  of  the 
United States to help our young nation manage its financial affairs. The First Bank received a 
20-year charter from Congress and operated from 1791 to 1811. Although this charter was 
not  renewed,  the  War  of  1812  and  the  ensuing  inflation  and  economic  turmoil  convinced 
Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United States, which operated from 1816 to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
1836. However, Congress could not override the veto of President Andrew Jackson, and the 
Second Bank’s charter also lapsed. Both institutions failed to overcome the public’s mistrust 
of centralized power and special interests. 
Nearly 80 years later, Congress tried again. To balance political, economic, and geographic 
interests, Congress created a Federal Reserve System of 12 regional Reserve Banks with 
oversight provided by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This decentralized central 
bank  was  structured  to  overcome  concerns  that  its  actions  would  be  dominated  either  by 
political interests in Washington or by financial interests on Wall Street. 
These 12 Reserve Banks perform several roles. They distribute currency, act as a bankers’ 
bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the 
bank for the U.S. Treasury. They also play a critical role in supervising many banks and bank 
holding companies across the country. 
Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors selected in a nonpartisan way to 
represent  a  cross-section  of  banking,  commercial,  and  community  interests.  Pat  Harker, 
president  of  the  University  of  Delaware,  serves  on  our  board.  These  directors  fulfill  the 
traditional  governance  role,  but  they  also  provide  valuable  insights  into  economic  and 
financial conditions, which contributes to our assessment of the economy. 
The Reserve Banks seek to stay in touch with Main Street in other ways. Some have Branch 
boards,  and  all  have  advisory  councils.  Reserve  Banks  also  collect  and  analyze  data  and 
conduct  surveys  of  economic  activity.  This  rich  array  of  information  and  the  diverse  views 
from across the country help policymakers paint a mosaic of the economy that is essential as 
we formulate national monetary policy. 
Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal 
Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the system with 
a number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included 
the  seven  Governors  in  Washington,  who  are  appointed  by  the  President  of  the  United 
States and confirmed by the Senate, as well as the president of the New York Fed, and four 
other Reserve Bank presidents who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. 
Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate 
in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy 
options.  The  FOMC  has  eight  regularly  scheduled  meetings  each  year  to  set  monetary 
policy. The first one in 2014 was held just two weeks ago. In normal times, the Committee 
votes  to  adjust  short-term  interest  rates  to  achieve  the  goals  of  monetary  policy  that 
Congress has set for us. 
Congress spelled out the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal 
Reserve Act specifies that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and 
credit  aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to  increase 
production,  so  as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices, 
and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.”  Since  moderate  long-term  interest  rates  generally 
result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have 
interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment 
in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 
Economic conditions 
In  order  to  determine  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  to  promote  these  goals,  the  FOMC 
must monitor and assess economic developments. So, let me turn to an assessment of our 
economy as we enter 2014. 
In a nutshell, my view is that the economy is on firmer footing than it has been for the past 
several years. So let’s look at some of the details of how last year ended and the implications 
for the coming year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Real output grew at a 3.2 percent annual pace in the fourth quarter of last year, following a 
4.1  percent  growth  rate  in  the  third  quarter.  That  means  economic  growth  doubled  in  the 
second  half  of  2013  compared  with  the  first  half.  Consumer  spending  and  business 
investment in equipment ended the year with strong increases. Inventory investment and net 
exports also contributed to growth. On the other side of the ledger, a decline in residential 
investment and a sharp decrease in federal government spending subtracted from growth in 
the fourth quarter of the year. Going forward, I expect that there will be less fiscal drag in 
2014 than we saw in 2013 and that housing will continue its recovery. 
Personal  consumption,  which  accounts  for  more  than  two-thirds  of  GDP,  advanced  at  an 
annual rate of 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter, the highest personal consumption growth rate 
since  fourth  quarter  2010.  Rising  house  prices  and  stock  prices  have  helped  improve 
consumer balance sheets, and steady job growth has added to wage and salary growth, all 
of which have supported spending. 
On  the  job  front,  the  January  employment  report  showed  payroll  gains  of  113,000  jobs, 
following  an  increase  of  75,000  jobs  in  December,  which  was  below  many  analysts’ 
expectations.  Yet,  these  numbers  were  affected  by  the  unseasonably  cold  and  snowy 
weather. Indeed, winter weather has continued to be unusually disruptive, and that is making 
it  difficult  to  assess  underlying  economic  trends.  I  suspect  it  may  be  another  couple  of 
months before we have a better read on the economy – hopefully the weather will turn better 
before that! 
We have to remember that these employment numbers are subject to revisions, and such 
revisions can be significant. For instance, in the latest report the November jobs number was 
revised  up  by  33,000,  from  241,000  to  274,000,  while  the  December  number  was  also 
revised up by 1,000 to 75,000. 
Because of month-to-month volatility and data revisions, I prefer not to read too much into 
the most recent numbers but, instead, look at averages over several months. Here the news 
remains positive. Based on the latest revision, firms added an average of 194,000 jobs per 
month in 2013, somewhat better than the pace in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth 
was enough to drop the unemployment rate 1.2 percentage points last year. In January, it fell 
a  bit  further  to  6.6  percent.  This  is  noticeably  lower  than  the  FOMC  anticipated  in  its 
Summary  of  Economic  Projections  in  September  2012,  when  we  started  the  current  asset 
purchase program. That is, the labor market has performed better than expected, according 
to the unemployment rate measure. 
Should we be sceptical of the unemployment rate as an indicator of labor market conditions? 
Some people are because the decline in the unemployment rate reflects not only increases 
in employment but declines in labor force participation as well. Declines in participation can 
include discouraged workers who have stopped looking for work because it is difficult to find 
a  job.  There  is  concern  in  some  quarters  that  the  unemployment  rate  will  move  back  up 
significantly when these discouraged workers reenter the labor force. Based on research by 
my staff, I am less concerned about this possibility.1  
First, it is important to realize that labor force participation rates can decline for reasons other 
than  a  rise  in  discouraged  workers.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  steadily  declining  participation 
rates  since  2000  that  reflect  demographic  changes,  most  notably  the  aging  of  the  baby 
boomers. This trend is continuing and has long been expected to accelerate. 
Second, detailed analysis of the Current Population Survey’s micro data indicates that about 
three-quarters  of  the  decline  in  participation  since  the  start  of  the  recession  in  December 
2007 can be accounted for by increased retirements and movements into disability. Some of 
                                                
1   Shigeru  Fujita,  “On  the  Causes  of  Declines  in  the  Labor  Force  Participation  Rate,”  Research  Rap  Special 
Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, February 6, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
these  increases  might  have  been  driven  by  the  state  of the  economy.  For  example,  some 
baby  boomers  may  have  moved  their  retirement  decision  forward  after  losing  a  job. 
Nevertheless,  few  of  these  individuals  are  likely  to  reenter  the  labor  force.  So,  while  I  do 
expect some discouraged workers to reenter the labor force as the economy improves, I still 
believe  the  overall  unemployment  rate  remains  a  good  summary  statistic  of  labor  market 
conditions. 
The  business  sector  is  also  entering  the  year  on  a  positive  note.  At  the  national  level, 
manufacturing  activity  accelerated  over  the  final  three  months  of  2013.  The  Philadelphia 
Fed’s  Business  Outlook  Survey  of  regional  manufacturing,  which  is  a  reliable  indicator  of 
national  manufacturing  trends,  also  showed  that  manufacturing  activity  picked  up  in  the 
second  half  of  2013.  In  January,  the  survey’s  general  activity  index  posted  its  eighth 
consecutive positive number. Expectations for manufacturing activity six months ahead also 
remained positive. This gives me some hope that business fixed investment, which has been 
generally  lackluster  during  the  course  of  the  recovery,  will  pick  up  somewhat  this  year. 
Indeed, we saw a nice rebound in equipment spending in the fourth quarter. 
Inflation has been running below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred 
measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption 
expenditures, or PCE inflation. It came in at 1.1 percent last year. It is important to defend 
our 2 percent inflation target from both below and above. But I believe  inflation is likely to 
move up. Economic growth is firming, and some of the factors that have held inflation down, 
such as the one-time cut in payments to Medicare providers, are likely to abate over time. 
An  additional  and  important  determinant  of  actual  inflation  is  consumer  and  business 
expectations  of  inflation.  I  am  encouraged  that  inflation  expectations  remain  near  their 
longer-term  averages  and  consistent  with  our  2  percent  target.  Thus,  I  anticipate,  as  the 
FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target 
over time. Indeed, given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and 
continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer 
term. 
Although growth in the first quarter is likely to be somewhat slower than the rapid pace we 
saw in the second half of last year, overall, I anticipate economic growth of around 3 percent 
this year, a pace that is slightly above trend. Everyone would like to see robust growth of 5 to 
6  percent,  but  I  don’t  see  that  happening.  Nevertheless,  I  do  see  steady  progress  and  an 
improving  economy.  This  growth  is  sufficient  to  result  in  a  continued  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate, which should reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. 
Of  course,  with  any  forecast,  there  are  risks.  The  current  volatility  in  emerging  market 
currencies could pose a risk if it were to spill over more broadly into other financial markets. 
But  at  this  point,  I  do  not  consider  it  a  significant  risk  to  the  U.S.  economy.  While  there 
continues to be some downside risks, for the first time in a few years, I see a potential for 
some  upside  risks  to  the  economic  outlook.  We  need  to  consider  this  possibility  as  we 
calibrate monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  extraordinary  policy  actions  to  support  the  economic 
recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate – the federal funds rate – to essentially zero, 
where it has been for more than five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the 
Fed  has  attempted  to  provide  additional  accommodation  through  large-scale  asset 
purchases. We are now in our third round of this quantitative easing, or, as it is commonly 
called, QE3. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity 
of the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet. 
The  Fed  is  also  using  forward  guidance  as  a  policy  tool,  which  is  intended  to  inform  the 
public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In this dimension, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
FOMC has indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the time that 
the  unemployment  rate  falls  below  the  6.5  percent  threshold.  The  FOMC  had  previously 
indicated  this  was  the  earliest  point  at  which  it  would  consider  raising  interest  rates, 
especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent target. On 
asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook 
for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. 
Yet,  with  the  economy  having  improved  substantially  over  the  last  year  and  the  outlook 
brightening, the time has come for the FOMC to slow the pace at which it is adding monetary 
accommodation, which is to say, ease our foot off the accelerator.2 My personal view is that 
the  process  should  have  started  sooner  and  proceeded  more  expeditiously.  Nevertheless, 
the FOMC did decide in December to take a very modest step by reducing asset purchases 
from  $85  billion  to  $75  billion  per  month,  and  then  reduced  this  by  another  $10  billion  to 
$65 billion a month in January. 
The FOMC indicated that if incoming information broadly supports the expectation of ongoing 
improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  and  inflation  moving  back  toward  its  longer-run 
objective, then we’ll likely reduce the pace of purchases further in measured steps at future 
meetings. Former Chairman Ben Bernanke indicated in his December press conference that 
if  we  are  making  progress  in  terms  of  inflation and  continued  job  gains,  then  the  program 
would be concluded late in 2014. 
Notice that even though we are reducing the pace at which we are purchasing longer-term 
assets,  we  are  still  adding  monetary  policy  accommodation.  So,  the  foot  is  still  on  the 
accelerator.  My  preference  would  be  that  we  conclude  the  purchases  sooner  rather  than 
later. 
I believe a good case can be made for speeding up the pace of our taper if the economic 
outlook plays out as I expect. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate fell 1.2 percentage 
points last year, and again in January to 6.6 percent. This is a much sharper decline than 
anticipated  when  we  started  the  purchase  program  in  September  2012.  We  are  now  only 
one-tenth of a point from the 6.5 percent threshold in our forward guidance for interest rates. 
The FOMC has indicated that it doesn’t anticipate raising rates when the economy crosses 
that threshold. However, I do believe that we have a communications challenge. We have 
not described how policy will be conducted after the unemployment rate passes 6.5 percent. 
Last summer, it was thought that we would stop asset purchases by the time unemployment 
reached 7 percent. Well, that didn’t happen. What is the argument for continuing to increase 
monetary  policy  accommodation  when  labor  market  conditions  are  improving  more quickly 
than  anticipated  and  inflation  has  stabilized  and  is  projected  to  move  back  to  goal?  The 
longer we continue purchases in such an environment, the more likely we will fall behind the 
curve  in  reducing  the  extraordinary  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation.  With  the 
economy awash in reserves, the costs of such a misfire could be considerably higher than 
usual, fomenting higher inflation and perhaps financial instability. 
My preference was, and remains, to scale back our purchase program at a faster pace to 
reflect the strengthening economy. Given the falling unemployment rate, our communications 
should  be  focused  on  how  economic  conditions  will  determine  the  interest  rate  path. 
Continuing to buy assets is neither helpful nor essential. 
                                                
2   For  more  on  the  subject,  see  Charles  I.  Plosser,  “The  Outlook  and  the  Hazards  of  Accelerationist  Policy,” 
remarks before  The  University  of  Delaware  Center  for  Economic  Education  and  Entrepreneurship,  Newark, 
DE, February 14, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
from 
increasing 
Conclusion 
In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are 
likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to 
improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue its decline, reaching 6.2 percent 
by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that 
inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. 
On  monetary  policy,  we  must  back  away 
the  degree  of  policy 
accommodation in a manner commensurate with an improving economy. Reducing the pace 
of asset purchases to $65 billion a month is moving in the right direction, but that may prove 
to  be  insufficient  if the economy  continues to  play  out  according  to  the  FOMC  forecasts. I 
believe the economy has met the criteria for ending the asset purchases as there has been 
significant improvement in labor market conditions. I also believe that further increases in the 
balance  sheet  are  unlikely  to  provide  appreciable  benefits  for  the  recovery  and  may  have 
unintended  consequences.  A  case  can  be  made  for  ending  the  current  asset  purchase 
program sooner to reflect the improvement in the economic outlook and to lessen some of 
the communications problems we will face with our forward guidance. 
Even  after  the  asset  purchase  program  has  ended,  monetary  policy  will  still  be  highly 
accommodative.  As  the  expansion  gains  traction,  the  challenge  will  be  to  reduce 
accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to 
our  target,  that  the  economy  continues  to  grow,  and  that  we  avoid  sowing  the  seeds  of 
another financial crisis. This means the Fed still has considerable work to do. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
