  R Gandhi: Real estate and housing – a sensitive sector or Samvriddhi 
sector? 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “NAREDCO 
CONCLAVE – Banking & Investment Reforms: Housing for all by 2022”, Mumbai, 20 August 
2014. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Arnab Roy and Shri Lalit Kumar is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  Shri  Navin  Raheja,  Chairman,  National  Real  Estate  Development  Council,  Shri  Sunil 
Mantri, President, NAREDCO, members of NAREDCO, Ladies and Gentlemen, a warm good 
evening to all of you. I am very happy to be addressing you all at this valedictory session of 
the NAREDCO Conclave on Banking & Investment Reforms. 
Real estate and our economy 
2. The term “real estate” is defined1 as land, including the air above it, the ground below it, 
and  any  buildings  or  structures  on  it.  It  is  also  referred  to  as  realty.  It  covers  residential 
housing, commercial offices, trading spaces such as theatres, hotels and restaurants, retail 
outlets, industrial buildings such as factories and government buildings. Real estate involves 
the purchase, sale, and development of land, residential and non-residential buildings. The 
real estate sector is a major employment driver, being the second largest employer next only 
to agriculture. This is because of the chain of backward and forward linkages that the sector 
has  with  the  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  especially  with  the  housing  and  construction 
sector.  About  250  ancillary  industries  such  as  cement,  steel,  brick,  timber  and  building 
materials are dependent on the real estate industry. While it is difficult to estimate the exact 
contribution  of  the  real  estate  sector  to  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  as  it  appears  in  a 
disaggregated  and  dispersed  form  in  the  National  Accounts  Statistics,  in  view  of  what  is 
stated  above,  lot  of  importance  has  been  placed  on  the  development  of real  estate  in  the 
country by the Government. 
Finance to real estate 
3.  Real  estate  and  Housing  sectors  are  unique  in  one  respect.  It  is  in  these  sectors  the 
financing thereof is contributed by every possible source – be in the central government, the 
state  governments,  banks,  NBFCs,  HFCs,  MFIs,  private  capital  –  formal  or  informal,  or 
individuals – has a hand in it; still it is insufficient, given the massive magnitude of the needs 
for housing and real estate sectors in the country. 
4. The Government of India has taken several important policy decisions over the years in 
the areas of affordable and low income housing. It has played an important role in ensuring 
that the affordability component merges well with the overall sectoral strategy. Two factors 
that have clearly emerged as key drivers in the Indian housing market are: (1) a wider group 
of stakeholders and a multiplicity of institutions, and (2) enhanced confidence in the housing 
finance industry of all stakeholders. 
5.  The  National  Housing  and  Habitat  Policy  2007  lays  emphasis  on  development  of 
affordable housing and elimination of acute housing shortage among the poor. Accelerated 
supply  of  serviced  land,  expansion  of  housing  finance  market  and  facilitating  the  private 
sector  participation  in  the  sectoral  growth  are  also  emphasized  in  the  Policy.  With  the 
establishment of individual home loan financing through commercial banks & housing finance 
                                                
1  Tenth Five year Plan document of the Planning Commission 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  companies, access to home loan finance has expanded considerably.  However, access to 
finance  for  the  very  poor  and  those  working  in  informal  sector,  to  fulfil  their  affordable 
housing needs, still needs to go a long way. 
6.  Recognising  the  importance  of  housing  and  real  estate  sectors,  the  Union  Budget  for 
2014–15 included several announcements such as – 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
₹ 8000 crores allocated to the Rural Housing Fund run by NHB. 
₹ 7,060 crores allocated for development of 100 new smart cities in the country. 
Relaxation of FDI norms in the real estate sector. 
₹ 4,000 crores allocated for low-cost housing and ₹ 50,000 crores for urban housing. 
Slum development to be treated as Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activity. 
Real estate investment trusts (REITs) introduced. SEBI has since issued guidelines 
in this regard. 
Increase in deduction limit on interest paid on home loans. 
• 
7. State Governments have also played an important role in promoting affordable housing for 
the  lower  segments  of  the  population.  Many  of  the  State  Governments  have  initiated 
programmes  aimed  at  eradication  of  slums  and  provision  of  formal  housing  to  the  lower 
income segments. These programmes, which are at various stages of execution, have given 
to the people, hopes for a better life and hopes for a brighter tomorrow. Other policymakers 
such as the Reserve Bank of India and the National Housing Bank are also playing their part 
in promoting growth through housing. It is heartening to note that the housing finance sector, 
which  was  in  its  infancy  just  two  decades  back,  is  now  a  thriving  and  vibrant  part  of  the 
overall  financial  sector,  is  well  integrated  with  the  other  segments  of  the  economy  and  is 
equipped to take on the challenge of extending access to formal housing finance system to 
the less privileged segments of the society. 
Housing finance 
8. The housing finance market witnessed significant expansion in late 1990s and early 2000s 
with the entry of scheduled commercial banks in a big way. The housing loan portfolio of both 
SCBs and HFCs has grown significantly over the years due to supportive policies initiated by 
Government  of  India  and  RBI. On the  one  hand, fiscal  concessions  were  provided  by  GoI 
(under sections 80 C and 24 of I.T.Act) while on the other hand, housing loans upto ₹ 25 lakh 
given  by  SCBs  were  brought  under  Priority  Sector  Lending.  NPAs  being  very  low  and 
supported  by  SARFAESI  Act,  has  prompted  the  financial  institutions  to  make  available 
housing loans at competitively affordable and comparatively  lower rates. Besides, GoI has 
also implemented Interest Subvention Schemes like 1% Interest Subsidy Scheme, Interest 
Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) and Rajiv AwasYojana (RAY), etc., in 
order  to  make  housing  loans  affordable  for  the  targeted  segments.  These  measures  have 
resulted  in  improving  the  demand  for  housing  loans.  Recently,  RBI  has  carved  out 
Residential  Project  loans  out  of  the  purview  of  Commercial  Real  Estate  arena  to  boost 
financing  of  project  loans  for  increasing  the  supply  of  housing  stock.  The  housing  loan 
portfolio of financial institutions (SCBs and HFCs) has increased from ₹ 4.60 lakh crores in 
2010 to ₹ 8.90 lakh crores in 2014 thereby registering CAGR of about 18% over 2010–2014. 
9. However, housing loans as a percentage of GDP in our country has remained quite low at 
around  9  per  cent  which  is  significantly  lower  than  the  levels  achieved  in  most  of  the 
developed countries. Further, the housing shortage in the urban areas was estimated, as of 
2012,  at  18.78  million  units  while  in  rural  areas  it  is  estimated  to  be  more  than  40  million 
units.  The  situation  is  alarming  with  95  per  cent  of  the  housing  shortage  pertaining  to  the 
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG) categories which do not 
seem to be getting translated into economic demand due to lower affordability by the poor. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  ever  increasing  demand  for  housing  due  to  increased  migration  from  rural  to  urban 
areas  has  continuously  led  to  development  of  slums  and  unhygienic  living  conditions 
dragging down the productivity of the city and its potential contribution to economic growth. 
This definitely indicates the extent of opportunity for deeper penetration of this market. 
10. The housing market in India is influenced by both demand and supply side constraints. 
The growing middle class, income levels of the people, cyclical conditions, urbanization are 
demand drivers which have impacted the housing sector. The major supply side constraints 
include  the  lack  of  availability  of  land,  finance  at  reasonable  rate,  infrastructure,  legal  and 
regulatory framework and the limitations of the private and other stakeholders to provide low 
income housing. 
11. Banks and financial institutions consider lending to the poor a risky business. To renew 
the interest of the lending agencies in the financial sector towards extending housing finance 
to this segment of the population the Government of India has been taking a number of steps 
like  the  establishment  of  the  Credit  Risk  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Low  Income  Housing, 
Rajiv  Rin  Yojana,  etc.  The  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister  in  his  budget  of  2014–15  has  given 
impetus to the mission of “Housing For All” by allocating a sum of ₹ 8000 crore towards the 
Rural  Housing  Fund,  ₹ 4000  crore  towards  affordable  housing  to  the  urban  poor/EWS/LIG 
segment. He has also extended additional tax incentive on home loans under Sections 80 C 
and 24 of I.T.Act, to encourage people, especially the young, to own houses amongst others. 
Regulatory approach 
12. Despite the significance of the real estate and the housing sectors for the economy as a 
whole, their contribution to and further potentials for economic growth, and their critical role in 
poverty alleviation, these sectors have been globally considered by regulators as volatile and 
prone  to  formation  of  asset  bubbles,  requiring  special  regulatory  attention  to  protect  the 
interest  of  lenders  and  even  the  borrowers.  Many  a  financial  crisis  in  the  world  has  been 
caused by the excesses in these sectors. Most recent global economic and financial crisis of 
2008–09  has  also  been  caused  by  these  excesses.  Therefore  the  regulatory  approach  to 
these sectors has been highly sensitive. 
13. Reserve Bank’s regulations have also been directed towards containing excessive/rapid 
flow  of  credit  towards  the  sector,  prescribing  prudential  norms  for  banks  and  NBFCs  for 
lending towards real estate activities. However, India needs special attention and support for 
housing.  Therefore,  the  policy  approach  has  been  so  fine-tuned  facilitating  affordable 
housing  for  weaker  sections  and  growth  of  the  residential  real  estate  sector.  National 
Housing Bank’s regulations for the Housing Finance Companies also follow similar approach. 
Banks and CRE & housing 
14.  CRE  and  Housing  finance  as  a  financial  service  is  relatively  young  in  India  and  has 
witnessed  massive  growth  particularly  over  the  last  twenty  years.  Banks  became  major 
players  in  the  Indian  mortgage  market  only  from  the  late  1990’  and  are  now  one  of  the 
largest  mobilizers  of  households’  savings  and  housing  finance.  The  Indian  banking  sector 
has an expansive reach and is well geared to serve all segments of the society, including the 
underprivileged. 
15.  Our  circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.42/08.12.015/2009–10  dated  September  9,  2009  on 
“Guidelines  on  Classification  of  Exposures  as  Commercial  Real  Estate  (CRE)  Exposures” 
prescribes that for an exposure to be classified as Income Producing Real Estate (IPRE) / 
Commercial Real Estate (CRE), the essential feature would be that the funding will result in 
the  creation  /  acquisition  of  real  estate  (such  as,  office  buildings  to  let,  retail  space, multi-
family residential buildings, industrial or warehouse space, and hotels) where the prospects 
for repayment would depend primarily on the cash flows generated by the asset. Additionally, 
the  prospect  of  recovery  in  the  event  of  default  would  also  depend  primarily  on  the  cash 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  flows generated from such funded asset which is taken as security, as would generally be 
the case. The primary source of cash flow (i.e. more than 50% of cash flows) for repayment 
would generally be lease or rental payments or the sale of the assets as also for recovery in 
the event of default where such asset is taken as security. 
16. This circular also states that it is possible for an exposure to get classified simultaneously 
into  more 
than  one  category,  as  different  classifications  are  driven  by  different 
considerations.  In  such  cases,  the  exposure  would  be  reckoned  for  regulatory  /  prudential 
exposure limit, if any, fixed by RBI or by the bank itself, for all the categories to which the 
exposure is assigned. For the purpose of capital adequacy, the largest of the risk weights 
applicable among all the categories would be applicable for the exposure. The rationale for 
such  an  approach  is  that,  while  at  times  certain  classifications  /  categorizations  could  be 
driven  by  socio-economic  considerations  and  may  be  aimed  at  encouraging  flow  of  credit 
towards  certain  activities,  these  exposures  should  be  subjected  to  appropriate  risk 
management  /  prudential  /  capital  adequacy  norms  so  as  to  address  the  risk  inherent  in 
them.  Similarly,  if  an  exposure  has  sensitivity  to  more  than  one  risk  factor  it  should  be 
subjected to the risk management framework applicable to all the relevant risk factors. 
17. In view of the volatility in prices of commercial real estate (CRE), higher risk weight and 
provisioning  norms  have  been  prescribed  by  us  for  the  CRE  Sector.  We  have  prescribed 
differential  Loan  to  Value  (LTV)  Ratio,  risk  weights  and  provisioning  for  individual  housing 
loans in order to differentiate the risks involved in low value and high value home loans. In 
order to support the residential housing sector, we have carved out (vide circular dated June 
21,  2013)  a  separate  sub-sector  out  of  CRE  viz.  CRE-RH  (Commercial  Real  Estate  – 
Residential Housing). The circular defines CRE-RH as below: 
CRE-RH  would  consist of  loans to  builders  /  developers  for residential housing 
projects  (except  for  captive  consumption)  under  CRE  segment.  Such  projects 
should  ordinarily  not  include  non-residential  commercial  real  estate.  However, 
integrated housing projects comprising of some commercial space (e.g. shopping 
complex,  school,  etc.)  can  also  be  classified  under  CRE-RH,  provided  that  the 
commercial area in the residential housing project does not exceed 10% of the 
total Floor Space Index (FSI) of the project. In case the FSI of the commercial 
area  in  the  predominantly  residential  housing  complex  exceeds  the  ceiling  of 
10%, the project loans should be classified as CRE and not CRE-RH. 
18.  Carving  out  of  CRE-RH  was  done  with  the  intention  of  providing  regulatory  support  to 
lending towards residential housing projects by allowing lower provisioning and risk-weights. 
Apart  from  this,  different  slabs  of  LTV  ratios,  risk  weights  and  provisioning  have  been 
prescribed  to  support  housing  loans  for  lower  income  groups  while  stressing  the  need  for 
higher stake of home buyers in high cost houses. 
19. The LTV ratio – Risk weight matrix for housing loans as also CRE and standard assets 
provisioning for both Housing as also CREs are tabulated below:  
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  20. The restructured housing loans should be risk weighted with an additional risk weight of 
25%.  In  view  of  the  higher  risk  associated  with  housing  loans  at  teaser  rates  i.e.  at 
comparatively  lower  rates  of  interest  in  the  first  few  years,  after  which  rates  are  reset  at 
higher  rates,  we  have  prescribed  higher  standard  asset  provisioning  on  such  loans  at 
2.00 per  cent  from  December  2010.  The  provisioning  on  these  assets  would  revert  to 
0.40 per cent after 1 year from the date on which the rates are reset at higher rates if the 
accounts remain “standard”. 
21. We have also advised banks vide circular dated February 3, 2012 that they should not 
include stamp duty, registration and other documentation charges in the cost of the housing 
property they finance so that the effectiveness of LTV norms is not diluted. These charges 
overstate  the realisable  value  of  the  property  and  consequently  the  margin  stipulated gets 
diluted. 
22.  In  order  to  ensure  adequate  credit  flow  to  infrastructure  sector  as  also  towards  the 
affordable  housing  needs  of  the  country,  by  encouraging  banks  to  optimally  utilize  the 
long-term  financing  avenues  already  available  to  them  to  finance  their  lending  to  these 
sectors,  the  extant  prudential  guidelines  on  this  issue  have  been  reviewed  with  a  view  to 
minimize certain regulatory pre-emptions. RBI vide its circular dated July 15, 2014 allowed 
banks to issue long-term bonds with a minimum maturity of seven years to raise resources 
for lending to (i) long term projects in infrastructure sub-sectors, and (ii) affordable housing. 
The circular has defined lending to affordable housing as housing loans eligible under priority 
sector lending by the RBI and also housing loans to individuals upto ₹ 50 lakhs for houses of 
values  upto  ₹ 65  lakhs  located  in  the  six  metropolitan  centres  viz.  Mumbai,  New  Delhi, 
Chennai, Kolkata, Bengaluru and Hyderabad and ₹ 40 lakhs for houses of values upto ₹ 50 
lakhs  in  other  centres  for  purchase/construction  of  dwelling  unit  per  family.  RBI  will 
periodically review the definition of affordable housing on account of inflation. 
NBFCs and real estate 
NBFCs primarily into housing finance – Housing Finance Companies (HFC): 
23. NBFCs that are primarily into housing finance are regulated by National Housing Bank. 
At  present,  around  60  Housing  Finance  Companies  are  registered  with  NHB,  of  which 
around 18 are deposit taking ones. As per the NHB report on trend and progress of housing 
in  India  2013,  the  share  of  HFCs  in  the  total  housing  loan  portfolio  of  the  country  was 
46 per cent  for  2012–13.  Total  outstanding  housing  loans  of  HFCs  as  on  March  31,  2013 
stood at ₹ 2,90,427 crores. 
NBFCs other than HFCs: 
24. Regulation on lending to / investment in real estate by NBFCs registered with Reserve 
Bank cover the following: 
i. 
Deposit taking NBFCs are not permitted to invest in land or building, except for its 
own use, beyond an amount exceeding ten per cent of its owned fund. 
Since September 2011, deposit taking and non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of 
₹ 100 crores and above are required to furnish data on their exposure to real estate. 
While  granting  finance  to  housing  /  development  projects,  NBFCs  also  should 
stipulate as a part of the terms and conditions that the builder / developer / owner / 
company  would  disclose  in  the  Pamphlets  /  Brochures  /  advertisements,  etc.,  the 
name(s) of the entity to which the property is mortgaged and that they would provide 
No Objection Certificate (NOC) / permission of the mortgagee entity for sale of flats / 
property, if required. 
ii. 
iii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
 The  risk  weight  currently  applicable  to  real  estate  exposures  is  100  per  cent.  For 
loans  guaranteed  by  Credit  Risk  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Low  Income  Housing 
(CRGFTLIH), NBFC-MFIs may assign zero risk weight for the guaranteed portion. 
Every  non-deposit  taking  NBFC  with  asset  size  of  ₹ 100  crores  and  above  shall 
disclose its exposure to real estate, both direct and indirect. 
Mere extension of date of commencement of commercial operation (DCCO) in the 
case of CRE projects would not be considered as restructuring, if the revised DCCO 
falls within the period of one year from the original DCCO and there is no change in 
other terms and conditions. 
Further, the general instructions with regard to prudential norms including exposure 
norms are also applicable to NBFCs’ exposure to real estate. 
NBFCs – Real estate exposure 
25.  As  on  March  31,  2014,  the  real  estate  exposure  of  NBFCs  registered  with  the  Bank  at 
around 4.1 per cent of the total assets of the sector is not significant as may be observed from 
the table below. Further, only few NBFCs are reported to have relatively high exposure to real 
estate. The number of such NBFCs having exposure of more than 40 per cent of their assets 
was around 14. As compared to previous years, the exposure shows a rising trend, though.  
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Mortgage Guarantee Companies (MGC) 
26. A mention may also be made here  with regard to mortgage guarantee companies. An 
MGC is a company which primarily transacts the business of providing mortgage guarantee. 
Reserve  Bank  regulates  them  towards  since  2008.  The  concept  of  MGC  was  mooted,  as 
announced  in  the  Union  Budget  Speech  2007–2008, to give  greater comfort  to  banks  and 
housing  finance  companies  that  lend  against  mortgages.  So  far  only  one  MGC  has  been 
registered  with  the  Bank.  Certain  bottlenecks  identified  as  reasons  for  the  concept  not 
picking up are being addressed by the Reserve Bank. 
National housing bank’s refinance initiatives 
27. NHB extends refinance assistance to primary lending institutions (PLIs) in respect of their 
lending for housing. There are different schemes for catering to the requirements of different 
segments  such  as  rural  housing,  urban  low  income  housing,  housing  for  women,  energy 
efficient  housing,  etc.  Since  inception,  the  Bank  has  provided  cumulative  refinance 
assistance to the tune of ₹ 1.20 lakh crores under its various schemes. 
Rural Housing Fund 
28. Central Government has set up a Rural Housing Fund (RHF) to enable primary lending 
institutions to access funds for extending housing finance to targeted groups in rural areas at 
competitive  rates.  The  corpus  of  the  Fund  is  contributed  by  those  Scheduled  Commercial 
Banks  (SCBs)  which  have  been  unable  to  fulfil  their  priority  sector  targets  during  the 
preceding  year.  The  quantum  of  funds  to  be  contributed  by  each  SCB  and  the  applicable 
interest rate are determined by the Reserve Bank of India depending upon the priority sector 
shortfall of the respective SCB. The funds are made available to NHB for a period of 7 years. 
The corpus of the Fund for 2008–09 was ₹ 2000 crore, which was enhanced by ₹ 2000 crore 
during 2009–10, ₹ 2000 crore for 2010–11, ₹ 3000 crore for 2011–12, ₹ 4000 for 2012–13 
and by a further amount of ₹ 6000 crore for 2013–14. A total amount of ₹ 12,778 crore was 
received by the Bank under the Fund in the first five years, and was deployed in full towards 
refinance  for  rural  housing  for  the  target  groups.  For  the  year  2013–14,  an  allocation  of 
₹ 6000  crore  was  made,  out  of  which  an  amount  of  ₹ 3527  crore  has  been  deployed  for 
refinance till  date. The Union  Budget for  2014–15  has  made  an  allocation  of  ₹ 8000  crore 
towards RHF. 
Urban Housing Fund 
29. The Urban Housing Fund (UHF) was announced in the Union Budget for 2013–14 with 
an initial outlay of ₹ 2000 crore to provide refinance assistance with a view to mitigating the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  housing  shortage  in  urban  areas. The  UHF  refinance  scheme  covers  urban  housing  loans 
upto ₹ 10 lakhs (where the annual household income of borrower is upto ₹ 4 lakhs and the 
unit cost is ₹ 16 lakhs or unit size is upto 60 m2). Out of an allocation of ₹ 2000 crore under 
UHF, an amount of ₹ 890 crore has been deployed till date. 
Special refinance scheme for urban Low Income Housing (LIH Scheme) 
30.  The  LIH  scheme  has  been  designed  with  the  objective  of  augmenting  the  flow  of 
institutional housing finance to the low and moderate income segments in urban areas. The 
scheme provides refinance at fixed concessional rates for long tenures in respect of housing 
loans extended to target beneficiaries in urban areas. 
What more 
31. There are several more things to ensure that the real estate and housing sectors grow at 
the desired pace and direction. First, to be effective and efficient, housing finance systems 
need  to  be  supported  by  explicit  legal  institutions  and  instruments.  These  are  not  only 
necessary  to  acquire  and  transfer  ownership  rights  in  real  estate,  but  also  represent  the 
foundation  for  the  orderly  functioning  of  mortgage  lending.  Legal  arrangements  must  also 
take into account the additional layers of complexity raised by the mobilization of collateral in 
the secondary mortgage market. 
32.  Secondly,  there  is  also  a  felt  need  for  financial  innovation  with  respect  to  the  loan 
products. One such product could be savings induced home loan or a home loan deposit. 
The willing consumers may be induced to generate a savings balance by way of monthly or 
periodic deposits. This will enable creation of a track record for repayment of a future home 
loan product. Once the customer reaches a threshold balance, the financial institutions can 
consider sanctioning of a housing loan. The balance in the account could act as collateral or 
the  margin.  The  amount  deposited  every  month  would  act  as  the  base  to  assess  the 
repayment  capacity  of  the  customer  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  monthly  repayment 
instalments. 
33. Thirdly, the credit risks originating in the housing sector, particularly low ticket housing 
segment, should also be internalized through proper insurance schemes for banks and other 
lenders.  The  various  stakeholders  should  aim  at  timely  completion  of  projects,  delivery  of 
houses/flats  to  target  segments  without  cost  escalations  and  with  valid  titles  and  all 
necessary clearances. 
34. Fourthly, we need to develop an elaborate system for collecting data on real estate and 
housing activity. Statistics on housing starts, house sales – new and old, housing prices, etc., 
so that our policy decisions can be fully informed and guided by research. 
Conclusion 
35. To conclude, we recognise that housing is integrally related to a host of outcomes for the 
individuals,  communities  and  society  more  broadly  beyond  those  that  are  financial  or 
material. Quality housing can facilitate psychological and social outcomes such as security 
and a sense of control over one’s life. Although commendable progress has been made over 
the  years  in  the  real  estate  and  housing  sectors,  there  is  room  for  a  great  deal  more. 
Availability  of  adequate  housing  units  in  the  affordable  segment  and  improved  home 
ownership  coupled  with  access  to  formal  housing  finance  for  the  lower  income  segments, 
continues to be a policy priority for contributing significantly to all round economic growth. 
36.  In  short,  a  comprehensive  and  holistic  approach  involving  easy  availability  of  land, 
accessible financing, supportive legal framework and innovative technology continues to be 
the fulcrum required for realising the full potentials of these sectors. 
37. Thanking everyone for your patient attention.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
