Charles I Plosser: Systematic policy and forward guidance 
Remarks  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc., Down 
Town Association, New York, 25 March 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President  Plosser  highlights  the  relationship  between  systematic  monetary  policy 
and forward guidance. His goal is to help underscore how a systematic approach to 
monetary  policy  can  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  both  normal 
times  and  in  more  unusual  or  extreme  circumstances,  such  as  when  policy  is 
constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. 
President Plosser’s preference for dealing with forward guidance is for the FOMC to 
articulate  a  reaction  function  as  best  it  can.  This  entails  describing  a  systematic 
approach 
to  policymaking,  where  policy  decisions  are  based  on  available 
information in a consistent and predictable way. 
President  Plosser  believes  the  most  recent  FOMC  statement  took  a  step  in  this 
direction when it moved to a qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that the 
Committee  will  be  assessing  progress  –  both  realized  and  expected  –  toward  its 
policy objectives. 
Introduction 
I want to thank William Kanto and the Money Marketeers for inviting me to speak again this 
evening. Your series of guest speakers over the years has been quite illustrious, and it has 
included  many  Federal  Reserve  governors  and  presidents,  not  to  mention  distinguished 
economists and a wide array of others. So, before I share some thoughts on monetary policy 
with you tonight, I will begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not 
necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  or  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC).  Of  course,  that  disclaimer  is  a  two-way  street,  and  you 
should not necessarily associate the views of my colleagues with my views. 
I believe that this diversity of views among FOMC participants does more than assure variety 
among your guest speakers. It is one of the great strengths of our decentralized central bank. 
Open  dialogue  and  diversity  of  views  leads  to  better  policy  decisions  and  is  the  primary 
means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated into our monetary policy framework. 
Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of thoughtful progress. As I noted in 2009 when I 
last  spoke  to  you,  the  famous  American  journalist Walter  Lippmann  once  said,  “Where  all 
men think alike, no one thinks very much.” 
Tonight I would like to focus on a particular aspect of current monetary policy that has been a 
source of much discussion and debate – forward guidance – that is, the practice of providing 
information on the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. Forward guidance has 
taken  on  greater  significance  since  the  FOMC  lowered  the  target  federal  funds  rate  to 
essentially  zero  more  than  five  years  ago.  Facing  this  zero  lower  bound  constraint  on  its 
primary policy instrument, the FOMC has been attempting to implement monetary policy, in 
part, by influencing expectations of future policy. The logic for this approach derives from the 
important role expectations play in shaping economic outcomes. If monetary policy can affect 
those expectations in specific ways, it can influence current economic conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The approach I want to take in my discussion is to highlight the relationship between such 
forward guidance and systematic monetary policy. By systematic, I mean setting policy in a 
rule-like  or  largely  predictable  manner  in  response  to  changes  in  economic  conditions. 
Forward  guidance  and  systematic  monetary  policy  are  closely  related.  Understanding  this 
relationship can provide insights into effective monetary policy in both normal times and in 
more  unusual  or  extreme  circumstances,  such  as  when  policy  is  constrained  by  the  zero 
lower bound on nominal interest rates. 
So, I will begin with a brief review of the benefits of systematic policy. I will highlight why I 
think most academic economists have concluded that conducting monetary policy in a rule-
like manner is preferable to regimes that are more discretionary. 
Systematic policy 
For someone my age, it doesn’t seem all that long ago when it was taken for granted that 
central banking was supposed to be mysterious and secretive – the less said about monetary 
policy the better. Indeed, it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to publicly announce the 
policy changes made at an FOMC meeting. Up until then, the markets were left to infer the 
policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market.1  
But  times  have  most  definitely  changed.  Transparency  has  replaced  secrecy,  and  open 
communications  have  replaced  mystery. While  there  are  those  who  long  for  those  thrilling 
days of yesteryear when central bankers said little and communicated even less, I don’t think 
we can turn back the clock – nor should we. 
Economic science has come a long way in the past 30 years, and one of the most important 
developments  has  been  the  recognition  of  the  important  role  that  expectations  play  in 
understanding  economic  outcomes.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  financial  markets,  where 
investment  decisions  and  the  valuation  of  securities  depend  on  assessments  of  future 
economic  outcomes.  But  this  is  also  true  for  individuals  buying  homes  and  businesses 
making capital investments. 
When  businesses  and  households  have  a  better  understanding  of  how  monetary  policy  is 
likely  to  evolve,  they  can  make  more  informed  spending  and  financial  decisions.  If 
policymakers can  reduce  uncertainty  about the course  of monetary  policy,  the  economy  is 
likely  to  perform  more  efficiently.  Thus,  monetary  policy  that  is  more  systematic  and 
predictable  can reduce expectational  errors  and  contribute to  a more  stable  and  efficiently 
functioning economy. This recognition of the important role played by expectations has led 
many academics and policymakers to stress the importance of credibility and commitment to 
well-articulated monetary policy objectives. It has also led to extensive research on monetary 
policy rules that can enhance the predictability of policy. In fact, virtually all of the mainstream 
macroeconomic models are built upon the presumption that monetary policy is conducted in 
a rule-like manner that is well understood by all agents in the economy. 
In  their  Nobel  Prize-winning  work,  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed  Prescott  demonstrated  that  a 
credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic, rule-like manner over time 
leads to better outcomes than discretion.2 In monetary policy, less discretionary behavior and 
a commitment to a more systematic approach have been shown to lead to more economic 
stability – lower and less volatile inflation and less volatile output. 
Yet, the science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the 
optimal rule for setting monetary policy and turn decisions over to a computer. Judgment is 
                                                
1  See the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “Timeline to Transparency.” 
2  Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp 473–91. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
still  required.  Moreover,  optimal  rules,  that  is,  those  that  maximize  economic  welfare,  are 
highly  dependent  on  the  particular  model  from  which  they  are  derived.  For  example,  the 
optimal  rule  for  one  model  can  produce  very  bad  outcomes  in  another  model.  In  addition, 
optimal  rules  can  often  be  quite  complex,  thus  making  them  difficult  to  implement  and  to 
communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. 
However, these limitations to implementing optimal policy rules should not prevent us from 
adopting  a  systematic  approach  to  the  conduct  of  policy.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of 
progress in identifying simple, robust rules that appear to perform well in a variety of models 
and environments. Such robust rules can form a basis for developing more systematic, rule-
like policymaking. This rule-like approach does not mean one can know the future or what 
future  policy  decisions  will  be.  You  often  hear policymakers  speak  of  policy  as  being  data 
dependent,  and  indeed,  it  is.  But  the  data  should  feed  into  a  systematic  decision-making 
process  so  that  policy  will  be  similar  in  similar  environments.  One  way  to  think  about  this 
systematic part of policy is as a reaction function with parameters that are largely stable over 
time. 
One important and desirable characteristic of such a reaction function is that it can be easily 
articulated  to  the  public.  This  greatly  improves  the  transparency  and  predictability  of 
monetary  policy,  which  reduces  surprises.  Everyone  is  more  informed  about  the  course of 
monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing 
economic circumstances. 
The most well-known simple rule is that proposed by John Taylor in 1993.3 The Taylor rule 
calls for setting the nominal fed funds rate based on three factors. The first represents the 
economy’s  long-run  real  interest  rate,  perhaps  the  steady-state  real  interest  rate,  plus  the 
Fed’s target rate of inflation. This is sometimes referred to as the normal, or neutral, nominal 
rate of interest. 
The second factor is a function of the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target or 
goal. If inflation is above the target, the Taylor rule says the funds rate should be higher, and 
if it is below target, the funds rate should be lower. The third element in the Taylor rule calls 
for  an  adjustment  of  the  funds  rate  to  departures  of  real  GDP  from  some  measure  of 
“potential”  GDP.  Simply  put,  when  GDP  is  below  “potential,”  the  funds  rate  should  be 
reduced, and when it is above, it should increase. 
I  will  point  out  that  our  recent  thresholds  did  not  provide  a  reaction  function.  They  simply 
suggested  a range  of  economic  conditions  under  which  we  would  not  act. They  conveyed 
nothing about our actions in other states of the economy. In my view, this  was one of the 
major drawbacks to the approach and the reason changes were needed. 
Over  the  past  20  years,  the  Taylor  rule  has  garnered  a  great  deal  of  attention  and  study. 
Many variations have been proposed and their properties investigated. Almost all the simple 
rules  that  have  been  found  to  be  robust  over  a  range  of  models  have  very  similar 
constructions and can be expressed as variants of Taylor’s original specification. Of course, 
the  Fed  has  never  adopted  a  formal  reaction  function  or  simple  rule  for  setting  monetary 
policy. But the FOMC does look at the implications of various rules for interest rates when it 
makes its policy decisions. 
The fact that the FOMC has not adopted a formal reaction function might reflect the desire 
for discretion on the part of some policymakers. But it also reflects the difficulty in reaching a 
consensus. The Committee is composed of 19 members with varying views about how the 
economy functions, the shocks affecting the economy, and how policy should be set to meet 
the FOMC’s monetary policy goals. Despite not having formally adopted a particular rule, the 
                                                
3  John  B.  Taylor,  “Discretion  Versus  Policy  Rules  in  Practice,”  Carnegie-Rochester  Series  on  Public  Policy, 
North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Fed appeared to behave in a systematic way at various times in the past. Indeed, Taylor’s 
1993  article  noted  that  his  rule  approximated  Federal  Reserve  policy  setting  over  the  
1987–1992 period, save for a deviation during the stock market crash of 1987. 
I believe that despite the challenges, there would be large benefits to the FOMC reaching a 
consensus  on  a  reaction  function  that  could  serve  as  a  useful  guide  to  understanding  its 
behavior.  Those  benefits  would  be  in  the  form  of  increased  transparency  and  in  the 
alignment  of  the  public’s  expectations  with  policymakers’  intentions.  As  I’ve  discussed 
before,  there  are  limitations  to  the  use  of  simple  rules,  and  no  central  bank  can  be 
constrained by one simple rule in all circumstances. Rules are basically intended to work well 
on average, but any central bank looks at many variables in determining policy. There will be 
times when policy must deviate from a reaction function or policy rule. However, simple rules 
do  provide  valuable  benchmarks for  assessing  the  appropriate  stance  of  policy.  They  also 
provide  guidance  about  the  likely  path  of  policy  and  thus  are  intended  to  reduce  volatility. 
However,  this  outcome  cannot  happen  unless  the  central  bank  is  willing  to  publicly 
communicate a reaction function or rule. 
Another benefit of articulating a rule is enhanced accountability. There will inevitably be times 
when  economic  developments  fall  outside  the  scope  of  our  models  and  warrant  unusual 
monetary  policy  action.  Events  such  as  9/11,  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, and the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from the simple 
rule. Having articulated a rule guiding policymaking in normal times, the policymaker will be 
expected to explain the departures from the rule in these unusual circumstances. With the 
rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform us how excessively tight or easy 
policy  might  be  relative  to  normal.  If  the  events  are  temporary,  policymakers  will  have  to 
explain how and when policy is likely to return to normal. 
Thus, I  see several  benefits to the  FOMC  reaching  a consensus  on  a reaction function  or 
policy  rule,  including  aligning  expectations  for  policy  and  enhancing  transparency  and 
accountability of the policymaking process. 
Forward guidance 
One way to think about the policy reaction function is as a form of forward guidance. Indeed, 
it is perhaps the best and most useful form of forward guidance. 
In normal times, forward guidance provides the public  with information about the expected 
path of policy. As I’ve discussed, forward guidance is a form of transparency that reduces 
volatility by reducing policy uncertainty relative to discretionary decision-making. 
However, with the policy rate at or near zero, forward guidance can play a role in increasing 
the degree of accommodation. When the policy rate is constrained by the zero lower bound, 
the  future  policy  rate  becomes  potentially  more  important  than  the  current  policy  rate  in 
influencing current economic conditions through its impact on expectations. In some models, 
when faced with the zero lower bound, it can be desirable to indicate that future policy rates 
will be kept lower for longer than might otherwise be the case.4 Thus, policymakers may want 
to  deliberately  commit  to  deviating  from  what  they  would  otherwise  choose  to  do  under 
normal  conditions,  such  as  following  a  Taylor-like  rule  or  their  normal  reaction function. In 
these models, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-
run nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. 
This  use  of  forward  guidance  asks  more  of  policymakers  than  just  articulating  a  reaction 
function. In a sense, it requires more of a commitment from policymakers; it requires them to 
commit  to  a  future  path  that  will  not  be  time  consistent  if  policymakers  were  only  forward 
                                                
4  Gauti  B.  Eggertsson  and  Michael  Woodford,  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 2003, pp. 139–211. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
looking. Instead, policymakers need to commit to a policy path that is history dependent. As I 
noted,  you  can  think  of  this  as  a  commitment  to  deviate  from  a  prior  reaction  function, 
particularly if that reaction function makes no provision for operating at the zero lower bound. 
If  such  a  commitment  can  be  made  credible,  it  can  yield  better  economic  outcomes.  But 
managing the public’s beliefs about the future policy path is challenging if policymakers must 
convince the public that they will not behave as they have in the past. And I would argue that 
that is the circumstance that the FOMC faces.5  
Managing  expectations  is  even  more  challenging  when  policymakers  have  not  been  clear 
about the reaction function they use in normal times. How can policymakers credibly commit 
to  deviate  from  something  they  have  never  committed  to  in  the  first  place?  How  can 
policymakers convey that they will be implementing policy that is more accommodative than 
normal  when  they  have  not  been  clear  about  what  would  constitute  the  normal  degree  of 
accommodation? 
Managing  the  public’s  expectations  may  be  not  only  difficult  but  also  counterproductive. 
Without  the  public’s  understanding  of  policymaking  in  normal  times,  trying  to  pursue  a 
commitment  to  looser-than-normal  policy  may  send  the  wrong  signal.  For  example,  if  the 
public  hears  that  the  policy  rate  will  be  lower  for  longer,  it  may  interpret  the  message  as 
policymakers  saying  that  they  expect  the  economy  to  be  weaker  for  longer.  If  this  is  the 
interpretation,  then  the  forward  guidance  will  weaken  rather  than  strengthen  current 
spending. 
Where do we go from here? 
My  preference  for  dealing  with  forward  guidance  is  for  the  FOMC  to  articulate  a  reaction 
function as best it can. This entails describing a systematic approach to policymaking where 
policy  decisions  are  based  on  available  information  in  a  consistent  and  predictable  way.  I 
believe the most recent FOMC statement took a step in this direction when we moved to a 
qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that we will be assessing progress  –  both 
realized and expected  –  toward our policy objectives. The idea that policy will change as we 
approach our objectives has the flavor of a reaction function. 
But,  of  course,  there  is  more  work  to  do.  Because  we  do  not  know  the  true  model  of  the 
economy, I would suggest the Committee begin by considering a set of robust policy rules 
designed  to  have  good  results  in  a  variety  of  models  and  across  various  stages  of  the 
business  cycle.  Such  robust  rules  recognize  that  data  are  measured  imprecisely  and  are 
subject to revision. 
These  robust  rules  typically  indicate  that  policy  should  respond  to  changes  in  the  gap 
between  inflation  and  the  inflation  goal,  and  to  changes  in  the  deviation  of  output  from  a 
measure  of  potential  output,  or  to  changes  in  unemployment  from  the  steady-state  or  the 
natural rate of unemployment. Most robust rules suggest that the reaction to the changes in 
the inflation gap be more than one-for-one and should exceed the reaction to changes in the 
output or unemployment gap. The rules also suggest that policy should be somewhat inertial. 
By recognizing the fundamental difficulty in measuring potential output or the natural rate of 
unemployment, I think a good case can be made to consider rules that rely on the growth of 
output or changes in the unemployment rate or employment growth. 
I want to stress that these rules suggest that policy should respond to changes in the output 
or  unemployment  gap  not  because  policy  is  seeking  to  fine-tune  the  real  economy  but 
                                                
5  This would not be the case if the reaction function or rule explicitly described how policy would be conducted 
at the zero lower bound. In that case, new forward guidance would not be required, as the reaction function 
would have already notified the public what to expect. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
because  doing  so  allows  the  economy  to  efficiently  use  resources  given  the  economic 
disturbances that it experiences. 
By considering such robust rules, the FOMC might be able to move toward a consensus on a 
qualitative  description  of  its  reaction  function  as  an  important  first  step.  For  example,  we 
would not have to specify the precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of 
key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key 
variables.  If  policy  were  changed, then  we  would  explain  that  change  in  terms  of  how  the 
variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and 
systematically  use  them  to  describe  our  policy  choices,  the  public  will  form more  accurate 
judgments  about  the  likely  course  of  policy  –  thereby  reducing  uncertainty  and  promoting 
stability. 
The  FOMC  has  kept  the  federal  funds  rate  at  effectively  zero  since  December  2008.  For 
much of this time, interest rate rules suggested that the zero lower bound on nominal interest 
rates was constraining policy; in other words, that nominal rates should be negative if that 
were  possible.  However,  many  robust  rules  now  suggest  that  given  the  progress  the 
economy has made over the past year, policy either is no longer constrained or will soon not 
be constrained by the zero bound. That is, they indicate that the policy rate should be above 
zero. 
Rule-based policymaking would require the FOMC to indicate how it plans to adjust policy to 
a more normal stance. The Committee could decide to simply follow the prescriptions offered 
by the reaction function. Or instead, the Committee might decide that normalization will be 
delayed with a more gradual adjustment of rates relative to the prescriptions of the reaction 
function.  But  even  if  the  FOMC  were  not  prepared  to  choose  a  particular  rule,  it  could 
articulate more clearly a qualitative reaction function that would serve as a baseline for future 
changes in policy as we exit the zero lower bound. It is my belief that doing so would be a 
more  understandable  form  of  forward  guidance,  less  subject  to  misinterpretation  as  policy 
transitions from unusual times to more normal times. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
