  Haruhiko Kuroda: The role of foreign financial institutions in Japan’s 
financial system 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
International Bankers Association of Japan, Tokyo, 29 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  having  me  at  this  event  commemorating  the  30th  anniversary  of  the 
International Bankers Association of Japan or the IBA Japan. 
The IBA is a business association for foreign banks, securities firms, and other associated 
financial services firms operating in Japan. Since its establishment in 1984, the IBA has been 
making  a  substantial  contribution  to  economic  and  financial  developments  in  Japan.  I 
wholeheartedly honor the 30th anniversary of the IBA Japan and pay respect for its constant 
efforts to date. 
To  start  with,  let  me  look  back  on  the  developments  in  the  cross-border  integration  of 
financial  markets  and  the  role  foreign  financial  institutions  have  been  playing  during  the 
30 years  since  the  IBA  Japan  was  established.  Then,  I  will  touch  on  the  importance  of 
financial system stability from a central bank’s perspective, and close my speech by briefly 
explaining the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy management. 
Financial globalization and financial system stability 
The establishment of the IBA in 1984 coincided with the publication of the report by the joint 
Japan-U.S.  working  group  on  the  yen/dollar  exchange  rate,  financial  and  capital  market 
issues. The report of the working group included the liberalization of, and the entry of foreign 
financial institutions into, Japan’s financial markets, as well as the development of the Euro-
yen market in order to promote, so to speak, the opening of Japan’s financial markets to the 
rest of the world. In the 30 years since the publication of the report, the globalization of the 
economy and the financial system has progressed significantly. With the globalization of the 
financial  system  and  the  growing  cross-border  integration  of  financial  markets,  the  role 
played  by  foreign  financial  institutions  in  Japan  has  been  quite  significant.  Many  foreign 
financial institutions that have started business one after another in Japan have been playing 
a leading role in Japan’s financial markets in various aspects, including the adoption of new 
financial  technologies,  the  development  of  new  markets,  and  the  introduction  of  advanced 
risk management methods. In addition, they have played an important role in tightly linking 
financial markets across borders. 
The  economic  and  financial  globalization  has  proceeded  rapidly  in  recent  years  first  in 
advanced economies, then involving emerging economies. Naturally, such developments are 
part  of  the  process  of  increasing  the  interdependence  of  financial  systems  in  different 
countries.  In  case  there  is  a  shock  in  a  market,  its  effects  will  spread  globally  and 
immediately. That suggests that financial system stability needs to be achieved on a global 
basis, not in each individual country. 
In fact, the global financial crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers has made it 
clear that the impact of the manifestation of a risk in globalized markets can be severe and 
spread  to  a  wide  range  of  areas.  Although  Japan’s  financial  system  was  relatively  robust 
when the crisis struck, it was not immune to the crisis. Looking back at the situation, there 
was  a  large  impact  on  Japan’s  financial  markets.  That  included  heightened  concern  over 
counterparty risk in the money market, the distortion of pricing in financial markets due to a 
liquidity  shortage,  and  a  decline  in  the functioning  of the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Unfortunately,  there  are  not  a  few  foreign  financial  institutions  that  had  to  cut  back  their 
activities in Japan following the crisis. 
Stability and functioning of the financial system 
It  has  become  a  shared  recognition  on  a  global  basis  that, to  avert  the  reemergence  of a 
financial crisis, it is important to analyze and assess the risks in the entire financial system as 
well as to take adequate measures to prevent systemic risk from manifesting itself. It is the 
so-called emphasis on a macroprudential perspective. Various international forums such as 
the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision are vigorously 
examining  the  substantial  reform  of  international  financial  regulation.  In  line  with  those 
developments, individual countries have been  independently strengthening regulations and 
substantially reviewing the supervisory system on financial institutions. One of the aspects of 
a stronger macroprudential approach both on regulatory and supervisory fronts might be to 
clean up individual problems that have surfaced in the process of the global financial crisis. 
The cleaning up includes ensuring the soundness of individual financial institutions, solving 
the too-big-to-fail problem and thereby preventing the moral hazard problem, and avoiding 
taxpayers’ burden in the resolution of failed financial institutions. 
During  the  past  decades,  financial  business  has  become  increasingly  sophisticated  and 
complex,  financial  systems  have  globalized,  and  financial  markets  have  integrated  across 
borders. In this context, we should pay more attention to another aspect, to strengthen the 
financial  system  as  a  whole  on  a  global  basis.  Therefore,  it  is  critical  to  bear  in  mind  the 
interconnectedness of financial institutions through market transactions and to gauge more 
extensively overall changes in financial institutions and financial markets that compose the 
financial system. On that basis, it is also critical to implement a wide range of initiatives to 
maintain financial system stability. 
In implementing the initiatives to enhance the stability of the financial system, we should not 
ignore initiatives to enhance its functioning so that the system can firmly support sustainable 
economic growth from the financial side. It appears that financial institutions’ role to support 
firms’ innovation and growth strategy from the financial side, is only bound to become larger 
in the future. Financial institutions play a variety of roles in encouraging firms’ growth, such 
as  developing  new  financial  products  corresponding  to  social  changes,  providing  efficient 
settlement  services  and  risk-hedging  measures,  as  well  as  supporting  M&As  and 
reorganizations  of firms.  It  is  extremely  important for financial  institutions  to  enhance  such 
roles constantly. Going forward, from a perspective of supporting Japan’s economic growth 
from  the  financial  side,  I  strongly  hope  that  foreign  financial  institutions  will  continue  to 
implement new initiatives while responding to changes in the surrounding environment. 
While taking account of changes including financial and economic globalization, the Bank of 
Japan will continue to make efforts to strengthen the functioning of Japan’s financial markets 
by enhancing payment and settlement services, including the development of the new Bank 
of  Japan  Financial  Network  System,  the  so-called  BOJ-NET,  and  the  extension  of  its 
operating hours, and by participating in initiatives to improve market practices, while closely 
cooperating with market participants. 
A macroprudential perspective for a central bank 
Now, let me further talk on the issues of financial stability and a macroprudential perspective 
for a central bank while taking into account their relationship with monetary policy. 
Monetary policy aims at ensuring price stability and does not aim at ensuring the stability of 
the financial system. However, there is a close relationship between monetary policy and the 
stability of the financial system. To begin with, monetary policy has a substantial impact not 
only  on  price  stability  but  also  on  financial  system  stability  through  its  effects  on  financial 
intermediation and various asset prices. For example, central banks in advanced economies 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have  been  pursuing  ultra  monetary  easing  through  unconventional  monetary  policies  to 
achieve price stability while responding to the economic downturn after the global financial 
crisis. In that situation, investment in high-risk assets such as high-yield bonds and emerging 
economies’  bonds  and  stocks  has  been  expanding  considerably  against  a  backdrop  of 
declining  volatility  in  interest  rates,  stock  prices,  and  foreign  exchange  rates,  as  well  as 
investors’ search for yields. Since the effects of monetary policy are transmitted to the real 
economy  through  the  financial  system,  financial  system  stability  is  the  basis  for  monetary 
policy that aims at ensuring price stability. If the functioning of the financial system declines, 
the effects of monetary policy will decline to that extent. If by any chance the functioning of 
the financial system is significantly impaired due to a financial crisis, it will be certain to see 
an adverse impact on price stability through a plunge in economic activity. 
In any event, central banks cannot be unconcerned about the stability of the financial system. 
Nowadays,  while  a  macroprudential  perspective  has  attracted  attention  in  the  context  of 
regulating  and  supervising  financial  institutions,  it  is  not  at  all  new  for  central  banks. 
Traditionally, central banks possess the Lender of Last Resort function. While that takes the 
form of central bank lending to individual financial institutions, its aim is to secure the stability 
of  the  financial  system  and  it  is  not  to  bail  out  a  single  financial  institution.  In  the  global 
financial crisis, the Bank of Japan and other central banks responded to a rapid contraction 
of  the  markets  by  providing  liquidity  to  the  markets  as  a  whole  through  open  market 
operations, such as purchases of assets like CP and corporate bonds as well as unlimited 
fund  provisioning  to  the  markets.  Those  responses  are  often  called  a  central  bank’s 
functioning  of  Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort.  And  it  can  also  be  said  to  be  a  policy  that  is 
clearly associated with a macroprudential perspective. It safeguards financial system stability 
through dealing not with the liquidity provision to individual financial institutions but directly 
with a decline in overall market liquidity. 
In considering a central bank’s initiatives in a macroprudential aspect, it is often argued that 
there may  sometimes  be  a  trade-off between  a  central  bank’s  objectives  of  ensuring  price 
stability and ensuring financial system stability. That point has been discussed at home and 
abroad and the jury is still out, but at least one can point out that history does suggest that 
substantial imbalances in financial and economic activity emerge through a feedback loop in 
which  changes  in  the  output  gap  and  changes  in  the  financial  cycle  reinforce  each  other. 
That is evident when you look back on the global financial crisis and the burst of the bubble 
in Japan in the 1990s. There have been many discussions on how to deal with substantial 
imbalances  including  a  bubble:  to  what  extent  such  changes  could  be  gauged  in  advance 
and  preemptive  measures  could  be  taken,  or  what  measures  should  be  implemented  in 
response to the imbalances. In any event, the recognition has become widespread that the 
financial cycle could lead to significant changes in the economy as a whole. Even at normal 
times, it is important to appropriately grasp the conditions of the financial system in monetary 
policy management. 
Analysis and assessment on risks in the financial system 
Taking  those  points  into  account,  the  Bank  examines  risks  in  the  financial  system  in 
establishing  the guidelines for monetary  policy.  In  establishing the guidelines  for monetary 
policy, the Bank assesses the economic and price situation from two perspectives. The first 
perspective concerns examining whether the outlook for economic activity and prices in the 
coming two years or so suggests that the economy is on a path toward sustainable growth 
with  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the  second  perspective,  based  on  a  longer-term 
viewpoint, concerns examining the risks that the Bank considers to be the most relevant to 
monetary  policy  management  in  achieving  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  This 
second perspective includes the examination of risks in the financial system as one element 
of medium- to long-term risks. 
Japan’s financial system currently maintains stability and has substantial resilience against 
shocks. Capital bases of financial institutions have been adequate on the whole, given that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  accumulation  of  capital  has  continued  while  the  amount  of  risk  borne  by  financial 
institutions  has  increased  only  slightly.  Developments  in  financial  intermediation  show  no 
indication of overheating or excessively bullish expectations. In the future, the globalization of 
the economy and transformation of industrial structures could lead to changes in the financial 
intermediation function and the risk profile of the financial system. In addition, financial and 
economic developments at home and abroad would affect financial institutions’ performance 
in securities investments. The effects of various environmental changes on financial system 
stability will continue to warrant attention. 
Analyses that form a basis for the Bank’s assessment of risks in the financial system as a 
whole  are  semiannually  published  as  the  Financial  System  Report.  The  next  issue  will  be 
published in mid-October and I hope you will have a chance to read it. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by briefly touching on the Bank’s monetary policy management. 
Although a decline following the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption 
tax  hike  still  remains  and  there  has  been  some  weakness  in  exports  and  industrial 
production,  a  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  been 
continuing and household sentiment has been improving. Firms have been maintaining their 
proactive  stance  for  business  fixed  investment  as  corporate  profits  have  improved.  The 
virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating steadily in both the household 
and corporate sectors, and Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery 
trend  and  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  are 
expected to wane gradually. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index, excluding volatile food and the 
direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  is  expected  to  be  around  1¼  percent  for  some 
time. It is expected to subsequently follow an uptrend again from the second half of this fiscal 
year and reach about 2 percent around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 
2014 to 2016. 
Quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  dubbed  QQE,  has  so  far  been  producing  its 
intended effects. The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target 
of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the 
outlook  changes  due  to  the  manifestation  of  risk  factors  and  it  is  judged  necessary  for 
achieving the price stability target, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. 
I have high hopes that foreign financial institutions will continue to play  the significant role 
they have played in Japan’s economy in the past 30 years and will contribute to the robust 
growth  of  Japan’s  economy  in  the  future.  With  such  hopes,  let  me  conclude  my  speech 
today. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
