Malcolm Edey: Reflections on the financial crisis 
Address by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the CFO Summit 2014, Gold Coast, 16 March 2014. 
 Thank you to our hosts for the opportunity to speak here today. 
I have called this talk “Reflections on the Financial Crisis”. That might seem like a somewhat 
dated  and  backward-looking  focus.  After  all,  it  is  now  roughly  seven  years  since  the  early 
signs of trouble in the US sub-prime mortgage market first came to general attention, in the 
early part of 2007. It is 5½ years since the failure of Lehman Brothers brought the crisis to its 
most severe phase. And it is almost exactly five years since the markets and economies that 
were worst affected began their gradual path to recovery. 
Five years is a long time in economics. But one of my themes today is that financial crises 
are costly events, and one of the reasons they are so costly is that their effects can continue 
long  afterwards.  The  after-effects  of  the  latest  crisis  are  still  with  us  and,  I  expect,  will 
continue to shape the business environment for some time to come. 
It needs only a few facts and figures to convey the impact of the crisis at its height. In the 
world’s largest economy, national income and output fell by about 4 per cent over the year to 
June 2009. That made it by far the sharpest US recession of the post-war period. In the euro 
area the peak-to-trough fall in output was even larger at around 6 per cent, and in the UK it 
was 7 per cent. These are big numbers when you remember that in Australia’s most recent 
recession, in 1991, output fell by less than 2 per cent. 
The  contractionary  effects  around  the  world  were  particularly  concentrated  in  trade  and 
industrial  production.  Some  of  the  economies  in  the  east  Asian  region  posted  declines  in 
those variables of the order of 30 per cent in the space of just a few months in late 2008. And 
of  course  financial  markets  were  severely  affected.  Global  equity  prices  fell  by  around 
40 per cent and there was a major dislocation in debt markets. 
On all of these counts, the recent crisis was certainly the most severe since the Depression, 
and in that sense it might be thought of as the kind of once-in-a-lifetime event that helps to 
define an epoch. 
That background suggests a number of interesting questions that I want to think about today: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Let me take those questions in turn. 
Why was the latest crisis so severe? 
What does history teach us about the risk of it happening again? 
In what ways are the after-effects of the GFC still continuing? 
And what will the crisis mean for the way central banks do their jobs? 
Why was the latest crisis so severe? 
There  have  been  many  “post  mortem”  efforts  to  analyse  the  causes  of  the  GFC  and  the 
severity of its effects.1 Generally speaking, they focus on two lines of explanation. 
                                                
1  See  for  example,  Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing 
Market and Institutional Resilience”, 7 April.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  first  stresses  the  factors  that  are  common  to  all  financial  bubbles:  the  combination  of 
cheap credit, leverage, rising asset prices (especially in real estate) and increased appetite 
for risk; and of course, the perception that “this time it’s different”. All of these elements were 
present in the lead up to the GFC. And, as in earlier cases, there was at least some rationale 
for the initial exuberance. There were credible arguments, for example, that business cycle 
risks had been genuinely reduced.2 Some thought that this could justify an increased appetite 
for risky assets. 
The second line of explanation focuses on the distinctive risk factors that came to the fore in 
the GFC and made this financial cycle different from others. They included the expansion in 
US sub-prime lending in the decade leading up to the crisis, the subsequent downturn in the 
US  housing  market  and  the  resultant  collapse  in  markets  for  mortgage-backed  securities. 
Contagion was amplified by exposures to over-engineered securities of dubious value, and 
by a range of poor risk management and governance practices associated with all of that. 
We  all  remember  the  CDOs  (collateralised  debt  obligations)  that  were  marketed  as  highly 
rated securities but turned out to be largely  worthless. These initial asset quality problems 
then exposed other weaknesses that led to institutional failures and the international collapse 
in confidence. This story has been well told. 
Every crisis, of course, has its own particular pathology but that fact in itself doesn’t explain 
their relative impacts. Why was this one so much more severe than most of the others? 
I can think of at least three reasons why that might have been the case. 
One  is  the  presence  of  a  common  driver  affecting  asset  values  and  financial  systems  in 
multiple countries at once. Many would view the low interest rate environment that prevailed 
around  the  world  in  the  pre-crisis  years  as  a  key  driver  in  that  regard.  This  was  itself  a 
function of deeper factors that were much debated at the time, including what some saw as a 
global “glut of saving” along with concerns about deflation risks following the collapse of the 
earlier tech bubble. 
I won’t go into that debate today other than to note the consequences. Periods of low interest 
rates are not uncommon, but what was unusual in this case was its persistence across large 
parts of the world. While not making a crisis inevitable, it contributed to simultaneous risk-
taking and hence vulnerabilities in a number of the major economies. 
Another  factor  is  the  increasing  size  and  complexity  of  financial  systems.  It  has  been  a 
general  pattern,  at  least  within  the  post-war  period,  that  financial  systems  have  tended  to 
grow faster than the economies that they service. There are some good reasons to expect 
this to be the case. As societies get richer, the proportion of income that people are prepared 
to  spend  on  financial  services  tends  to  rise.  At  the  same  time,  technological  progress 
supports  innovation  and  new  forms  of  financial  risk-taking.  The  result  is  a  general  trend 
towards financial deepening as economies develop. 
In 2006 the outgoing Reserve Bank Governor Ian Macfarlane made the prediction that these 
factors would change the nature of the business cycle. In particular he expected that future 
cycles would be driven more by financial events than by the shocks to demand and spending 
that had predominated in the post-war period to date. It was a prescient observation, coming 
not long before the onset of the GFC.3 
A third factor is that this has really been two separate crises joined together. There was a 
crisis  of  asset  quality,  financial  over-engineering  and  leverage  driven  by  the  forces  that  I 
have already described. But there was also a crisis of confidence in the stability of the euro 
                                                
2  See  for  example,  Bernanke  BS  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  Remarks  at  the  meetings  of  the  East 
Economic Association, Washington, DC, 20 February. 
3  Macfarlane IJ (2006), The Search for Stability, Boyer Lectures 2006, ABC Books, Sydney. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as a single currency area. The first one triggered the second, but the euro area vulnerabilities 
were already present for reasons unconnected to the origins of the GFC. 
Observers had previously questioned whether the euro area had the necessary governance 
arrangements to ensure resilience. At heart the question was whether a currency union could 
be  robust  to  shocks  without  fiscal  and  banking  union,  or  at  least  without  appropriate 
coordination arrangements in those areas to ensure that stress events could be managed. 
The effect of the GFC was to put that to the test. By the second half of 2009 the US economy 
was clearly recovering from the initial crisis impact, and US authorities had taken a number 
of  steps  to  repair  damaged  banks.  But,  initially  at  least,  the  strains  in  European  markets 
intensified  further.  These  strains  culminated  in  the  Greek  sovereign  debt  crisis,  along  with 
severe pressure on a number of the so-called “peripheral” euro area markets in 2010 and the 
first half of 2011. All of this made it harder for the European economy to recover, which in 
turn represented a drag on growth for the global economy as a whole. Confidence-building 
measures are now being put in place and the euro area economy has started to grow again, 
but all of this takes time. 
So  my  candidates  for  explaining  why  the  GFC  was  so  much  more  severe  than  previous 
crises are threefold: 
• 
• 
• 
Correlated risk-taking in a low interest rate environment; 
The increased size and complexity of the global financial sector; and 
The knock-on effect from the initial crisis to the structural stability of the euro area. 
What does history teach us about the risk of it happening again? 
History tells us that financial crises are not new and not particularly rare. In fact, they go back 
as far as financial activity itself. Historical accounts highlight many colourful examples like the 
Dutch “Tulipmania” of the 1620s, the South Sea Bubble of 1720, and the UK railway mania of 
the 1840s. Australia has its own examples, most notably the banking crisis of the 1890s, and 
we could also include the asset and credit bubble that occurred in the late 1980s. As I have 
already indicated, there are some common elements to these episodes but each one had its 
own  distinctive  mix  of  greed,  dishonesty  and  collective  folly.  The  general  flavour  is  well 
captured by the title of Kindleberger’s famous book, Manias, Panics and Crashes.4 
These  episodes  have  not  been  confined  to  any  particular  country  or  region.  A  recent 
historical study by the economists Rogoff and Reinhart5 identifies roughly 400 banking crises 
around  the  world,  of  varying  degrees  of  severity,  over  the  past  200  years.  They  affected 
countries from all regions, and at a wide range of different stages of development. Evidently 
there is something in human nature that generates these episodes of financial excess, even 
though  in  most  cases  the  impacts  have  not  been  as  severe  or  as  widespread  as  those 
generated by the GFC. 
This history might lead us into a certain degree of pessimism about the inevitability of future 
crisis events. But I think that would be the wrong response for a couple of reasons. 
One  is  that,  despite  the  summary  figures  that  I  have  just  cited,  genuinely  significant 
international  crises  have  been  relatively  rare.  The  Reinhart-Rogoff  study  identifies  only  six 
crisis events of international significance in the past two hundred years, and all but one of 
those were less severe than the GFC. The others were mostly quite localised, both in their 
causes and their effects.  
                                                
4  Kindleberger CP (1978), Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crisis, Macmillan, London. 
5  Reinhart  CM  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press, Princeton. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The second reason is that good policy can make a difference, both to the risk of a crisis and 
to the severity of its impact. 
I  am  often  asked  why  Australia  was  able  to  come  through  the  GFC  relatively  unscathed. 
Unlike  the  US,  the  UK  and  the  euro  area,  Australia  didn’t  have  a  recession  and  we  didn’t 
have any bank failures. My usual response is that it was a mixture of good luck and good 
management.  On  the  luck  side,  we  do  have  the  good  fortune  to  be  geographically  well 
connected to the fastest growing part of the world economy at a time when its demand for 
mineral resources has undergone a major expansion. That was undoubtedly a factor in the 
Australian economy’s general resilience over the past few years. 
But, without being too triumphalist, there was also the good management side of the ledger. 
Australia’s  monetary  and  fiscal  framework  was  sound,  and  it  gave  us  plenty  of  scope  to 
respond  when  the  crisis  hit.  Interest  rates  were  at  relatively  normal  levels  (actually  on  the 
high side of neutral) in the lead up to the GFC. This helped to limit some of the aggressive 
risk-taking  seen  elsewhere,  and  it  allowed  plenty  of  room  to  shift  to  a  more  expansionary 
stance  when  that  was  needed.  On  the  fiscal  policy  front,  successive  governments  had 
maintained  high  standards  of  discipline,  and  again  this  allowed  plenty  of  room  for 
expansionary action when needed. 
At least as important as all this is that Australia was well served by its prudential regulatory 
framework. The post-Wallis framework that was put in place in 1998 established APRA as 
the integrated prudential regulator, affirmed the financial stability role of the RBA and set up 
the Council of Financial Regulators to ensure appropriate coordination among the regulatory 
agencies. Under APRA’s leadership, Australian banks were held to much higher standards of 
resilience than many of their international counterparts. The banks remained profitable and 
well capitalised. Loan performance did deteriorate during the crisis period, but nowhere near 
as much as it did in the North Atlantic economies. 
My general conclusion from all of this is twofold: the risk of at least low-level crises is never 
too  far  away,  so  we  shouldn’t  be  complacent;  but  good  policy  can  make  a  difference  in 
containing that risk. 
In what ways are the after-effects of the GFC still continuing? 
The economic impacts of financial crises can be costly and long-lasting. That is why the risk 
management effort is so important. 
The Reinhart and Rogoff study that I cited earlier assembled some interesting data on the 
size  and  duration  of  impacts  from  financial  crises  in  history.  They  found  that  the  average 
duration of impact from a major financial crisis on variables like output and employment was 
about four to five years. Given that the GFC was a more severe crisis than average it is not 
surprising, then, that significant effects are still continuing, five years or more after the event. 
However,  the  effects  have  not  been  evenly  distributed  around  the  world.  They  have  been 
concentrated  in  the  North  Atlantic  economies  and,  in  important  respects,  they  have  been 
most severe in Europe. 
I have very few slides in this presentation, but if I had to pick a single chart to illustrate the 
evolution of these effects it would be the following one (Graph 1). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 1 
 that 
initial  deterioration  but  one 
It  shows  non-performance  rates  on  assets  in  the  major  banking  systems.  The  initial 
deterioration  in  asset  quality  was  sharpest  in  the  US  –  not  surprisingly,  since  the  crisis 
originated  there.  Non-performance  rates  on  US  banking  assets  peaked  in  early  2010  and 
there has since been a gradual improvement. The UK experience has been broadly similar 
except that the peak was higher and came about a year later; but, as in the US, a recovery is 
now  clearly  underway.  The  experience  in  the  euro  area  has  been  very  different.  It  was 
marked  by  a  more  gradual 
is  still  continuing. 
Non-performance rates in Europe are now around 8 per cent of loans, higher than the US 
and  UK  at  their  peaks,  and  still  rising.  The  figures  also  illustrate  the  good  performance  of 
Australian banks during this period. 
There are a number of reasons for the contrasting performances of the US and European 
banking systems. One is that there were more timely and effective corrective actions taken in 
the US to repair banks’ balance sheets than has been the case to date in Europe, both by 
government  authorities  and  by  the  banks  themselves.  The  TARP  (Troubled  Asset  Relief 
Program)  program,  the  early  US  stress  tests,  and  various  actions  to  recapitalise  troubled 
banks and dispose of poorly performing assets were all important in this regard. 
A  second  reason  is  one  that  I  have  already  alluded  to.  The  events  of  recent  years  have 
amounted  to  a  two-stage  crisis,  and  the  second  stage  of  it  was  specifically  European  (or 
more accurately, euro area) in focus. 
The third is the interdependency between growth and financial stability. It is easier for banks 
to recover in an environment where the economy itself is growing, and in Europe growth has 
been sluggish at best in the period since the initial downturn. 
Conversely, it is harder for the economy to grow without a strong banking system. As I have 
already  remarked,  this  two-way  dynamic  has  been  weighing  on  the  euro  area  for  some 
years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The lingering after-effects of the crisis can be seen not just in the effects on the banks. There 
are  continuing  effects  on  a  wide  range  of  economic  variables  in  the  major  economies.  To 
summarise these I will pick just three: output, employment and government debt.  
My  next  chart  shows  the  levels  of  output  and  employment  in  the  same  set  of  economies 
(Graph 2). 
Graph 2 
 Again, we see some major ongoing effects from the crisis and the contrasting severity among 
the  four  economies  that  I  have  focused  on.  One  result  commonly  seen  is  that  economic 
recovery  following  a  financial  crisis  is  typically  slower  than  the  recovery  from  an  average 
recession, and that has certainly been the case in this instance.  
In  the  United  States,  GDP  regained  its  2008  peak  level  in  mid-2011  but  growth  in  the 
recovery period has generally remained only around trend. This is in contrast to the normal 
pattern  of  rapid  catch-up  seen  after  earlier  recessions.  Employment  in  the  US  has  yet  to 
regain  its  pre-crisis  peak.  In  Europe,  output  and  employment  are  still  well  below  pre-crisis 
levels.  Australia,  as  I  have  said,  didn’t  have  a  recession,  with  output  and  employment 
continuing to expand throughout this period. 
My  third  and  final  chart  shows  comparative  levels  of  government  debt  for  the  same 
economies, before and after the crisis (Table 1). Not surprisingly we see that debt ratios have 
substantially increased. The reasons for that are not hard to understand: a combination of 
automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  as  revenues  declined  when  the  major  economies  went  into 
recession;  discretionary  stimulus  measures  to  counteract  the  crisis  impact;  and  in  some 
cases, the costs of emergency public support to troubled financial institutions. Once again, I 
include  the  Australian  data  for  comparison,  and  note  that  the  effects  here  have  been 
relatively mild and come from a favourable starting point.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Table 1: 
Net Public Debt 
  US 
Euro Area 
UK 
Australia(a) 
  46.5 
52.1 
38.4 
−3.8 
(a)  Financial years 2007/08 and 2013/14 
(b)  Estimates 
Sources: Australian Treasury; IMF 
Per cent of GDP 
2007 
2013(b) 
87.4 
74.9 
84.8 
12.1 
It is interesting to note that the post-crisis debts ratios in the “north Atlantic major three” have 
been broadly similar, in the range of 70 to 90 per cent of GDP. The reason the euro area 
experienced  a  crisis  in  its  sovereign  debt  markets  was  not  because  of  the  size  of  its 
aggregate  debt  position  per  se.  It  was  because  of  the  distribution  of  that  debt,  and  the 
associated  divergences  in  economic  conditions  among  the  euro  area  member  countries. 
Nonetheless,  the  aggregate  numbers  are  high  in  historical  terms  and  will  need  to  be 
addressed.  
One  implication  of  high  debt  ratios  in  the  north  Atlantic  economies  is  that  they  will  face 
significant pressures for medium-term fiscal consolidation. When coupled with the lingering 
effects of balance sheet stress and labour market weakness, it seems clear that large parts 
of the global economy continue to face headwinds to growth more than five years after the 
peak impact of the crisis has passed.  
What will the crisis mean for the way central banks do their jobs? 
One  of  the  further  consequences  of  the  crisis  has  been  a  rediscovery,  or  at  least  a 
substantial upgrading, of the role of central banks in financial stability policy. Central banks 
played a crucial part in the initial crisis response by providing emergency liquidity support to 
institutions  and  to  markets  under  strain.  In  many  cases  they  held  direct  regulatory 
responsibilities  for  dealing  with  troubled  institutions,  or  else  cooperated  closely  with  the 
agencies exercising those powers. And they have played a key advisory role in helping to 
shape the post-crisis regulatory response around the world. During this period, governments 
in a number of jurisdictions have taken steps to strengthen the financial stability mandates of 
their central banks and in some cases have given them additional regulatory powers to that 
end.  
I refer to this as a rediscovery rather than an innovation, because in many ways it represents 
a return to the original rationale for central banking. Central banks are often referred to as 
“lenders of last resort”. They evolved in 18th and 19th century Europe as a mechanism of 
liquidity insurance for banking systems that would otherwise have been highly unstable.6 In 
                                                
6  Goodhart, The Evolution of Central Banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
that way they always had an important role in crisis prevention and crisis management, and it 
was natural that they took a wider interest in the risk management of the financial system as 
a  whole.  It  was  only  in  recent  decades  that  some  came  to  see  their  role  as  being  more 
narrowly confined to the inflation control function. What we are now seeing, I think, is a better 
appreciation of the broader original role.  
How is that playing out in practice? 
In  some  cases  governments  have  responded  to  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  by  transferring 
significant regulatory powers to their central banks. Perhaps the most prominent example of 
this is in the UK, where the Financial Services Authority has been made a subsidiary of the 
Bank of England. Both the US and the euro area have also shifted regulatory powers into 
their  central  banks,  though  within  more  complex  arrangements  that  are  quite  distinctive  to 
their jurisdictions.  
Australia is one of a number of jurisdictions that retains the model of an integrated prudential 
regulator separate from the central bank. But the Wallis reforms that led to the establishment 
of APRA still recognised the Reserve Bank’s general mandate to use its powers to promote 
financial stability. This was more recently emphasised by the incorporation of a section on 
financial stability into the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy in 2010.  
Whether  or  not  central  banks  have  formal  prudential  regulatory  powers,  they  retain  an 
irreducible role in financial stability through their position as managers of system liquidity risk 
and  their  associated  role  in  crisis  management.  What  is  important  is  that  this  function  be 
effectively coordinated with the regulatory policies conducted by the prudential supervisor.  
This  is  not  the  occasion  to  examine  the  relative  merits  of  different  coordination  models  in 
detail. Most likely there are a range of different models that can be made to work, depending 
on each jurisdiction’s history and legal tradition.  
Here I simply make the observation that, in Australia’s case, the coordination arrangements 
held up well during the crisis period. There are a number of mechanisms, both formal and 
informal, that contribute to this. At the peak level the four main regulatory agencies form the 
Council  of  Financial  Regulators,  chaired  by  the  Reserve  Bank  Governor.  Numerous  other 
coordinating  arrangements  exist  at  the  staff  level.  Although  the  Council  is  a  body  without 
formal  powers,  it  has  played  an  important  role  in  a  number  of  different  ways,  including 
information  sharing,  helping  to  develop  the  overall  post-crisis  response  and  in  making 
coordinated recommendations to the government. Internationally I find that there is a lot of 
interest  in  the  Australian  coordination  arrangements,  and  it  is  interesting to  observe  that  a 
number of other jurisdictions have moved to develop financial stability council structures of 
their own in the wake of the crisis.  
Concluding remarks 
Financial crises are costly. Their effects on the real economy can last a long time. More than 
five years after the main event, the after-effects of the latest one are still being felt. Large 
parts of the global economy, especially in Europe, still face headwinds in achieving a return 
to normal conditions.  
All  of  that  underscores  the  importance  of  better  risk  management  to  avoid  crises  in  the 
future. For regulators, that means holding financial players to better standards of probity and 
prudence than prevailed in the past. That is what the G20-led regulatory effort is all about. 
This year, as holder of the G20 presidency, Australia is playing an important leadership role 
in those efforts.  
There are also important lessons for the private sector. Excessive leverage is a bad idea. So 
is investing in complex financial securities where the risk is not properly understood. Banks 
around  the  world  need  better  risk  management,  and  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  buffers, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
than they had in the past. It is not just regulators who are demanding this, but shareholders 
and investors. Expectations about financial sector growth and about sustainable debt need to 
be realistic.  
That  said,  history  suggests  that  crises  often  have  the  salutary  effect  of  promoting  greater 
prudence,  at  least  for  a  while.  Hopefully  that  will  be  the  case  this  time.  The  longer  the 
lessons stay learnt, the better will be the prospects for sustained recovery around the world.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
