  Luis M Linde: The internationalisation of the Spanish economy 
Testimony by Mr Luis  M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Special Senate 
Committee for the Development of Internationalisation, Madrid, 2 June 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Allow  me  to  begin  by  thanking  Mr.  Pío  García-Escudero  and the  Chairman  of this  Special 
Committee, Mr. Iñaki Anasagasti, for the opportunity to participate in your work.  
First,  today, I  shall  set out  some  matters relating to  the  internationalisation  of  the  Spanish 
economy and capital flows between Spain and the rest of the world. Next, I shall detail the 
main characteristics of the international trade financing structure and of the funding of longer-
term projects. And finally, I shall review the characteristics of, recent developments in and 
regulatory treatment of such trade in respect of the remit of the Banco de España.  
Recent developments in the external sector of the Spanish economy  
In the second half of 2013 a scenario of recovery began to take shape in our economy. A 
combination  of  several  positive  factors,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  has  contributed  to  a 
situation  in  which  Spain  is  beginning  to  overcome  its  second  recession  since  2008.  The 
gradual  improvement  in  GDP  growth  figures  has  been  accompanied  by  a  sustained 
correction  of  the  main  imbalances  built  up  during  the  previous  upturn.  Progress  here  has 
helped Spain in ceasing to evidence excessive macroeconomic imbalances, in the opinion of 
the European Commission, expressed in the conclusions of the report it issued on 5 March 
as  part  of the  European  Semester. This  is  a  positive  result  which  should  nevertheless  not 
distract  us  from  the  need  to  continue  adopting  measures  that  further  the  correction  of  the 
imbalances still in place, even though appreciable progress is being made.  
Of  most  visibility  and  weight  has  been  the  redressing  of  the  external  deficit.  Following  a 
deficit  of  10%  of  GDP  in  2007,  the  external  balance  posted  a  surplus  of  1.5%  of  GDP  in 
2013.  From  the  standpoint  of  its  contribution  to  GDP  growth,  net  external  demand  has 
substantially cushioned the fall-off in domestic demand.  
The  opening-up  of  our  productive  system  to  the  external  sector  through  trade  flows  and 
foreign  direct  investment  is,  as  you  know,  one  of  the  factors  that  has  most  boosted  the 
modernisation  of  the  Spanish  economy  in  recent  decades.  The  aggregate  share  of  goods 
and services imports and exports from 1995 to 2013 has risen from 45% to 66% of GDP, 
outpacing  countries  such  as  France  and  Italy,  although  it  is  still  some  distance  off  those 
economies with greater export potential, such as Germany.  
The  buoyancy  of  Spanish  exports  has  exceeded  the  increase  in  global  trade.  Our  export 
share in the world total, in real terms, has increased over the past five years to around 2.2%, 
slightly  above  the  relative  weight  of  our  economy  in  world  output.  This  trajectory  is  all  the 
more significant when compared with events in other developed economies and, in general, 
in the euro area as a whole, where export shares fell during the crisis.  
Our sound export performance has been underpinned both by gains in competitiveness and 
the pick-up in external demand, as well as by more structural factors, allowing us to expect 
this potential to continue and become more entrenched in the long run. The structural factors 
include  the  geographical  diversification  of  exports  of  Spanish  goods  and  services  to 
emerging markets and the more export-oriented gearing of our companies, which is reflected 
in  the  increase  over  recent  years  in  the  number  of  Spanish  companies  competing  on 
international markets.  
The re-directing of exports towards emerging markets has contributed significantly to these 
developments,  thanks  to  the  substantial  dynamism  of  the  demand  for  imports  in  those 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1 
   
countries.  Indeed,  their  dynamism  has  compensated  for  the  cyclical  weakness  in  the 
developed countries, particularly in the euro area.  
The  relative  weight  of  goods  exports  to  emerging  countries  has  increased  since  2007, 
coming to account for 30% of the total. The increases have been across the board, although 
particular  mention  may  be  made  of  Latin  America,  China  and  North  Africa.  However,  the 
share  of  the  developed  countries  has  fallen  on  the  same  scale,  owing  to  the  loss  in  the 
weight  of  sales  to  the  euro  area,  which  at  end-2013  stood  slightly  below  50%.  In  parallel, 
there  has  also  been  an  increase  in  the  variety  of  goods  and  services  exported,  with 
intermediate goods and services accounting for a growing proportion.  
Since 2007 the number of Spanish goods-exporting companies has increased by more than 
40%. And this despite the difficulties the international environment has undergone and the 
competition  from  the  emerging  economies.  Moreover,  the  contribution  of  SMEs  to  this 
process is beginning to be significant.  
A  further  reflection  of  the  internationalisation  of  the  Spanish  economy  in  the  past  two 
decades has been its growing share in international direct investment flows, not only through 
foreign  capital  inflows,  but  also  through  investment  by  Spanish  firms  abroad.  Spain  has 
become a net issuer of direct investment, running counter to the historical pattern.  
Large  Spanish  companies  initially  directed  their  foreign  investment  towards  Latin  America, 
diversifying subsequently towards the European Union. Currently, these two areas account 
for 50% and 30%, respectively, of total Spanish foreign direct investment in the rest of the 
world.  
Direct  investment  flows  into  Spain,  after  having  been  interrupted  at  the  height  of  the  euro 
area  financial  market  tensions  in  2012,  are  regaining  their  pre-crisis  levels.  The  gains  in 
competitiveness and the reforms undertaken have no doubt increased the attractiveness of 
our economy to investors.  
The headway made in the internationalisation of the economy against a particularly difficult 
background underscores the competitive capacity of part of the Spanish productive system. 
However, despite progress in recent years, Spain’s share in some potentially very dynamic 
markets is still low and faces major challenges, in a world of growing competitive pressures 
and the globalisation of production channels.  
Nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that  our  economy’s  dependence  on  energy  and  capital  goods 
imports  and  the  high  net  payment  of  income  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  as  a  result  of  high 
external  indebtedness,  are  a  permanent  constraint  as  regards  achieving  the  surpluses  on 
current and capital account that are needed to deleverage our economy. 
Institutions and financial policy for the internationalisation of Spanish companies  
Internationalisation calls for a series of financial services in which the banking industry plays 
a central role. These services can be grouped into two major categories: operations geared 
to mitigating the risk of transactions, namely guarantees and insurance; and those geared to 
providing liquidity or financing to companies.  
On  the  data  available,  regarding  the  importance  of  banks  in  financing  international  trade, 
banks participate directly in approximately one-third of global trade.  
On  one  hand  they  offer  financing,  usually  short-term  in  nature,  which  responds  to  the 
exporter’s or importer’s liquidity or working capital needs. They also offer coverage for risks 
through guarantees or insurance, ensuring the successful completion of transactions for the 
customer. Moreover, the extension of coverage for credit risk facilitates – albeit indirectly – 
access  to  financing  by  reducing  risk  on  the  company’s  balance  sheet  and,  consequently, 
reducing the financial cost of the transaction.  
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The remaining two-thirds of the financing of international trade are covered through inter-
company  credit,  without  the  direct  involvement  of  banks.  Nonetheless,  these  transactions 
might be indirectly backed by the banking sector, for instance through the discounting of bills 
that enables the company to obtain financing by using its customer trade receivables.  
The instruments used by banks to finance international trade share certain characteristics. 
They  are  short-term  instruments  with  low  credit  risk  (low  default  rates)  and  are  non-
renewable.  
Notable  among  these  instruments  are  pre-export  credit,  which  allows  the  exporter’s 
production  or  transport  costs  to  be  covered,  and  export  loans,  whereby  companies  obtain 
short-term  financing  to  cover  financing  needs  in  the  event  of  deferred  payment  by  the 
supplier.  
Also  of  note  is  the  recent  securitisation  of  assets  linked  to  international  trade  financing. 
Securitisation is a habitual practice in the finance industry, but its application to these assets 
is quite new. By means of such securitisation, banks release capital and liquidity while non-
bank institutions are able to invest in international trade-related securities.  
Asset  securitisation  has  been  regulated  in  Spain  since  1981,  but  the  developments  aimed 
specifically at promoting securitisation linked to the financing of foreign trade are much more 
recent. “Internationalisation covered bonds” were introduced by Royal Decree-Law 20/2012 
on 13 July 2012, and in Law 14/2013 of 27 September 2013, on support to entrepreneurs, 
this  legal  framework  was  amended  with  a  new  instrument,  namely  “internationalisation 
bonds”.  Unlike  covered  bonds,  the  latter  are  backed  by  packages  or  specific  groups  of 
foreign  trade financing  operations. These  new  bonds  may  contribute  to reducing  exporting 
firms’ financial costs and to increasing the total volume of financing.  
Along  with  providing  financing,  banks  also  extend  coverage  for  export  risks,  relating  for 
instance to the recipient country’s economic or political situation, so-called “country risk”; the 
risk that products may be damaged in transit or withheld at borders; collection difficulties in 
the  event  of  non-payment,  associated  with  different  jurisdictional  frameworks;  and  greater 
uncertainty in the relationship between the supplier and acquiring company.  
Banks have used various instruments to extend guarantees on international trade flows.  
The classic instrument is, of course, the documentary credit. The importer’s bank guarantees 
the  exporter’s  bank  that  payment  will  be  made  once  it  has  been  confirmed,  through 
presentation  of  the  pertinent  documentation,  that  the  transaction  has  been  correctly 
completed. In this way, exporters notably reduce their risks.  
Naturally, the demand for coverage of credit risk is higher for trade flows with countries with 
which there are fewer historical ties and with those trade partners for which greater risk is 
perceived. Accordingly, this may prove important in the opening-up of new markets and in 
flows to emerging economies.  
As regards the medium and long term, the nature and functioning of transactions differ from 
those for short-term transactions. The financial services provided by banks for longer-dated 
terms  are,  essentially,  financing  and  the  extension  of  guarantees  and  bonds  needed  to 
participate  in  international  tender  procedures.  On  many  occasions  these  are  syndicated 
operations, or operations performed by several banks from various countries.  
We should highlight here the role played by export credit companies. This activity is subject 
to the rules set under the OECD Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits, or the 
OECD Consensus, as it is usually called.  
The OECD Consensus  
The  OECD  Consensus,  signed  in  1976,  has  regulatory  status  in  the  European  Union  and 
seeks  to  prevent  financial  facilities  granted  by  a  State  to  an  exporter  from  distorting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3 
   
competition  and  giving  an  exporter  an  unfair  advantage  against  competitors  from  other 
countries.  The  Consensus  also  works  on  the  assumption  that  official  support  is  warranted 
only  if  there  is  a  “market failing” that  prevents  the  private  sector from  properly  meeting  its 
task as a financier. The Consensus sets common rules for exports in the medium and long 
term,  understanding  as  such  terms  over  two  years,  and  specifies  that  official  support  may 
take the form of either direct public financing of the export, or the underwriting by the public 
sector of the refund of the export financing granted by private institutions.  
In Spain, CESCE (Spanish Export Credit Insurance Agency) pursues its activity on behalf the 
State,  complementing  that  of  the  banking  system.  Among  its  operations,  what  affords  the 
greatest  value  added  is  the  coverage  of  credit  risk  arising  from  a  Spanish  export,  of  a 
relatively  high  amount,  at  a  term  of  over  two  years,  habitually  financed  by  a  bank.  Such 
coverage is the norm for exports towards countries with appreciable risk and in transactions 
which, frequently, have the sovereign guarantee of the importing country.  
CESCE also provides underwriting on the State’s behalf for the political risks associated with 
exports (the main such risk being default by the sovereign or by the institutions backed by 
the  sovereign),  except  in  operations  at  less  than  two  years  in  EU  and  OECD  countries, 
where  it  is  considered  that  there  is  a  sufficiently  developed  private  underwriting  market;  it 
also extends guarantees and bonds for participating in international tender procedures and 
projects.  
From 1998 to 2007 there was a strong expansion in international banking activity in financing 
for Spanish companies’ international activity. Banks took on a relevant role in the financing of 
trade flows to emerging countries and in the opening-up of new markets.  
Against the backdrop of this boom, the use of instruments offered by export credit agencies 
for exports became less necessary and less frequent.  
The international financial crisis  
The  financial  instability  as  from  mid-2007  and  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis  in  autumn  2008 
radically  altered  this  financial  landscape,  giving  way  to  an  across-the-board  decline  in 
financing by international banks. The contraction in credit had a particularly severe effect on 
international trade, which fell by between 20% and 30% in the main economies.  
The central banks responded to this situation through coordinated action that stabilised bank 
financing conditions. The measures included most notably the currency swap lines opened 
by the Federal Reserve and the main central banks, including the Eurosystem, which helped 
ease  the  shortage  of  dollars.  The  G-20  also  launched  initiatives  to  raise  funds  for  the 
financing of international trade and to increase the funding of multilateral development banks.  
Export  credit  agencies  and  their  countercyclical  measures  contributed  to  easing  the 
problems.  Against  a  background  of  high  uncertainty,  exporters  sought  to  guarantee  with 
hedging instruments operations for which previously they required no insurance whatsoever, 
but the supply of private financing was strongly depressed and its cost rose notably.  
The difficulties of raising external wholesale funding and the need to shore up their solvency 
ratios  led  Spanish  banks  to  reduce  their  financing  for  export  transactions.  The  impact  on 
medium-  and  long-term  transactions  (those  CESCE  could  insure)  was  notable.  Hence, 
CESCE’s activity declined given that without financing there can be no insurance.  
The risk perceived by foreign institutions in their transactions with Spain also increased. This 
led  to  a  squeeze  on  the  financing  provided  by  some  foreign  banks,  reflecting  Spain’s 
sovereign  downgrade.  The  increased  risk  perception  lessened  foreign  banks’  capacity  to 
accept guarantees from Spanish banks, even in the short term. As to the long term, foreign 
banks  restricted  guarantees  to  Spanish  companies  to  participate  in  international  tender 
procedures, or more generally, the financing of Spanish companies’ long-term projects.  
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  tensions  eased  through  various  channels,  among  which  the  activity  of  CESCE,  which 
bolstered  the  extension  of  guarantees  and  bonds  to  Spanish  companies  to  participate  in 
international tender procedures and projects.  
Regulation by the Banco de España 
The Banco de España, in the performance of its functions, lays down a series of accounting 
and prudential rules that determine the requirements made of banks in the pursuit of their 
activity. These rules comprise the regulatory implementation of Spanish legislation which, in 
turn, is determined by European regulations and by the agreements reached on the Basel 
Banking Supervision Committee.   
Let  me  begin  with  accounting  regulations  and,  in  particular,  with  the  rules  on  country  risk 
provisions, which are particularly significant in international trade transactions.  
In these financing operations there is, alongside the risk of commercial insolvency, so-called 
country risk, which includes, by way of sovereign risk, transfer risk (i.e. that it is not possible 
to  meet  debts  abroad  owing  to  a  lack  of  currency  or  the  legal  impossibility  of  transferring 
currency)  and  other  risks  arising  from  international  financial  activity,  such  as  expropriation 
and  natural  disasters.  As  what  is  involved  is  a  risk  other  than  habitual  commercial  risk,  it 
requires a differentiated treatment under default provisioning rules.  
These rules set provisioning percentages based on risk and criteria so that banks may make 
an assessment of country risk by monitoring economic developments and the political and 
institutional situation; further, they contain exemptions arrangements, with such exemptions 
depending on the type of transaction, its term and the modus operandi. Notably, these rules 
do  not  affect  foreign  direct  investment  by  the  Spanish  financial  system,  since  they  do  not 
apply  to  debt  instruments  and  to  contingent  risks,  nor  to  risks  vis-à-vis  European  Union 
countries.  
The impact of these rules on foreign trade is low since most trade finance products are not 
subject to country risk provisioning. Trade credits with a maturity not exceeding one year are 
exempt, as are pre-financing credits with a term equal to or less than six months for specific 
export agreements.  
The rules also provide for an exemption for CESCE insurance operations, which is an added 
incentive for banks to have this guarantee in medium- and long-term transactions since, in 
addition to eliminating default risk, they do not then have to set aside country risk provisions.  
The  prudential  treatment  of  instruments  supporting  internationalisation  and,  specifically,  of 
instruments  linked  to  short-term  trade  transactions  draws  on  two  significant  regulatory 
frameworks: Basel III, at the international level; and the Regulation (which is directly applicable in 
all Member States) and the Directive on prudential requirements and their attendant supervision, 
drafted  within  the  European  Union,  namely  Regulation  (EU)  No.  575/2013  on  prudential 
requirements for credit institutions and investment firms, which is directly applicable throughout 
the  EU,  and  Directive  2013/36/EU  on  access  to  the  activity  of  credit  institutions  and  their 
prudential supervision. This latter Directive requires, in turn, national transposition.  
The three major avenues of regulatory reform under Basel III and their transposition to the 
European  legislative  framework,  with  consequences  for  foreign  trade-related  transactions, 
are  the  treatment  of  credit  risk  for  solvency  purposes,  the  leverage  ratio  (the  ratio  of  top-
quality  capital  to  total  assets)  and  liquidity  ratios.  The  discussions  on  solvency  have  been 
concluded, while certain aspects of the leverage and liquidity ratios remain subject to review.  
As regards the treatment of credit risk, Basel III recognises a lower foreign trade financing 
risk than Basel II. As a result, the consumption of capital in these transactions is lower than 
in other analogous short-term financing transactions. These changes have been transposed 
into European prudential regulations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5 
   
Lastly, in connection with liquidity management and supervision, the Basel Committee (and, 
to  a  greater  extent,  European  legislation)  has  incorporated  into  the  determination  of  the 
short-term  liquidity  ratio  a  specific  treatment  for  foreign  trade-related  transactions  with  a 
residual  maturity  of  30  days  or  less.  The  potential  adverse  effect  on  the  availability  of 
financing  for  foreign  trade  derived  from  the  obligation  to  maintain  sufficient,  quality  liquid 
assets is thereby mitigated.  
In  an  economy  with  a  developed  banking  system  such  as  ours,  financing  for  the 
internationalisation  of  the  Spanish  economy  is  largely  conditional  on  developments  at  the 
international level. The best policy for promoting the financing of the international expansion 
of our companies is to ensure the financial stability and soundness of the Spanish financial 
and banking system.  
6 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
