  Ardian Fullani: Albania on the road to EU integration 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the launching ceremony of 
the Needs Analysis for the Bank of Albania project, Tirana 17 April 2014. 
 Dear Mr. Mersch, 
Dear Mr. Hamza, 
Dear Mr. Bajrami, 
Your Excellencies Ambassadors, 
Dear guests, 
The purpose of the programme we are launching today is to support the Bank of Albania in 
the process of approximation with the EU central banking rules, procedures and standards. 
This  is  another  step  forward  in  the  increasingly  closer  cooperation  between  the  Bank  of 
Albania,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  and  the  Eurosystem.  I  am  delighted  we  have 
here today the Governor of the Central Bank of Kosovo and Vice Governor of the National 
Bank of Macedonia, as co-beneficiaries under this project. 
The Project addresses 13 different fields of central banking, as identified by Bank of Albania 
and ECB experts, wherein the Bank of Albania needs to make progress to reach comparable 
benchmarks to an EU central bank. These fields relate to all the main functions of the Bank 
of  Albania,  such  as  monetary  and  financial  stability,  operations,  financial  infrastructure, 
transparency, accountability and human capital. 
For  the  first  time,  information  technology  is  also  incorporated  in  the  project  scope,  hence 
reflecting the impact of technology’s evolution on central bank operational systems over the 
past decades. 
The cooperation programme will be implemented with the support of experts from 11 central 
banks in the EU, with the ECB being the overall coordinator. Only two years ago, the Bank of 
Albania  successfully  concluded  a  twinning  project  with  two  of  them:  Banca  d’Italia  and 
Banque de France. 
During the six-months of the project implementation period, central banks of the Eurosystem 
will  provide  expertise  through  training,  conferences,  seminars,  study  visits  and  support  to 
strengthen  administrative  capacities,  and  regular 
form  of 
cooperation  will  aim  at  fostering  the  existing  relations  and  building  a  broader  network  of 
cooperation between the Bank of Albania, central banks of the region and the Eurosystem. 
The Project is funded by the European Commission, in the framework of support policies for 
the central banks of the Western Balkans, to promote macroeconomic and financial stability 
in the region. This form of technical assistance has been particularly successful in the past, 
creating strong institutional ties between the central banks of the Eurosystem and those of 
our  region.  The  twinning  is  based  on  a  detailed  plan  of  action  for  achieving  a  series  of 
concrete and measurable objectives. 
This  means  that  upon  conclusion  of  the  project,  having  benefited  from  the  technical 
assistance,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  be  able  to  discharge  its  institutional  duties  and 
responsibilities in the relevant fields more effectively and more efficiently. I believe the main 
factor  of  success  for  such  technical  cooperation  programmes  is  closely  related  to  having 
clear goals and objectives, set jointly with our European partners. 
Twinning agreements are an important instrument for ensuring Albania’s compliance with EU 
legislation. This agreement is reached in a convenient time, taking into account that only two 
technical  missions.  This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  months  from  now,  a  decision  will  be  made  by  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  on  the 
candidate status with regard to Albania’s EU membership. 
The ultimate objective of this cooperation will go beyond the assistance; it will contribute to 
achieving  high  levels  of  professionalism,  independence  and  transparency.  It  will  also 
contribute  to  promoting  the  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  Albania.  Moreover,  the 
assistance  will  be  an  impetus  to  the  country’s  European  integration,  with  special  focus  on 
compliance with criteria for legal and economic convergence with the European Union. This 
underlines, once again, the role of European integration as a driver to economic and social 
modernisation in our countries. 
Today’s agreement comes at a moment when the commitment of the European Central Bank 
to our region is focused not only on the field of technical cooperation, but also extends to the 
political one. 
In  addition  to  the  close  monitoring  of  the  economy  of  Albania  and  other  countries  in  our 
region,  the  European  Central  Bank  plays  an  active  role  in  the  Vienna  Initiative  2.0,  which 
aims  at  identifying  and  mitigating  systemic  risks  in  the  countries  where  European  banks 
operate.  This  initiative  is  experimenting  a  new  coordinating  mechanism  between  the 
European  Union  and  our  region,  bringing  together  representatives  from  parent  banks, 
subsidiaries,  home  and  host  supervisory  authorities,  international  financial  institutions  and 
the European Commission. 
Moreover,  the  European  Central  Bank  is  assuming  a  new  supervisory  role  for 
130 systemic  banks  in  the  euro  area,  some  of  which  operate  in  Albania  or  other 
countries  of  the  region  through  their  branches  or  subsidiaries.  This  role,  which  is 
expected to become functional in the field as of November this year, will be exercised 
in  cooperation  with  national  supervisory  authorities  and  will  have  implications  for 
Albania  and  other  countries  of  the  region,  given  the  presence  of  euro  area-based 
banks in our banking sectors. 
With the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the European Central Bank will 
become  the  home  supervisor  for  a  number  of  banks  operating  in  Albania.  In  addition  to 
improving  the quality  of banking  supervision,  this  mechanism  has the  potential  to facilitate 
cooperation  between  home  and  host  countries,  hence  fostering  cooperation  between  the 
European Central Bank and central banks in the region on financial stability. 
Dear participants, the common challenges that lie ahead of us are numerous and should be 
solved within a short period of time. 
On behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to assure you that we will continue to be in 
close contact with the European Central Bank and Eurosystem central banks, furthering our 
existing open and sincere communication. 
Approximation with best EU central bank standards and practices is a crucial process for a 
central bank not only for the effective discharge of the duties, but also for the efficient and 
stable functioning of the financial system, and benefit of the economy, overall. I am confident 
that the implementation of this project will be characterised by the cooperative spirit between 
the  Bank  of  Albania  and  central  banks  in  the  region,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  European 
Central Bank and Eurosystem, on the other. 
I would like to conclude with a heart-felt appreciation and gratitude for all the stakeholders 
having an active role in the launching of this project: 
• 
• 
the European Central Bank for coordinating all the activities; 
member central banks for providing a large number of experts to assist us with the 
project implementation; 
Delegation of the European Union in Tirana for funding it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
   to  adopting 
the  Commission’s  assistance  with  regard 
We  highly  appreciate 
the 
implementation of the European Union legislation and are seriously committed to continuing 
with the successful cooperation, established with the Delegation in the last twinning project. 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  my  message  that  the  road  to  European  Union 
integration  passes  through  regional  integration.  The  financial  system  and  central  banks 
spearhead this process. We expect that public and private economic agents will determinedly 
follow this step we are taking. In my view, regional cooperation can and should serve as a 
forerunner to European integration. 
Lastly, my special thanks and highest appreciation for Mr. Mersch for the fruitful cooperation 
between  our  institutions  during  his  mandate  as  the  Governor  of  the  central  bank  of 
Luxembourg, and now as an Executive Board member of the European Central Bank and, 
above all, as a friend of ours. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
