Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 March 2014. 
 Today,  on  27  March  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Given  Albania’s  latest  monetary  and 
economic  developments  and  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the 
Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.75%. 
The Council deems that inflationary pressures on the economy remain subdued. Under these 
circumstances,  the  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  stimulating  in  the  period  ahead  to 
provide the necessary conditions for compliance with our inflation target in the medium run. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and key issues discussed 
at today’s meeting. 
 Annual inflation stood at 1.9% in February, slightly up from a month earlier. The increase 
resulted from higher prices of agricultural products, tariffs of potable water in some regions of 
the country, and vehicle insurance premiums. Prices of other items of the consumer basket 
are stable and their inflation is low. 
New information obtained during the last month is limited. It does not alter our assessment 
that the overall economic and financial setting is characterised by low inflationary pressures. 
Our  projections  have  remained  overall  unchanged,  but  near-term  downside  risks  are 
assessed as high. 
Reflecting the weakness in aggregate demand, the output gap remains negative and the 
Albanian economy is still characterised by incomplete utilisation of production capacities. The 
lower economic growth and poor performance of the employment index have led to weaker 
pressures on increasing wages and production costs. Also, the sluggish aggregate demand 
keeps  profit  margins  low.  Weak  pressures  from  production  costs  and  downward  inflation 
expectations  were  the  main  drivers  lowering  core  and  headline  inflation  rates.  In  parallel, 
imported inflation was contained due to low inflation rates internationally and the exchange 
rate stability. This situation is expected to continue in the quarters ahead. 
The macroeconomic analysis, updated with information for the first two months of the year, 
suggests  low  economic  growth  during  this  period.  Private  investments  and  consumption 
remained weak because of the low confidence of economic agents, slowdown of disposable 
income, tight lending terms, and presence of spare production capacities. 
Trade  deficit  expanded  3.6%  in  January,  primarily  as  a  result  of  declining  exports,  in 
contrast to a month earlier, when it expanded due to unusual import growth. “Minerals, fuels 
and electric energy” were the main drivers of contraction in exports of goods. On the other 
hand, exports of goods in the category of “Textiles and footwear” increased. 
In  response  to  enhanced  competitiveness  and  shifting  of  financial  and  human  resources 
towards  exporting  sectors,  export  growth  should  be  one  of  the  main  pillars  of  Albania’s 
economic development in the period ahead. In the near future, the exporting sector of the 
economy is expected to be sustained by improved demand in Albania’s trading partners. 
Fiscal indicators were characterised by higher revenues and lower expenditures during the 
first two months of the year. As of February, budget revenues increased 4.9%, year on year, 
whereas  expenditure  and  budget  deficit  fell  9%  and  82%,  respectively.  Expenditures 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
decreased  mainly  due  to  downward  capital  spending,  while  revenues  upped  thanks  to 
increase in tax revenues. 
These  developments  have  determined  a  consolidating  trend  of  the  fiscal  policy  and  have 
kept its impact on aggregate demand and economic growth subdued. Excluding the effect of 
payment arrears, the consolidating trend of the fiscal policy is expected to be maintained 
over  the  medium-term  period.  As  always,  the  Bank  of  Albania  endorses  and  encourages 
measures for fiscal consolidation, considering them as necessary for reducing risk premia in 
the  economy  and  maintaining  the  country’s  medium  and  long-term  stability.  Moreover,  the 
Government  will  pay  a  part  of  its  arrears  to  businesses  within  this  budget  year.  This 
development is expected to improve the private sector’s balance sheets and demand. 
In response to the easing monetary policy and the liquidity situation, financial markets have 
been  calm,  in  terms  of  trading,  showing  a  tendency  to  cut  interest  rates.  The  latest  key 
interest rate cut in February is transmitted to short-term interest rates in the money market. 
The  yields  of  government  securities  and  interest  rates  on  lek  deposits  have  also  fallen, 
whereas  the  interest  rate  on  lek  loans  continues  to  move  in  line  with  a  medium-term 
downward trend. Overall, while downward, the credit cost takes into account high risk levels 
arising from loan default. 
Monetary  indicators  have  reflected  developments  in  the  real  economy  and  exercised  low 
inflationary pressures. Broad money expanded 2.8% in January, from 2.3% a month earlier, 
in annual terms, driven mainly by the expansion of the forex component. 
Credit to the private sector maintained the annual contraction rates in January, standing at –
1.4%. The banking system continues to be well capitalised, with sound financial parameters. 
But, the banking system’s lending continues to reflect the private sector’s weak demand for 
funds,  resulting  from  the  downward  credit  demand  and  added  prudence  by  banks  when 
lending. 
 New  available  data  support  our  assessment  for  gradual  growth  of  the  economy  in  the 
quarters  ahead.  The  transmission  of  the  monetary  stimulus,  payment  of  arrears  by  the 
Government  to  businesses,  and  improvement  of  confidence  are  expected  to  boost 
consumption and investments in Albania. 
Also, the steady recovery of the global economy is expected to boost foreign demand and its 
contribution to aggregate demand. The Albanian economy, however, is expected to operate 
below its potential in the period ahead. Below-potential economic growth and low inflationary 
pressures from the foreign sector are expected to be reflected in low inflation rates, in the 
short-term period. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 2.75%. This policy will help provide the requisites for complying with the 
inflation  target  and  is  consistent  with  our  projections  for  inflation  rates  returning  within  the 
target band in the medium term. 
In this context, I avail myself of this opportunity to underline that the Bank of Albania expects 
a better response by the banking system with regard to lending. This response should take 
into  account,  among  others,  the  positive  prospective  of  economic  development  in  Albania 
and the stimulating policies applied by the Bank of Albania. 
Based on the available information, the Bank of Albania deems that expected economic and 
financial development requires maintaining the easing monetary policy stance in the quarters 
ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
