  Benoît Coeuré: Credit and investment in the European recovery 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the IMF/Bank of Slovenia high-level seminar on “Reinvigorating Credit Growth in Central, 
Eastern and Southern European Economies”, Portoroz, 26 September 2014. 
 Summary 
To revive the euro area economy recapitalisation not only in the banking sector but also a 
repairing  of  private  sector  balance  sheets  is  needed.  The  banking  sector  is  undergoing  a 
necessary  process  of  structural  reforms.  With  concluding  the  Comprehensive  assessment 
there is potential to ensure that credit supply constraints diminish and the cycle turns. 
For a stronger rebound in investment the private non-financial sector needs to raise equity. 
One instrument especially for smaller and medium size enterprises is to allow EU investment 
funds to be distributed in the form of equity and not only in the form of debt, as the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and development (EBRD) and the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC) already do in many countries. Also the fragmentation in venture capital markets should 
be reduced. 
For smaller firms with the need of deleveraging debt-for-equity-swaps, possibly fostered by 
tax incentives, could facilitate private debt workouts. 
What is also needed is to raise productivity. An “upward shock” to total factor productivity is 
needed but only possible in highly competitive markets. 
 Introduction 
Across Europe credit growth is weak. In most central and eastern European countries credit 
is either stagnant or growing at low rates. In many countries of the euro area1 credit to the 
private sector is even in negative territory. The reasons for this are several, but at the heart is 
a  vicious  circle  of  low  growth,  low  investment  and  low  credit.  And  the  challenge  facing 
policymakers today is how to break it. 
The  current  policy  debate  is  largely focused  on the  credit  dimension.  And  indeed,  there  is 
evidence that creditless recoveries, while not as rare as sometimes contemplated, are much 
less common in high income, financially developed economies than in low income countries.2 
As European economies heavily depend on bank loans, it stands to reason that the recent 
weak credit performance of Europe is contributing low economic growth rates. 
It is nevertheless important that reinvigorating credit growth is not seen as an end in itself. 
Research based on international evidence suggests that a fast-growing banking sector can 
be  detrimental  to  aggregate  productivity  growth.3  And  we  have  seen  in  the  euro  area  that 
                                                
1  
In  Q2  2014,  the  annual  growth  rates  of  MFI  loans  to  the  private  sector  were  negative  in  Cyprus,  Greece, 
Ireland, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, and Spain. 
2   See for example Darvas, Zsolt, (2013), “Can Europe recover without credit?” Using Data from 135 countries, 
covering five decades, the study suggests that creditless recoveries, in which the stock of real credit does not 
return to the pre-crisis level for three years after the GDP trough, are not rare and can be characterised by 
remarkable real GDP growth rates. However, the study finds that the implications of these historical episodes 
for the current European situation are limited, as creditless recoveries are much less common in high-income 
countries, and such recoveries were associated with significant real exchange rate depreciation. 
3   Cecchetti,  Stephan  G  and  Enisse  Kharroubi  (2012),  “Reassessing  the  impact  of  finance  on  growth”,  BIS 
Working Papers No 381. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Ireland)  TFP  actually  declined.  An 
credit  growth  that  leads  to  the  wrong  type  of  investment  creates  financial  imbalances 
eventually leading to crises, while doing little to support long-term economic performance. 
Indeed, the 1999–2007 period saw a positive correlation between the initial level of GDP per 
capita and average total factor productivity (TFP) growth rates: the highest TFP growth rates 
were  found  in  Germany,  Austria,  Netherlands  and  Finland,  while  in  the  “catching-up” 
economies  (Spain,  Greece,  Portugal, 
important 
explanation for this is that capital in the latter economies flowed disproportionately into the 
non-tradable/services sector, which in general has lower productivity growth. Investment was 
highest in the construction and real estate sectors, closely followed by retail, transport and 
leisure.4 
This experience shows us that the quality of credit matters as much as the quantity, and it 
implies  that  policymakers  should  focus  on  a  broader  question  than  just  reviving  credit  – 
namely,  “how  can  we  channel  savings  towards  productive  investment?”.  This  focus  on 
investment is warranted because, in the short run, it is key to boosting demand and creating 
a  self-sustaining  recovery.  And  over  the  longer  run,  ensuring  that  investment  is  efficiently 
allocated  helps  create  a  virtuous  circle  between  productivity  and  credit,  thus  avoiding 
mistakes of the past. 
Achieving this requires a policy agenda that encompasses both credit supply and demand 
factors. It requires that we unclog and diversify the channels of financial intermediation in the 
euro area; that we recapitalise the economy through both reducing debt and raising equity; 
and that we have a policy mix that makes borrowing to invest worthwhile. 
In  other  words,  it  requires  a  comprehensive  approach.  And  what  I  would  like  to  do  this 
afternoon is sketch out for you what such a comprehensive approach could look like, drawing 
on the lessons learnt from the crisis and the post-crisis adjustment. 
Fixing the credit channel 
The  starting  point  is  logically  the  financial  sector,  and  here  we  are  confronting  a  changing 
landscape: the European banking sector is undergoing a necessary and largely unavoidable 
process  of  structural  change.  Banks  are  adopting  less  risky  business  models,  moving  to 
more  deposit-based  funding  strategies  and  strengthening  their  equity  capital.  As  a  result, 
there is a clear trend towards an overall smaller and less leveraged banking industry. 
While  there  are  several  benefits  to  this  process5,  it  also  presents  an  important  question, 
which is how we can have more credit for productive firms, but less leveraged banks. 
The  medium-term  solution  is  for  both  banks  and  capital  markets  to  adapt  to  the  new 
environment. For banks this means refocusing their business models and taking advantage 
information  technology  developments  to  improve  risk  management  and  lower  operating 
costs. We will always need strong banks in the euro area, as they play an essential role in 
situations where information cannot be standardised or where state verification is costly, for 
example lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).6 
The main challenge in capital markets is to expand market access for firms across the euro 
area. This is to some extent already happening organically, as firms that can issue diversify 
their funding sources, but it is uneven: bond issuance is strongly concentrated in countries 
                                                
4   European Commission, 2013, “Catching-up processes in the euro area”, in Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 
Vol. 12, Issue 1, March 2013. 
5   See speech by Benoît Cœuré, “On the optimal size of the financial sector”, Frankfurt, 2 September 2014. 
6   See for a discussion Levine, Ross (1997). “Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda”. 
Journal of Economic Literature 35, 688–726 or more recently Jayaraman, Sudarshan. and Anjan V. Thakor, 
2014, “Who Monitors the Monitor? Bank Capital Structure and Borrower Monitoring”, mimeo. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  among  firms  where  bank  lending  constraints  are  lowest.  As  the  ECB  has  argued  on 
several occasions7, this is one reason why we need to urgently focus on creating the legal 
and regulatory framework for a genuine single market in capital in Europe. 
Essentially,  what  we  are  aiming  for  is  a  more  balanced  financing  mix  where  firms  have  a 
greater  ability  to  substitute  bank  and  market  finance,  and  hence  intermediation  becomes 
more contestable and resilient. I would however emphasise that balance is key; we should 
not  view  market  finance  as  a  cure-all.  Indeed,  there  is  some  research  to  suggest  that  too 
much  substitution  towards  market  finance  may  lead  to  less  total  borrowing,  as  firms  that 
replace bank loans with bond issuance internalise the fact that this type of borrowing will be 
harder  to  restructure  in  bad  times.8  Besides,  Europe  does  not  have  a  set  of  institutions 
consistent with a fully market-based allocation of savings, such as funded pension schemes. 
In any event, a more diversified financing mix is realistically a project for tomorrow. We are 
now seeing signs that credit demand is picking up, making it imperative that nascent demand 
is not choked off by credit supply constraints. Our focus today therefore has to be on bank 
finance,  namely  ensuring  that  it  can  continue  to  fund  the  real  economy  even  as  banks 
downsize and restructure. And this is where two current policy initiatives come in. 
The first is the comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets, which has the potential 
to ensure that supply constraints diminish as the cycle turns this year. One purpose of the 
assessment is to steer the deleveraging process towards a “good” form – i.e. banks quickly 
carving  out  non-performing  assets  and  raising  equity  –  which  international  experience 
suggests  leads  to  a  faster  rebound  in  credit  to  viable  firms.  Indeed,  empirical  research 
suggests that  the  oft-heard  view  that  higher  bank  capital  leads to  lower  loan  supply  is  not 
accurate. Long-run evidence for Germany, for example, finds that higher bank capital tends 
to be associated with higher business loan volume, with no evidence of a negative effect.9  
While  the  exercise  will  only  conclude  next  month,  we  can  already  see  signs  that  it  has 
affected  both  the  speed  and  quality  of  deleveraging.  Whereas  from  2011  to  2012  asset 
deleveraging accounted for only 0.1 percentage point of 1.3 percent increase in banks’ Core 
Tier 1 ratios, from 2012 to 2013 (i.e. after the assessment was launched) it accounted for 
1.0 percentage point of the overall increase of 1.2 percent. Capital increases accounted for 
about half the increase over the 2 years.10 This acceleration of the process suggests that, 
once  the  final  results  are  known  and  residual  uncertainty  is  removed,  banks  will  be  in  a 
stronger position to resume new lending. 
The second on-going initiative is the full rollout of the ECB’s credit easing package, which 
aims  to  encourage  banks  to  use  their  new  balance  sheet  space  for  lending  to  the  real 
economy. 
The  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTRO)  have  a  built-in  incentive 
mechanism to encourage loans to firms and households, and we expect a stronger take up 
from  banks  in  the  December  operation  and  in  the  six  subsequent  instalments  until  June 
2016. And our programmes to purchase outright high quality asset-backed securities (ABS) 
and  covered  bonds  complement  this  by  providing  market  incentives  for  banks  to  originate 
more saleable securities, and thus more loans to collateralise them. 
                                                
7   See speech by Benoît Cœuré, “Completing the single market in capital”, ICMA Capital Market Lecture Series 
2014, Paris, 19 May 2014. 
8   Crouzet, Nicolas (2013), “Corporate debt structure and the macroeconomy”, mimeo. 
9   Buch, Claudia and Esteben Prieto (2014), “Do better capitalized banks lend less? Long-run panel evidence 
from Germany”, International Finance 17:1. 
10   See ECB Financial Stability Review, May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In short, the combination of these two initiatives results in a confluence of factors – improved 
incentives and higher capital – that should allow loan supply to expand elastically to meet 
loan demand. And to the extent that credit supply and demand are endogenous, for instance 
through the effect of supply constraints on macroeconomic risk, we could see the beginnings 
of a self-sustaining credit recovery. 
I would nonetheless question whether a credit recovery is enough to achieve an investment 
recovery, and hence a sustained recovery for the economy. If we look at the breakdown of 
credit  demand  components  in  the  survey  data,  fixed  investment  is  only  having  a  mildly 
positive effect on demand after 11 quarters of negative effects.11 And this demand may well 
be  “backward-looking”  –  that  is,  delayed  projects  coming  back  online.  From  a  “forward-
looking” perspective, there are reasons to cautious about the degree of pent-up investment 
demand. 
Principal among these is that, while banks might have deleveraged, not all of their customers 
have.  In  several  euro  area  countries  firms  still  face  a  debt  overhang  that  affects  the 
economics of taking on new credit. 
Real interest rates in the euro area are expected to decrease, as nominal interest rates will 
remain low for a long period while inflation is expected to gradually rise back towards 2%. 
But the issue for over-indebted firms is that long-term real interest rates probably cannot go 
low  enough  to  make  new  investment  attractive:  any  profits  generated  will  be  absorbed  by 
servicing existing debt. Indeed, we see a clear negative correlation – with a coefficient of –
0.48  –  between  corporate  debt-to-GDP  levels  in  different  countries  at the  beginning  of the 
crisis and the evolution of non-residential investment since. 
Repairing private sector balance sheets 
If  we  want  to  see  a  stronger  rebound  in  investment  across  the  euro  area,  the  next  step 
therefore has to be repairing non-financial private sector balance sheets. And as this process 
will  take  place  against  the  backdrop  of  low  inflation  and,  in  the  most  affected  countries, 
limited fiscal space, it will have to involve reductions in nominal debt. 
The rebooting of the financial sector that has already taken place puts us in a better position 
to  achieve  this. When  the  comprehensive  assessment  concludes,  banks  will  acknowledge 
losses and raise provisions and capital – after the disclosure of the results, capital shortfalls 
are expected to be covered within six months for the Asset Quality Review or the baseline 
stress test scenario, and within nine months for the adverse stress test scenario. Thus, from 
the bank side, restructuring loans to distressed borrowers should become more feasible. 
What we need going forward is more efficient debt restructuring and insolvency regimes for 
firms,  which  at  present  vary  widely  between  euro  area  countries.  The  effectiveness  of  the 
restructuring  regimes  is  often  hampered  by  sluggish  creditor  coordination,  a  lack  of  new 
financing  for  viable  companies  undergoing  restructuring  and  an  overburdened  judicial 
system.  For  example,  according  to  the  World  Bank,  to  resolve  insolvency  in  Italy  takes 
1.8 years, compared with just 0.4 years in Ireland. 
A  number  of  stressed  countries  have  already  begun  to  take  initiatives  to  improve 
restructuring and insolvency proceedings. In Greece, for example, facilitating debt workouts 
for viable companies is being made simpler by two new out-of-court debt restructuring tools: 
one for larger enterprises that includes a multi-creditor coordination mechanism inspired by 
international standards; and one for SMEs that employs standardised templates. 
In  Spain,  the  substantial  amendment  to  the  Insolvency  Law  earlier  this  year,  among  other 
things,  makes  facilitating  out-of-court  settlements  easier  while  also  making  in-court 
                                                
11   See ECB Bank Lending Survey, July 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  settlements more effective. Court approved refinancing agreements now have lower majority 
requirements and permit the extension of maturities on bank loans, negotiating haircuts and 
arranging  debt-for-equity  swaps.  Ireland  and  Portugal  have  also  introduced  various 
measures targeted at enterprises, SMEs and households. 
In most cases, however, restructuring and insolvency regimes could be made more efficient 
still  by  adopting  best  practice  more  broadly.  This  would  include,  inter  alia,  strengthening 
measures  to  facilitate  out-of-court  settlements  for  viable  firms;  introducing  centralised 
guidelines  for  voluntary  debt  workouts  coupled  with  independent  intermediation  for  larger 
companies; and establishing standardised voluntary workouts for SMEs. 
The deleveraging of European firms is however not only about reducing debt; it is first and 
foremost about raising equity. We have in fact already seen a significant decline in debt-to-
equity ratios for larger euro area corporates since end-2009 due to valuation gains in equity 
markets,  supported  by  low  interest  rates.12  To  the  extent  that  our  new  monetary  policy 
measures  affect  the  relative  supply  of  financial  assets  and  initiate  further  portfolio 
rebalancing, we may see further spillovers to equity markets that continue this trend. 
For smaller firms, however, these channels are less powerful as equity markets are largely 
underdeveloped. Raising equity therefore has to be more proactive process. 
One  way  to  achieve  this  is  to  use  debt-for-equity  swaps  (fostered  possibly  through  tax 
incentives)  to  facilitate  private  debt  workouts.  Another  is  for  EU  investment  funds  to  be 
distributed in the form of equity as well as debt, as the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and  development  (EBRD)  and  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC) already  do  in  many 
countries, and as I called for in a recent article.13 A third, more medium-term aim is reduce 
fragmentation  in  European  venture  capital  markets  to  increase  the  depth  of  private  equity 
markets. 
This  last  point  is  another  example  of  where  advancing  towards  a  single  market  in  capital 
would  be  beneficial  for  the  euro  area  –  it  would  not  only  help  strengthen  capital  markets 
relative  to  banks,  but  also  help  strengthen  equity  funding relative  to  debt. This  would  also 
have  positive  structural  effects  for  the  euro  area:  cross-country  integration  through  equity 
improves  risk-sharing  and,  as  it  is  harder  for  investors  to  “cut  and  run”,  would  most  likely 
provide  more  resilience  in  a  crisis  than  integration  through  interbank  lending  and  fixed 
income investment. New research shows that the vulnerability of the euro area to a “sudden 
stop” worsened the crisis by further constraining the fiscal reaction of governments during the 
downturn.14  
While  such  options  to  increase  equity  funding  are  being  developed,  a  strategy  that  can 
improve  debt  dynamics  for  all  firms’  is  to  raise  “implied  equity”  –  the  outlook  for  future 
income.  If  firms  expect  higher  income,  it  improves  their  debt-to-income  ratios  and  debt 
service capacity, which in turn creates space for new investment.15 In this sense, raising both 
the level and trend of potential growth is an integral part of recapitalising European firms, and 
indeed of the economy as whole. 
                                                
12   For more information see article on “Deleveraging patterns in the euro area corporate sector”, ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, February 2014. 
13   See opinion piece by Benoît Cœuré and Jörg Asmussen, “A three-pillar-strategy for the euro”, published in 
Berliner Zeitung and Les Echos, 19 September 2014. 
14   Martin,  Philippe  and  Thomas  Philippon  (2014),  “Inspecting  the  Mechanism:  Leverage  and  the  Great 
Recession in the Eurozone”, forthcoming. 
15   The  concept  of  “implied  equity”  echoes  in  an  investment  context  what  Holmstrom  and  Tirole  have  called 
“inside  liquidity”,  i.e.  future  income  streams  that  the  private  sector  can  pledge  to  react  to  a  liquidity  shock. 
Raising implied equity has therefore the additional benefit of making the economic system more resilient to 
shocks, i.e. it has stabilising as well as allocative properties. See Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (2010), 
Inside and Outside Liquidity, MIT Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  We  face  however  a  circular  problem  in  the  euro  area:  we  need  higher  potential  growth  to 
work through the debt overhang so that firms can being investing again; but that investment 
is  itself  necessary  to  raise  potential  growth.  And  this  circle  is  potentially  vicious:  if  low 
potential growth leads to lower investment, then it further lowers potential growth. 
A policy mix to lift investment demand 
This is where the next part of a comprehensive approach comes in: getting the policy mix 
right on the supply side of the economy to lift investment demand. 
In a basic Solow growth model, investment grows at the growth rate of productivity plus the 
growth  rate  of  hours  worked  along  the steady  state  path  of the  economy.  As  we  can  only 
expect limited labour participation gains in an ageing society, to raise investment demand we 
therefore have to raise productivity. Indeed, achieving an upward shock to TFP seems to me 
essential to trigger, in a sustainable way, a positive accelerator effect between productivity, 
investment and credit. 
But it requires an environment characterised by two things: competition and certainty. 
Competitive  markets  are  necessary  to  ensure  that  investment  and  productivity  are  indeed 
mutually enhancing, which as I said earlier is not a given: high investment in several euro 
area  countries  in the  pre-crisis  period  did  not  lead  to  a  convergence  in TFP.  Certainly,  an 
important reason for this was that too much capital flowed into real estate. But misallocation 
also  resulted  from  low  levels  of  competition  in  the  non-tradable/services  sector  more 
generally which distorted price signals. As some firms could capture excess rents, a falling 
marginal product of capital was counterbalanced by rising profit margins, meaning that total 
compensation from investing in these sectors remained high.16  
So:  the  flipside  of  productive  investment  is  more  competitive  markets  that  produce  more 
accurate price signals, thus drawing resources to where they are most efficiently employed. 
Achieving  this  requires  not  only  product  and  labour  market  reforms  that  accelerate  the 
“churn” process within and across sectors17, but also reducing unnecessary regulations that 
hinder the allocation and reallocation of resources. 
The  World  Bank’s  “Doing  Business”  report  gives  examples  such  obstacles.  If  an 
entrepreneur  wants  to  start  a  new  business  in  Spain,  she  has  to  go  through  10  separate 
procedures, while doing so in Slovenia requires only two. If a firm wants to launch a green 
field investment, it would have to wait 200 calendar days in Ireland before a new warehouse 
gets electricity; in Germany it would have to wait only 17 days.18  
There are reasons to be optimistic about the effects of a reform process in the euro area. 
Recent micro-level research from the Eurosystem’s Competitiveness Network, for instance, 
shows that there is a large and skewed distribution between the most and least productive 
firms in individual euro area countries. Far from being normally distributed, there are a few 
highly productive firms and many which have low productivity.19 This implies that a faster and 
more efficient reallocation across firms and sectors could be quite powerful. 
                                                
16   European Commission (2013). 
17   For more on the effects of “churning” on productivity see Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson 
(2008),  “Reallocation,  Firm  Turnover,  and  Efficiency:  Selection  on  Productivity  or  Profitability?”,  American 
Economic Review, 98(1). 
18   World  Bank  (2013),  Doing  Business  2014:  Understanding  Regulations  for  Small  and  Medium-Size 
Enterprises. 
19   CompNet Task Force (2014), “Micro-based Evidence of EU Competitiveness: The CompNet Database”, ECB 
Working Paper Series No. 1634. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Where certainty complements this process is by fixing expectations: the more firms trust that 
structural reforms will be followed through vigorously, the more they will be inclined to invest 
on that basis. Put differently, certainty allows the positive medium-term effects of structural 
reforms  to  be  brought  forward  into  the  present.  The  fact  that  euro  area  corporates  are 
currently  holding  record  amounts  of  cash,  rather  than  investing,  suggests  that  plans  for 
structural reforms are not yet credible enough to reap this “certainty dividend”. 
Certainty  also  extends  to  tax  policy.  Remember  that  what  matters for firms  when  deciding 
whether  to  invest  is the  after-tax return  on  investment. Thus,  if firms  expect the  burden of 
future  taxation  to  rise,  the  internal  rate  of  return  on  a  given  project  is  lowered,  effectively 
cancelling out the stimulative effect of lower interest rates on investment. And by contrast, a 
lower expected tax burden increases the effectiveness of any monetary policy measures. 
But  certainty  means  also  that  we  stick  to  our  commitments.  Indeed,  sticking  to  our  own 
commitments has to become the hallmark of the euro area. The ECB will continue to provide 
a  nominal  anchor  to  the  euro  area  recovery  by  delivering  its  primary  mandate  to  bring 
inflation  back  to  a  growth  rate  of  below  but  close  to  2%.  It  is  essential  that  in  parallel  all 
countries  follow  the  rules  outlined  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  and  in  the 
Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP) and that these rules are not stretched to the 
point where they would lose credibility. 
Conclusion 
My  main  message today  is  simple:  we  need  to focus  on  the quality  of credit,  not  only  the 
quantity. 
To create an environment where credit flows to productive investment requires a coherent 
and comprehensive approach. It requires managing the bank deleveraging process while the 
euro area transitions to a more balanced financing mix. It requires finding workable solutions 
to reduce the debt overhang involving both reducing debt and raising equity. And it requires 
acting on the basic determinants of investment demand, namely productivity. 
Fortunately, all the pieces of the jigsaw are now in place to achieve such an approach. Banks 
are approaching the end of their deleveraging. This is creating a better capitalised sector that 
can facilitate restructuring. And we have an emerging consensus on the importance of supply 
sides policies to boost growth potential. We now simply need to put those pieces together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
