  Mario Draghi: Interview with Europe 1 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  Europe  1, 
conducted by Mr Jean-Pierre Elkabbach on 23 September 2014, aired on 24 September 2014. 
 Europe 1: You have already acted decisively in June and September. If unemployment 
continues to grow, can the ECB continue to stimulate the economy? 
Monetary policy  will stay accommodative for a long time and I can say that the Governing 
Council is unanimous in its commitment to use the available instruments within its mandate 
to bring inflation back to close but below 2%. Interest rates will stay at the present level for an 
extended period of time because they can’t go much lower than that. 
In Europe, is there a risk today of deflation or even of recession? 
For the euro area as a whole we don’t see risk of deflation. We see risk of too low inflation for 
too long a time and for the euro area as a whole, as I’ve said many times our recovery is 
modest, weak, uneven, and fragile, but it’s not recession. 
Do you have a lot of liquidity at the ECB? 
Yes, we’ve shown that we have a lot of liquidity in the ECB. 
And could you show it again? 
And we’re certainly, as I said before, we’re certainly ready to use all the instruments within 
our mandate to make sure that… 
To  obtain  more  of  growth  by  2017,  2018:  what  needs  to  be  done?  One  talks  about 
developing infrastructure and about investing. How? Where to invest? 
I said before that monetary policy can’t be the only thing producing growth. There must be 
two other components. One is structural reforms. We can provide as much credit as we can 
to  the  private  sector.  But,  if  for  a  young  entrepreneur  it  takes  months  in  some  countries 
before he can have the permits, the authorisations, to open a new shop he will not ask for 
this credit. 
So let’s abolish bureaucracy. 
Yes, indeed and if this young entrepreneur would like to open a new shop and finally has the 
permit  but  he  is  overburdened  by  taxation,  he  will  not  apply  for  credit.  So  credit  is  the 
necessary but not sufficient condition to have growth. 
In your building, at the ECB, when one thinks about France, does one say that France 
is the sick man of Europe? 
Well,  frankly,  I  must  say  I  hate  this  expression  of  the  sick  man  of  Europe. We  all  need  a 
strong France. We need a competitive France and we need a France where competition lives 
together with solidarity. Europe needs a strong France. 
In  the  euro  area,  growth  forecasts  are  discouraging.  The  Italy  of  Matteo  Renzi  is  in 
recession.  France  is  around  0.4%.  What  do  you  tell  French  people  who  are  worried 
about the future? 
The ECB will continue to have a very expansionary monetary policy for an extended period 
of time until we see the rate of inflation going close to 2% and that’s something that should 
be counted upon. But, at the same time, as I said before, proper structural policies and fiscal 
policies have to be in place. 
In France, a question comes back often: the mythical 3% of deficit which was fixed in 
Maastricht 22 years ago. This was in very different universe and Europe. There were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
not  28  member  states,  didn’t  go  through  a  worldwide  crisis  with  as  much 
unemployment,  the  French  people  were  not  65  million.  Will  the  time  come  for  the 
Europeans to re-evaluate, to revise the Maastricht criteria that strangle them? 
Well, I don’t think it would be proper for me to discuss changes in the treaty. That’s the task 
of our European legislators. But, for the ECB, it’s important to remind to all of us that rules 
are  there  to  be  respected  and  that’s  the  ground  for  trust  amongst  member  states.  These 
rules  have  been  broken  in  the  past  and  the  result  of  it  was  not  exceptional.  Many  of  our 
countries arrived in the financial crisis completely unprepared. 
What is the main danger, the main enemy of Europe? 
Well, the main enemy for Europe is unemployment: youth unemployment and unemployment 
in general. But this is caused by a broader sentiment of lack of confidence in the future and 
lack of trust between member states, and we have to fight this. 
Who? You or we? 
Yes, for all of us. All of us have to fight against this lack of confidence, against this lack of 
trust. 
Are there three or four words that symbolize your ambition for Europe? 
First is investment. Private investment, but also public investment. 
Did you say it to Ms Merkel? 
I did say so in Jackson Hole. Not to her, but to every country that has fiscal space. But the 
other thing  that  we  have  to remember  is  –  and  I  did  say  this  before  – we  have  to  restore 
confidence. Investors, entrepreneurs have to go back being confident in the future and in the 
resilience and robustness of Europe. 
And  you  say  it  for  all  countries.  Some  people  wonder  if  we  are  assured  about  the 
survival of the euro. 
What  answer  do  you  expect  from  someone  who  said  that  we  will  do  whatever  it  takes  to 
preserve the euro within our mandate? 
So you still say it. 
The euro is irreversible. The euro is irreversible and we will do whatever it takes within our 
mandate to make sure it will happen. 
Not a too strong euro. The euro started to weaken, will it continue in this path? 
Well, you know we never comment specifically on exchange rates. I’ve said many times that 
the exchange rate as such is not a policy target, but it’s very important for price stability and 
for growth.  At the  present  time,  the  exchange rate  movement reflects  the  different  path of 
monetary policies in Europe versus the monetary policies in other important countries. Our 
monetary policy will stay accommodative through time for an extended period of time while 
other countries’ monetary policies may gradually acknowledge that recovery is taking place 
in their countries. 
You  were  speaking  about  structural  reforms.  In  France,  they’re  starting.  You  don’t 
speak about government policies. But what do you say? Should the reforms happen? 
Should they still be implemented even if not all people agree with them? Otherwise, 
there are risks. 
Yes, there is a sentence in the Jackson Hole speech where I said that the risks of doing too 
little are bigger than the risks of doing too much and this applies to structural reforms as well. 
Many countries, most countries in the euro area have planned these reforms for a long time, 
have designed these reforms. What is needed now is action. They have to implement these 
reforms and each country has its own specific agenda. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Otherwise you see anti-Europe political parties rise: in Germany, in Greece and even 
in France with Marine Le Pen that argues for the return to national currency. It seems 
that you are worried, what is the best answer to this? 
The best answer to this, but also to the sense of lack of hope that the millions of unemployed 
people  have  in  the  euro  area  –  the  best  answer  is  to  do  the  reforms,  implement  the 
appropriate policies and monetary policy will do its task. 
You have the reputation to have an independent character. Do you think that you make 
the ECB move forward with the Council, despite some people maybe not agreeing or 
not happy? 
Let me tell you, we have a mandate and we have to comply with this and this mandate does 
require  the  ECB  to  bring  inflation  back  below  2%.  Close,  but  below  2%  and  we’ll  do 
everything that is needed within our mandate to comply with this. 
So: more Europe, more Europe, more Europe? 
[In French] More Europe, more Europe, more Europe. 
The  audio  and 
http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x26ijk8_mario-draghi-l-europe-a-besoin-d-une-france-
forte_news  
found  here: 
in  French 
video  of 
can  be 
interview 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
