  Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 May 2014. 
 Today,  on  30  May  2014,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  After  discussing  the  recent  economic  and 
monetary developments and their outlook, the Supervisory Council decided to lower the key 
interest rate by 0.25 percentage point, to 2.50%. 
The key rate decrease aims at creating more favourable conditions for inflation to return to 
our target in the medium term. The decision reflects our assessment and projections for low 
inflationary pressures in the quarters ahead, in response to the weak aggregate demand and 
the  downward  trend  of  inflation  in  Albania’s  trading  partners.  This  move  contributes  to 
boosting domestic consumption and investments, aiming at a fuller utilization of production 
capacities and a faster return of inflation to our target. 
(Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and key issues that were 
discussed at today’s meeting.) 
 Annual inflation rate was 1.7% in April, slightly down from the average rate recorded in the 
first  quarter  of  2014.  In  the  last  months,  the  dynamics  of  inflation  have  been  largely 
determined  by  the  performance  of  food  prices.  The  added  volatility  of  inflation  for  these 
items, over the past months was in response to structural changes in the domestic market 
and the downward trend of inflation in regional markets. Prices of other items in the basket 
continued to give low contributions. 
In spite of the volatility, medium-term inflation trends remain clear. The overall economic and 
monetary environment is characterised by weak inflationary pressures, reflected, in turn, in 
low  core  inflation  rates.  The  analysis  of  macroeconomic  factors  shows  that  aggregate 
demand remains weak, maintaining economic activity below its potential level. The unutilized 
productive  capacity  led  to  low  increases  in  employment,  wages  and  production  costs. 
Supply-side  inflationary  pressures  remain  weak,  owing  to  the  downward  inflation  in  our 
trading  partners,  low  primary  commodity  prices  and  stable  exchange  rate.  Inflation 
expectations remain subdued and close to Bank of Albania’s inflation target. 
Regarding economic activity, recent data corroborate our earlier assessments for positive 
growth rates in the first months of the current year. Aggregate demand increased due to the 
positive performance of domestic private demand, while the public sector’s contribution was 
negative. Foreign demand continued to grow, as reflected in export growth. 
Consumption and private investments increased in the first three months of 2014, though 
at  lower  pace  than  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2013.  Their  performance  remained  sluggish, 
reflecting the uncertainties of economic agents and tight financing conditions. The recovery 
in  these  components  of  demand  will  be  a  determining  factor  for  the  country’s  economic 
growth  in  2014.  Today’s  key  interest  rate  cut  aims  at  providing  a  further  boost  to 
consumption  and  private  investments,  creating  premises  for  lower  financing  costs  in  the 
banking sector. 
Data  on  public  sector  performance  refer  to  the  first  four  months  of  the  current  year. 
Revenues increased 9.1%, in annual terms, while spending shrank 5.9%. This performance 
materialised  in  the  budget  deficit  of  about  73.1%  lower  than  a  year  earlier.  A  similar 
dynamics, though less intensive, is expected to persist in the months ahead. Consistently, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  in  favour  and  has  endorsed  the  consolidation  path  of fiscal 
policy, deeming that such policy contributes to the reduction of risks in the economy. 
Developments in the external sector led to an annual expansion of the trade deficit by 8.7%, 
during the first quarter of 2014. Albanian exports grew 11.6%; yet, the trade deficit expansion 
was determined by a 10.1% annual increase in imports. A more detailed analysis of trade 
developments  shows  that  trade  deficit  expansion  was  attributed  almost  entirely  to  the 
increase in electrical energy imports. Albanian exports’ growth, however, was driven by the 
gradual improvement of foreign demand and depreciation of the real exchange rate over the 
past  years.  A  steady  improvement  in  this  area  should  be  anchored  in  structural  reforms 
supporting  the  increase  in  productivity,  development  of  Albania’s  comparative  advantages 
and reduction of vulnerabilities in certain sectors of the economy. 
Forecasts for a low inflation level in the period ahead have dictated the implementation of an 
accommodative monetary policy in the last quarters. The policy rate cuts have already been 
passed  through  to  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  and  deposits  market,  and  to  most  of 
government securities’ yields. Interest rates on loans have also reflected the expansionary 
stance of the monetary policy of the Bank of Albania, but they continue to contain high risk 
premiums  for  credit  risk  and  other  risks  related  to  long-term  investment.  The  slow 
performance  of  the  economy  is  also  reflected  in  the  monetary  indicators.  Money  supply 
continued to increase at low annual rates, standing at 2.1% in March. This performance has 
reflected  the  decrease  in  credit  to  the  private  sector  and  the  lower  financing  needs  of  the 
public sector. Credit to the private sector shrank 2.4% in March. Besides the weak demand 
from  businesses  and  households,  the  sluggish  performance  of  credit  reflects  the  banks’ 
conservative  lending  policies.  This  approach  is  reflected  not  only  in  the  interest  rates  on 
loans, but also in other lending standards applied by the banking system. 
In this regard, the Bank of Albania deems that the banking system in Albania has room for 
and  should  adopt  a  more  appropriate  behaviour  towards  crediting  the  Albanian  economy. 
The  country’s  economic  and  financial  reality,  on-going  monetary  policy  easing  and  our 
liquidity-injection  operations,  as  well  as  the  adaptation  of  our  regulations  to  the  market 
situation provide the premises for faster crediting to the economy. 
Consisting in financial institutions licenced to facilitate movement of funds in the economy, 
the banking system should be more active in crediting, as the steady growth of the economy 
is a prerequisite for the sustainable growth of the banking system itself. 
 The Supervisory Council concluded that the incoming available information does not alter our 
baseline projections on the country’s economic activity. The economy is expected to record a 
gradual  growth  in  the  quarters  ahead,  driven  by  foreign  demand  and  domestic  private 
demand.  The  output  gap  will  remain  negative  during  2014,  though  the  gap  is  expected  to 
narrow.  The  price  performance  will  continue  to  be  contained  and  inflation  is  expected  to 
gradually  approach  the  target.  Recent  information,  however,  reinforces  our  judgement  for 
subdued  inflationary  pressures  in  the  period  ahead,  keeping  the  balance  of  risks  on  the 
downside. 
At  the  end  of  the  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  lower  the  key 
interest  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points,  to  2.50%.  This  further  easing  of  monetary 
conditions is expected to facilitate a faster return of inflation to the 3% target of the Bank of 
Albania. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
