Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 9 January 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference.  Let  me  wish  you  all  a  Happy  New  Year.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to welcome Latvia as the eighteenth country to adopt the euro as its currency. 
Accordingly,  Mr  Rimšēvičs,  the  Governor  of  Latvijas  Banka,  became  a  member  of  the 
Governing Council on 1 January 2014. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting 
of the Governing Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. Incoming information and analysis have continued to confirm our 
previous  assessment.  Underlying  price  pressures  in  the  euro  area  are  expected  to  remain 
subdued over the medium term. In keeping with this picture, monetary and credit dynamics 
remain subdued. At the same time, inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium 
to long term are firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2%. Such a constellation continues to suggest that we may experience a prolonged 
period of low inflation, to be followed by a gradual upward movement towards inflation rates 
below,  but  close  to,  2%  later  on.  Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  strongly 
emphasises that it will maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy for as long as 
necessary, which will assist the gradual economic recovery in the euro area. Accordingly, we 
firmly reiterate our forward guidance that we continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to 
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. As previously stated, this 
expectation is based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium 
term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  of  the  economy  and  subdued  monetary  dynamics. 
With regard  to money market  conditions  and their  potential  impact  on our monetary  policy 
stance,  we  are  monitoring  developments  closely  and  are  ready  to  consider  all  available 
instruments.  Overall,  we  remain  determined  to  maintain  the  high  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation and to take further decisive action if required. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.1%, quarter on quarter, in  the third quarter of 2013, 
following  an  increase  of  0.3%  in  the  second  quarter.  While  developments  in  industrial 
production  data  for  October  point  to  a  weak  start  to  the  fourth  quarter,  survey-based 
confidence  indicators  up  to  December  have  improved  further  from  low  levels,  overall 
indicating a continuation of the gradual recovery in economic activity. Looking at 2014 and 
2015, output is expected to recover at a slow pace, in particular owing to some improvement 
in  domestic  demand  supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  Euro  area 
economic  activity  should,  in  addition,  benefit  from  a  gradual  strengthening  of  demand  for 
exports. Furthermore, the overall improvements in financial markets seen since the summer 
of 2012 appear to be working their way through to the real economy, as should the progress 
made  in  fiscal  consolidation.  In  addition,  real  incomes  have  benefited  recently  from  lower 
energy price inflation. At the same time, unemployment in the euro area remains high, and 
the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and the private sector will continue to 
weigh on economic activity. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  Developments  in  global  money  and  financial  market  conditions  and  related 
uncertainties  may  have  the  potential  to  negatively  affect  economic  conditions.  Other 
downside  risks  include  higher  commodity  prices,  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand 
and export growth, and slow or insufficient implementation of structural reforms in euro area 
countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.8%  in 
December 2013, compared with 0.9% in November. This outcome was broadly as expected 
and  reflected  lower  services  price  inflation.  On  the  basis  of  prevailing  futures  prices  for 
energy, annual inflation rates are expected to remain at around current levels in the coming 
months. Over the medium term, underlying price pressures in the euro area are expected to 
remain subdued. At the same time, inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium 
to long term continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2%. 
The risks to the outlook for price developments continue to be seen as broadly balanced over 
the  medium  term,  with  upside  risks  relating  to  higher  commodity  prices  and  stronger  than 
expected increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and downside risks stemming 
from weaker than expected economic activity. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, data for November support the assessment of continued 
subdued  underlying  growth  in  broad  money  (M3)  and  credit.  Annual  growth  in  M3  was 
broadly unchanged at 1.5% in November, after 1.4% in October, following two consecutive 
declines in September and August. Annual growth in M1 remained strong at 6.5%, reflecting 
a preference for liquidity, although it was below the peak of 8.7% observed in April 2013. As 
in previous months, the main factor supporting annual M3 growth was an increase in the MFI 
net external asset position, which continued to reflect the increased interest of international 
investors  in  euro  area  assets.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  the  private  sector 
remained weak. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) stood at 0.3% in November, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  was  –3.1%  in  November,  following  –3.0%  in  October.  Overall,  weak  loan 
dynamics for non-financial corporations continue to reflect their lagged relationship with the 
business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector 
balance sheets. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed.  The  forthcoming  comprehensive  assessment  by  the  ECB  will  further  support  this 
confidence-building  process.  It  will  enhance  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the 
condition of banks and result in the identification and implementation of necessary corrective 
actions.  A  timely  implementation  of  further  steps  to  establish  a  banking  union  will  help  to 
restore confidence in the financial system. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that we may experience a prolonged period of 
low inflation, to be followed by a gradual upward movement towards inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% later on. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms 
this picture. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  it  is  important  not  to  unravel  past  efforts  but  to  sustain  fiscal 
consolidation  over  the  medium  term.  Fiscal  strategies  should  be  in  line  with  the  fiscal 
compact and should ensure a growth-friendly composition of consolidation which combines 
improving the quality and efficiency of public services with minimising distortionary effects of 
taxation. When accompanied by the decisive implementation of structural reforms, this will 
further support the gradual economic recovery in the euro area and have a positive impact 
on  public  finances.  Reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets  and  a  rigorous  enactment  of 
Single Market policies warrant particular focus to improve the outlook for economic growth 
and to foster job creation in an environment of high unemployment. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
