Stephen S Poloz: Redefining the limits to growth 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Halifax Chamber 
of Commerce, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 18 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
Happy belated St. Patrick’s Day. I hope everyone’s feeling fine. 
I want to speak today about a different kind of headache: the prolonged lacklustre economic 
growth we are experiencing, here in Canada, but also globally. 
Canada’s economy has been in recovery since 2009 – for four years – yet economic growth 
still pales compared to the pre-crisis years. Likewise, the global economy has been growing, 
on average, at only about two-thirds the pace of growth in the four years prior to the crisis. 
You’re  right  if  you  think  it’s  unusual  to  have  such  weak  growth  in  a  recovery.  It  is  also 
unusual to have weak growth for such a prolonged period of time. You might well be asking: 
So, what are we in for? What can we plan on? 
There are different ways of looking at this. Some suggest it is the tail end of the crisis that is 
still  limiting  growth,  while  others  propose  that  we  are  facing  a  slower  long-term  trend.  In 
short, there are two responses: on the one hand, the cheque is in the mail; and, on the other, 
this is as good as it gets. 
The real answer is: It’s complicated. Both views are part of the story. In the time I have with 
you today, I’d like to talk about the forces that are holding back economic growth in Canada 
and the world. My hope is that you will take away some insights into the Bank’s analysis of 
what we are experiencing – so that you can make reasonable, informed financial decisions 
for yourselves and your families, your businesses, and your futures. 
The global financial crisis 
Let’s start with the financial crisis. As a global event, it has drawn a lot of attention, rightly so. 
In very short order, global GDP fell by more than 3 per cent and millions of jobs were lost. 
Here in Canada, almost a half million jobs were lost and GDP fell by more than 4 per cent. 
The policy response around the world was rapid and extraordinary. Policy interest rates were 
slashed to near-zero in many advanced countries; the economies at the centre of the crisis 
further  eased  monetary  conditions  through  quantitative  easing.  The  G-20  countries  also 
undertook an unprecedented and concerted fiscal expansion. 
These  policies  worked  well,  no  doubt  about  that.  No  matter  how  you  feel  about  the  final 
outcome, we all recognize that it could have been far worse – indeed, that coordinated policy 
response may have averted a full-blown global depression. 
Nevertheless,  given  the  passage  of  time,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  why  growth  has  not  yet 
returned to pre-crisis trends. One widely accepted explanation is that, historically, a recovery 
following  a  financial  crisis  has  always  taken  longer  than  a  recovery  in  a  more  normal 
business cycle. According to this view, a period of subdued growth after a financial crisis can 
still be regarded as cyclical, in the sense that it will eventually prove to be temporary. Once 
balance sheets have been repaired, growth should return to its historical trend – bearing in 
mind that growth in the United States, and much of the rest of world, leading up to the crisis 
was extraordinary, so the true historical trend precedes that period. Still, given the uncertain 
timing, this approach reminds me of that old excuse, “Sorry, but the cheque is in the mail.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
More than a hangover 
But  the  global  economy  may  not  be  just  suffering  through  a  hangover  from  the  financial 
crisis. There are other, longer-term forces at work as well. Some analysts are suggesting we 
may  be  facing  a  long  period  of  secular  stagnation.  On  this  alternative  view,  the  economy 
could perform well below normal, leaving many out of work or underemployed for a long time 
to come. As business people, you need to understand that possibility, and how much weight 
to put on it. As a central banker, I need to understand it as well. 
Let’s dive in. Long-term economic growth is driven by two factors: 1) growth in the supply of 
labour, which is connected to population growth and changes in its composition, or what we 
call  “demographics;”  and  2)  productivity  growth,  which  is  economists’  shorthand  for  how 
efficiently we produce goods and services. For illustration, if we had 2 per cent trend growth 
in  the  supply  of  labour  and  1  per  cent  trend  growth  in  productivity,  trend  growth  for  the 
economy would be about 3 per cent. 
Now, productivity is fodder for a speech all on its own, which I won’t impose on you. Let me 
quickly summarize how it fits in before expanding on the demographic forces at work. 
Productivity  growth  fluctuates  around  a  long-term  trend,  tending  to  be  weak  during 
recessions  and  the  early  stages  of  a  recovery,  and  stronger  in  periods  of  economic 
expansion. It follows then that the weakness in productivity growth since the financial crisis 
may  be  a  symptom  of  a  post-crisis  hangover.  Indeed,  in  Canada,  the  latest  data  show  a 
pickup  in  productivity  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  to  around  2  per  cent,  which  is  very 
promising. The Bank’s outlook for the next couple of years is that uncertainty will continue to 
dissipate,  boosting  investment  and  new  firm  creation,  and  then  productivity  growth  is 
expected to outpace its 30-year average. 
A demographics story 
The other ingredient of Canada’s potential economic growth is the labour force. So let’s turn 
to demographics and start with one immovable fact and one quick reminder. First, we are all 
getting older each day; and second, the baby-boom generation – yes, I am among them – is 
Canada’s largest population cohort. 
The  demographics  story  is  often  told  as  one  about  the  labour  force:  as  the  boomer 
generation retires and exits from the workforce, labour’s contribution to the potential growth 
of  the  economy  declines.  This  is  already  under  way.  In  2011,  the  growth  rate  of  the 
population of working-age Canadians crossed below that of the overall population, reversing 
an  almost  50-year  trend.  The  Bank  expects  that  next  year,  labour’s  contribution  to  the 
potential growth of the economy will be half what it was in 2007. That’s the labour story, in a 
nutshell, and it is slowing us down. 
There’s another dimension to the demographics story – one that gets less attention, but that 
merits careful consideration to fully understand what the future holds. 
As people move through different stages of life, their spending and savings habits change. 
Think of the students out there who are amassing university or college loans. A bit later on, 
people enter a family-building stage, which normally involves some heavy borrowing up front 
for a family home. As we get older, we tend to take a breather on the accumulation of debt; 
we  work  at  paying  it  back  and  start  to  put  aside  savings.  As  we  get  closer  to  retirement, 
people  save  more  and  build  up  wealth.  Typically,  in  the  15  or  20  or  so  years  before  they 
retire, people are in serious nest-building mode. 
As  the  facts  show  it,  Canadian  households  are  indeed  getting  wealthier,  which  is  a  good 
thing. Data released last month show that, despite the financial crisis and Great Recession, 
net worth rose noticeably across all age groups from 1999 through 2012. 
Now, let’s bring the boomers into the picture. They’re called the boomers for a reason. The 
huge wave of that generation simply overwhelms the charts. Born between 1946 and 1964, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  youngest  boomers  are  turning  50  this  year.  And  so,  right  now,  we  are  seeing  a  very 
predictable demographic bulge of more people, putting away more savings. This is Mother 
Nature at work, and it’s where things get interesting. 
Why  does  a  central  banker  care?  First,  the  financial  decisions  made  by  individuals  are  of 
course  important to  those  individuals.  But  when  a  large  swath  of the  population  is  making 
similar  decisions,  the  impact  on  the  broader  economy  can  be  significant.  Second,  where 
individuals decide to store their wealth also matters a great deal. 
Allocation matters 
Canadians, it won’t surprise you, love their houses. We hold a lot of our wealth in real estate. 
This practice preceded the crisis, and it was reinforced by it. You may recall – it even may 
have been your experience – in the 1990s, the share of household wealth in financial assets, 
such as equities, was increasing faster than that in real estate. 
But since then, real estate has become more attractive and has grown as a share of total 
household assets. With the “dot-com” bust and Enron and other corporate scandals in the 
rear-view mirror, with low interest rates helping keep mortgage payments manageable, and 
with  cocooning  taking  hold,  housing  was  increasingly  seen  as  a  safe  and  attractive 
investment. For the sector as a whole, real estate assets accounted for 40 per cent of total 
wealth in 2012, up quite a bit from 32 per cent in 1999. 
Economists have their own way of interpreting these trends. We see some forms of assets 
primarily as “stores of value,” while others work through the system to fund investments and 
add to the productive potential of the economy. Savings that fund infrastructure and business 
investment are “being put to work,” which can help improve productivity, while savings that 
go into housing are seen as contributing less to productive potential. 
This shift toward housing was also evident in many developed countries before the crisis hit 
and could have contributed to a slower growth rate for productivity. 
Layering on the crisis 
Importantly, the fallout from the financial crisis has worked to magnify some of these effects. 
It’s only logical to expect that secular trends and cyclical fluctuations interact with each other 
– and this is certainly true of the demographics-savings trend and the crisis. 
As  I  mentioned,  the  crisis  walloped  global  demand.  It  opened  up  a  huge  and  persistent 
uncertainty wedge that has held down global demand for business fixed investment. In many 
countries,  the  crisis  also  triggered  household  and  bank  deleveraging,  not  to  mention fiscal 
consolidation. 
As  a  result,  there  has  been  a  crisis-induced  increase  in  savings  at  a  global  level.  There 
already  was  a  demographics-driven  desire  for  higher  savings  in  advanced  economies  and 
there  were  massive  savings  inflows  from  emerging  markets.  Then,  through  widespread 
deleveraging, the crisis added an extra boost to the world’s aggregate savings. Naturally, this 
translates into weak aggregate demand. 
As a trade-dependent economy, Canada feels these effects directly. Weak global demand is 
limiting the growth of our exports, and the associated uncertainty is holding back business 
investment in structures, equipment and software. 
In other words, demographic forces and the lingering hangover from the financial crisis are 
pulling in the same direction, putting limits on our growth possibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Policy response and the outlook for growth 
I’ve slowly come around to answering my own question about why this matters to a central 
banker. It’s not just because we care – which, let me assure you, we do. But in order for us to 
do  our  job  properly,  we  need  to  understand  all  the  dynamics  that  feed  into  the  Canadian 
economy – and, importantly, how our own policy measures affect the outcomes. 
In  Canada,  low  policy  rates  motivated  Canadians  to  invest  even  more  in  real  estate.  You 
could say the Canadian recovery was due to the reinforcing of activity that was already under 
way, thanks to underlying demographic forces. 
But we know that we cannot sustain economic growth in Canada based on housing alone. 
Our belief is that the post-crisis hangover in the United States is dissipating, and momentum 
is  building.  This  will  inevitably  lead  to  more  growth  in  Canadian  exports  and,  with  the 
reduction  in  uncertainty  that  comes  with  that,  more  investment  in  Canada’s  economic 
capacity, including creating more companies – and the much-anticipated rotation in growth. 
This  won’t  necessarily  happen  in  a  linear  fashion.  Although  we  continue  to  expect  above-
trend growth in Canada this year and next, the recent data suggest that the first quarter will 
be  on  the  soft  side. This  mostly  seems  to  be  attributable  to  unusual  weather,  but  it  bears 
deeper analysis. Similarly, on the inflation front, while  we have had a couple of months of 
slightly  stronger  core  inflation,  which  is  reassuring,  most  analysts  are  expecting  softer 
inflation data later this week because of a sharp movement in February last year. Looking 
through  the  short-term  volatility,  inflation  still  seems  to  be  running  at  around  1.2  per  cent, 
give or take a tenth or two. 
While we expect growth to approach 2.5 per cent over the next couple of years, we also see 
the economy’s potential capacity growing at around an average of 2 per cent. This is why we 
say that it will take a couple of years for us to close our excess capacity gap and get inflation 
back  to  near  our  2  per  cent  target.  Looking  beyond  that,  one  would  normally  expect  our 
economy to grow at its potential, which, as I said, is around 2 per cent, and which is made up 
of about 1 to 1.5 per cent growth in productivity and a gradually declining contribution from 
labour force growth, driven by the demographics story I outlined earlier. 
Accordingly, were it not for our demographic outlook, our growth would converge on a higher 
trend line. This is the sense in which demographic forces help define our limits to growth. 
In  the  broader global  economy,  however,  the  possibility  of  secular  stagnation  needs  to  be 
taken seriously. The combination of low demand, low investment and high savings could be 
having an impact on what economists refer to as the Wicksellian rate, or the equilibrium real 
rate  of  interest.  There  is  rigorous  theory  behind  this  notion,  which  I  will  spare  you,  but  it 
suggests that interest rates may remain lower than we have experienced in the past for a 
longer  period,  until  some  of  these  long-term  forces  dissipate.  One  specific  consequence 
would be that even extraordinarily low policy interest rates could prove to be less stimulative 
than in normal circumstances. 
Cause for optimism 
In  the  G-20  meetings  held  recently  in  Sydney,  Australia,  we  recognized  that  the  global 
economy has not yet returned to strong, sustainable and balanced growth, and that there is 
limited  scope  for  further  stimulus  from  conventional  policies.  It  was  in  this  context  that  we 
underscored the importance of structural reforms to future growth. 
To make this notion concrete, the G-20 set out an aspiration to collectively boost global GDP 
by 2 per cent over the next five years, or about 0.4 per cent per year in growth terms, on 
average. Maybe this does not sound like much, but it would add up to US$2 trillion for the 
world. That’s a lot of income, especially when it would arrive more or less for free – it would 
come from countries removing structural impediments to growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Such impediments include trade barriers, labour market rigidities and other factors that make 
economies inefficient. If your car has an issue that is preventing it from running at top speed 
or top efficiency, you either arrive late or waste a lot of fuel getting there. Economies are the 
same – structural impediments impose limits to growth, and removing them can redefine our 
limits to growth. 
The  goal  of  raising  global  GDP  by  an  extra  2  per  cent  over  the  next  five  years  is  a 
reasonable aspiration, and Canada certainly shares it. As a small open economy, we have 
the opportunity to garner more growth from abroad by building our international businesses. 
There are lots of economies growing faster than ours, and we can position ourselves to catch 
those tailwinds, which will help us overcome some of the domestic demographic constraints 
on demand. We can do this now, but as our various free trade agreements fall into place, we 
will be able to do so even more effectively. 
As our exports strengthen and confidence improves, increased business investment and the 
creation of brand new companies will help raise our productivity and counterbalance some of 
the demographic constraints on labour supply. Other structural changes can also contribute 
in  this  way,  including  improving  competitiveness;  removing  barriers  to  interprovincial  trade 
and  the  migration  of  workers;  and  increasing  investments  in  education,  training  and 
infrastructure, to name a few. 
The effect of any of these structural changes is win-win-win: companies win, because they 
can plan better and grow their business; consumers win, in the form of employment growth 
and reduced uncertainty; and governments win, as higher growth automatically makes fiscal 
planning easier. Raising our trend growth rate by only 0.1 or 0.2 percentage points per year 
through such structural reforms would mean an income boost of $25,000 to $50,000 over a 
typical 30-year career – certainly worth having. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. 
Over 40 years ago, the Club of Rome published a book entitled, The Limits to Growth. To the 
global  think  tank,  those  limits  were  about  finite  natural  resources  and  the  environment. 
Although the timing remains uncertain, its arguments remain relevant today. 
But within that envelope, we have the ability to define our own limits to growth. The financial 
crisis was nearly calamitous, and we are still working to overcome its after-effects with both 
macroeconomic policies and a new global financial architecture. 
We continue to believe that the world economy is healing, and that Canada will benefit in the 
form  of  stronger  exports.  From  there,  we  expect  to  see  more  investment  and  new  firm 
creation. This will permit the emergence of a natural, sustained growth trajectory for Canada, 
and a return of inflation to our 2 per cent target. 
But  the  demographic  forces  that  are  in  play  suggest  that  the  growth  trajectory  that  we 
converge on after the recovery period will be slower than our historical trend, and it will also 
be associated with lower equilibrium rates of interest than we are used to. Fortunately, global 
policy-makers  have  the  ability  to  redefine  the  limits  to  growth  by  removing  growth 
impediments,  but  as  business  people  and  investors,  we  must  keep  those  efforts  in 
perspective. 
The world remains a complicated place, and there may be implications for your businesses 
and  your  personal  savings  and  investment  plans.  I  hope  I  have  been  able  to  add  to  your 
understanding today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
