Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 29 January 2014. 
 Today, on 29 January 2014, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved the Monetary Policy Statement of the Bank of Albania on the second half of 2013. 
Given  Albania's  latest  monetary  and  economic  developments  and  discussions  on  their 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged, at 3.0%. 
The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  inflationary  pressures  from  the  real  and  financial 
sectors  of  the  economy  are  weak  and  will  remain  so.  These  circumstances  require 
maintaining  a  stimulating  monetary  policy  over  the  period  ahead.  The  monetary  stimulus, 
transmitted  through  the  low  key  interest  rate  and  ongoing  liquidity  injection,  provides  the 
proper conditions for meeting our inflation target in the medium term. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Year 2013 was a difficult one for the Albanian economy. Aggregate demand and economic 
growth remained at low levels; inflation fluctuated around Bank of Albania's lower targeted 
band, while the budget deficit and public debt increased sharply. The unfavourable economic 
environment, both at home and abroad, led to this performance. Moreover, Albania’s June 
parliamentary  elections  added  uncertainties  to  the  economy  and  financial  markets.  As  we 
have  already  stated,  consumption  and  investments  continue  to  suffer  from  low  confidence 
and tight lending terms. Fiscal policy is faced with a high public debt level, which has limited 
the  possibilities  for  macroeconomic  stimulus.  On  the  other  hand,  the  external  environment 
was  characterised  by  ongoing  euro-area  problems,  hence  limiting  our  export  growth  and 
making  financial  markets  pursue  conservative  policies  in  terms  of  lending  to  developing 
economies. 
However,  2013  saw  positive  developments.  Financial  markets  were  characterised  by 
improved  liquidity  and  downward  interest  rates,  in  response  to  Bank  of  Albania's  easing 
monetary  policy.  Also,  introducing  new  financial  agents  and  instruments  has  further 
deepened these markets. The banking system remains solid and well- capitalised, regardless 
of increase in non-performing loans. The current account deficit has dropped, creating better 
premises for a sustainable external position of the economy and stable exchange rate. These 
developments have contributed to maintaining macroeconomic stability. 
Analysing  the  specific  developments  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  the  official  data  show  a 
slowing economic activity and a sustained downtrend in inflation. 
Average annual inflation reached 1.5% in the fourth quarter, remaining unchanged from the 
third  quarter.  In  December,  inflation  rate  edged  up  to  1.9%,  almost  entirely  due  to  higher 
prices  of  foods,  particularly  unprocessed  foods.  Prices  of  other  CPI  basket  items  were 
generally stable and affected slightly on inflation. 
From  the  macroeconomic  viewpoint,  the  low  inflation  rate  was  determined  by  the  sluggish 
aggregate demand, lower imported inflation and subdued inflation trends. 
Third-quarter  gross  domestic  product  dropped  2.3%,  driven  heavily  by  short-term  shocks 
arising  from  full  fiscal  stimulus  withdrawal  and  post-election  uncertainties,  which  impacted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
negatively on consumption, investments and tourism over this period. Excluding agriculture, 
the other sectors of the economy dropped, in annual terms. 
All the aggregate demand components performed poorly over the second half of the year. 
Private  consumption  was  at  low  levels,  reflecting  the  low  consumer  confidence  and  the 
decelerated  income  growth.  The  low  inflation  rates  contributed  to  maintaining  the  savings 
value.  However,  Albanian  households  continue  to  show  a  cautious  behaviour  toward 
consumption.  Also,  private  investments  deepened  the  downtrend  in  the  second  half  of  the 
year. The performance of this component has reflected the lower final demand, the boosted 
uncertainty  and  the  tight  bank  lending  terms.  Periodic  surveys  report  that  the  financial 
position of businesses remains difficult and this restrains their ability to invest. 
Fiscal policy was stimulating in 2013, mainly concentrated in the first half of the year. The 
fiscal stimulus is carried out by increasing spending and reducing taxes. The latest fiscal data 
are as of November 2013. During the first 11 months of the year, the budget deficit increased 
71.5%  in  annual  terms,  budget  spending  increased  4.7%,  while  fiscal  revenues  dropped 
3.1%.  The  revenue  drop  was  due  to  easing  tax  policy  and  poor  economic  performance. 
Fiscal developments in 2013 worsened the public debt dynamics. This debt tends to increase 
over the periods of economic slowdown, in response to fiscal counter-cyclical policies and 
the impact of automatic stabilisers. However, given the essential role of fiscal sustainability in 
the overall economic and financial stability, and the high level of Albania’s public debt, the 
Bank of Albania has requested and supported the taking of measures to control and reduce 
this debt in the medium term. 
In this context, we reiterate our message for anchoring this process to a fiscal rule, which will 
orient the fiscal policy in the long term, and will be reliable and transparent for all Albanian 
and foreign economic agents. 
Developments in the external sector of the economy signalled a sluggish foreign demand in 
the  third  quarter  of  the  year.  Though  trade  deficit  dropped,  the  external  sector  impacted 
negatively  on  the  economic  growth  due  to  lower  tourism  revenues.  In  October  and 
November,  the  external  trade  data  show  ongoing  annual  nominal  contraction  of  the  trade 
deficit, at 11.9%. This contraction was due to increase in exports by 12.0% and decrease in 
imports by 2.0%, over this period. The Albanian economy's capacity to maintain and speed 
up the positive export growth rates will determine the country's medium-term and long-term 
economic growth. In the medium term, increasing exports helps offset the domestic demand 
sluggishness, while in the long term, increasing competitiveness of the Albanian economy in 
the world markets should be to the core of Albania's new economic growth model. 
The  low  demand  for  consumption  and  investment,  and  the  banks'  conservative  lending 
policies,  have  slowed  the  monetary  indicators.  The  increase  in  the  money  supply  slowed 
down  to  about  2.5%  in  October  and  November  due  to  private  sector's  lower  demand  for 
funding. Lending to economy continued to contract and in November, it was 2.4% lower than 
a year ago. 
The above monetary and economic dynamics has exerted weak inflationary pressures. The 
low aggregate demand has expanded the negative output gap. The labour market pressures 
have  been  subdued  against  a setting  of  unchanged  unemployment  rate,  moderate  wages, 
and partially-used capacities. These developments have affected the control on output costs 
and profit margins, and are reflected in low core inflation rates over this period. 
Also,  imported  inflation has  been  downward  due  to  lower  primary  commodity  prices  in  the 
international market and stable exchange rate. 
Based on the economic outlook and aiming to encourage aggregate demand, the Bank of 
Albania lowered the key interest rate by 0.5 percentage points, at 3.0% in the fourth quarter. 
Also,  Bank  of  Albania's  monetary  policy  decisions  are  associated  with  ongoing  liquidity 
injections  and  orientations  toward  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  This  policy  has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
managed  to  keep  liquidity  premia  and  inflation  in  check,  by  contributing  to  lowering  the 
interest rates in the interbank, government debt security, lek loan and deposit markets. 
However,  the  lek  loan  price  has  not  fully  reflected  our  monetary  policy,  indicating  the 
presence  of  high  risk  premia  and  containing  the  monetary  stimulus  transmission  to  the 
economy. These risk premia are also reflected in other lending terms, unrelated to the loan 
price, and appear tighter as compared to their historical performance. 
 Under the Bank of Albania's baseline scenario, the economy will improve slightly during the 
current year. Increase in exports and a better performance of consumption and investments 
will  continue  to  support  the  aggregate  demand.  The  monetary  policy  will  support  the 
domestic demand, by maintaining macroeconomic stability and ongoing injection of monetary 
stimulus in the economy. Also, payment of arrears will help improve the balance sheets of 
firms and the private sector, and is expected to improve business borrowing. Excluding the 
payment of arrears, the 2014 budget has projected a fiscal adjustment needed against the 
backdrop  of  a  rapidly  increased  public  debt.  Reflecting  the  weak  economic  and  monetary 
dynamics in the country, inflationary pressures are expected to be weak. 
After  four  quarters,  inflation  is  expected  to  vary  0.7%–3.8%,  with  a  90%  probability  of 
occurrence. This will require maintaining a stimulating monetary policy even in the medium 
term. 
 At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 3.0%. Given the expected inflation developments, the Supervisory 
Council deems that the monetary policy will remain stimulating in the medium term. 
The monetary stimulus intensity may increase further over the periods ahead, in the 
event the economic and monetary developments continue to shift the balance of the 
downside  inflation  risks.  In  any  case,  the  Bank  of  Albania  remains  determined  to 
ensure price stability, in accordance with its inflation target. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  2014  will  be  a  turning  point  for  the  Albanian  economy. 
Maintaining  financial  and  economic  stability,  improving  external  environment,  pursuing 
stimulating macroeconomic policies and continuing structural reforms would open the way to 
Albania's stable and long-term development. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
