Guy Debelle: The Australian bond market 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Economic Society of Australia, Canberra, 15 April 2014. 
 I would like to thank Ivailo Arsov, Mathew Brooks and Karl Stacey for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
Thank you for inviting me to talk at the Economic Society here in Canberra. Today I am going 
to walk you through the current state of the Australian bond market. The bond market plays 
an  important  role  in  the  financial  structure  of  the  Australian  economy  and  it  is  timely  to 
examine its structure and functioning with the financial system inquiry underway.  
I will start today by providing an overview of the composition of the Australian bond market 
and how this has changed in recent years. Then, I will discuss more recent developments in 
the market since the start of 2013, focusing particularly on two trends that emerged last year: 
the nascent signs of deepening of the domestic corporate bond market and the pick-up in 
securitised issuance. I will also talk a little about the prospect for market-based finance, of 
which bond issuance is an important part, playing a larger role in the future than it currently 
does.  
Shape of the Australian bond market 
The evolution of the Australian bond market over the past several years has been shaped to 
a  large  extent  by  the  fallout  from  the  global  financial  crisis.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  the  market 
comprised  mainly  bonds  issued  by  the  Australian  banks  and  asset-backed  securities. 
Together these accounted for just over half of the outstanding stock of Australian bonds in 
June 2007. Bonds issued by the public sector were a relatively small share of the market, at 
16 per cent of the total outstanding (Table 1).  
Overall, the size of the bond market in mid 2007  was equivalent to around 84 per cent of 
Australia’s  annual  GDP.  In  the  subsequent  seven  years  the  stock  of  Australian  bonds  on 
issue has increased to reach the equivalent of nearly 100 per cent of GDP. The increase has 
mainly  been  the  result  of  debt  issuance  by  the  Commonwealth  and  state  governments  to 
finance their budget deficits as they sought to support economic growth through the crisis. 
Bank bond issuance has slowed down in the last couple of years as Australian banks have 
sought to shift towards more deposit funding. However, the stock of bank bonds on issue is 
significantly higher than it was just before the start of the global financial crisis, reflecting the 
strong  issuance  of  bank  bonds  in  2008  and  2009  as  the  financial  system  was  re-
intermediated because other forms of non-bank financing dried up.1 One of the areas of the 
market that suffered the greatest impact from the crisis was asset-backed securities, due to 
the  loss  of  investor  confidence  in  this  asset  class  globally.  This  resulted  in  the  stock  of 
outstanding  Australian  asset-backed  securities  nearly  halving,  in  nominal  terms,  and 
declining three-fold relative to GDP since mid 2007.  
 
                                                 
1   The  developments  in  the  Australian  bank  bond  market  between  mid  2007  and  2009  are  covered  in  more 
details  in  Black  S,  A  Brassil  and  M  Hack  (2010),  “Recent  Trends  in  Australian  Banks'  Bond  Issuance”, 
Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, March, pp 27–33. More recent developments in the banks' bond issuance 
are  covered  in  Berkelmans  L  and  A  Duong  (2014),  “Developments  in  Bank’s  Funding  Costs  and  Lending 
Rates”, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, March, pp 69–75. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Table 1 
Australian Bonds Outstanding* 
  Overview of developments since 2013 
Conditions  faced  by  Australian  bond  issuers  have  continued  to  improve  since  early  2013, 
reflecting the markedly better conditions in global financial markets as the global economic 
recovery  has  become  more  entrenched  and  as  European  sovereign  debt  concerns  have 
eased.  
Issuance  has  been  generally  strong  and  has  been  met  by  robust  domestic  and  offshore 
demand. The only exception to this was the month of June which saw virtually no issuance of 
non-government  bonds  as  issuers  and  investors  stood  on  the  sidelines  while  financial 
markets  were  assessing  the  prospects  and  implications  of  the  start  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve’s tapering to its asset purchases program. However, this episode proved short-lived, 
with Australian and global bond market activity resuming quickly and continuing apace when 
tapering actually started in December.  
The  past  year  in  the  Australian  bond  market  has  been  most  notable  for  the  signs  of  the 
improvement  in  investor  sentiment  extending  along  the  risk  spectrum  towards  lower  rated 
corporate bonds and to parts of the fixed income market that have been, unfairly, at least in 
the  case  of  Australia,  tarred  by  the  loss  of  global  investor  confidence.  Issuance  in  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
domestic market of lower-rated corporate bonds, which in the case of Australia means those 
rated  BBB+  to  BBB−,  was  the  strongest  on  record,  and,  notably,  at  longer  than  usual 
maturities. The securitisations market, particularly for residential mortgage-backed securities 
(RMBS), also recorded a significant increase in activity.  
These  trends  in  issuance  were  also  reflected  in  the  pricing  of  Australian  bonds,  with  the 
difference in yields between these bonds and CGS narrowing across the risk spectrum since 
early 2013 (Graph 1). Although, the pace of narrowing has slowed relative to 2012, spreads 
are  now  at  their  lowest  levels  since  the  end  of  2007.  Borrowing  costs  for  Australian 
corporates  and  states  are  at  very  low  levels  historically,  while  wholesale  funding  costs  for 
banks,  which  are  more  a  function  of  bond  spreads  rather  than  bond  yield  levels,  have 
declined further.  
Graph 1 
 A further sign of the improved market conditions has been the continual extension in bond 
maturities  across  most  market  segments  (Graph  2).  The  lengthening  in  maturities  reflects 
principally two developments: improvement in overall risk sentiment; and the search for yield 
in a low interest rate environment pushing investors out along the yield curve in search for 
yield pick-up.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Graph 2 
 Recent issuance trends 
I will now go through these developments in more detail. 
Public sector 
Since 2013, net issuance of CGS and semis has slowed down from the pace in recent years. 
Based  on  the  latest  borrowing  programs  and  budget  forecasts,  the  stock  of  public  sector 
bonds outstanding is expected to increase to around 40 percent of GDP by 2016/17, before 
stabilising at that level (Graph 3). As you are aware, this is considerably lower than in most 
other countries. Beyond 2016/17, it is desirable to maintain a reasonable amount of CGS on 
issue to support a liquid government bond market and thereby provide a risk-free curve off 
which other debt instruments can be priced.2  
 
                                                 
2   The  Australian  government  announced  in  its  2011/12  Budget  that  in  order  to  support  a  liquid  and  efficient 
bond market it will aim to maintain the stock of outstanding CGS at around 12 to 14 per cent of GDP, a level 
which the Reserve Bank views as appropriate for this purpose. For more details see Australian Government 
(2011),  “Budget  Strategy  and  Outlook  2011-12”,  in  Budget  Paper  No.  1,  2011/12  Australian  Government 
Budget,  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  Canberra,  pp  7–16  –  7–18.  Available  at  <http://budget.gov.au/2011-
12/content/bp1/html/index.htm>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
 Demand  for  Australian  public  sector  debt  has  remained  high  due  to  Australia’s  solid 
economic performance and high credit ratings of the public sector. The federal government is 
currently  one  of  only  13  AAA-rated  (by  S&P)  sovereigns  globally,  attracting  continuing 
demand for CGS, particularly from official reserve managers. This demand has facilitated the 
lengthening  in  the  maturity  profile.  In  November  last  year,  the  AOFM  issued  a  20  year 
nominal fixed rate bond raising $5.9 billion. This was Australia’s largest bond issue (until the 
$7 billion 2026 CGS issue in March this year) and it generated significant demand with nearly 
$9 billion in bids and 60 per cent foreign investor participation.  
Bond  issuance  by  the  state  borrowing  authorities  in  recent  years  has  featured  increasing 
issuance of floating-rate notes (FRNs). Since early 2013 around one quarter of the issuance 
has  been  FRNs  (Graph  4).  The  increased  FRN  issuance  has  been  designed  to  meet  the 
demand for such paper from banks who want to hold state government paper to meet the 
soon to be implemented prudential liquidity requirements.3 Banks have a natural preference 
to hold FRNs to match the floating rate nature of their liabilities.  
 
                                                 
3   The  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  requires  banks  to  hold  a  proportion  of  their  assets  in  high-quality  liquid 
assets (HQLA). In Australia, only Commonwealth and state government debt are eligible securities as HQLA. 
Banks are required to limit their holdings to around 30 per cent of the stock on issue of these assets, to avoid 
impairing the liquidity in the market of holding higher amounts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 4 
 Financial sector 
Gross bond issuance by Australian banks over the past year has been around its average 
level  since  2007.  Roughly  three-quarters  of  banks’  issuance  was  offshore,  mainly  in  US 
dollars and euros. Banks have slowed down their issuance of covered bonds now that their 
covered bond programs are maturing, having only been able to issue under them since late 
2011 (Graph 5).4  
Graph 5 
                                                 
4   For  a  more  in-depth  discussion  of  the  evolution  of  the  Australian  covered  bonds  see  Aylmer  C  (2013), 
“Developments in Secured Issuance and RBA Reporting Initiatives”, Address to the Australian Securitisation 
Forum, Sydney, 11 November. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There  has  been  minimal  net  bank  bond  issuance  in  recent  times,  with  banks  basically 
content with their existing level of bond funding.5 Banks have been comfortably able to fund 
asset growth (which has been relatively subdued) with deposits.6  
Securitisations 
The  continual  improvement  in  broad  market  sentiment  has  been  seen  strongly  in  the 
Australian asset-backed market, particularly in the market for RMBS. The volume of issuance 
of RMBS in 2013 was the highest since 2007 (Graph 6). The majority of issuance continues 
to  be  in  Australian  dollars,  as  has  been  the  case  in  recent  years,  and  in  fact,  the  total 
Australian  dollar  issuance  in  2013  was  only  exceeded  by  the  level  of  Australian  dollar 
issuance in the two and a half years immediately preceding the onset of the financial crisis.  
Graph 6 
 Despite  the  low  level  of  foreign  currency  issuance  in  2013,  foreign  investor  demand  for 
Australian  RMBS  has  been  quite  high,  reflecting  the  lack  of  supply  of  RMBS  in  foreign 
markets,  the  global  search  for  yield,  and  confidence  in  the  high  quality  of  the  underlying 
collateral  of  Australian  RMBS.  Publicly  available  data  indicate  that,  on  average,  around 
40 per  cent  of  each  deal  in  2013  was  placed  with  foreign  investors,  and  foreign  investor 
participation at issuance has increased significantly.  
The  gradual  improvement  in  RMBS  market  conditions  since  mid  2012,  particularly  the 
increase in private investor demand, led to the AOFM ceasing its RMBS purchases in 2012 
and the government announcing the formal end of the AOFM’s RMBS investment program in 
April  2013.  Since  the  start  of  2013,  the  AOFM  has  sold  around  $1  billion  of  its  RMBS 
holdings  in  five  transactions,  including  in  February  this  year  the  sale  of  a  large  part  of  its 
holdings of mezzanine tranches following strong investor demand for such exposures.  
                                                
5   One area where there has been stronger growth has been in the area of subordinated debt, with the banks 
issuing new Basel III compliant securities to refinance legacy Tier 1 and Tier 2 securities and to meet strong 
investor demand. 
6   The  stock  of  outstanding  government-guaranteed  bonds  has  declined  to  around  $23  billion,  reflecting 
maturities and buybacks. The remaining government-guaranteed bonds mature over the next 12 months. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  improvement  in  the  RMBS  market  conditions  has  also  been  reflected  in  a  number  of 
other dimensions:  
• 
Deal sizes have increased, especially for RMBS issued by the major banks, where 
the average size has increased to $2.5 billion.  
Issuance has picked up not only for the major banks but also for regional banks and 
non-banks  (i.e.  credit  unions  and  mortgage  originators),  with  a  number  of  smaller 
issuers returning to the market after an absence of several years.  
RMBS  issuance  spreads,  over  the  last  year  or  so,  have  remained  at  their  lowest 
level since mid 2007; despite the significantly larger volume that has been brought 
to market (Graph 7).  
  Graph 7 
 Deal structures have continued to evolve with further issuance of bullet tranches to manage 
prepayment risk. One recent deal was structured without a serial pay trigger, which has been 
the norm in recent years, apparently in anticipation of the changes to the APRA’s prudential 
standard on securitisations outlined late last year.7  
2013 saw the first Australian CMBS issue since 2011, and although volumes have remained 
low  this  has  been  followed  by  a  further  two  transactions.  Issuance  of  other  ABS  has 
remained strong, with 2013 recording the highest level of gross issuance on record with a 
sizable pick-up in Australian dollar issuance.  
to 
                                                
7   For  an  outline  of  APRA’s  proposed  reforms  to  APS  120  see  Littrell  C  (2013),  Prudential  Reform  in 
Securitisation,  Presentation 
the  Australian  Securitisation  Forum,  Sydney,  11  November.  
Available  at  <http://www.apra.gov.au/Speeches/Documents/CharlesLittrell-Australian-Securitisation-Forum-
11November2013.pdf>. One of the major thrusts of the proposed changes is the introduction in the prudential 
standards  of  the  so  called  “skin  in  the  game”  for  ADI  issued  RMBS.  RMBS  issued  since  mid  2007  have 
typically  included  a  serial  pay  trigger  which  after  certain  conditions  are  met,  mainly  satisfactory  deal 
performance for several years after issuance, switch the principal payment order from paying tranches in order 
of  seniority  to  paying  all,  or  most  tranches,  proportionately  to  their  outstanding  amount.  This  feature  was 
introduced in the market to address the higher cost on junior tranches in the wake of the global financial crisis 
and for ADI sponsored RMBS, where the sponsor has been limited to hold no more than 20 per cent of the 
deal to qualify for capital relief, to cap the share of the RMBS held by the ADI. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Corporates 
Australian  corporates  have  continued  to  have  good  access  to  bond  markets  both 
domestically and offshore, raising a total of $35.1 billion of new bonds since the start of 2013 
(Graph  8).  While  the  amount  issued  has  been  less  than  in  2012,  issuance  that  year  was 
underpinned by significant bond issuance by the large Australian miners. Part of the reason 
for  that  strong  issuance  was  that  the  miners  were  able  to  access  the  market  at  least  as 
cheaply  as  the  banks,  so  this  was  very  cost  effective  for  them.  As  these  companies  have 
reduced  capital  expenditure,  their  need  to  tap  the  bond  market  for  long-term  funding  has 
declined, leading to a drop-off in their bond issuance.  
Graph 8 
 The main development in the corporate bond market over the past year or so has been the 
significant pick-up in lower rated issuance into the domestic market and at longer maturities 
than have been previously achieved domestically. While domestic tenors remain well below 
the  tenors  at  which  corporates  can  raise  bond  funding  in  some  offshore  markets, 
particularly in the US, this is a very much welcomed development, reflecting the continuing 
maturity of the domestic market. Investors have become more comfortable with moving up 
the maturity spectrum and down the ratings spectrum in the domestic market in order to 
pick  up  yield  and  corporates  are  finding  the  pricing  more  attractive.  The  seven  year 
maturity  was  the  favoured  point  for  the  domestic  issuance  by  BBB+  to  BBB−  rated 
Australian  corporates,  with  $2.2 billion  raised  by  9  issuers  across  10  bonds  (Graph  9). 
How  much  of  this  will  be  sustained  when  we  are  no  longer  in  a  very  low  interest  rate 
environment remains to be seen.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 9 
 Last  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  began  publishing  more  comprehensive  measures  of  spreads 
and yields on Australian non-financial corporate bonds, covering points on the yield curve up 
to 10 years.8 This additional information will bring greater transparency about bond market 
conditions faced by these issuers. 
Investor base 
Non-residents’  demand  for  Australian  fixed  income  securities  remains  strong.  This  is 
particularly the case for CGS, where the share of the market held by non-residents remains 
close to its historical high, despite declining slightly in mid 2013 (Graph 10). A sizeable share 
of  this  demand  comes  from  official  reserve  managers  who  are  attracted  to  the  relatively 
higher  yield  on  Australian  government  bonds,  the  high  and  stable  credit  rating  of  the 
Australian  government  and  Australia’s  strong  and  stable  economic  performance.  Non-
residents’  holdings  of  semis  have  continued  to  decrease,  while  the  semis  holdings  of 
Australian  banks  have  continued  to  increase. This  reflects  the  demand for  semis from  the 
Australian  banks,  given  that  these  securities  qualify  as  high  quality  liquid  assets  under 
APRA’s  rules,  and  offer  a  (small)  yield  pick-up  over  the  other  high  quality  liquid  assets  in 
Australia, CGS. The share of holdings of financial bonds by non-residents remains below the 
pre-crisis level as the Australian banks have reduced their funding sourced from offshore. On 
the other hand, the share of non-residents’ holdings of Australian corporate bonds remains at 
a  historically  high  level  as  Australian  corporates  have  continued  to  have  good  access  to 
international bond markets.  
 
                                                 
8   For  details  on  the  new  measures  of  credit  spreads  see  Arsov  I,  M  Brooks  and  M  Kosev  (2013),  “New 
Measures of Australian Corporate Credit Spreads”, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, December, pp 15–26. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 10 
 Conclusions 
Although Australia avoided most of the more severe disruptions in financial markets during 
the  global  financial  crisis,  the  turmoil  has  left  its  mark  on  the  Australian  bond  market 
landscape.  Conditions  in  financial  markets  have  been  improving  steadily  since  mid  2012; 
2013 and the first quarter of this year have resembled what normal bond market conditions 
may  look  like  in  a  post  crisis  world.  Looking  forward,  we  can  expect  the  Australian  bond 
market to solidify this normalisation. Credit spreads are likely to remain higher than their pre-
crisis levels, reflecting the repricing of credit and liquidity risk, while yields are likely to remain 
low for some time as central banks only gradually normalise their monetary policy settings.  
We  are  likely  to  see  some  further  growth  in  the  size  of  the  public  sector  bond  market  in 
Australia for a little while longer, but the stock of outstanding bonds is expected to stabilise 
as  a  share  of  GDP  by  mid  2017.  Issuance  by  the  Australian  banks  is  likely  to  remain 
subdued as they continue to favour deposit funding.  
Total corporate bond issuance may remain subdued in the near term as the main potential 
issuers  –  the  large  diversified  mining  companies  –  have  a  focus  on  increasing  production 
from  already  developed  projects,  containing  capital  expenditure,  and,  more  broadly,  large 
Australian companies have accumulated significant cash balances since mid 2007.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
However, while bank-based finance remains dominant today, in the future we may well see 
the Australian financial system move to more market-based sources of finance, particularly 
bond  issuance.  The  regulatory  changes  have  increased  the  relative  cost  of  bank 
intermediation,  as  liquidity  is  now  more  appropriately  priced  and  the  cost  of  maturity 
transformation  has  increased.  As  a  result, market-based sources  of finance  are  now  more 
cost effective for a wider range of companies and one would expect them to respond to this 
with increased bond issuance.  
At the moment, parts of the corporate sector can access the bond market at a cheaper price 
than banks can. As mentioned earlier, there has been increased appetite for debt issued by 
lower-rated companies at attractive prices for the issuer and at longer maturities than they 
would normally get from a bank. How much of this is a function of the current global interest 
rate environment remains to be seen, but there is a reasonable prospect that some of these 
developments will be long-lasting. 
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
