  Peter Pang: Economic and financial outlook for the Asia/Pacific region 
Welcome remarks by  Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  Launch  of  the International  Monetary  Fund’s  Regional Economic  Outlook, 
Hong Kong, 28 April 2014. 
 1. 
Good afternoon. It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the launch of the latest 
issue of the IMF’s Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook. We are honoured to have 
Mr.  Changyong  Rhee,  Director  of  the  Asia  and  Pacific  Department  of  the  IMF,  and  his 
colleagues  to  share  with  us  today  their  views  on  the  region’s  economic  and  financial 
developments, the outlook and the challenges, and what can be done to manage the risks 
and promote further growth that is sustainable over the years ahead. 
2. 
I  totally  agree  with  the  theme  of  this  issue  of  the  REO  –  sustaining  Asia’s  high 
growth momentum would require continuing vigilance and reforms. There is little doubt that 
Asia  will  continue  to  grow  faster  than  most  other  regions  in  the  world.  Since  the  Asian 
financial crisis, policymakers have implemented many structural reforms making the region 
more resilient. Asia has also been leading the world recovery after the global financial crisis. 
Having said that, Asia cannot afford to feel complacent as the road ahead is bumpy. And we 
will  be  in  unchartered  waters  when  the  high  tide  of  global  liquidity  starts  to  ebb  as  the 
developed economies embark on the normalization of their monetary policies. We should get 
well prepared or would lose the momentum quickly. 
3. 
Exit by the U.S. Fed from its unconventional monetary policies is one of the most 
important external challenges that the region will face in the next year or two. A timely and 
orderly  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  US  should  help  to  slow  credit  growth  and 
contain asset price inflation in the region. However, a disorderly normalisation process could 
lead to significant outflows of capital, abrupt tightening of financial conditions and a severe 
re-pricing  of  assets.  This  can  result  in  financial  instability  and  even  a  sharp  slowdown  of 
economic  growth  in  the  region,  particularly  in  those  economies  with  weaker  fundamentals 
and higher reliance on external financing. Yet, there is a lively debate about the size of the 
labour market slack in the US, which could complicate the judgment about inflation risks and 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  the  path  of  exit  is  not  necessarily  smooth,  and 
interest rate volatility could be higher than currently anticipated. 
While monetary policy normalisation may reflect a pick-up in the growth momentum 
4. 
in the US which should help support Asia’s exports, the strength of this support is subject to 
some uncertainty. We also need to be aware that economic integration has increased within 
the region. As identified by the IMF in the REO, the increase in trade and financial integration 
have strengthened the propagation of growth shocks between regional partners. 
5. 
So,  what  are  our  major  policy  challenges?  With  the  US  rate  hike  cycle  drawing 
nearer, the window for the region to get prepared for a tightening in financial conditions is 
getting  smaller.  It  is  therefore  important  for  policy  makers  to  contain  further  build-up  of 
leverage, and to ensure banks will properly manage interest rate and exchange rate risks, 
and  can  withstand  any  potential  deterioration  in  loan  quality.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  that 
policymakers  in  many  economies  in  the  region  have  taken  pre-emptive  policy  actions  to 
lower credit growth and slow house price inflation. The biggest challenge now is when and 
how to relax these measures when market conditions reverse. 
6. 
Second, policymakers will need to have sufficient backstop to mitigate systemic risk 
in the financial system in the event of a disorderly exit of US monetary policy. In this regard, 
the  ASEAN+3  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralisation  Arrangement,  the  regional  financial 
safety  net,  could  help  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  financial  contagion  by  providing  financial 
resources to members in the event of short-term liquidity difficulties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  7. 
Third, structural reforms remain the best way to reduce vulnerabilities and achieve 
sustainable growth over the long-term. We have been moving forward on this front through a 
deepening of intraregional trade, strengthening private and public-sector balance sheets and 
improving market infrastructure. But a lot more needs to be done. There is still ample scope 
to  tackle  structural  impediments  to  growth  and  stability  such  as  further  capital  market 
development, product and labour market reforms and service-sector reforms. All these areas 
require  strong  political  commitment  and  continuous  efforts  in  order  to  achieve  successful 
outcomes. 
8. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  highlight  a  key  driver  of  sustained  economic  growth  that  is 
particularly important for Asia – infrastructure investment. Unfortunately, we still see big gaps 
for infrastructure financing today despite the large savings in the region, and infrastructure 
development has been slow and inefficient in many countries. One of the major reasons is 
the shortage of “bankable” projects. There are a host of factors behind involving legal and 
governance issues, and political risks. But whatsoever the reasons, it is a gap that can only 
be  filled  by  bringing  together  capital  and  know-how  from  the  public  and  private  sectors. 
Indeed,  the  G20  has  recently  highlighted  the  importance  of  infrastructure  investment  as  a 
growth  driver,  but  many  challenges  remain  in  overcoming  the  obstacles  to  identifying 
“bankable” projects. 
9. 
In the face of immense uncertainties and challenges ahead of us, IMF’s assessment 
of the prospects and risks, as well as advice on policy response for the region at this juncture 
is particularly important. We look forward to the presentation by IMF and the dialogue during 
the panel discussions. 
10. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
