  Louis Kasekende: Strengthening economic links between China and 
Uganda 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the dinner in 
honour of Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of People’s Bank of China, Kampala, 19 May 2014. 
 Honourable Minister responsible for Finance, Mrs. Maria Kiwanuka 
The Governor of the Peoples’ Bank of China 
The Ambassador of the Peoples’ Republic of China to Uganda 
Board of Directors, Bank of Uganda 
Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury 
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Chairman, Uganda Bankers Association 
Chairman, Uganda Manufacturers’ Association 
The President, Uganda Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
Executive Director, Private Sector Foundation 
Executive Director, Uganda Investment Authority 
Chairperson, Association of Uganda Foreign Exchange Bureaus 
Chairperson, Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) 
Distinguished Delegates from the Peoples’ Bank of China 
Management Staff of the Bank of Uganda 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening 
The  purpose  of  this  dinner  is  to  welcome  the  Governor  of  the  Peoples’  Bank  of  China 
Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan and his delegation. Dr. Xiaochuan, it is a great honour to welcome you 
to Uganda, on your first visit ever to this country. It marks the growing importance of China to 
Uganda  and  our  hope  is  that  your  visit  will  cement  the  relationship  between  the  Peoples 
Bank of China and Bank of Uganda and also boost trade and investment between China and 
Uganda. 
Over the last decade, China has become a very valuable partner for development in Uganda, 
as evidenced by the increasing bilateral trade between the two countries, project aid, and the 
in 
significant 
infrastructure 
development  such  as 
railway,  electrical  power  and 
communications, and oil. 
Apart from strengthening trade and direct investments between China and Uganda, I believe 
that  there  is  a  great  deal  to  learn  from  China’s  achievements,  which  include  steady  and 
robust  growth  for  two  decades,  often  with  the  highest  annual  growth  rates  in  the  world;  a 
record  in  poverty  reduction  that  is  unparalleled  in  human  history;  and  among  the  world’s 
Top 2  in  economic  size,  trade,  technology,  science  and  other  areas  of  the  21st  century. 
China  has  been  very  successful  in  structural  transformation,  modernisation  and  economic 
growth. 
Let  me  highlight  three  major  lessons  of  China’s  development  which  are  of  relevance  to 
Uganda and Africa: first, the structural transformation has involved shifting huge numbers of 
the  Chinese  Government 
road  construction,  hospitals, 
investments  by 
the  areas  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  workers  from  low  productivity  agriculture  to  modern  industries,  while  simultaneously 
increasing  agricultural  production.  Central  to  this  impressive  trend  has  been  high  rates  of 
private investment in labour intensive industries. 
The second lesson is the importance of the demographic transition in driving development. 
The  structural  advantage  of  the  demographic  dividend  has  contributed  to  more  than 
30 percent of China’s total economic growth. China cut its total fertility rate to slightly under 
2 children per woman and, as a result, was able to reduce the age dependency ratio to only 
36 per 100 workers. In contrast, Uganda has a total fertility rate and age dependency ratio of 
6.1 and 104, respectively, among the highest levels in the world. Therefore, a reduction in 
the  fertility  rate  and  the  age  dependency  ratio  would  contribute  to  driving  structural 
transformation and economic growth in any developing country. 
Third  lesson  I  would  like  to  draw  from  China  is  the  maintenance  of  a  competitive  real 
exchange  rate  that  supported  export  led  growth.  This  is  in  marked  contrast  to  some 
economies  in  the  Sub  Saharan  Africa  region  where  the  exchange  rates  have  often  been 
overvalued, thereby reducing incentives in the export sector. An undervalued exchange rate 
that increases the size of the tradable sector would stimulate economic growth. 
This morning, the Bank of Uganda senior management had the opportunity of meeting the 
Governor with his delegation. We shared the economic experiences of the two countries and 
a number of issues came out, which would be of great interest to the investor and banking 
community in Uganda. I will share with you the following: 
1.  
Over  the  last  10  years,  foreign  exchange  management  in  China  has  been 
transformed  extensively  leading  to  lifting  restrictions  on  the  use  and  international 
settlement of the Renminbi and that the currency is now fully convertible; 
The  Peoples’  Bank  of  China  has  a  number  of  swap  arrangements  with  several 
Central Banks in advanced, emerging, and developing economies; 
China  permits  direct  investment  into  the  Chinese  bond  and  securities  markets 
through an agent correspondent bank; 
China is open to correspondent relationships with financial institutions; 
A  number  of  windows  have  been  developed  for  medium  to  long term financing of 
trade  and  investments  and  that  the  Governor  will  soon  be  signing  a  US$2  billion 
Joint Investment Fund with the President of the African Development Bank. 
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
The  opportunities  for  trade  and  financing  are  many  and  the  Ugandans  can  position 
themselves to take advantage of these opportunities. 
Further, the Peoples’ Bank of China and the Bank of Uganda agreed this morning on staff 
and information exchanges to pursue issues of common interest in central banking. We look 
forward to a continued collaboration and dialogue between the Peoples’ Bank of China and 
the Bank of Uganda and hope that China and Uganda will derive mutual benefits from this 
collaboration. 
Thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
