  Norman T L Chan: What does it take to develop a Global Offshore 
RMB Hub? 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Treasury Markets Summit 2014, Hong Kong, 15 September 2014. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
 A very warm welcome to all of you to this year’s Treasury Markets Summit. 
The  theme  of  today’s  Summit  is:  “Development  of  Hong  Kong  as  the  Offshore 
Renminbi  Hub”.  This  is  indeed  a  very  timely  topic  as  we  have  just  marked  the 
5th anniversary of the launch of the pilot scheme for the use of renminbi (RMB) in 
cross-border  trade  transactions  in  the  summer  of  2009.  We  of  course  started  the 
RMB banking business back in 2004, but until 2009 our business was restricted to 
the  development  of  personal  accounts  for  Hong  Kong  residents  and  use  of  credit 
cards. The major milestone was clearly the start of offshore RMB trade settlement 
and other businesses for corporates five years ago. 
So what have we accomplished in the last five years? It is probably fair to say that 
very few of us could have envisaged the rapid progress that we have achieved in 
turning Hong Kong into the global offshore RMB business hub in such a short time. 
In  terms  of  deposits,  including  Certificate  of  Deposit  (CDs),  we  have  grown  from 
around  RMB90  billion  in  end-June  2010  by  nearly  twelve  times  to  RMB1.1  trillion 
now, which makes us the largest offshore RMB liquidity pool in the world. In trade 
settlement, Hong Kong banks handled a phenomenal amount of RMB2.9 trillion in 
the first half of 2014, as compared to the total amount of Mainland’s external trade 
settled in RMB of RMB3.3 trillion in the same period. Hong Kong has also become 
the largest issuance hub of offshore RMB bonds or Dim Sum bonds, with a total of 
93  issuances  in  the  first  six  months  of  this  year,  amounting  to  RMB130  billion  in 
value. The total amount of outstanding RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong amounted 
to  RMB380  billion  at  end-June  this  year.  In  addition,  the  forex  and  financial 
derivative  markets  for  RMB  have  grown  steadily  over  these  few  years,  which, 
according  to  SWIFT,  have  raised  RMB  from  the  20th  position  of  the  most  used 
payment currency to the 7th position lately. Most strikingly, the value of payments that 
go  through  our  RMB  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  system  has  registered  a 
phenomenal growth, reaching an average of around RMB700 billion each working 
day. 
I won’t bore you further with the numbers as I  am sure  you are very familiar with 
them.  Surely  it  is  useful  for  us  to  pause,  look back,  take stock  and  try  to  think  of 
ways in which we can continue to excel as we go forward from where we are. So 
without  further  ado,  let  me  quickly  turn  to  the  main  theme  of  my  remarks  this 
morning:  “What  does  it  take  to  build  a  successful  global  hub  for  offshore  RMB 
businesses?” The key to success, if I may summarise it, lies in the acronym: “PIPs”. 
“PIPs”  stands  for  “Policy  Headroom,  Infrastructure  and  People/Products”.  Let  me 
cover these three elements in the reverse order. For People and Products, I have 
said  many  times  that  for  any  financial  centre  to  thrive  and  out-compete  other 
centres, the crucial building block would be its people and products. It goes without 
saying that a world class financial centre must have the right people designing and 
distributing the right products that serve the needs of the financial consumers. This 
is an important and core component of the soft power that I have been talking about 
in  the  last  few  years.  It  is  a  key  attribute  that  differentiates  a  global  hub  from  the 
other financial centres. People and Products fall into the area in which the financial 
industry,  including  the  individual  firms,  practitioners  and  industry  bodies  like  the 
TMA, can and should play a dominant role. I am sure that you will agree with me 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
2 
  that  policy  makers  and  regulators,  while  having  the  responsibility  to  safeguard 
financial  stability  and  to  accord  appropriate  protection  to  financial  consumers,  are 
not really well suited to get too involved in gauging market demand and designing 
financial products that would best meet the requirements of the consumers. 
Having  said  that,  policy  makers  and  regulators  do  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in 
respect of Policy Headroom and Infrastructure, which are the first two elements of 
“PIPs”. Let me elaborate further. 
Clearly there could not be any offshore RMB markets if the Mainland did not make a 
move in 2009 to change its policy of not allowing the use of RMB in cross-border 
trade and other transactions. But of course, the Mainland authorities were and still 
are understandably wanting to open up the capital account on an incremental basis, 
taking one step at a time. When one looks back at the last five years, the scope and 
breadth  of  the  cross-border  flow  of  RMB  have  been  progressively  and  steadily 
expanded. While we have come a long way from 2009 and there have been many 
policy changes in this period that help the offshore market to move forward, I would 
like  to  highlight  four  major  milestones  of  policy  headroom  expansion  that  made  it 
possible for the incremental development of RMB markets offshore. The first one is 
the RMB trade settlement pilot scheme I mentioned at the beginning. Then comes 
the relaxation in the use of RMB for foreign direct investments into the Mainland and 
outward direct investments by Mainland corporates starting in 2011. Then channels 
for  RMB  portfolio  investment  flows  have  also  been  created,  such  as  the  RMB 
Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (RQFII) scheme, so that offshore investors 
can  invest  in  the  onshore  bond  and  equity  markets.  The  fourth  and  most  recent 
milestone is the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect Programme, which will enable 
Hong Kong and overseas investors to invest in A-shares listed in Shanghai through 
Hong  Kong,  and  Mainland  investors  to  invest  in  Hong  Kong  shares  through 
Shanghai. This marks a significant step in the liberalisation of the Mainland’s capital 
account,  and  will  increase  the  flows  of  RMB  between  the  onshore  and  offshore 
markets  and  propel  the  development  of  offshore  RMB  business  in  Hong  Kong  to 
new highs. As far as the HKMA is concerned, we have used our best endeavours to 
work  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBoC)  and  other  relevant  Mainland 
authorities to continually expand the policy headroom that would enable Hong Kong 
to continue to thrive as the global hub for offshore RMB businesses. 
Lastly, let me turn to the second element of the key to success in developing into a 
global  offshore  RMB  hub,  i.e.  market  infrastructure.  I  can  think  of  four  key 
components: (i) efficient clearing and settlement systems, (ii) robust and yet market 
friendly  regulatory  regime,  (iii)  financial  benchmarks  (such  as  CNH  fixings)  and 
(iv) liquidity. In the interest of time, I would skip the first three components and just 
focus on the fourth. As we all appreciate, in terms of financial market development, 
liquidity  is  essential.  We  also  know  that  liquidity  breeds  further  liquidity.  Without 
ample  market  liquidity,  it  is  hard  for  any  financial  centre  to  flourish  or  maintain  a 
competitive edge. We of course are acutely aware of the importance of promoting 
market  liquidity,  especially  in  the  early  stages  of  our  development  of  the  CNH 
market.  It  was  against  this  background  that  the  HKMA  has  all  along  taken  a 
proactive approach in seeking to strengthen the liquidity of the CNH market in Hong 
Kong. In June 2012, the HKMA launched a Repo facility to provide one-week funds 
for  banks  in  Hong  Kong  as  a  backstop  to  facilitate  banks’  liquidity  management. 
However, the facility was for T+2 settlement and did not fully address the needs of 
the  banks.  In  order  to  assist  bank  treasurers  to  better  manage  their  liquidity,  the 
HKMA shortened the settlement of the repo to T+1 in January 2013 and again to 
T+0 in July 2013. 
Today, I am pleased to announce that, in preparation for the imminent launch of the 
Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect,  the  HKMA  will  implement  two  additional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 10. 
 measures as backstop facility to assist banks in Hong Kong in managing their RMB 
liquidity: 
(a) 
In addition to what the BoC HK, as the RMB Clearing Bank, is providing to the 
Participating  Banks  through  intraday  overdraft,  the  HKMA  will  provide  an 
intraday Repo facility of up to RMB10 bn to banks in Hong Kong. The HKMA 
will charge a fee, based on the actual time used during the day, for the use of 
the facility. The purpose of the HKMA intraday liquidity facility is to promote 
more efficient RMB payment flows between banks; and 
(b)  The HKMA will also designate a number of banks active in the CNH market as 
Primary  Liquidity  Providers  (PLPs).  Banks  that  are  designated  as  PLPs  are 
committed  to  using  and  developing  Hong  Kong  as  the  global  platform  for 
supporting  their  offshore  RMB  businesses.  They  are  also  committed  to 
expanding their market-making activities in CNH market. In return, the HKMA 
will  offer  a  repo  line  to  each  of  the  PLPs  so  as  to  facilitate  more  efficient 
liquidity management when they carry out market-making and other business 
activities in the CNH market. This bilateral repo line can be used by the PLPs 
as  intraday  or  overnight  liquidity  management  purposes.  The  HKMA  is  now 
finalising the list of PLPs and the necessary documentation. We hope to be 
able to announce the list of PLPs very shortly. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  competitive  edge  of  a 
successful  financial  centre  depends  crucially  on  its  soft  powers,  not  just  on  hard 
infrastructure. Hong Kong is uniquely well positioned to take advantage and play a 
pivotal role in the new era of China’s growth story and in the internationalisation of 
RMB. Hong Kong enjoys both first-mover advantages as well as many irreplaceable 
structural  advantages,  given  Hong  Kong’s  very  close  links  with  the  Mainland  in 
trade,  investment  and  finance  under  the  “One  Country,  Two  Systems”  principle. 
However,  there  is  absolutely  no  room  for  complacency.  As  this  new  era  of  RMB 
internationalisation  has  just  begun,  we  still  have  a  long,  long  way  to  go  as  the 
offshore  RMB  markets  continue  to  grow  and  mature,  while  the  capital  account 
controls in Mainland China are being gradually relaxed or lifted. In the early stages 
of this new era, the primary task of Hong Kong is to develop the CNH market and at 
the same time work with other financial centres such as Sydney, London or Paris to 
grow the pie, leading to win-win outcomes. As we move into the more mature stages 
of  the  internationalisation  of  RMB,  the  available  policy  headroom  should  be  quite 
ample for the markets to flourish. At that time, the  2nd and  3rd elements of PIPs, i.e. 
Infrastructure and People/Products, would matter a great deal more if  Hong Kong 
wishes to retain its competitive edge over the others. It will be up to our industry, 
financial firms and market practitioners to out compete the other centres in terms of 
product  innovation  and  distribution  of  various  financial  products  and  services  that 
best serve the needs of their clients. I am sure that the TMA, with the support of its 
members and the financial industry, will continue to play a leading role in developing 
the professionalism of the practitioners and in facilitating product innovation. Thank 
you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
