  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Convergence in a divergent world 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the ACI Phils-FMAP-IHAP-MART-TOAP Joint General Assembly, 
Makati, 23 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
Last time I addressed your General Assembly, I did a little “word association” game with you. 
I  don’t  know  how  many  of  you  recall  that,  but  I  did  that  last  year  to  highlight  the  fact  that 
often, the same words we hear have different meanings to us. Often, this is so because of 
our individual “positions” in the market. In other words, that adage “where we stand depends 
on where we sit” is very true among you. 
Last  time,  I  highlighted  the  BSP’s  desire  to  get  everyone  on  the  same  page,  wherein  the 
same  words  would  mean  the  same  thing.  Because  clearly  that  ideal  situation  of  common 
understanding makes for more effective and efficient BSP policy implementation. 
This  year,  I  will  not  do  that  game  anymore.  Rather,  let  me  focus  on  just  two  words.  Can 
anyone hazard a guess as to what these two words would be? Any guesses? 
The first word 
The first word is DIVERGENCE. 
I  chose  this  word  because  of  late,  it  has  become  quite  an  important  word  that  describes 
some of the remarkable features of the current global economic environment. 
First. Divergence in the growth paths among major economies. 
We  have  seen  that  in  the  US  there  continues  to  be  a  sprinkling/sputtering  of  positive 
economic  indicators,  while  both  the  EU  and  Japan  are  still  struggling  for  their  economic 
growths to gain traction. 
Second.  Divergence  between  the  current  growth  path  of  emerging  market  economies  and 
the  previous  forecasts  for  the  growth  path  of  these  economies.  EME  growth  has  broadly 
slowed down from the earlier anticipated growth trajectories. 
Together, these two “divergences” have important implications for the speed and manner of 
global growth rebalancing and policy normalization. 
Third. Divergence in the monetary policy stances among the AEs. 
Major central banks’ policy rates have remained at historic lows. But while the Fed has kept 
the  phrase  “considerable  length  of  time”  in  its  statement,  it  raised  its  expectations  on  the 
future  path  of  the  target  rate  (i.e.,  those  infamous  dots).  It  also  reiterated  its  exit  plan  – 
stating  that  depending  on  data  developments,  it  could  raise  its  target  rates  sooner  than 
earlier expected. 
My sense is that the markets have taken these statements from the Fed to be of a relatively 
hawkish tone, and therefore USD supportive. Particularly so when the market would contrast 
these statements against: 
1. 
the  ECB  action  of  offering  liquidity  directly  to  banks  under  its  TLTRO  (which, 
subsequently received only a weak take-up by banks), and, 
the BOJ preparing for further QE. 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This apparent divergence in the monetary policy postures among AEs is not necessarily a 
bad situation. It should give you in the market some comfort that global liquidity will not be 
drying up anytime soon. In the BSP, we refer to these as “countervailing forces”. 
But  it  should  also  give  us  cause  to  pause…  as  this  sentiment  could  very  well  lead  to  the 
perpetuation of low volatility in the financial markets. 
For while there is disparity in the expected directions of policy among the AEs, this disparity 
is transpiring at very, very low levels of interest rates. 
With  the  forward  guidance  provided  by  the  Fed,  EU  as  well  as  Japan,  helping  to  reduce 
some of the uncertainty about interest rate changes, the low volatility  may actually  lead to 
further investor complacency. 
This leads to a Fourth Divergence. 
The possible divergence in the “true state” of the global economy and the financial system 
against that which the low volatility in financial markets is portraying. 
Those of you have been “around the block” a few times and (I see a number of you in the 
front row!)… You have witnessed that serious episodes of market stress are often preceded 
by unusually low volatility, which oftentimes signal the gradual build-up in risk-taking. 
What then does this current global backdrop of divergence mean for us? For our domestic 
markets? 
Our monetary policy stance – the reasons behind 
Our last policy action speaks to this issue. 
Keenly  aware  of  how  our  domestic  market,  i.e.,  your  industry  associations,  is  extremely 
reactive to US rate movements, the BSP acted “pre-emptively” against the expected rise in 
US interest rates. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have maintained for some time now that, early, measured action is 
superior  to  belated,  large,  discrete  re-actions.  The  latter  could  create  more  volatility  in  the 
markets in general, and on your own P/L in particular. 
Therefore, as we prepare for the eventual Fed “lift-off”, you may wish to also consider making 
only gradual, non-chunky adjustments in your own portfolios. 
Let me now spend just a few more minutes to speak about our current stance of monetary 
policy. 
The BSP has done a number of things over the past few months. We have raised reserve 
requirements, hiked the SDA rate, the RRP rate and then, recently, both the SDA and the 
RRP rates together. 
These we did in response to various factors to achieve the following results: 
1. 
To rein in domestic liquidity growth. M3 growth is now down from above 30 percent 
to  just  above  18  percent  in  July  this  year.  We  expect  M3  growth  to  continue  on  its 
deceleration path and reach more normal levels later this year.; 
2. 
To  help  manage  the  financial  stability  risks  of  the  over-all  low  interest  rate 
environment. While we have not seen broad-based asset mis-valuations, the BSP remains 
cognizant  that  keeping  rates  low  for  too  long  could  result  in  mis-appreciation  of  risks  in 
certain  segments  of  the  market,  including  the  real  estate  sector  and  the  stock  market  as 
markets  search  for  yield.  So  far,  coupled  with  changes  in  reportorial  requirements  and 
macroprudential  measures,  the  monetary  policy  actions  appear  to  have  achieved  some 
success in moderating the buildup of “irrational exuberance” in certain market segments.; 
3. 
To help steer inflation expectations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our  most  recent  Business  Expectations  Survey  showed  that  the  number  of  those  who 
expected inflation to go up in the current and next quarters has increased. In addition, our 
survey of private sector economists shows inflation forecasts that are precariously close to 
the upper end of our target range. This is particularly true of forecasts for 2015, for which the 
NG target is lower at 2–4 percent. 
Further,  our  own  forecasts  are  also  now  higher.  We  now  see  2014  inflation  to  average 
4.48 pct, up from previous 4.33 pct, and 2015 inflation to average 3.79 pct, up from previous 
3.72 pct. 
While most of the reasons cited for the heightened inflation expectations are due to supply 
side pressures, elevated expectations need to be addressed sooner rather than later. These 
could fuel second-round effects, which may be more difficult to arrest once they have set in; 
and 
4. 
interest rates. 
Right now because of excess liquidity in the system, the industry doesn’t seem to mind much 
that  real  interest rates  are  negative.  But  ladies  and  gentlemen,  when  the  tide  turns,  those 
projects that you may have “approved” based on a specific expected value may not provide 
you  the  “return”  you  anticipated. With  this  in  mind,  our  policy  actions  have  been  aimed  at 
helping you manage your own risk appetites. 
Given  all  these  fundamental  reasons  for  the  series  of  BSP  actions  so  far,  what  can  the 
market expect from the BSP going forward? 
As I have always said, the BSP  will remain  watchful. We will keep our ears to the ground 
while  we  have  our  eyes  on  our  price  and  financial  stability  mandate.  And  we  will  remain 
flexible to use all available tools in our now enhanced tool kit, including our strong external 
liquidity position. 
To reduce the possible financial stability impact of extended periods of negative real 
a disciplined monetary policy framework, 
a deep enhanced policy tool kit, 
a healthy level of gross international reserves, and 
ample monetary policy space 
Validating our position of strength 
Indeed, in addition to: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
we have built other buffers that make us confident we would be able to withstand the impact 
of the “divergences” in the external environment that I had just outlined. 
Of significance among these other buffers is our sound banking system. 
We  have  had  numerous  occasions  over  the  last  few  years  to  point  to  the  strength  of  our 
banking industry. 
Even  before  the  sovereign  attained  investment  grade,  the  Philippine  banking  system  had 
already been cited for its resilience in the midst of global dislocations. 
Total  assets  held  by  universal  and  commercial  banks  increased  by  a  little  over  two  trillion 
pesos  from  end-2012  to  July  2014.  This  translates  into  an  annualized  double-digit  growth 
rate of 16.9% over this 19-month period. 
The  same  two  trillion-peso  increase  can  be  seen  in  deposit  liabilities,  equivalent  to  an 
annualized growth of 23.1%. Asset-side accounts have also increased, with Loans growing 
at an annual rate of 14.3% and another 10.6% for Financial Assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What  is  most  impressive  is  that  universal  and  commercial  banks  have  continuously 
strengthened their balance sheet for possible exigencies. The Capital Account of U/KBs has 
increased  by  around  Php156  billion  in  the  past  19  months,  driven  by  improvements  in 
Retained Earnings (Php94 billion) and Paid-In Capital (Php46 billion). 
To top it all, our U/KBs appear to be purposely leaning on the side of caution. The account 
“Cash  and  Due  From  Banks”  has  significantly  increased.  Since  end  2012,  U/KBs  have 
recorded an increase of Php867 billion or a staggering annualized growth of 37%. 
Reforms: How strength can be further enhanced 
As  these  numbers  validate,  there  is  definitely  every  reason  to  believe  that  we  are  in  a 
position of strength and finding ways to sustain it. 
This is a feather on our cap. But we also must be circumspect enough to accept that strength 
is neither absolute nor eternal. Financial markets continuously evolve and the same position 
of  strength  can  be  a  marked  weakness  at  another  time  and  under  different  market 
circumstances. 
This  is  why  the  BSP  has  made  it  clear  that  we  support  the  principles  underlying  the 
espoused global reforms. We believe that there is reason to the global reforms. But we are 
open to both the timing and execution of the reform details. 
Bank  capital  –  the  very  core  of  banking  supervision  principles  –  must  always  have  the 
capacity  to  absorb  losses  from  risk  taking  behavior.  These  are  no  longer  from  your  plain-
vanilla credit, market and operational risks. Instead, we need to be more cognizant of such 
issues  as  liquidity  pressures,  excessive  leverage,  interconnectedness,  and  the  bar  of 
governance applicable to each entity with a public franchise to operate as a bank, including 
and  especially  for  those  which  are  deemed  systemic  by  virtue  of  their  operations,  market 
reach and the unique products and services that they provide. These are all enshrined in the 
Basel 3 reform agenda. 
And while we support the basic prudential intent of these reforms, we have also been very 
deliberate in our roll out of the reform components. 
Within the ASEAN-5, we were the last to implement the capital reforms for Basel 3. To-date, 
we  have  issued  exposure  drafts for the  treatment  of  counterparty  credit  risk,  domestically-
operating systemically important banks, the data aspect of OTC derivatives and of leverage. 
And  while  the  exposure  draft  for  liquidity  risk  has  yet  to  be  issued,  this  too  has  been 
simulated, much like our prior efforts on capital, D-SIBs and leverage. 
Apart from the global reforms, we have quite a bit in the pipeline for things that we consider 
home-grown issues. It is a long wish list, and I shall not go through each of them here. I am 
fully  aware  that  your  industry  associations  are  in  constant  conversation  with  the  BSP  on 
these topics through the BSPC. 
For  all  these  to  “work”,  we  need  the  plumbing.  Just  like  in  a  house,  the  financial  markets 
need to have efficient plumbing. This is why the BSP is currently reviewing, not just Philpass, 
but the whole financial market infrastructure as well. In market infrastructure, the BSP is a 
vested stakeholder – for whether it is wholesale or retail payments, securities transactions or 
the  transfer  of  liquidity  from  one  account  to  another,  the  backroom  of  our  banks  must 
ultimately meet at PhilPass to effect final and irrevocable settlement. For the BSP this goes 
well  beyond  the  issue  of  efficiency.  For  us,  it  is  about  ensuring  the  flow  of  financial 
transactions through the appropriate management of liquidity across financial institutions and 
for the system as a whole. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Do we really need all these now? 
Ladies and gentlemen, I just went through 5 compacted slides of reforms... There is much 
that is already on the table as far as change is concerned. And the honest truth is that the 
market should expect more. We have been asked quite often: Do we really have to do all 
these now? 
In response, I ask those who can remember what it was a decade and a half ago. 
I believe quite a few of those on the presidential table were already here then! 
A few years removed from the immediate impact of the Asian Financial Crisis, the Philippines 
was  strong  enough  to  be  as  devastated  as  some  jurisdictions  around  us  but  not  strong 
enough  to  be  deemed  resilient.  Before  then  was  the  so-called  Tequila  crisis  and  the 
Philippines figured in several publications as among the “most likely jurisdiction” to fall next. 
During those years, changes were also introduced. Back then, the question was also raised: 
Do we have to do these reforms now? 
The point of the matter is that reforms are inconvenient because they introduce change and 
change needs to be managed. The strength that we see around us in the industry is the by-
product of calibrated change. And as the Central Monetary Authority, we have every intention 
to continue enabling the operating environment within the context of a pro-active culture of 
risk management and financial governance. 
The  point,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  of  all  these  is  that  the  “position  of  strength”  that  we  so 
cherish today is the result of reforms. This is the reward for introducing the facets of change 
that we needed, even when it was unpopular to do so. 
But in the end, it cannot be just the standards that have made a difference. Instead, we do 
recognize that the market has – to a large extent although not absolutely always – conducted 
itself in a prudent and professional manner. 
It is this combination of prudential governance and market conduct that has gotten us this far. 
As a community, we clearly value it. It is to our best interest to sustain and also find ways to 
enhance it. 
Final thoughts 
At  the  beginning  of  my  remarks,  I  said  I  had  TWO  words…  I  have  only  given  you  one  – 
DIVERGENCE. Let me conclude with the second word – CONVERGENCE. 
In this divergent world, where each is driven by his own bottom line considerations, we come 
to realize that there is no exercise that does not leave us short of breath. Whether it is a pro-
active effort or an intervention to address parochial concern, the intention to make us better 
requires deliberate effort. There is no short cut to this and there cannot be easy wins if it is 
longer term competitiveness that is our objective. 
Strength is achieved, not granted. Reforms are consciously laid out, not wantonly enforced. 
Our efforts therefore need to CONVERGE towards purposeful reforms. If we value what we 
see around us in the industry today, let us actively find ways to improve ourselves and our 
operating environment. We are all vested parties and the future is a collective interest. 
This  is  the  message  I  would  like  to  share  with  all  of  you  today.  Be  part  of  the  pro-active 
change. Reforms are never convenient. But, with the right mix, they make us better. 
Indeed, we must find convergence in this divergent world we operate in. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
