  Patrick Honohan: The impact of the boom and bust on the capital of 
households in Ireland 
Response  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the 
presentation  by  M  Thomas  Piketty,  at  the Think-tank for  Action  on  Social  Change  (TASC) 
Conference  “The  Challenge  of  Economic  Inequality  to  Recovery  and  Wellbeing”,  Dublin, 
20 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
For me, a long-time admirer of Thomas Piketty’s work and a first-day-of-issue purchaser of 
Capital in the 21st Century (Piketty, 2014) there is much to enjoy and admire in this work, 
focusing as it does, not only on the distribution of income at a point in time, but in particular 
on  the  evolution  of  wealth  or  capital  holdings  over  time,  a  topic  neglected  to  a  surprising 
degree in most analysis of economic statistics. 
I especially like the historical sweep including the well-detailed comparison and contrast of 
the late 19th Century “gilded age” with the more recent “age of financialisation”. (We didn’t 
have much of a “gilded age” in Ireland, but we did have “financialisation” with a vengeance 
cf. O Riain, 2014). 
I  also  was  intrigued  by  the  documentation  of  the  destruction  of  wealth  –  and  of  wealth 
concentration  –  by  war  and  depression  in  mid-20th  century.  (Resonances  also  here  to 
Ireland’s current experience). 
I appreciate the matter-of-fact concern with inequality – especially wealth inequality: I differ 
from those commentators who do not see the obvious policy relevance of these matters. 
And  I  like  the  handling  of  the  contrasting  roles  of  inheritance  and  accretion  through 
investment earnings versus “earned income” in generating wealth inequalities. 
Finally, as someone who studied macroeconomic dynamics in graduate school, I was very 
struck by the neglected relevance of the r – g dynamic (i.e. the dominance and concentration 
wealth will grow in the economy if the average rate of return on capital continues to exceed 
the  rate  of  growth  of  economic  activity)  for  interpreting  and  predicting  trends  in  the 
concentration of wealth. 
I  have  to  disappoint  anyone  expecting  a  “however”  at  this  stage,  because  (while  such  an 
ambitious book will continue to prompt many debates and questions) for me it is a tour de 
force. 
Although much of the commentary around Piketty’s book has centred on his forward-looking 
analysis of the prospects for the size distribution of worldwide wealth in the decades ahead, 
other  parts  have  greater  immediate  resonance  for  us  here  in  Ireland.  I  am  thinking 
specifically  about  the  way  in  which  many  of  the  long  data  series  in  Capital  show  a 
pronounced  decline  in  the  mid-20th  Century.  Related  to  two  world  wars  and  the  Great 
Depression  which  separated  them,  as  well,  perhaps,  as  to  the  rise  of  the  “Welfare  State”, 
these  collapses  occurred  both  in  terms  of  the  aggregate  wealth-to-income ratio  and  to  the 
concentration of wealth at the top end of the distribution. 
If  Capital  convinces  of  anything,  it  surely  establishes  that  looking  at  major  historical 
transitions through the lens of data on wealth is very instructive. We also have had disruptive 
events  in  Ireland  in  the past  decade  somewhat  comparable to the mid-century  capital  and 
wealth  collapses  in  Europe  documented  by  Piketty.  As  well  as  tipping  the  economy  into  a 
deep recession, triggering a surge in unemployment and emigration and crippling the public 
finances, our crisis has been associated with large losses in household capital and increases 
in indebtedness causing distress. These latter aspects have been the focus of a lot of work at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the Central Bank in the past few years as we have used the limited powers at our disposal 
and sought to provide advice to Government to map the best available route to recovery. 
Data on the distributional impact of recent economic developments in Ireland 
Capital in the 21st Century shows the value of comprehensive data to understand trends in 
capital  and  debt.  So,  seen  through  such  a  data  lens,  how  does  the recent  boom-and-bust 
experience of Ireland compare? Do we have the data? Well, for aggregate household wealth 
and indebtedness we do have many of the most important elements (Cf. Cussen and Phelan, 
2010,  2011,  Cussen,  O’Leary  and  Smith,  2012),1  and  I  will  speak  about  those  aggregate 
numbers in a few minutes. 
But  for  how  that  wealth  and  indebtedness  is  distributed,  much  less  is  known.  To  be  sure, 
systematic  collection  of  income  inequality  and  poverty  data  in  Ireland  has  been  well 
established since the 1980s and is carried forward notably in the CSO’s SILC survey. The 
share  of  the top few  percent  of the  income  distribution  has  also  been tracked  over  a  long 
period  of  time  in  Ireland,  and  that  data  (Nolan,  2007)  is  part  of  the  World  Top  incomes 
database employed by Piketty. 
Using this and other sources there has been extensive work to understand the impact of the 
boom and bust on income distribution (cf. McGinnity et al. 2013) on the distribution of labour 
market  effects  of  the  bust  (ibid.),  on  the  distribution  of  economic  stress  and  material 
deprivation  (Maître,  Russell  and  Whelan,  2014)  and  on  mortgage  distress  (McCarthy  and 
McQuinn, 2011). The question of mortgage distress has indeed been the subject of a large 
body of data-intensive analysis at the Central Bank, much of it published (cf. Kennedy and 
McIndoe, 2012). 
The  literature  also  has  emphasised  the  role  of  the  state  in  influencing  the  distributional 
impact  on  disposable  income  through  tax  and  social  welfare  policy  (Callan  et  al.,  2013; 
Maître and Watson, 2013).2  
So we do know a lot about changes in living standards, loan servicing and economic stress 
resulting  from  the  crisis.  But  the  somewhat  different  dimension  which  Piketty  has 
emphasised  relates  to  assets  and  liabilities  as  distinct  from  income  and  expenditure  –  to 
stocks as distinct from flows: here we do have aggregate data, but little on its distribution. 
We would like to have, as indeed Piketty includes in his book for many other countries and 
over  a  long  time  period,  the  size  distribution  of  household  wealth.  In  addition  it  would  be 
valuable for the purposes of Government policy to know about the distribution of the different 
elements  of  household  wealth  as  between  different  income  deciles,  age  categories,  social 
class, educational attainment, occupational category or economic sector. 
But  for  Ireland,  apart  from  the  early  work  at  the  ESRI  (Nolan,  1991;  Honohan  and  Nolan, 
1993), no really systematic nationally representative survey of the distribution of wealth has 
been published. There are, of course, various partial analyses, for example the wealth data 
from the TILDA survey of older people recently analysed by O’Sullivan and Layte (2011) and 
O’Sullivan, Nolan, Barrett and Dooley (2014), and the small 2012 Central Bank household 
survey focused on indebtedness (McCarthy, 2014; McCarthy and McQuinn, 2014). 
Happily, we will soon know more about the distribution of assets and liabilities of households, 
with  the  data  cleaning  phase  now  nearing  completion  from  the  Household  Finance  and 
                                                
1  Cussen  and  Phelan  (2011)  also  discuss  trends  in  the  aggregate  assets  and  liabilities  of  other  sectors: 
Government and financial and non-financial corporations. 
2  The latest data suggesting a broadly proportional impact of policy changes on all income groups, though with 
a somewhat higher adverse impact for top and bottom deciles, when the period 2009–14 is taken together. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Consumption Survey (HFCS), which was conducted for Ireland for the first time in 2013 by 
the Central Bank and the CSO.3 
This  means  that,  when  it  comes  to  discussion  of  wealth  distribution,  we  will  not  have  the 
luxury of data-free speculation for much longer. So let me hasten to indulge myself! 
How did the main components of wealth change in Ireland in the boom and bust? 
The financial crisis had a dramatic effect on net worth of households in Ireland…as had the 
prior  boom.  As  shown  in  the  figure,  measured  aggregate  household  net  worth  peaked  in 
Ireland in mid-2007 at €719 billion, up almost €300 billion from five years before. Just five 
years later, in mid-2012, it had fallen back to its mid-2002 level. From that trough there has 
since been a small net increase again.4 (I will not touch on the assets and liabilities of the 
corporate sector, an area which is greatly complicated by the large presence of multinational 
corporations; I think that omission does not much distort what I have to say.) 
                                                 
3  Like most such exercises, this survey may not throw light on the very top end of the wealth distribution. 
4  A  few  points  should  be  noted  about  this  data.  About  two-fifths  of  the  household  financial  assets  represent 
insurance and pension fund assets held for the benefit of households, a further two-fifths represent currency 
and deposits. Quoted and non-quoted equities account for most of the remainder. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Figure: Main components of household and Government net 
worth, 2002, 07, 12 and 13 
(€  bn.  Source  for  Household:  Cussen  and  Phelan,  2010  and  updated  by  those 
authors;  for  Government:  net  financial  assets  from  Central  Bank  Quarterly 
Financial Accounts.) 
 Households  saved  throughout  this  decade,  and  this  tended  to  increase  net  worth.  But  the 
up-and-down swing in measured net worth was primarily related to changes in the price of 
land and housing.5  
The  value  of  housing  assets  grew  much  more  quickly  than  household  net  worth  between 
2002  and  2007;  this  was  accompanied  by  a  rapid  increase  in  aggregate  household  debt. 
Indeed, by 2007 aggregate household debt represented the third highest ratio to disposable 
income  among  24  European  countries  for  which  data  is  available  (Cussen,  O’Leary  and 
Smith, 2012). The increase in household debt 2002–7 was about the same as the increase in 
aggregate  household  financial  assets.  But  of  course  this  would  not  be  true  of  individual 
households: distribution matters. When the price of property fell back, the debt remained. 
The two factors which have transformed what might seem a rather benign valuation blip into 
a crippling debt crisis are, of course (i) the distribution issue, namely the fact that different 
households were affected in dramatically different ways, depending mainly on whether they 
had  borrowed  to  buy  over-priced  property  and  (ii) the  fact  that  the  Government’s  net  debt 
position has also deteriorated by about €150 bn since 2007: a third of it attributable to the 
bail-out of bank creditors6 and the rest resulting from the borrowing undertaken, especially 
from  official  sources,  in  the  course  of  smoothing  the  transition  to  restoring  budgetary 
balance.7  
                                                
5  The role of valuation changes is shown in Cussen and Phelan (2010, 2011). Aggregate equity withdrawal from 
mortgage lending in the boom years amounted to about €8 billion (Lydon and O’Leary, 2013). 
6  Though not of bank shareholders, who lost essentially all of their investment; subordinated debt holders of the 
banks also lost heavily. Between them, these investors, mostly foreign, absorbed about half of the banking 
losses. 
7  The  latter  need  became  evident  after  the  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  (e.g.  unemployment  payments  and 
reductions  in  tax  revenue)  kicked-in  when  the  global  and  domestic  economic  crises  coincided  to  erode 
employment and income levels. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  If everyone’s assets and liabilities had been affected in the same way, then the return of net 
assets to their 2002 level might have seemed relatively painless. But the modest net change 
in aggregate household net worth between 2002 and 2012 should not mask an increase in 
aggregate indebtedness of over €100 bn. Not everyone borrowed. But for most of those who 
did  at  the  height  of  the  price  bubble,  the  devastating  effect  on  their  net  worth  of  the 
subsequent price fall is the most significant wealth outcome of the crisis. It has sent net worth 
into negative territory for many, especially before taking account of future earning potential 
(sometimes known as “human capital” in wealth analyses). Current and future earnings have 
also been damaged by unemployment.8 Migration flows are also a factor. 
The whole size distribution of net wealth moved to the left: pushing those at the bottom into 
very negative positions. 
While I cannot prove it, I think we may take it (based on what evidence we have) that there 
has  also  been  a  widening  of  inequality  within  the  wealth  distribution  (using  conventional 
measures of inequality) since the beginning of the millennium. 
Furthermore, the churn within the distribution has been substantial. Clearly many people who 
had become rich lost all of their gains. Other rich people were relatively unaffected. But the 
sizable group which incurred heavy debts to acquire property close to the top of the market 
have  seen  their  net  worth  (even  if  modest  to  begin  with)  wiped  out  entirely.  It’s  not  just  a 
question of analysing the relative impact of the bust on those who were rich before the boom 
versus those who were poor before the boom. Also striking is, for instance, the fact that the 
loss  of  net  worth  was  concentrated  mainly  on  those  who  borrowed  in  mid-century.9  This 
group was in turn concentrated in the age group 30–45, as is confirmed, for example, by the 
data of Duffy and O’Hanlon (2013). 
While,  as  Piketty’s  account  well  illustrates,  many  factors  alter  the  net  worth  of  different 
households over time – poor investment decisions; adverse shocks of one sort or another – 
this large movement strongly affecting a sizable fraction of society in a short period of time 
represents a huge shift in the distribution of household worth, as well as an overall widening 
of  wealth  inequality.  It  constantly  provokes  the  question:  “what  more,  if  anything,  can  or 
should Government policy do about this to alleviate the resulting stress?” 
What can or should Government do? 
In my experience, this question is inclined to elicit a wide range of responses displaying a 
wide range of fundamentally different approaches to questions of ownership and debt. There 
are,  on  the  one  hand,  what  may  be  called  “contract  fundamentalists”  who  disregard  the 
extreme nature of the crisis that has occurred. On the one hand there are those who attach 
little importance to conventional principles of ownership and private property. 
In practice – and this is part of the underlying mid-20th Century story shown by Piketty for 
Europe  –  sudden  and  major  debt  crises  on  this  scale  around  the  world  have  often  been 
accompanied by a surge of inflation and currency depreciation. Such surges have had the 
effect of lowering the real burden of indebtedness and passing some of the real losses to the 
holders of monetary assets. Unanticipated inflation is a crude mechanism of redistribution, 
though,  and  typically  results  in  output  costs  in  subsequent  years  as  monetary  authorities 
struggle to bring it back under control. In any event, it is not an option for Ireland. 
                                                
8  The burden of some of this debt has been partly mitigated by the low-for-long interest rate policy of the ECB – 
its policy rate has averaged well below 1 per cent for the past 5 years – which has brought the servicing costs 
of tracker mortgages well below where they were when the loans were contracted. 
9  Another category often mentioned are retired persons whose wealth was concentrated as was traditional on 
long-standing holdings of bank equity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Because it too reached the limit of its debt capacity (for the reasons mentioned above), the 
Government has little room left for policies involving net additional spending, so in practice it 
is  limited  to  broadly  cost-neutral  adjustments  to  tax  and  spending.  Along  with  this  limited 
capacity,  there  has  been  little  appetite  for  a  transfer  from  taxpayers  to  those  indebted 
households who can still afford to service their debts. 
Personal  insolvency  legislation  has,  however,  been  modernised  and  streamlined,  offering 
viable  options  for  over-indebted  borrowers.  Ideally,  though,  lenders  should  be,  and 
increasingly  are,  negotiating  more  favourable  arrangements  than  bankruptcy  that  restore 
borrowers to a sustainable position, while husbanding (as is their responsibility) the capital of 
the bank and avoiding unwarranted losses from concessions to borrowers that can afford to 
pay – concessions that would largely fall on the banking system’s largest shareholder, the 
State. I need hardly recall that walking this tightrope has been a very slow process. 
Some home-owners have seen their income situation deteriorate to the point where they can 
no longer afford to service the mortgage debt. Fortunately, the number of involuntary owner-
occupier  repossessions  has  so  far  remained  low:  given  the  sharp  fall  in  property  prices 
between  2007  and  2012,  it  can  make  sense  for  lenders  to  avoid  repossession  even  for  a 
homeowner who can no longer fully service the original debt. 
Banks  have  been  pressured  by  the  Central  Bank,  within  the  limitations  of  prudential 
regulation and their constitutional property rights, to accelerate the conclusion of sustainable 
loan modification solutions where the existing contracts are no longer viable. Gradually – too 
gradually  –  we  are  seeing  progress  on  this  front.  Banks  are  obliged  to  comply  with  the 
Central Bank’s code of conduct on mortgage arrears in arriving at sustainable solutions in a 
fair  and  transparent  way. This  remains  a focus of  our  close  attention  at  the  Central  Bank. 
Indeed,  we  have  examined  many  options  in  the  attempt  to  accelerate  the  process  of 
achieving a return to sustainability. 
Could  a  one-size-fits-all  debt  modification  scheme  be  devised  to  deliver  wholesale  loan 
modifications speedily for unaffordable debt? Despite our best efforts at the Central Bank, we 
have had to conclude that no blanket scheme can be devised that would be both viable and 
effective in current circumstances. No workable schemes have been devised that do a good 
job at hitting the target of those who really need assistance; and blanket schemes would be 
extremely costly for the State (over and above the large injections which it has already made 
into the banks). Unfortunately, then, this work has not displayed a way forward. 
To the extent that the lenders do not provide adequate workouts for unaffordable debt, it falls 
on  the  personal  insolvency  legislation  to  deal  with  this  problem.  The  recent  great 
liberalisation  of  this  legislation  was  badly  needed  and  it  provides  a  benchmark  context 
against  which  lenders  must  negotiate  workouts.  Is  it  enough?  Clearly  things  are  working 
slowly and too many creditors still adopt a “Victorian” approach to debt modification where 
the  borrower  cannot  pay.  On  the  other  hand  those  debtors  who  can  pay  are  beginning  to 
realise that the State is not likely to impose on the rest of society the costs of investments 
gone wrong for those who can afford to take the losses. 
The question of how best to deal with the overhang of household debt generated by the crisis 
has been extremely fraught. It involves political as well as technical decisions and judgment. 
The role of the Central Bank relates solely to the technical and here I hope we have provided 
advice  that  has  helped  maximise  the  overall  room  (in  terms  of  aggregate  economic 
resources  available)  for national  political  choices. We  have  contemplated  many  alternative 
approaches: While few people can be fully satisfied with the outcome to date, there do not 
seem to be any better paths. 
Discussions about the distribution of household assets and liabilities has rightly focused on 
those  with  little  or  no  net  wealth,  and  also  on  middle-income  householders  who  borrowed 
more  than  they  can  afford  to  acquire  over-priced  property.  Still,  there  are  also  important 
questions about the wider economic impact of changes in wealth higher up the scale. Many 
Irish  families  of  moderate  wealth  also  saw  their  capital  shrink  dramatically  in  the  crisis  as 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  property investments made in the boom, and inherited bank equity investments, lost value. 
Given  the  traditional  importance  of  family  funds  in  underpinning  start-up  finance  of  small 
firms, will this loss of wealth have an adverse effect on investment by small firms now and in 
the coming years? Are alternative financing mechanisms, including those being put in place 
by Government, going to be enough to fill this gap? 
Concluding remarks 
Before  closing,  I  need  to  emphasise  that  today’s  discussion  of  assets  and  liabilities, 
prompted by Thomas Piketty’s work, should not allow us to neglect the other ways in which 
the crisis has had a severe effect – for example, through loss of employment or reduction of 
social benefits, to mention just the financial costs – on many households too far down the 
income scale to have accumulated any significant net assets. Indeed, some of the affected 
persons have emigrated and no longer show up in the national statistics. 
As for the future, how important Piketty’s r – g dynamic will be in coming years in Ireland is 
hard to know. Certainly for r the return on bank deposits will remain low for the period ahead, 
and some of the bounce-back value of Irish property and business assets will accrue to the 
foreign buyers so much in evidence. The context for g of this will, of course, be the growth 
recovery in the European Union and the euro area, underpinning employment and income 
growth in Ireland itself. 
References 
Callan, Tim, Claire Keane, Michael Savage and John R. Walsh. 2013. “Distributional Impact 
of  Tax,  Welfare  and  Public  Service  Pay  Policies:  Budget  2014  and  Budgets  2009–2014.” 
ESRI Quarterly Economic Commentary, Winter. 
Calvert, Emma, Brian Nolan, Tony Fahey, Deirdre Healy, Aogan Mulcahy, Bertrand Maître, 
Michelle Norris, Ian O’Donnell, Nessa Winston, and Christopher T. Whelan. 2011. Growing 
Inequalities and their Impacts in Ireland GINI Country Report for Ireland. 
Cussen,  Mary  and  Gillian  Phelan.  2010.  “Irish  Households:  Assessing  the  Impact  of  the 
Economic Crisis.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 2010/4. 
Cussen,  Mary  and  Gillian  Phelan.  2011.  “The  Rise  and  Fall  of  Sectoral  Net  Wealth  in 
Ireland.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2011/3. 
Cussen,  Mary,  Brídín  O’Leary  and  Donal  Smith.  2012.  “The  Impact  of  the  Financial 
Turbulence on Households: A Cross Country Comparison.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly 
Bulletin 2012/2. 
Duffy,  David  and  Niall  O’Hanlon.  2013.  “Negative  Equity  in  the  Irish  Housing  Market: 
Estimates Using Loan Level Data.” ESRI Working Paper 463. 
Gerlach-Kristen, Petra. 2013. “Younger and older households in the crisis.” ESRI Quarterly 
Economic Commentary¸ Spring. 
Honohan,  Patrick  and  Brian  Nolan.  1993.  The  Financial  Assets  of  Households  in  Ireland 
ESRI General Research Series Paper No. 162. 
Kelly,  Robert,  Yvonne  McCarthy  and  Kieran  McQuinn.  2012.  “Impairment  and  Negative 
Equity in the Irish Mortgage Market.” Journal of Housing Economics 21, 256–68. 
Kennedy,  Gerard  and  Tara  McIndoe-Calder.  2012.  “The  Irish  Mortgage  Market:  Stylised 
Facts, Negative Equity and Arrears.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2012/1. 
Lydon, Reamonn and Brídín O’Leary. 2013. “Housing Equity Withdrawal Trends in Ireland”, 
Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2013/1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Maître, Bertrand, Helen Russell and Christopher T. Whelan. 2014. “Economic stress and the 
great  recession  in  Ireland:  polarization,  individualization  or  ‘middle  class  squeeze’?” 
University College Dublin Geary WP2014/07, April, 2014. 
McCarthy, Yvonne. 2014. “Dis-entangling the mortgage arrears crisis: The role of the labour 
market,  income  volatility  and  housing  equity.”  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Technical  Paper 
2/RT/14. 
McCarthy, Yvonne and Kieran McQuinn. 2014. “Deleveraging in a highly indebted property 
market: Who does it and are there implications for household consumption?” Central Bank of 
Ireland Technical Paper 5/RT/14 
McCarthy, Yvonne and Kieran McQuinn. 2011. “How Are Irish Households Coping with their 
Mortgage  Repayments?  Information  from  the  Survey  on  Income  and  Living  Conditions.” 
Economic and Social Review 42(1). 
McGinnity, Frances, Helen Russell, Dorothy Watson, Gillian Kingston and Elish Kelly. 2014. 
“Winners  and  Losers?  The  Equality  Impact  of  the  Great  Recession.”  Dublin:  The  Equality 
Agency and the Economic and Social Research Institute. 
McGuinness,  Anne.  2011.  “The  Distribution  of  Property-level  Mortgage  Arrears.”  Central 
Bank of Ireland Economic Letter 2011/6. 
Nolan, Brian. 1991. The Wealth of Irish Households: What Can We Learn from Survey Data? 
Dublin: Combat Poverty Agency. 
Nolan, Brian. 2007. “Long Term Trends in Top Income Shares in Ireland.” in A.B. Atkinson, 
and  T.  Piketty,  eds.  Top  Incomes  over  the  Twentieth  Century.  A  Contrast  Between 
Continental European and English-Speaking Countries. Oxford University Press, chapter 12. 
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. 
Ó Riain, Seán. 2012. “The Crisis of Financialisation in Ireland.” Economic and Social Review. 
43(4). 
The Rise and Fall of Ireland’s CO’Sullivan, Vincent and Richard Layte. 2014. “Income and 
Asset Levels of Older People.” in Alan Barrett, George Savva, Virpi Timonen and Rose Anne 
Kenny,  eds.,  Fifty  Plus  in  Ireland  2011:  First  results  from  the  Irish  Longitudinal  Study  on 
Ageing (TILDA). Dublin: Trinity College. 
O’Sullivan, Vincent, Brian Nolan, Alan Barrett and Cara Dooley 2014. “Income and Wealth in 
the Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing.” Economic and Social Review. 
Watson,  Dorothy  and  Bertrand  Maître.  2013.  Social  Transfers  and  Poverty  Alleviation  in 
Ireland:  An  Analysis  of  the  Survey  on  Income  and  Living  Conditions  2004  –  2011.  Social 
Inclusion Report No.4. Dublin: Department of Social Protection.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
