George A Provopoulos: Indications are that 2013 was the last year of 
recession 
Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 81st Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 27 February 2014. 
 At the previous General Meeting of Shareholders of the Bank of Greece in February 2013, I 
had  stated  that,  according  to  the  Bank’s  assessment,  the  Greek  economy  would  soon 
stabilise.  At  the  time,  our  forecasts  indicated  that  the  recession  would  gradually  ease  and 
that positive GDP growth rates would be observed in 2014. The developments in the past 
year have confirmed this assessment. 
More specifically, in the past twelve months: 
First,  economic  policy  remained  committed  to  the  stabilisation  programme.  Consistent 
implementation of the programme boosted international markets’ confidence in Greece. As a 
result, the spread between Greek and German 10-year government bonds fell to 655 basis 
points at end-2013, from 1,000 basis points at end-2012. 
Second, the improvement in confidence is gradually feeding through into the real economy. 
The  fall  in  GDP  in  2013  turned  out  to  be  milder  compared  both  with  2012  and  with 
projections in early 2013, mainly on account of the robust performance of exports, especially 
tourism, and smaller declines in consumption and investment. 
Third, the risks to gradual stabilisation did not materialise. The most serious of these risks 
was the Cypriot crisis, which was dealt with promptly and effectively, without repercussions 
for confidence in the domestic banking system. 
Fourth,  the  recapitalisation  of  Greece’s  four  core  banks  was  completed  successfully,  and 
major steps were taken towards restructuring and consolidating the banking system. These 
changes  were  carried  out  smoothly,  without  impact  on  the safety  of  deposits  and financial 
stability. 
The year 2013 marks a turning point, with the elimination of the twin deficits and the 
restoration of the economy’s cost competitiveness 
The increasingly brighter outlook during the course of 2013 gradually led to stabilisation and 
permitted noticeable improvements in fiscal and macroeconomic aggregates: 
The first noteworthy development is the estimated achievement of a primary surplus for the 
first  time  since  2002.  This  is  a  remarkable  achievement,  considering  the  severity  of  the 
recession. 
Second, according to provisional data from the Bank of Greece, the current account posted a 
small surplus in 2013. The substantial improvement in the current account balance over the 
last  four  years  was  due  to  lower  imports,  as  a  result  of  the  recession,  and  to  increased 
exports.  Between  2010  and  2013,  while  imports  of  goods  and  services  in  nominal  terms 
contracted by 15%, exports rose by 21%. 
Third,  after  more 
international 
competitiveness up to 2009, by 2013 Greece had recovered all of the cost competitiveness it 
had lost relative to its trading partners. This was due mainly to a decline in unit labour costs 
throughout the economy in the context of a deep recession with a surge in unemployment, 
and  greater  labour  market  flexibility.  Price  competitiveness,  by  contrast,  has  not  yet  fully 
recovered, as inflation only started to respond to weak demand and lower labour costs during 
2013. Negative inflation of –0.9% in 2013 has contributed to improving the economy’s price 
competitiveness and supports real incomes. 
two  decades  of  almost  continuous 
losses 
than 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Structural reforms were implemented between 2010 and 2013 that had been overdue 
for decades 
The  elimination  of  both  domestic  and  external  macroeconomic  imbalances  came  as  the 
result of a gradual adjustment of the economy from 2010 to 2013. During the same four-year 
period, a series of structural reforms were implemented in labour and product markets and in 
public administration. 
Structural changes in labour and product markets 
In the labour market, significant changes were adopted, aimed, first, at better aligning wage 
developments  with  firm  performance  and,  second,  at  enhancing  labour  mobility  across 
sectors.  Progress  with  structural  reforms  in  goods  and  services  markets,  by  contrast,  was 
markedly  slower  than  in  the  labour  market.  Nevertheless,  according  to  OECD  estimates, 
Greece  ranked  first  in  responsiveness  to  structural  reform  recommendations  made  by  the 
Organisation. 
Institutional changes to public administration 
The fiscal measures taken during the period 2010–2013 aimed at improving the budgetary 
balance  as  quickly  as  possible.  They  consisted  mainly  of  increases  in  direct  and  indirect 
taxes,  as  60%  of  the  adjustment  achieved  came  from  increased  tax  receipts,  while  the 
remaining 40% came from expenditure cuts. 
Nonetheless,  this  period  also  witnessed  significant  institutional  changes  geared  towards 
streamlining  the  public  administration  and  downsizing  the  public  sector.  At  the  same  time, 
new  institutional  reforms  were  adopted  that  lay  the  foundations  for  improving  fiscal 
management and ensuring the better control of public spending. 
It  should,  however,  be  stressed  that  progress  with  several  critical  reforms,  such  as 
administrative reform and the restructuring of public entities through mergers or closure, was 
slow, thereby delaying an effective restructuring of public administration and an improvement 
in  public  services.  Efforts  have  also  been  made  to  upgrade  the  tax  collection  mechanism. 
However,  here  as  well,  despite  clear  improvement,  the  necessary  progress  in  curbing  tax 
and contribution evasion has yet to be made. 
Financial stability was safeguarded by the bank of Greece with the support of the 
government 
During the crisis, Greek banks were cut off from international markets and, until June 2012, 
experienced  an  unprecedented  outflow  of  deposits,  equivalent  to  one  third  of  the  deposit 
base. In response, they resorted increasingly to short-term financing from the Eurosystem. At 
the height of the crisis in June 2012, total central bank financing to credit institutions came 
close to €140 billion. 
In addition, although Greek banks entered the crisis with satisfactory capital adequacy ratios, 
the  heavy  losses  they  suffered  from  2010  onwards  and  especially  the  impact  of  Private 
Sector Involvement (PSI) resulted in nearly all banks being faced with a capital shortage at 
end-2011.  The  recapitalisation  of  Greek  banks  thus  became  imperative,  in  order  to  fully 
protect depositors. 
Under these adverse circumstances, the government and the Bank of Greece took a number 
of  decisive  actions  aimed  at  safeguarding financial  stability  and  protecting  depositors. The 
most important of these actions involved: 
• 
the  uninterrupted  coverage  of  banks’  short-term  liquidity  needs  and  the  public’s 
demand for cash; 
the securing of adequate public funds for the recapitalisation and restructuring of the 
Greek banking sector; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  the resolution of weak banks under a new legal framework; and  
the recapitalisation of core banks. 
Steps towards the restructuring of the banking system 
The establishment of an appropriate resolution framework allowed for a smooth restructuring 
of the banking sector. By end-2013, twelve banks had been resolved, mainly via the transfer 
of  their  healthy  assets  to  another  bank.  Also,  following  a  bidding  process,  the  assets  and 
liabilities of Cypriot bank branches were transferred smoothly to a Greek bank. 
With  the  completion  of  the  recapitalisation  process  by  mid-2013,  banks’  capital  adequacy 
ratios  had  been  restored.  The  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund  (HFSF)  is  now  the  largest 
shareholder in each of Greece’s four core banks and has a buffer of over €8 billion to meet 
any further capital needs. 
The banking landscape today is different from that prevailing at the start of the crisis. Excess 
capacity has largely been eliminated, fewer but stronger banks are in operation, and the first 
benefits from the exploitation of synergies are already visible. 
Institutional reforms to reinforce EU economic governance 
The crisis served as a catalyst for strengthening economic governance in the EU, in general, 
and  the  euro  area,  in  particular.  Support  mechanisms  were  created.  Economic  policy 
coordination and budgetary surveillance have been reinforced. 
The  new  fiscal  framework,  laid  down  in  the  “Fiscal  Compact”,  came  into  force  in  January 
2013.  Member  States  that  have  signed  up  to  the  Compact  are  required  to  adopt  national 
fiscal rules to ensure that the annual structural government deficit does not exceed 0.5% of 
GDP,  as  well  as  a  correction  mechanism  to  be  triggered  automatically  in  the  event  of 
deviation from either the Medium-Term Objective (MTO) itself or the adjustment path towards 
it. 
At  the  same  time,  decisions  were  taken  towards  enhancing  the  institutional  framework  for 
financial  supervision  and  safeguarding  financial  stability.  Top  priority  was  given  to  the 
establishment  of  a  banking  union.  The  approval  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism, 
scheduled  to  become  operational  in  November  2014,  as  well  as  the  European  Council’s 
agreement  on  a  general  approach  to  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  are  important  steps 
towards  the  completion  of  the  banking  union.  In  2013,  agreement  was  also  reached  on 
directives on deposit guarantee schemes and a framework for the recovery and resolution of 
credit institutions. 
As far as Greece is concerned, the institutional improvements to the EMU architecture will 
ensure that past mistakes in fiscal management are not repeated and will contribute in the 
long run to economic stability, while the banking union is expected to boost confidence in the 
banking system. 
Prerequisites for the materialisation of the forecasted recovery in 2014 
Based on all the available data, it is reasonable to forecast that 2013 was the last year of 
recession.  However,  if  this  forecast  is  to  become  a  reality,  not  only  must  the  conditions 
contributing  to  the  improved  outlook  remain  unchanged,  but  they  also  have  to  be  taken 
further. The prerequisites for this to happen are: 
• 
Resolve and consistency in implementing the stabilisation programme. The positive 
outcomes  so  far  leave  no  room  for  complacency.  On  the  contrary,  they  call  for  a 
continuation  of  fiscal  adjustment  for  maintaining  a  sustainable  and  increasing 
primary  surplus  so  as  to  ensure  debt  sustainability  and  consolidate  the  climate of 
confidence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Elimination  or  at  least  minimisation  of  the  risks  and  uncertainties  that  might  be 
triggered by a deterioration in the social and political climate, as a result of growing 
confrontation in the run-up to the European and local government elections. 
Today, as we are near the end of a protracted recession, a comprehensive national policy 
that will lead us safely out of the crisis and onto a path of sustainable growth is required. To 
be effective, such a policy requires consensus building and compromise. Both, however, are 
difficult to achieve in a polarised climate, which acts only to amplify differences and thwarts 
the convergence of views. 
A prerequisite for growth is the continuation of fiscal adjustment. In this regard, top priority 
must be given to: 
• 
ensuring  consistency  in  the  execution  of  the  2014  Budget,  thereby  providing  a 
strong signal that the fiscal adjustment is sustainable; 
markedly upgrading the tax administration and the tax collection mechanism; 
speeding up the resolution of tax cases pending before the courts; 
cutting red-tape and the administrative burden on the private sector; 
enhancing the quality of public services; 
evaluating  the  performance  of  public  services  and  civil  servants  according  to 
transparent and objective criteria; and  
further  strengthening  the  institutional  framework  for  budget  preparation,  execution 
and monitoring. 
  Financing the economic recovery 
With  the  start  of  the  fiscal  crisis  in  2009  and  the  deep  recession  that  followed,  both  the 
supply  and  demand  for  credit  contracted  sharply.  Against  this  backdrop,  banks’  lending 
capacity was inevitably constrained, as the fiscal crisis strongly affected the credit ratings of 
both  the  country  and  domestic  banks.  Thus,  bank  credit  to  the  private  sector  gradually 
declined, causing a large number of businesses to have difficulty financing their production 
activities. 
Subsequently,  the  banking  landscape  in  Greece  has  changed.  Recapitalisation  and 
restructuring of the banking system are gradually restoring confidence and are creating the 
conditions  necessary  for  the  supply  of  bank  credit  to  the  economy  to  increase  over  the 
medium term. However, several factors continue to limit new lending in the short term. The 
most important are the following: 
First,  net  deposit  inflows,  a  critical  determinant  of  banks’  capacity  to  supply  credit  to  the 
economy, remain low. 
Second,  the  loan-to-deposit  ratio  needs  to  be  kept  at  a  conservative  level.  This  ratio  has 
risen largely because of the loss of deposits during the crisis. 
Third, the reliance of domestic banks on short-term financing from the Eurosystem remains 
high, in contrast to other euro area countries, and must be gradually brought down to more 
reasonable levels. 
Fourth, despite the boost in confidence achieved after the recapitalisation, the accumulation 
of non-performing loans gives rise to concern. This accumulation makes banks reluctant to 
extend  new  credit,  as  it  signals  a  high  level  of  credit  risk.  Moreover,  the  non-servicing  of 
loans  deprives  banks  of  income  that  could  otherwise  be  recycled  into  new  loans. 
Accumulating  non-performing  loans  force  banks  to  tie  up  more  capital  for  future  loan-loss 
provisions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The capacity for credit expansion will remain limited on account of these factors. This credit 
squeeze  can,  however,  be  offset  in  the  short  term  by  companies  turning  to  alternative 
sources  of  funds,  such  as  internal  capital  generation,  corporate  bond  markets,  equity 
markets, private placements and other modern financing tools, as well as resources available 
from EU Structural Funds and the European Investment Bank. In the medium term, though, 
the improvement in macroeconomic aggregates will pave the way to a gradual normalisation 
of credit expansion. 
from production of non-tradables to production of tradables; 
from consumption to savings and investment. 
Policy to speed up the restructuring of the economy and move quickly to sustainable 
growth 
The  main  objective  of  policy  today  is  the  strengthening  of  the  productive  capacity  of  the 
economy so that the emerging recovery can be the start of sustainable growth in the years 
ahead. The economy is in a process of transition from a growth model that has exhausted its 
limits to a new model, capable of ensuring robust, sustainable growth in the future. As the 
Bank of Greece has repeatedly stressed, this new growth model must be based on a shift: 
• 
• 
Admittedly,  while  the  old  growth  model  was  discredited  suddenly  and  violently,  the  new 
model has yet to emerge clearly into sight. Transformation is, by its very nature, slow and 
painful, as it entails a shift of capital and human resources across sectors and activities. It 
presupposes the emergence of new poles of attraction for capital, innovative investment and 
cutting-edge entrepreneurship. It can be facilitated by a reorientation of the banking system 
and policies to enhance labour mobility. The restructuring of the economy towards tradables 
production  has  already  begun,  but  remains  weak,  against  the  backdrop  of  recession  and 
heightened  uncertainty.  Restructuring  can,  however,  be  accelerated  if  economic  policy 
assigns  top  priority  to  generating  the  necessary  conditions  conducive  to  the  desired 
transformation. 
Such a policy objective requires: 
• 
• 
Well-functioning markets for products, labour and capital. 
A  business  environment  in  line  with  best  international  practices,  with  a  low 
administrative  burden  for  businesses,  an  efficient  public  sector  and  a  stable  and 
favourable tax framework. 
A  steady  commitment  to  reducing  the  tax  burden,  especially  on  businesses. 
Declining taxation would both increase the incentive to invest and make more funds 
available for investment. 
Accelerated implementation of the privatisation programme and strengthening of the 
legal framework for investor protection to attract foreign investment. 
A shift on the part of companies to market-based financing. 
The productive use of programmes for the co-financing of loans and guarantees with 
resources from EU Structural Funds and the European Investment Bank. 
The active role of the banking system in the restructuring of businesses and sectors, 
with specific actions to support truly viable businesses and to encourage initiatives 
that  promote  bold  sectoral  restructuring.  By  adopting  such  a  stance,  banks  could 
speed up the transition to the new growth model that Greece so urgently needs. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The challenges and role of the banking system today 
As the only sector to have undergone such radical restructuring, the banking system today is 
well-positioned to play an active role and spearhead the restructuring of the business sector. 
What  the  banks  have  learned  from  experience  can  be  equally  valuable  for  businesses  in 
other  sectors.  The  banks  should  therefore  see  it  as  their  duty  to  make  an  essential 
contribution to the transformation of production along the lines of the new sustainable growth 
model. 
To this end, bank strategy must be reoriented so as to avoid a recurrence of the trends of the 
previous decade, when credit was largely used for residential investment and consumption. 
New credit must now go to dynamic outward-looking enterprises with growth prospects. In 
other words, the limited liquidity available should be channelled into the real economy in a 
way  that  maximises  its  growth  potential.  It  is  pointless,  and  even  dangerous,  to  let  weak, 
non-viable businesses and saturated sectors to continue operating as usual. 
More reforms now in order to turn stabilisation into dynamic growth 
After  a  protracted  period  of  deep  recession,  the  Greek  economy  is  showing  signs  of 
recovery.  We  now  face  the  challenge  of  turning  the  incipient  signs  of  stabilisation  into 
dynamic  growth  built  on  solid  foundations.  This,  today,  is  the  main  item  on  the  national 
agenda,  the  only  way  to  ensure that  the  sacrifices  of the  past  years  will  not  have  been  in 
vain.  The  front-runners  in  this  effort  will  be  dynamic  firms  that  shift  their  activities  to  new 
products and markets, generating a virtuous circle of growth. Economic policy can and has to 
facilitate this effort. The banking system must also lead the way by effectively supporting the 
restructuring of the business sector. 
The Greek  economy,  after  years  of  complacency,  during  which  the  twin  deficits  and  debts 
rose  to  unsustainable  levels,  ultimately  culminating  in  a  crisis  of  unprecedented  scale  and 
depth, is now stabilising. The country has come a long way in terms of adjustment. However, 
the effort has not yet been completed. Now that we have succeeded in overturning the twin 
deficits into twin surpluses – a primary fiscal surplus and an external surplus – we must focus 
our attention on structural reforms and speed up their pace. It is in this area that our actions 
have not been broad and deep enough to ensure that structural changes can steadily feed 
through into sustainable growth. Regrettably, attempts at structural reform so far have been 
timid,  characterised  by  wavering  and  delays.  We  all  know  of  reforms  that  have  been 
announced repeatedly over the past four years and yet have still not been implemented. If 
we want to move forward, we have to overcome these weaknesses. The anticipated recovery 
will  prove  hesitant  and  fragile,  undermining  the  country’s  growth  prospects,  if  we  fail  to 
implement reforms, aimed to ensure: 
• 
• 
• 
a fundamental reorganisation of the state; 
modernisation of the institutions of education, health care and justice; 
the creation of competitive markets, including the opening-up of closed professions; 
and 
the design of a stable tax system, friendly to entrepreneurship and labour, but strict 
with tax evaders. 
 Only through such reforms can an environment conducive to sustained and healthy growth, 
as well as to economic and social progress, be created.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
