Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial market and payment system developments 
in East Africa 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
17th Ordinary  Meeting  of  the  East  African  Community  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC), 
Nairobi, 16 May 2014. 
 My Fellow Governors; 
Deputy Secretary General, EAC Secretariat;  
Delegates from the EAC Central Banks; 
EAC Secretariat Officials Present; 
IMF Officials Present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning. It is a pleasure to welcome you to Nairobi for the 17th Ordinary Meeting of 
the East African Community Monetary Affairs Committee. It is an honor for me to host this 
important meeting that will deliberate on pertinent issues aimed at driving forward the EAC 
integration Agenda. We are also grateful to have the EAC central bank Governors grace the 
official  launch  of  the  East  African  Payments  System  (EAPS),  later  today.  The  launch  of 
EAPS marks a key milestone in the EAC integration process and will improve the efficiency 
of  the  payments  system  in  the  region.  This  is  one  of  the  targeted  quick  wins  by  the  EAC 
central banks. 
Fellow Governors, we have managed the financial sector in a commendable manner since 
the onset of the financial crises in 2008, a period beset with structural shocks, both external 
and  internal.  Despite  the  challenges,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  region  has 
continued  to  take  effect,  and  is  delivering  expected  results.  We  have  in  the  recent  past 
managed  to  coordinate  among  others,  market  expectations  on  inflation,  which  is  a  great 
boost to the credibility of central banks in discharging the principal mandate of price stability. 
This outcome partly reflects implementation of appropriate operational frameworks that have 
strengthened  both  the  signaling  of  the  policy  stance  and  fining-tuning  interbank  liquidity 
management. 
However, a few challenges, though no less important, still remain especially in the conduct of 
open  market  operations  where  interventions  to  stabilize  interbank  liquidity  are  at  times 
misinterpreted  by  money  market  participants  as  an  attempt  to  defend  a  particular  level  or 
direction of the value of the currency. It appears we have to strive even more to improve our 
communication  on  monetary  policy  operations 
the  market’s 
understanding of our use of available tools for monetary policy operations. 
Reverting  to  the  purpose  of  this  meeting,  we  are  here  to:  review  progress  on  the 
implementation of the decisions of the 16th MAC Meeting held in Kampala on May 23, 
2013;  consider  strategic  objectives  to  operationalize  the  EAMU  Protocol  and  update 
on  IMF  Technical  Assistance  in  support  of  financial  markets  development  in  the 
transition to the East African Monetary Union (EAMU). 
As  is  usual  at  MAC  meetings,  the  format  will  involve  the  presentation  of  a  Report  of  our 
Technical Officials, followed by a discussion of the issues raised in the Report. Our technical 
staff  have  worked  extremely  hard  over  the  last  four  days  and  produced  a  very 
comprehensive Report. I commend them for a job well done. Fellow Governors, I believe you 
to  enhance 
in  order 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have already received a brief on the issues in the technical Report from your technical staff 
this morning. 
Without  wishing  to  pre-empt  the  discussions,  I  would  like  to  briefly  highlight  the  following 
issues  which  I  think  merit  particular  attention  today.  The  various  initiatives  by  MAC  to 
enhance  financial  and  monetary  integration  in  the  EAC  region  are  now  bearing  fruits.  We 
have  made  inroads  in  the  harmonization  of  monetary  policy  frameworks,  harmonization  of 
macroeconomic  statistics,  improvement  in  the  payments  system  and  financial  markets 
development. Delegates will recall that studies undertaken by MAC were used to inform the 
negotiation of the EAMU Protocol. This culminated in the adoption and signing of the EAMU 
Protocol on 30th November 2013 by the EAC Heads of State which sets the stage for the 
establishment of the EAC Monetary Union. 
This notwithstanding, it is also important to acknowledge that much more needs to be done 
during  the  10-year  transition  window  beginning  2014  that  the  Summit  provided  for  the 
establishment  of  the  EAC  Central  Bank.  More  importantly,  the  EAC  central  banks  need  to 
harmonize their frameworks and policies in their core mandate areas, and enhance internal 
capacities. In this regard, we need to articulate strategic objectives and priorities under MAC 
geared towards operationalization of the EAMU Protocol. 
Fellow  Governors,  allow  me  to  commend  the  EAC  Secretariat  for  their  support  in  our 
activities as well as reaching out to Development Partners who have continued to support the 
EAMU process. In particular, I take cognizance of the invaluable support by the IMF in the 
EAC  integration  process.  The  Fund’s  continued  partnership  has  been  instrumental  in  the 
transformation  and  modernization  of  our  economies  at  the  national  level  as  well  as 
regionally. 
To conclude, fellow Governors, I once again want to reiterate that it is a great privilege to 
host you in our beautiful city, Nairobi. I invite you to enjoy the beautiful sites in the country 
side  and  savor  our  local  cuisines.  With  these  few  remarks,  I  look  forward  to  fruitful 
engagement in discharging our mandate in this meeting. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
