  Vítor Constâncio: Banking Union – meaning and implications for the 
future of banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of the  European  Central  Bank,  at  Banking 
Union  Conference,  organised  by  the  Master  in  Banking  and  Financial  Regulation,  Navarra 
University, Madrid, 24 April 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
I was asked to share with you my views on the latest developments regarding the European 
Banking  Union:  what  is  the  meaning  of  what  has  been  achieved  and  what  are  the 
implications for the future of banking and the financial system in the Eurozone? 
There  are  many  good  arguments  to  explain  the  rationale  of  building  a  European  Banking 
Union  to  complement  the  Monetary  Union.  I  have  addressed  them  in  several  recent 
speeches.1 Today, I will skip the arguments related to correcting the flaws in the initial design 
of the monetary union that, by keeping supervision at the national level in both creditor and 
debtor countries, contributed to the large imbalances before the crisis, generated by the vast 
private capital flows intermediated by banks.2 Contrary to the “it was mostly fiscal” view of the 
crisis,  private  financial  sector  developments  largely  explain  the  build-up  of  unsustainable 
current account and competitiveness positions in peripheral countries before the crisis. 
The current account deficits in most peripheral countries were in fact led by very large capital 
inflows coming from core countries with capital account surpluses. The exposures of banks 
from  core  to  peripheral  countries  more  than  quintupled  between  1999  and  2008. 
Competitiveness  losses  in  the  periphery  were  simply  the  mechanism  that  connected  the 
capital account surplus and the current account deficit – that is, an appreciation of the real 
exchange rate caused by economic over-heating. As John Williamson explained long ago, it 
is  impossible  to  have  “an  immaculate  transfer”  from  capital  inflows  to  current  account 
deficits.3  National  supervisors  found  it  impossible  to  contain  these  developments  because 
they had to respect the single market rules and lacked the macro-prudential tools to offset 
the effects of large capital inflows. But by introducing supervision at the European level, the 
Banking Union offers a possibility to better pre-empt such developments in the future – and 
therefore to better protect the real economy and financial stability in the whole area. 
Today,  I  will  concentrate  my  remarks  on  two  more  practical  and  immediate  goals  of  the 
Banking  Union:  (i)  to  eliminate  the  sovereign-bank  loop  and  thereby  reduce  financial 
fragmentation and (ii) to repair bank´s balance-sheets, recover the impaired credit channel 
and  consolidate  the  on-going  mild  economic  recovery.  In  my  remaining  remarks,  I  will 
discuss  some  implications  for  the  financial  system’s  future  and  for  the  role  of  macro-
                                                
1  Banking union and the future of banking, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the 
IIEA  Conference  on  “The  Future  of  Banking  in  Europe”,  Dublin,  2  December  2013;  Towards  the  Banking 
Union,  speech  by  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  ECB,  at  the  2nd  FIN-FSA  Conference  on  EU 
Regulation  and  Supervision  “Banking  and  Supervision  under  Transformation”  organised  by  the  Financial 
Supervisory Authority, Helsinki, 12 February 2013; Towards a European Banking Union, speech by Vítor 
Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  ECB,  Lecture  held  at  the  start  of  the  academic  year  of  the  Duisenberg 
School of Finance, Amsterdam, 7 September 2012 (ECB website). 
2  See  “The  European  Crisis  and  the  role  of  the  financial  system”,  speech  by  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-
President of the ECB, at the Bank of Greece conference on “The crisis in the euro area” Athens, 23 May 2013 
(ECB website). 
3  See Williamson, J., “Comment”, in Bergsten, F. (ed), International Adjustment and Financing: The Lessons of 
1985–1991, Institute for International Economics, 1991, p. 243. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  prudential policies. I will conclude with a few words about what else is needed to complete 
the repairing of our monetary union. 
The sovereign-banks’ feed-back loop 
1. 
As you may remember, the whole idea of launching a single European supervisor was born 
in  the  June  2012  Summit  as  a  consequence  of  the  decision  to  prepare  direct  European 
recapitalisation of weak banks. The acute situation of liquidity shortage in late 2011 that led 
us at the ECB to conduct two long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with a maturity of 
three years, and the continuing sovereign debt crisis convinced Member States to frontally 
address  the  bank-sovereign  link,  notably  by  promising  the  possibility  of  European  capital 
injections that would not overburden the already indebted sovereigns. This naturally required 
that supervision would have also to be transferred to the European level and the embryo of 
Banking Union saw the light of day. Later, the Van Rompuy Report elaborated the concept 
by adding a Single Resolution Mechanism and a future possible Deposit Guarantee Scheme. 
In the meanwhile it was clarified that European direct recapitalisation could only happen after 
the  Single  Supervision  Mechanism  would  become  operating  and  after  a  comprehensive 
assessment  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets  would  be  conducted.  This  is  because  direct 
recapitalisation  would  not  be  used  to  cover  bad  legacy  assets  stemming  from  the  crisis. 
Many months later, agreement was reached among Member States on the second element 
of  the  Banking  Union  –  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  –  to  add  to  the  Single 
Supervision Mechanism (SSM). As the ECB underlined many times, those two components 
were necessary for the framework to work effectively. The Banking Union can thus be seen 
as  the  biggest  reform  after  the  inception  of  the  euro  with  vast  implications  that  go  well 
beyond the problem of the sovereign-banks’ loop. 
In this way, the question of direct European recapitalisation – for which a framework has not 
yet  been  decided  –  ceased  to  be  the  main  focus  of  attention.  In  the  view  of  many 
commentators,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  became  the  expected  instrument  to 
achieve the separation between banks and sovereigns. This is a somewhat misleading view, 
as I will explain later. 
What makes the question of the link between sovereigns and banks important relates to the 
fact that weak banks weakened the sovereign and the reverse was also true in the financial 
crisis. Some governments had to support their national banks with significant consequences 
to  their  own  debt.  In  other  cases,  weakened  sovereign  with  low  ratings  and  difficulty  in 
accessing the financial markets, enfeebled the banks who saw their ratings tumble and their 
funding become more difficult. At the same time, as the sovereign debt crisis in 2010 became 
explicit  and  triggered  contagion  effects  across  countries,  banks’  holdings  of  domestic  debt 
rose, thereby increasing their dependence of the sovereign’s fortunes. 
These  different  forms  of  dependence  created  a  negative  feed-back  loop  that  induced 
financial fragmentation among member of the monetary union and contributed to impair the 
credit channel and the transmission of monetary policy. Monetary policy interest rates were 
not  properly  transmitted  and  deposit  and  credit  rates  became  much  too  different  among 
countries  as  if  we  were  not  related  to  the  same  currency  and  to  banks  operating  in  a 
monetary union. 
The ECB did the utmost to repair the transmission of monetary policy and restore the credit 
channel.  The  OMT  initiative  coupled  with  the  development  of  the  Banking  Union  project, 
proved finally effective reducing fragmentation. The recent world market developments and 
the  perception  that  the  tail  risk  of  euro  redenomination  was  overcome,  contributed  to  an 
inflow  of  capital  looking  to  the  European  periphery,  further  mitigating  fragmentation  of 
financial markets in the Eurozone. 
Both  components  of  the  Banking  Union,  the  SSM  and  the  SRM  help  reduce  the  negative 
feed-back loop between banks and sovereigns but do not completely eliminate it. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Let me start with the first building block: the SSM. One important objective of the SSM 
regulation  is  to  improve  the  quality  of  supervision  and  to  ensure  homogenous  supervisory 
standards across the euro area. The SSM, upon its operational start in November, will root 
its  supervisory  work  on  the  best  supervisory  practices.  The  general  principles,  processes, 
and methodology for supervision will be described in the SSM Supervisory Manual of which a 
comprehensive public version is being prepared. 
The SSM will lead to a convergence of rules and standards and a harmonised supervisory 
culture.  For  example,  by  imposing  common  principles  about  methods  and  models’ 
parameters that improve the reliability of banks’ internal models it will address the problems 
created by differences in the way that banks calculate risk-weighted assets. Importantly, the 
SSM  will ensure that the same risks are given  similar weights, knowing of course that the 
same types of risk can have different manifestations in different markets, in accordance with 
the  local  economic situation. There  will  also  be  a  harmonised  treatment  of  non-performing 
exposures  and  provisioning  rules,  which  at  present  varies  between  jurisdictions  and  is  not 
directly  comparable  for  investors.  More  generally,  the  substantial  compliance  costs,  from 
having to observe different sets of rules and different sets of reporting requirements, as well 
as having to interact with several different authorities, will be reduced. 
Direct supervision of significant banking groups will be undertaken by joint supervisory teams 
that will comprise supervisors from both the ECB/SSM and National Competent Authorities, 
thus  enabling  a  fully  integrated  approach  to  the  supervision  of  cross-border  banks. 
Compared with supervision at national level, this integrated approach will enable the SSM to 
detect excessive risk-taking and the cross-border externalities associated with it, and to be 
therefore  proactive  if  local  financial  developments  develop  into  threats  to  broader financial 
stability. 
I  expect  all  these  changes  in  the  supervisory  framework  to  contribute  to  reducing 
fragmentation  by  creating  a  level  playing  field  for  financial  institutions  and  spreading  best 
practices  across  borders,  thus  removing  the  barriers  that  existed  in  the  past.  Essential for 
de-linking banks from sovereigns is the trust that the financial system at large will develop in 
relation  to  the  banks  both  directly  and  indirectly  supervised  by  the  SSM.  This  can  help 
normalise interbank markets and overcome financial fragmentation. 
That  said,  high  standard  banking  supervision  is not  centred  on  preventing bank failures  at 
any cost. In fact, to effectively perform its tasks, a supervisor must also be able to let failing 
banks  exit  the  market.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  SSM  has  also  been  given  the 
competencies  to  withdraw  from  credit  institutions,  the  authorisation  to  operate.  However, 
given the role of banks in the financial system and in order to safeguard financial stability, the 
supervisor  has  to  feel  confident  that  the  resolution  of  banks  is  conducted  in  an  orderly 
fashion. This brings me to the second pillar of the Banking Union. 
The  establishment  of  the  SRM  is  the  second  crucial  step  towards  addressing  financial 
fragmentation  and  breaking  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  The  main  point  here  is  that  the 
orderly  resolution  of  banks,  even  big  ones,  may  contribute  to  avoid  costly  rescues  by 
sovereigns that may endanger their own finances. 
The SRM puts in place a single authority responsible for the resolution of banks in the euro 
area  and  participating  Member  States.  This  will  enable  swift  and  unbiased  resolution 
decisions, which will address notably cross-border resolution cases in an effective manner. In 
this respect, the SRM should be viewed as a necessary – and logical – complement to the 
SSM.  It  would  indeed  be  ill-advised  to  elevate  the  responsibility  for  supervision  to  the 
European level, while keeping resolution at the national level. This would create a mismatch 
of  responsibilities,  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  SSM  as  supervisor,  and  delay  the 
resolution of banks, a task that has to be done swiftly. 
An important element of the SRM is the Single Resolution Fund, which will be financed via 
levies on the banking sector and gradually mutualised. Starting with national compartments, 
it will become one truly single European Fund in the course of eight years. By mutualising the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  cost of bank resolution, this approach will loosen the link between domestic banks and their 
sovereigns and further level the playing field. A shortcoming of the SRM is the absence of a 
clear  common  financing  arrangement  that  would  provide  additional  temporary  resources 
when needed. 
However,  the  SSM  and  SRM  are  not  enough  to  completely  sever  the  ties  between 
sovereigns  and  their  domestic  banks.  The  SSM  and  harmonised  supervision  may  not  be 
enough to build sufficient trust among banks and, on the other hand, the SRM may face legal 
limitations  to  autonomously  manage  orderly  resolutions  of  significant  banks,  using  its  own 
funds. These limitations come from the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) 
which, in my view, is the most crucial regulatory change in Europe of late, applicable to all 
28 EU  member  countries,  and  will  significantly  contribute  to  breaking  the  bank-sovereign 
nexus. Let me explain. 
The BRRD implements a true paradigm change, ending the culture of bail-out and ushering 
in  a  culture  of  bail-in.  As  of  2016,  in  all  resolution  cases,  the  BRRD  will  impose  to  the 
Resolution  Authorities,  a  bail-in  of  shareholders and  creditors  equal  to  at  least  8%  of  total 
liabilities including own funds of a given bank. This amount of 8% is very substantial if we 
compare it to the losses which banks faced in the recent crisis. To give you an idea: between 
2008 and 2010 only one bank had losses exceeding the 8% threshold, and the average for 
all  other  banks  was  slightly  less  than  3%.  If  we  look  further  back  to  the  Nordic  Financial 
Crisis in the 90s, none of the banks affected by this crisis faced losses of more than 8% of its 
total liabilities including own funds. 
Let me first briefly describe what happens once a bank enters into resolution and how the so-
called  “bail-in  tool”  works  under  the  new  framework.  The  bail-in  tool  follows  a  sequential 
approach. Before any resolution fund can be tapped, shareholders and creditors have to first 
absorb  losses  amounting  to  at  least  8%  of  total  liabilities  including  own  funds.  Although 
uninsured  deposits  from  individuals  and  small  firms  come  last  among  liabilities  possibly 
subject to bail-in, they would be included if needed to attain the 8% total. According to the 
new rules, only insured deposits are totally excluded from the bail-in tool. Only after the 8% 
amount is bailed-in from shareholders and creditors, can money from the resolution fund be 
used and for a maximum amount of 5% of total liabilities (including own funds) of the bank 
under resolution. Public resources can then be used only in case this is not enough (which, 
based on past crisis experience would be exceptional). 
Public money, either from national governments or from direct European recapitalisation of 
banks, can only be used at the very end of the process which, in practice, should happen 
exceedingly rarely. Bail-in of shareholders and creditors plus the use of the Resolution Fund 
should in most conceivable cases, be enough to ultimately cover for the losses incurred by 
the bank. The “Government financial stabilisation tools” that the Directive introduces are an 
instrument of last resort after having assessed and exploited the other resolution tools to the 
maximum  extent  possible.  We  are  still  far  from  the  initial  plan  regarding  this  important 
question but the goal of avoiding to burden the sovereign with banks’ rescues has in practice 
been achieved. 
While  we  all  agree  with  the  objective  of  protecting  taxpayers’  money,  it  is  important  to 
examine  what  are  the  implications  of  the  new  rules  for  the  banking  market  and  for  the 
sovereignty  of  member  states.  As  a  natural  result  of  the  backlash  against  banks  in  our 
democratic  polities  following  the  huge  crisis  rooted  in  the  financial  system,  the  new 
framework  imposes  that  banks’  bailout  with  public  money  is  the  ultimate  resource  after 
extensive  bail-in  tools  have  been  activated.  I  agree  that  bailouts,  especially  when 
shareholders and bank management are not penalised, create moral hazard that may feed 
subsequent  reckless  management  behaviour  down  the  road.  The  difficult  judgment  is  of 
course to navigate in a general financial crisis between the Scylla of moral hazard and the 
Charybdis of financial collapse. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The second aspect I wish to highlight is that by avoiding the commitment of public money 
and protecting tax payers as much as possible – a goal widely shared –participant countries 
in  the  Banking  Union  must  shed  considerable  sovereign  power,  showing  a  remarkable 
willingness to continue to deepen European integration, thus reinforcing monetary union. In 
fact,  large  countries  with  strong  public  finances  must  renounce  to  provide  domestic  banks 
with the implicit subsidy of public support. This will reduce their strength in competing in the 
European space with an advantage and will be progressively reflected in banks’ ratings and 
funding  costs.  On  the  other  hand,  countries  with  vulnerable  public  finances  and  smaller 
banks will no longer be able to support, and possibly keep, their national champions. Finally, 
in both cases, governments accept the transfer of supervision and resolution of banks to the 
European level in what has to be considered a remarkable sharing of sovereignty. 
Another  aspect  of  the  BRRD  reflecting  the  reluctance  in  the  use  of  public  money  is  the 
disposition  that  foresees  that  a  criterion  to  put  a  bank  formally  into  resolution  is  that  it 
“requires  extraordinary  public  support”.  This  disposition  will  apply  as  of  January  next  year 
and  will  very  likely  be  in  force  when  the  corrective  supervisory  action  stemming  from  the 
SSM Comprehensive Assessment will be in course of implementation. I rush to indicate that 
there is a possible exemption to this rule. But according to certain interpretations, the rule is 
applicable,  for  instance,  to  a  listed  bank  that  fails  the  baseline  scenario  of  a  stress  test, 
cannot raise private capital and has to request public assistance. Very likely, if such bank is 
formally  put  into  resolution  it  may  suffer  irreparable  damage  in  the  market  place,  further 
complicating its situation and generating spillover effects on other banks. 
This could mean, according to those interpretations that under the BRRD, a bank may be put 
into  resolution  before  actually  attaining  the  point  of  non-viability  if  it  just  fails  a  baseline 
scenario of a stress test. We should be mindful that resolution does not lead to resurrection 
of the institution and, as seen by the market, implies deep restructuring, downsizing or even 
the winding down of an institution. 
The  interpretations  already  mentioned  would  also  imply  that  the  public  backstops  for  the 
purposes of the SSM Comprehensive Assessment announced last November, if used, would 
trigger putting the bank into formal resolution if the exemption I mentioned before would not 
apply.  The  terms  of  the  exemption,  surrounded  by  several  conditions,  are  basically 
dependent on the need to avoid a serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State 
and preserve financial stability. We certainly hope that in the context of such a wide-ranging 
undertaking  to  assess  the  robustness  and  resilience  of  European  banks,  there  will  be 
reasonable  financial  stability  aspects  to  justify,  in  several  cases,  such  exemption.  Also,  in 
2015 such an exemption should have no operational implication for the bail-in rules of the 
Directive  as,  contrary  to  the  rest  of  the  BRRD  articles,  bail-in  rules  will  be  applicable  only 
after January 2016. Also, the granting of such exemption would not preclude the application 
of  the  only  bail-in  rule  in  place  in  2015  which  exists  in  the  context  of  State  Aid  principles. 
Therefore, it is an exemption without substantive consequences in terms of bail-in rules. 
The rules now in place stem from the European Commission’s communication on “State Aid 
rules  to  support  measures  in  favour  of  banks  in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis”  of  July 
20144, which establishes that any public support to banks considered as State Aid should be 
preceded  by  bail-in  of  bank  shares,  capital  hybrids  and  subordinated  debt,  as  mentioned. 
Again, in this case, the text contemplates that exceptions “can be made where implementing 
such  measures  would  endanger  financial  stability  or  lead  to  disproportionate  results”.  For 
concrete cases, at the end of the SSM Comprehensive Assessment, it may be adequate to 
invoke such principles. 
                                                
4 
“Communication from  the  Commission  on  the  application  from 1  August  2013 of  State Aid  rules  to  support 
measures in favour of banks in the context of the financial crisis (“Banking Communication”) 2013/C 216/01. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In 2015, another potential complication may come from problems of a legal nature that can 
create difficulties to the maintenance of a level playing field in the context of our exercise. 
Some countries may have no national law or legal ability to implement burden sharing rules 
ahead of the entry into force of the BRRD bail-in rules in 2016. 
Amid these concerns, it is hoped that all the relevant legislation and related exemptions are 
applied in the wake of our Comprehensive Assessment with the adequate balance between 
the  different  values  of  avoiding  moral  hazard,  assuring  market  discipline  and  level  playing 
field, and safeguarding financial stability. 
The  present  situation  of  apparent  easy  access  to  capital  markets  driven  by  investors’ 
appetite  to  invest  in  banks  is  however  reassuring.  Hopefully,  this  situation  will  remain 
unchanged until November so that banks that need to reinforce their capital buffers will be 
able to raise money in the private market and the whole question of public backstops can 
move to the background. Nevertheless, I advise all banks, besides raising adequate levels of 
capital,  to  carefully  study  the  new  legislation  on  resolution  and  bail-in  because  the  bank 
market and even competition for capital control will be significantly affected as it enters into 
force. On the other hand, investors should be incentivised to learn and interiorize the new 
bail-in rules that will dominate the market for banks’ securities from now on. 
I  want  to  finish  this  section  with  some  general  considerations  concerning  the  delicate 
judgment calls that dealing with financial crises necessarily entail. We should be reminded 
that  not  only  direct  public  support  for  banks  has  a  cost  to  taxpayers  but  that  financial 
instability may imply significant costs for taxpayers. We just have to compare the worldwide 
costs for taxpayers  stemming from  no  public  intervention  in  the  case  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
with  zero  cost for  taxpayers  following  the  USD  700  billion  injection  in  US  banks to  rescue 
them in 2008, which have by now been totally repaid by the banks. Financial instability can 
have  a  meaningful  cost  to  taxpayers  even  if  that  it  is  not  visible  in  the  very  short  term,  a 
notion  that  all  policy  makers  should  keep  in  mind.  Obviously,  to  avoid  moral  hazard,  any 
intervention should penalise shareholders and managers appropriately as it was done in the 
exemplar  case  of  the  Nordic  banking  crisis,  where  financial  and  economic  collapse  was 
avoided with, in the end, virtually no costs for taxpayers when the restored banks were sold. 
After the financial crisis and the misbehaviour of several institutions, which by the way, is still 
being uncovered, the change of culture from easy public bailouts to a new culture of private 
bailing-in is justifiable and I support that trend. The burden of proof should be put on those 
who  want  to  invoke  exemptions  to  the  new  approach.  However,  for  those  of  us  able  to 
understand  the  externalities  to  the  whole  economy  and  society  that  a  financial  crisis  can 
generate, balanced and complex judgements have always to be applied. A distinction has to 
be made between how to deal with a few individual cases and the way to address the risks of 
generalised  financial  crises.  The  new  European  legislation  contemplates  the  necessary 
exceptions that, as a last resort, foresee interventions that can safeguard financial stability in 
a Member State or in the area as a whole. I trust that the new legislation will be applied by 
the competent authorities with rigour, wisdom and a sense of proportion in the aftermath of 
our Comprehensive Assessment. 
Banks’ balance-sheet repair and the economic recovery 
2. 
I  turn  now  to  the  implications  of  Banking  Union  for  other  economic  aspects.  Some 
economists are of the view that negative developments in bank credit in the Eurozone are 
predominantly due to credit supply restrictions linked with insufficient capital to absorb losses 
supposedly still unrecognised.5 This view is not entirely correct. We have observed a marked 
                                                
5  Acharya,  V.  and  S.  Steffen,  “Falling  Short  of  Expectation?  Stress-Testing  the  European  Banking  System”, 
(2014);  Kashyap,  A.  commentary  on  similarities  between  EU  and  Japan;  Kashyap,  A.  et  al.  “How  does 
financial regulation change bank credit supply?” (2014). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increase in banks’ capital ratios since the beginning of 2009. Since the onset of the global 
financial crisis, the top 20 European banks have increased capital in dollar amounts, net of 
share buy-backs, by much higher numbers than the corresponding top 20 American banks: 
USD 289 billion by EU  banks against USD 179 billion by US banks. And according to the 
FDIC, the leverage ratios of the biggest European banks, calculated according to the same 
accounting  standards,  are  very  close  to  their  American  peers.6  Since  mid  last  year  in 
particular,  European  banks  have  implemented  write-offs  and  increased  provisions  and 
capital,  partly  anticipating  the  Comprehensive  balance-sheet  Assessment  that  the  ECB  is 
conducting this year. As a result, confidence in the euro area banking sector is now starting 
to  rise.  This  development  has  been  recognised  by  the  stock  market  where  banks’  share 
prices increased by 41% in 2013, above market average growth of 20%.7 
Nevertheless, the task of bringing back confidence in the EU banking sector is still underway. 
This is why the Banking Union, and in particular the Comprehensive Assessment of banks’ 
balance-sheets, is so important. It will trigger corrective supervisory action where it is needed 
and  dispel  any  remaining  doubts  about  asset  valuations  and  the  corresponding  level  of 
provisions. This in turn, will help bring the deleveraging process in the banking sector to a 
swifter conclusion. 
In the short-term, this may have a pro-cyclical effect. However, a fast and targeted rebooting 
of the banking system could have two positive effects going forward. 
The first effect is cyclical. A well-functioning banking sector will support the transmission of 
our  monetary  policy  in  all  parts  of  the  euro  area,  thus  helping  observed  growth  to  rise 
towards  potential  growth  and  the  output  gap  to  close.  This  is  because,  on  the  asset  side, 
banks that are restructured and recapitalised will no longer have incentives to ration lending 
towards smaller firms with higher capital charges. And on the liability side, as they gradually 
reach their target loan-to-deposit ratios through raising deposits, the funding costs between 
banks in the core and periphery of the euro area will further converge. 
The  second  effect  is  structural.  To  the  extent  that  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  helps 
fixing  the  bank  lending  channel  and  ends  the  so-called  “ever-greening”  of  loans8,  it  will 
support an efficient credit allocation process. This could in turn support the overall process of 
reallocation within the euro area economy, thus boosting productivity and possibly reversing 
the slowdown in potential growth. 
Nevertheless, a word of caution is warranted in the sense that a sudden jump start of credit 
growth  may  not  result  immediately.  Recent  behaviour  of  credit  is  not  explainable  only  by 
credit  supply  restrictions,  but  it  is  largely  linked  to  lack  of  demand.  Completing  banks’ 
balance-sheet repair is thus a necessary but not sufficient condition to consolidate the on-
going recovery.9 The weak domestic demand outlook prevailing in the Eurozone combined 
with  slack  industrial  capacity  is  the  most  important  explanation  for  the  drop  in  private 
investment during the crisis, and the most important limiting factor for higher growth. 
                                                
6 
“Basel  III  Capital:  A  Well-Intended  Illusion”,  remarks  by  FDIC  Vice-Chairman  Thomas  M.  Hoenig  to  the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers, 2013 Research Conference in Basel, Switzerland. 
7  Changes in banks’ share prices and overall stock market in the euro area (from early April to end 2013). 
8  Although the identification of “evergreening” practices is challenging, a large number of analyses have been 
conducted  on  this issue, looking  at Japan’s  “lost  decade”. See,  among  others,  Caballero,  R.,  T.  Hoshi  and 
A. K. Kashyap (2008), “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, 
Vol.  98,  No.  5.  One  more  recent  study  looks  at  the  global  financial  crisis  and  identifies  lending  patterns 
consistent with evergreening practices, although limited to smaller banks; see Albertazzi, U. and D. Marchetti 
(2010) Credit supply, flight to quality and evergreening: an analysis of bank-firm relationships after Lehman, 
Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 756. 
9  See “Growing out of the crisis: Is fixing finance enough?” ,speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of 
the  ECB,  at  the  Annual  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and  World  Economies, 
Washington D.C., 10 April 2014 (ECB site). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  3.  Other important effects of the Banking Union 
I  believe  the  on-going  overhaul  of  bank  supervision  and  resolution  frameworks  will  have 
implications that go well beyond the primary objectives of financial stability and completion of 
the monetary union. I will focus on three aspects. 
Further integration of the European banking market 
The  first  effect  is  the  probable  consolidation  of  the  European  banking  sector.  Some 
restructuring  in  the  euro  area  banking  sector  has  already  been  on-going  since  2008.  For 
example,  in  net  terms  the  number  of  credit  institutions  has  fallen  by  9%  since  2008,  or 
around 600 institutions, while total assets of the euro area banking sector have declined by 
almost 12%. However, this consolidation was more due to retrenchment than to active M&A 
deals in the industry, which have instead been rather weak. From 2008 to 2012, the overall 
value  of  deals  decreased  fourfold  to  just  EUR10  billion,  with  cross-border  deals  being  the 
most affected. Yet, the Herfindahl-Hirschman concentration indicator for the euro area banks 
remains,  at  the  690  level,  well  below  the  1600  level  above  which  concentration  becomes 
detrimental, which means that there is margin for further efficiency-driven consolidation. The 
weak  profitability  and  excess  capacity  of  the  European  banking  sector  also  suggests  that 
efficiency gains could be reaped from more consolidation. This, together with the on-going 
repair  of  bank  balance-sheets,  should  set  the  stage  some  time  down  the  road  for  a  new 
phase of M&As geared towards improving efficiency. 
It seems likely that the Banking Union will create the conditions for further integration of the 
European banking market. Unified supervision should create greater trust among banks and 
cross-border banking groups will be able to optimise their internal management of capital and 
liquidity and reduce compliance costs. On liquidity and capital, we expect hidden barriers to 
disappear and allow their management at the level of the whole SSM space. A movement to 
subsidiarisation  that  we  observe  in  other  parts  of  the  world  has  no  justification  inside  the 
SSM perimeter. In this context, it is only natural that the establishment of the SSM and the 
Comprehensive  Assessment  of  banks’  balance-sheets  could  open  to  a  period  of  general 
restructuring in the European banking sector spontaneously driven by market forces. 
Enhancement of the capital markets role 
In  the  euro  area,  banks  have  historically  played  an  important  role  in  financing  the  real 
economy.  Bank  loans  account  for  most  of  household  borrowing  and  around  50%  of  non-
financial firms’ external financing, which is very different from the US where around 75% of 
firms’  financing  comes  from  capital  markets  (equity  and  debt  securities).  However,  recent 
evidence  from  the  euro  area  and  the  US  suggests  that  corporate  bond  financing  was  an 
important alternative to bank financing during the financial crisis, when banks were unwilling 
or  unable  to  lend,  mostly  reflecting  pressure  to  de-lever.10  Although  these  pressures  have 
eased and the economic recovery is beginning in Europe, I expect the move towards more 
capital  market-based  intermediation  to  persist  going  forward.  One  reason  is  that  the  new 
regulatory environment gives banks incentives to hold marketable, liquid securities, such as 
corporate bonds or asset backed securities, as opposed to corporate loans. This will, in my 
view, increase the complementarities between marketable assets and corporate loans within 
banks’ balance-sheets, where in the past they were considered as substitutes. 
What I am suggesting is not that Europe will – or should – abandon its intermediated model 
of financing but that it will complement it, more than in the past, with alternative sources of 
finance. This, combined with the structural deleveraging of the banking system and the new 
                                                
10  See  De  Fiore  F.  and  H.  Uhlig  (2011),  “Bank  finance  versus  bond  finance”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and 
Banking,  43(7),  1399–1421,  and  Adrian,  Colla,  and  Shin  (2012),  “Which  financial  frictions?  Parsing  the 
evidence of the financial crisis of 2007–09”, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  regulatory  regime,  should  enable  the  banking  sector  to  keep  providing  adequate  levels  of 
credit to the economy. The diversification of the financing mix will have obvious advantages 
for euro area firms, as it will allow them to access a larger pool of non-bank investors and to 
better insulate themselves from shocks in the banking sector. 
The role of macro-prudential policies 
The  third  effect  linked  to  Banking  Union  is  the  emergence  of  new  macro-prudential  policy 
tools for the ECB. Before the crisis, banking supervision in most (but not all) countries was 
fundamentally “micro-based”, focusing on the safety of individual institutions. But the crisis 
has shown that the stability of individual financial institutions alone is not enough to ensure 
the stability of the financial system as a whole. This is the reason why the SSM will have, not 
only micro-prudential powers but also new macro-prudential instruments to counter financial 
imbalances  and  apply  prudential  measures  in  both  borrowing  and  lending  countries  which 
was not possible before the crisis. 
At  the  current  juncture,  macro-prudential  policies  can  address  at  least  two  related  issues. 
First,  by  strengthening  banks  they  can  contribute  to  enhance  credit  flows  to  the  real 
economy, and mitigate the likelihood that a so-called credit-less recovery materialises, a type 
of recovery that is generally quite mild.11 At the same time, as macro-prudential policies can 
be targeted to specific sectors or regional developments, they can help attenuate the credit 
cycle heterogeneity characterising the euro area, and support a more balanced recovery. 
Second, one cannot exclude that present accommodative monetary policy generates pockets 
of instability in some specific market segments. Macro-prudential tools can in principle allow 
the  ECB/SSM  to  address  such  financial  imbalances  in  a  granular  way.  For  example, 
instruments like the counter-cyclical capital buffer can be applied at the national level to curb 
domestic credit booms, allowing monetary policy to remain focused on euro area aggregates. 
Going  forward,  by  dealing  with  imbalances  specific  to  a  group  of  countries  or  to  a  given 
sector  of  the  euro  area  economy,  macro-prudential  policies  should  effectively  take  into 
account heterogeneities among Member States and thus contribute to reducing dispersion, 
which in turn enhances the uniform transmission of monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Banking Union is an essential complement to monetary union and a project 
with vast consequences for European integration. It is not, however, the end of the journey. 
Banking  Union  must  provide  a  stable  and  efficient  framework  for  the  major  endeavour  of 
completing  the  economic  and  monetary  union.  The  dynamics  of  Jean  Monnet’s  functional 
method  of  integration  is  still  fully  operational.  From  each  institutional  innovation,  others 
become  necessary  and  more  pressing.  For  instance,  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  Banking 
Union,  we  need  legislative  changes  that  the  Commission  should  promote,  in  order  to 
complete the programme of financial services integration, particularly in relation to the capital 
markets. That would include changes to company law, bankruptcy rules and procedures, and 
higher harmonisation in the taxation of financial products. 
                                                
11  See,  for  instance,  Takats,  E.,  and  C.  Upper,  2013,  “Credit  and  growth  after  financial  crises”,  BIS  Working 
Paper No 416; Abiad A., G. Dell’Ariccia, and B. Li, March 2011, “Creditless Recoveries”, IMF Working Paper 
no. 58; Claessens S., M A. Kose, and M. E. Terrones, April 2011, “How Do Business and Financial Cycles 
Interact?”, IMF Working Paper no. 88; Abiad et al. (2013) define credit-less recoveries “as episodes where real 
credit growth is negative in the first three years following the recession”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Other  institutional  developments  are  also  well  identified  in  the  President  Van  Rompuy’s 
Report “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union”.12  
First, a more complete fiscal union going beyond mere disciplinary rules seems necessary, 
along  the  lines  described  in  that  Report  when  it  asks  for  “….the  establishment  of  a  fiscal 
capacity  to  facilitate  adjustment  to  economic  shocks.  This  could  take  the  form  of  an 
insurance-type  mechanism  between  euro  area  countries  to  buffer  large  country-specific 
economic  shocks.  Such  a  function  would  ensure  a  form  of  fiscal  solidarity  exercised  over 
economic  cycles,  improving  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  reducing  the 
financial and output costs associated with macroeconomic adjustments”. 
Second, under the umbrella of Economic Union, we need further progress in the completion 
of the single market of services and a more co-ordinated approach to macroeconomic policy 
at the Eurozone level. 
The  sovereignty-sharing  that  monetary  union  represented  implies further  progress  towards 
more political union. The euro area is, in the end, a political project and what we now need is 
to complete the integration of European nations in this unique community that is neither a 
nation nor a State. It is a powerful vision of preserving and defending national identities and 
interests in a globalised and very challenging world. 
                                                
12  See “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union” a Report by the President of the European Council 
in  close  collaboration  with  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB, 
(http://www.european-council.europa.eu/the-president/eurozone-governance). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
