Patrick Honohan: Ireland’s EU-IMF Programme – delivering what it says 
on the tin 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland to the European 
Commission DG-ECFIN Conference, Dublin, 10 January 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
The EU-IMF programme of financial support for Ireland, negotiated in November 2010 and 
with the final tranches of lending being completed about now, delivered what it said on the 
tin. Amid turbulent market conditions, it provided a safe harbour into which Ireland was able 
to  retreat,  in  order  to  clarify  its  ability  and  determination  to  deal  with  the  severe  financial 
problems  that  had  so  destructively  erupted  during  the  global  financial  crisis  in  September 
2008.  Those  problems  had  their  origin  in  the  property  bubble  that  had  already  begun  to 
deflate a little earlier, and which had not only generated the huge latent banking losses that 
have  been  so  much  discussed,  but  also  incubated  severe  fiscal  and  macroeconomic 
imbalances. 
The  key  to  the  return  of  market  confidence  to  the  extent  that  now  exists  has  undoubtedly 
been  rigorous  adherence  to  fiscal  goals.  Over  the  three  years,  a  continuation  of  the 
momentum  of  fiscal  adjustments  already  initiated  in  2008  has  brought  the  public  finances 
back within striking distance of EU norms. The debt-to-GDP ratio has reached a peak and is 
on target to fall in the coming year. Economic growth, albeit modest, has returned on a broad 
front;  both  full  time  and  part-time  employment  have  been  growing  for  many  months  now. 
Residential property prices in the capital have bounced back a little from their lows of two 
years ago, and have on average been broadly stable in the rest of the country also for some 
months. Later I will speak a bit about how far the economy is nevertheless away from where 
we need it to be. But it cannot be denied that, reflecting both policy and general economic 
conditions, market confidence in Irish creditworthiness is higher than at any time since well 
before the Greek crisis developments of May 2010. 
It was not always obvious that this restoration of market confidence was going to work out. 
The IMF staff appraisal of the initial programme proposal in December 2010 emphasised that 
the risks were high. And, after the programme began, the euro area slipped into a second dip 
recession which had its effect in slowing the Irish recovery. The cumulative change in GDP, 
consumption and employment over the three years may have been as much as 2 percentage 
points lower than projected (though GNP did not undershoot by much), and we end with an 
unemployment rate at around 12½ per cent instead of coming in below 12 per cent as was 
expected. 
Still, compared with the experience of other countries, the macroeconomic and especially the 
fiscal outturn have been notably close to projection, and the macroeconomic shortfalls seem 
attributable  to  the  disappointing  external  factors  and  not  to  any  miscalculation  about  the 
inevitable extent to which the fiscal contraction would dampen the recovery (relative to the 
infeasible alternative of unchanged fiscal stance). 
In addition to fiscal discipline, improved financing terms that emerged in various manners in 
the course of the programme represented a major contributing factor to the improvement in 
debt  sustainability  and  in  market  confidence,  enabling  the  Irish  state  to  fund  itself  in  the 
coming years. 
In my remarks this morning, I will concentrate on the matters where the Central Bank was 
most closely concerned, namely the broad liquidity, fiscal and debt issues and repair of the 
banking system. A large number of other policy areas have seen action, consistent with what 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
was set out at the start. Many of these would no doubt have happened in time, given that 
they  had  been  long  on  the  national  policy  agenda;  some  were  no  doubt  accelerated.  My 
overall impression is that most of the specific measures urged on the Government by Troika 
staff as the programme unfolded were sensible or inevitable; few were really bad ideas. And, 
as  had  been  foreseen,  the  Government  had  a  considerable  leeway  in  choosing  specific 
measures to meet the quantitative budgetary targets. 
Going into the programme 
The  contributing  factors  to  Ireland  becoming  the  second  euro  area  country  to  seek  the 
protection of an international loan from the IMF and European partners included fiscal and 
banking factors, and a market reappraisal of Europe’s attitude to sovereign bondholder bail-
ins. 
On the fiscal side the market began – by the second half of 2010 – to realise that, despite 
significant  fiscal  adjustment  since  late  2008,  the  Government’s  budget  remained  widely 
unbalanced since tax receipts had collapsed in the immediate aftermath of the property bust, 
and  with  the  additional  spending  costs  related  to  the  associated  surge  in  unemployment. 
Announced budgetary plans were not going to close this gap. 
The scale of banking losses, already acknowledged by April 2010 to imply a net budgetary 
cost in the tens of billions, also continued to creep up during the summer, especially noticed 
after  the  Government finally  decided  to  wind-down  Anglo  Irish  Bank.  The  degree  to  which 
property-backed  lending  had  distorted  the  banks’  balance  sheets  meant  that  placing  a 
credible  bound  on  potential  future  losses  was  hard:  the  potential  for  tail  risks  to  generate 
losses that might be unaffordable for the Exchequer to cover could not be convincingly ruled 
out. 
When  a  huge  block  of  Government-guaranteed  banking  debt  matured  in  September,  the 
banks required much more central bank refinancing; not surprisingly, the ECB also began to 
focus on the Irish outlook with increased concern. 
Talk  of  default  in  many  quarters  added  to  market  anxiety  and  an  outflow  of  deposits 
resumed,  with  about  €100  billion  (almost  three-quarters  of  that  year’s  GNP)  leaving  in  the 
course of the year, the bulk of it in the last five months, and a good segment financed by 
emergency liquidity assistance. 
With the Deauville agreement (on future EU policy with regard to sovereign creditor haircuts) 
casting further  doubt  on  the  sovereign’s  ability  to  continue to  underpin both the  continuing 
part  of  the  banking  guarantee  and  its  bond  issuance,  Irish  credit  spreads  moved  out  to 
unsustainable-looking levels.1 
From the combination of all these factors, by early November, it was clear that the protection 
of an official programme would be needed to enable the Government’s spending programme 
(which by then had been revised to deliver a convergent path for the public finances) to be 
maintained. 
Changing terms of Government debt in the programme 
As  initially  agreed,  the  programme  disappointed  the  Irish  negotiators  in  a  number  of 
dimensions,  especially  the  rate  of  interest  and  the  other  side’s  inability  to  factor  in  the 
banking risks in a way that would break the pernicious link between the sovereign and the 
                                                
1   Deauville came just after the market had relaxed following the build-up of uncertainty with the big guaranteed 
bank debt repayments at end-September. To be sure, the post-Deauville impact on spreads was not as large 
as spread movements that were seen later in the euro crisis, but it was enough to move Ireland very much into 
the danger zone. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks,  a  link  which  continued  to  inhibit  the  funding  of  both.  Had  the  stress  test  of  2011 
obliged the Government to inject as much as €35 billion into the banks (as was pencilled-in 
by  the  Troika  staff)  –  more  than  twice  the  figure  finally  struck  in  March  2011  –  the 
sustainability of the Government’s debt profile would have been even weaker. 
As we said publicly and privately at the time, alternative financing approaches, such as an 
insurance  scheme  against  extreme  loan  losses,  or  a  direct  recapitalisation  by  a  European 
entity, would have allocated risk more efficiently. But they were ruled-out by the other side, 
who argued that no mechanism was available to accomplish this. That was certainly the case 
for the IMF. Arguably, though, it would have been an appropriate time for further European 
institutional  innovation.  Actually,  had  a  European  entity  invested  an  equity  stake,  it  could 
have also used its own strong balance sheet to engineer2 much lower funding costs of the 
banks; and it would have had an incentive to do so as it would thereby have generated a 
sizable additional upside potential to the profits from its equity investment. This opportunity 
was not taken. 
More  generally,  forgoing  –  or  at  least  lacking  –  the  enhanced  risk-sharing  that  such 
mechanism  would  have  afforded,  the  lenders  proceeded  with  a  programme  which,  at  the 
outset, had less favourable debt sustainability than was possible to achieve. Accordingly, the 
lenders entered into what was in fact a riskier situation for them than necessary, although we 
can now say that this risk has not materialised. 
The interest rate initially charged on the European funds was in part modelled on the IMF 
lending  rate  conventions,  which  envisage  a  sizable  spread  over  the  cost  of  funds.  That  is 
what had been set for Greece in May 2010 and it was presented to the Irish negotiators as 
non-negotiable.  Whereas  for  developing  countries  such  rates  are  typically  attractive  and 
sustainable given the modest debt ratios that generally prevail, applying them to the levels of 
indebtedness  involved  in  the  European  loans  was  always  going  to  be  problematic.  All 
calculations  (including  those  published  by  the  IMF  at  the  programme’s  outset),  indicated 
serious sustainability concerns at the terms offered. 
I will not review here again the vexed question of guaranteed and unguaranteed bank debt. 
Suffice it (in the present context) to say that the relevant unguaranteed Irish bank debt that 
was still outstanding in November 2010 was left to mature, and largely did so before official 
Europe had finally accepted a more incentive-compatible understanding of how the cost of 
bank failures should be allocated. The bulk of the Government indebtedness attributable to 
the  bond-holder  bailouts  has,  following  the  liquidation  of  IBRC  (successor  to  Anglo  Irish 
Bank), now been folded into a portfolio of very long-term floating-rate notes (issued in place 
of the non-transferable promissory notes, which would have been unsuitable instruments for 
the Central Bank to hold). 
In the event, the €67.5 billion borrowed from the European and IMF sources almost covered 
the Government deficit from December 2010 to the end of 2013, of which about one-quarter 
represented cash bank recapitalisation. There were long-term Government debt repayments 
also in that period, but these were roughly balanced by new issues. This pattern is seen from 
the “sources and needs” table summarised in Figure 1.3  
Indeed  many  countries  experienced  banking  failures  in  2008  of  comparable  absolute 
magnitude to that of the Irish banks. Like Ireland, each of Britain, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Spain, France and Belgium saw banking failures that required their governments to step in 
for €50 billion or even more. Given its smaller overall economy, however, such a sum, when 
                                                
2   For example by adding its guarantee to mortgage-backed securities. 
3   Which 
is  based  on 
the  NTMA  presentation  at  http://www.ntma.ie/business-areas/funding-and-debt-
management/funding-needs-and-sources/. The pie chart excludes changes in cash balances and short-term 
borrowing; note also that “cash deficit” includes promissory note instalment payments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
combined with the sudden erosion of the tax base, proved to be more than Ireland’s public 
finances could easily absorb. (Banking losses in Cyprus and Iceland were even larger than 
those of Ireland in relative terms). 
Gradually, Europe began to realise the broad interdependence of member states, especially 
among  euro  area  members  in  the  banking  sphere:  poorly  performing  member  economies 
contributed to heightened systemic risk and slower growth across the entire euro area. The 
single  banking  market  and  the  single  currency  implied  such  an  interdependency  and  had 
encouraged policy thinking that focused on the euro area as a whole, and not on individual 
countries. Awareness of the interdependency led, fairly early on, to a lowering of the interest 
rate  on  the  official  borrowings  from  Europe  and  an  extension  of  the  maturities.  When 
combined with the  lengthy maturity of the floating rate notes issued by the Government in 
respect  of  the  liquidation  of  IBRC,  these  new  terms  for  a  large  fraction  of  official 
indebtedness (amounting to over 50 per cent of GDP) have made all the difference to debt 
sustainability calculations, both in terms of net present value, and also in terms of refinancing 
risk. 
The banks: liquidity 
What  happened  to  all  the  money  that  flowed  in  during  the  2000s?  The  answer  can  be 
expressed in different ways, and I will be selective here. From one point of view, the money 
flowed  out  again: the  pension  funds,  insurance companies,  banks, sovereign  wealth funds 
and others who had invested in Irish bank bonds and wholesale deposits were repaid, at first 
out of borrowings made from the eurosystem, and then increasingly out of the realisation and 
sale of assets and the repayment of loans made by the banks. 
Given all of the emphasis that has been placed on the different elements here, it is perhaps 
worth looking at the magnitudes. Figures 2 and 3 look at the “Irish headquartered group” of 
credit  institutions  which  is  the  most  relevant  for  our  purposes.  There  has  been  massive 
downsizing of this category of banks.4 (There has also been downsizing of the other banks 
active in Ireland, but these are less central to the fiscal-banking nexus that has been at the 
heart of the Irish crisis, so I will not dwell on that here). 
A few points are worth noting from these figures. First, the relative importance of bonds and 
deposits: deposits very much larger at all time periods; bonds5 disproportionately invested by 
foreign concerns. Second, the changing relative importance of foreign business on both the 
asset and liability side – growing up to the beginning of 2009, shrinking thereafter. Third, the 
way in which central bank financing was used effectively in the classic lender of last resort 
function during the crisis. 
The banks: troubled loans 
As was already foreseen at the outset of the programme, repairing the banks is a lengthy 
process. At first, negotiators on the other side were inclined to wonder why more action had 
not already been taken. But already by the time the programme had been negotiated, they 
realised  that  this  was  going  to  take  time.  As  IMF  staff  put  it  at  that  time:  “The  critically-
weakened banking sector can be returned to health only at a calibrated pace.” 
                                                
4   This downsizing has generally been labelled “deleveraging”, though I prefer not to use that term, as it could 
equally refer to a situation where total balance sheet size is maintained, but financed with a higher proportion 
of equity. 
5   This term includes a wide range of different instruments, such as commercial paper, certificates of deposit, 
and notes as well as “own-use” bonds issued with a government guarantee and either held as an asset or 
employed in repo transactions. So there are a number of definitional complexities here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Indeed, the textbook first steps: triage the viable banks from the nonviable; recapitalise the 
former,  and  resolve  the  latter;  were  hampered  both  by  the  straitjacket  created  by  the 
guarantee,  and  by  the  potential  scale  of  needed  recapitalisation,  and  its  threat  to  the 
Sovereign. 
This meant no asset fire-sales, and the target, ultimately achieved, of sharply reducing the 
loan-to-deposit  ratio  was  kept  under  review,  not  least  to  try  to  prevent  the  outbreak 
(frequently threatened) of a destructive deposit price war. On the other hand, for example, 
the other side’s insistence that deposits should be promptly transferred out of the two fatally 
damaged  banks,  Anglo  and  INBS,  actually  suited  the  authorities’  intention  to  wind  these 
entities  down  as  soon  as  the guarantee (which  had  effectively  precluded  such  action)  had 
ended. 
Had there been sufficient fiscal headroom, or if the damage had been limited to a segment of 
the  banking  system,  instead  of  infecting  it  all,  more  drastic  de  novo  approaches  to 
establishing a well-functioning banking system might have been available options. 
In  the  event,  even  injecting  the  proposed  amount  of  capital  in  mid-2011  presented  fiscal 
risks. Although seen as newly flush with capital, the banks still lacked the confidence of the 
market, which saw the fiscal situation as an over-arching threat to the banks. Paradoxically, 
the attempt to strengthen the banks by sharply recapitalising was sufficiently credit negative 
for the sovereign as to limit at first improvement in the banks’ access to the market. 
Only after sufficient further consolidation of the fiscal position (and a stabilisation of the wider 
situation  in  the  euro  area)  did  the  market’s  assessment  of  the  creditworthiness  of  both 
sovereign and banks improve. 
That  said,  other  parts  of  the  banking  repair  have  taken  much  longer  than  expected.  Even 
with  Troika  pressure  the  complex  bankruptcy  law  reforms  have  come  slowly;  and  on  the 
ground,  the  mortgage  arrears  and  wider  impaired  assets  problems  are  only  now  showing 
clear  signs  of  coming  under  control.  These  represent  the  major  unfinished  business  as 
Ireland exits the programme. Progress is being made, and more is needed before the banks 
can be regarded as restored to fully effective and self-reliant operation. We will not relax in 
this area. 
Conclusion 
So  where  has  the  Irish  economy  arrived  in  macroeconomic  terms  after  three  years  of  the 
programme?  Perhaps  the  best  single  picture  for  illustrating  the  pattern  of  macroeconomic 
stabilisation  is  Figure  4  which  shows  that  aggregate  employment  started  growing  again  in 
2012 and suggests that this resumes a gradually slowing trend that was in place for more 
than a decade before interrupted by a construction related surge in the mid-2000s. To those 
who wish to get back to the favourable and soundly-based economic conditions of the late 
1990s,  this  is  probably  the  most  encouraging  indicator.  There  is  plenty  of  scope  for 
disagreement on the quantification, but the pattern is likely to be valid. 
At  the  same  time  the  figure  also  hints  at  how  far  below  previous  trend  and  medium  term 
potential the economy remains at this point. Unemployment, albeit moderated by emigration 
and labour market exit, stands at 12.4 per cent. 
In any assessment of the major macroeconomic adjustments that have occurred, the impact 
on  income  inequality  needs  to  be  taken  into  account.  Actually,  we  don’t  yet  have  the 
comprehensive survey figures on this for 2012, but, while the available statistics indicate that 
the  downturn  has  had  a  broadly  similar  average  percentage  effect  on  incomes  across  the 
distribution,6 an equal proportionate reduction in incomes of course hits lower income groups 
                                                
6   At least if we are to go by the CSO SILC survey results stating that, in 2010–2011, the Gini coefficient was the 
same or even a little better than the levels that prevailed in the years before the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
harder: there has been a substantial increase in the proportion of poor households suffering 
deprivation in the years since the crisis broke. A return to higher levels of employment will be 
a macroeconomic key to reversing this situation. 
The  crisis  will  have  a  lasting  unfavourable  legacy.  The  accumulation  of  debt,  public  and 
private,  will  continue  to  weigh  on  growth  prospects  in  a  variety  of  ways.  And  many 
households  are  being  affected  by  long  term  unemployment.  But  the  damage  can  be 
ameliorated by a variety of means, including work on labour market activation and continued 
improvement of fiscal policy and measures. 
Limiting  the  legacy  damage  is  also  the  rationale  for  the  Central  Bank’s  persistence  in 
pressing the banks, in accordance with our mortgage arrears resolution strategy and targets, 
to accelerate their work to ensure that non-performing loans are brought back into performing 
status,  and  dealing  with  over-indebtedness  by  moving  to  sustainable  solutions.  These  are 
tasks which remain work in progress, though progress that is now accelerating. 
In  cushioning  the  impact  of  the  loss  of  market  confidence  resulting  from  the  crisis,  the 
programme did no more and no less than was promised on the tin. The rest is up to us.  
 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
