Fernando Restoy: Capital requirements and banking union 
Speech  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the  Analistas 
Financieros  Internacionales  (AFI)  conference  on  banking  regulation,  Madrid,  27  January 
2014. 
 Good morning. 
Thank  you,  Emilio,  for  your  kind  introduction  and  for  the  invitation  to  take  part  in  this  AFI 
(Analistas Financieros Internacionales) conference on banking regulation.   
As we move into 2014, we face a year of major challenges for the banking industry. This is 
so,  above  all,  because  of  the  historic  importance  of  the  start-up  of  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism, which will effectively come on stream next November. At that point the ECB will 
assume  supervisory  powers  over  the  main  euro  area  banks.  And  this  institutional  change, 
marking  the  origin  of  the  banking  union,  will  come  about  against  a  background  of  deep-
seated changes in the regulatory framework of banking activity.  
Allow me to begin by reviewing some of the latest regulatory changes in the prudential field, 
before sharing some thoughts with you on the ongoing construction of the banking union in 
Europe.  
Solvency regulations  
One  of  the  pillars  of  the  financial  reform,  which  arose  in  response  to  the  shortcomings 
evidenced during the crisis, has been the measures aimed at strengthening bank solvency. 
As you know, the new solvency rules, known as Basel III, have been applied since the start 
of this year in the European Union. They have been incorporated into legislation through a 
Directive and a Regulation on capital requirements. The rules require banks to appreciably 
increase the quality and quantity of regulatory capital. Further, they increase the instruments 
at  supervisors’  disposal  to  restrict  the  risks  of  bank  operations  and  to  ensure  financial 
institutions  have  sufficient  loss-absorbing  capacity,  and,  more  generally,  to  safeguard  the 
stability of the financial system as a whole.   
Yet the mission to strengthen the regulatory framework in order to minimise the likelihood of 
banking crises, together with their associated costs, is far from complete. You will be aware 
that  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  working  on  the  definition  and 
appropriate  parameterisation  of  new  liquidity  requirements  to  complement  the  solvency 
requirements.  At  the  same  time,  one  task  to  be  undertaken  in  the  near  future  is  the 
enhancement  of  the  current  tools  for  measuring  and  provisioning  risk  on  bank  balance 
sheets.  
Specifically, the Basel Committee has advocated the advisability of working on improving the 
methods  for  calculating  risk-weighted  assets  and  thus  increasing  their  consistency  and 
homogeneity.  
Indeed,  an  appreciable  degree  of  heterogeneity  has  recently  been  evident  in  the  internal 
models  banks  use  to  calculate  risk  weightings  under  the  advanced  approach,  whose  use 
must  be  approved  by  the  supervisor.  Supervisory  practice  indicates  the  technical  difficulty 
entailed  in  approving  the  models  presented  by  banks  and,  in  particular,  in  gauging  their 
ability  to  properly  measure  the  sensitivity  of  the  various  portfolios  to  risk.  It  is  thus  not 
unusual  that  the  studies  available  should  question  the  fact  that  banks  with  the  same  risk 
profile are actually subject in practice to comparable capital requirements when they operate 
in different jurisdictions.  
The dissatisfaction arising from the difficulties in achieving an appropriate estimation of asset 
risk  weightings  should  not  lead  to  conventional  solvency  ratios  being  discarded  or  to  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
role as essential indicators of the financial strength of banks being questioned. Nor is it easy 
to  justify  renouncing  the  use  of  the  specific  information  at  hand  at  banks  –  through  the 
advanced approach – to improve the measurement of the risk of exposures. Indeed, I believe 
any  effective  regulatory  reform  should  continue  to  aspire  to  have  capital  requirements 
discriminate  between  different  types  of  exposures  on  the  basis  of  their  risk  and  to  avoid 
excessively simplistic approaches that prevent capital requirements being adapted to each 
bank’s business model. What’s more, the calculation of the solvency ratios and, in particular, 
the use of advanced models should be subject to more demanding tests.  
In  this  respect,  various  options  –  which  are  not  mutually  exclusive  –  have  emerged  in the 
ongoing debate to refine the calculation of regulatory capital, and these merit in-depth study. 
The  first  approach  involves  developing  more  accurate  guidelines  for  the  design  and 
parameterisation  of  acceptable  models.  A  second  course  of  action  is  the  possibility  of 
imposing restrictions on the saving of own funds prompted by the use of the advanced as 
opposed to the standardised approach which, at an extreme, could lead to the results of the 
standardised approach being used as a floor for the required capital. A third proposal is the 
use of a leverage ratio as a complement to the traditional solvency ratios.  
As you know, the Basel Committee published, scarcely two weeks ago, a document detailing 
the  work  performed  to  introduce,  in  the  near  future,  a  minimum  leverage  ratio  in  the 
regulatory framework of banking activity.  
As a concept, the leverage ratio can be defined very simply as the ratio of the bank’s high-
quality capital to its total exposure. However, transposing the concept to regulation requires, 
in practice, adopting complex decisions on how to measure certain exposures (such as repos 
and  derivatives)  and  the  extent  to  which  these  exposures  should  be  netted  or  not  for  the 
purposes of calculating the ratio denominator. And all this must be done bearing in mind the 
existence  of  various  approaches  in  the  different  jurisdictions  linked  largely  to  the 
heterogeneity of the accounting frameworks in place.  
The definition proposed by the Basel Committee is a pragmatic approach to the problem that 
should provide for the application of a similar methodology for the calculation of the leverage 
ratio worldwide.  
In any event, the final calibration of the minimum ratio should be completed in 2017, with a 
view to its definitive inclusion in the solvency rules in 2018. This calibration will define the 
interrelatedness of the ratio to the other solvency measures and, specifically, the conditions 
under  which  it  will  act  as  a  binding  constraint.  We  are  still,  therefore,  at  the  analysis  and 
calibration  phase.  Next  year,  banks  will  be  required  to  publish  the  ratio as  a  transparency 
measure,  which  will  be  conducive  to  the  final  design  of  the  new  regulatory  requirement 
attaining a sufficient degree of consistency and homogeneity.  
Evidently, the introduction of new prudential control measures entails an additional effort for 
banks, at a time when the sluggishness of economic activity is exerting significant pressure 
on their margins. Undoubtedly, however, adopting these measures while observing a prudent 
implementation calendar will have an appreciably positive effect on the industry’s soundness 
and resilience and, consequently, on the economy as a whole.  
Banking union 
That said, as experience categorically shows, the harmonisation of solvency rules is not a 
sufficient guarantee to ensure homogenous control of the financial position of banks located 
in different jurisdictions. As important as having similar rules is the application of a common 
supervisory approach. And the homogeneity of the prudential control exerted over financial 
institutions  is  particularly  important  in  economic  areas  that  share  an  integrated  banking 
market  and  a  common  currency.  Hence  the  importance  for  Europe  of  setting  up  a  single 
supervisory mechanism.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This mechanism, as the first piece of the banking union project, is essential for contributing to 
doing  away  fully  with  the  financial fragmentation  that  threatened  the  continuity  of  the  euro 
and  to  deactivating  the  vicious  feedback  loop  between  banking  and  sovereign  risk,  which 
caused  so  much  harm  to  economies  such  as  Spain  in  terms  of  greater  funding  costs, 
difficulty of access to credit and, in sum, lower employment and growth.  
The single supervisory mechanism 
As  you  are  aware,  the  start-up  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  the  first  pillar  of  the 
banking  union,  is  at  a  very  advanced  stage  following  the  entry  into  force,  just  a  few  days 
back, of the Community Regulation creating it. Currently, intense preparatory work is under 
way, and I can assure you this poses a significant organisational challenge.  
A key element is to establish an appropriate governance structure combining the leadership 
of the ECB in the supervisory function with the involvement of the national authorities, all the 
while ensuring that the assumption of prudential functions by the ECB does not clash with its 
monetary  policy  responsibilities.  Supervisory  powers  will  mainly  be  channelled  through the 
Supervisory Board, whose chairperson and vice-chairperson, along with the representatives 
of the national authorities, have already been appointed. The Board will convene for the first 
time this very week. The four Directors-General of the ECB responsible for supervision have 
already  been  designated,  one  of  whom  is  the  current  Director-General  of  Banking 
Supervision of the Banco de España, which is a cause of satisfaction for our institution. The 
selection processes for the remaining management positions will continue over the coming 
months.  
Thanks  to  the  work  by  several  groups  of  experts,  two  essential  pieces  of  the  future 
mechanism are at an advanced stage. These are, namely: the Framework Regulation that 
will  define  the  supervisory  function,  its  internal  organisation  and  the  assignment  of 
responsibilities among the various authorities making up the mechanism; and the supervisory 
manual, which will precisely set out the procedures to be followed by all the members of the 
mechanism, including naturally the supervisory personnel of the national authorities.  
The  ECB  and  the  national  authorities  are  also  working  on  developing  the  comprehensive 
assessment of credit institutions in the participating countries, which began last November 
and  will  be  completed  before the  ECB  assumes  supervisory  powers.  This  assessment  will 
include an asset quality review, performed with the help of auditors or external consultants, 
and  subsequent  stress  tests,  which  will  be  conducted  in  collaboration  with  the  European 
Banking Authority (EBA).  
Shortly, the thrust of the design of these two exercises will be made public, although certain 
features  are  already  known,  such  as  the  minimum  capital  ratio  that  will  be  required  in  the 
accounting review phase and which stands at 8% of common equity tier 1 capital (CET1), 
according  to  the  definition  established  in  the  Community  Regulations,  including  the 
envisaged timetable for the application of the various deductions.  
Evidently,  the  exercise  aims  to  strengthen  confidence  in  the  European  financial  system 
through transparency and reinforcing the solvency of those banks that need it. Nonetheless, 
the  Spanish  experience,  in  particular  that from  the  exercises  performed in  2012  under  the 
financial  assistance  programme,  shows  that  the  proper  metric  for  measuring  attainable 
credibility is not based on the estimated capital needs resulting from the exercise, but on the 
application of a sufficiently rigorous methodology enabling all potentially vulnerable segments 
of  the  European  banking  system  to  be  evaluated  consistently,  particularly  those  whose 
reflection  in  the  financial  information  published  is  of  greater  complexity.  It  is  moreover 
important  that,  as  announced  in  the  public  communiqué  released,  the  measurements  of 
capital made should be consistent with the regulatory framework in force which, in Europe, 
essentially  comprises  the  recently  enacted  Community  Directive  and  Regulation  on  capital 
requirements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Thanks to the reform undertaken and the measures applied by banks, the Spanish banking 
system is, generally, in a reasonable position to face these exercises. However, obtaining a 
positive  result  in  the  exercise  is  only  a  favourable  starting  point  for  assuming  the  new 
supervisory regime in a macroeconomic and financial framework which, despite the recent 
improvement, remains beset by challenges to banks. Accordingly, irrespective of the results 
of the exercise, banks should continue to focus on implementing measures geared to capital 
preservation, improved efficiency and the pursuit of rigour in the recording and monitoring of 
asset quality.  
Single resolution mechanism and fund 
The second essential element of banking union is a single resolution mechanism. It has been 
said  on  numerous  occasions  that  unified  supervision  will  not  suffice  to  eliminate  market 
fragmentation.  Another  prerequisite  is  that  similar  banking  liabilities  of  banks  based  in 
different  jurisdictions  must  receive  similar  treatment  in  the  event  of  solvency  problems.  In 
order words, the resolution of vulnerable banks has to proceed according to common rules 
applied on a centralised basis by a single authority.  
Regarding  regulations,  the  agreement  reached  to  approve  the  future  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive  is  a  notable  step  forward  because  it  offers  a  common  framework  for 
orderly bank resolution at a minimum cost to taxpayers. 
The  Directive  introduces  burden-sharing  or  bail-in  arrangements  establishing  a  minimum 
amount and clear order of cost assumption by shareholders and creditors. It thus makes for 
accurate perception of the risk associated with each liability instrument and minimises the bill 
to  be  footed  by  taxpayers  for  the  disorderly  winding-up  of  banks.  Also  envisaged  is  a 
resolution  fund  fed  by  contributions  from  the  industry  to  meet  any  needs  for  capital  which 
cannot be covered by burden-sharing exercises. 
Furthermore,  last  December  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  reached  an  important 
consensus  after  several  months  of  complex  negotiations,  which,  taken  together  with  the 
aforementioned  Directive,  amounts  in  practice  to  the  creation  of  a  single  resolution 
mechanism. 
Further to this consensus, a bank resolution board will be set up whose scope of action will 
be the same as that of the single supervisory mechanism. It will have considerable freedom 
to act urgently in cases of restructuring or winding-up. It was also decided to set up a single 
resolution fund which will be progressively endowed with financial resources.  
The  bank  resolution  board  will  be  entrusted  with  applying  resolution  rules  uniformly, 
approving restructuring and resolution plans for banks supervised directly by the ECB and 
determining how the resolution fund is to be used.  
The  details  of  the  single  resolution  fund  are  to  be  set  forth  in  an  intergovernmental 
agreement  of  the  participating  countries  before  March.  However,  the  consensus  reached 
stipulates  that  the  fund  will  be  financed  through  contributions  from  the  European  financial 
services industry, although the resources contributed by the banks in each jurisdiction will not 
be  fully  merged  until  ten  years  have  passed.  During  these  ten  years  the  fund  will  have 
separate compartments funded by contributions from the banks of each country, which will 
be progressively mutualised year by year. Under this process, the system of burden-sharing 
among  the  national  and  mutualised  funds  will  be  gradually  adjusted  until  the  national 
compartments disappear completely around January 2025. 
The  complex  agreement  reached  has  yet  to  be  accepted  by  the  European  Parliament,  so 
there is still uncertainty as to the final design of the mechanism. Moreover, the capabilities of 
the  mechanism  will  foreseeably  be  limited  at  first,  since  the  single  resolution  fund  is 
constrained by its modest size and reduced mutualisation. Furthermore, for the time being, 
the agreement does not include common public mechanisms for the resolution of vulnerable 
banks after the available private funds have all been used up. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  this  respect,  although  the  new  resolution  rules  reduce  the  foreseeable  scope  of  the 
required external funds, provision should be made for public financial support at EU level to 
ensure  the  orderly  resolution  of  systemic  banks  if  necessary.  For  example,  following  the 
example  of  the  US,  we  could  consider  an  arrangement  in  which  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism  could  provide  the  resources  needed  to  the  common  resolution  fund  with  a 
charge to future contributions from the industry. Otherwise, the single resolution mechanism 
would,  at  least  in  the  short-to-medium term, foreseeably  be  insufficient  to  prevent  banking 
crises  from  continuing  to  be  resolved  with  a  charge  to  national  funds,  whether  public  or 
private.  
That  said,  the  agreement  reached  should  by  no  means  be  underrated.  In  particular,  the 
acceptance of the principle of transnational mutualisation of financial risk in Europe, although 
implemented very gradually and limited to funds contributed by the industry, is essential to 
ensure  the  homogeneous  treatment  of  banking  risk  throughout  the  EU.  Above  all,  from  a 
broader standpoint, the agreement means that a significant political obstacle to extending the 
risk-sharing  framework  has  been  overcome.  This  will  very  likely  pave  the  way  for  more 
significant progress in European integration in the future. 
Let me finish by noting that in recent economic history it is difficult to find bouts of regulatory 
reform as intense as at present.  
Globally, the unprecedented costs of the banking crisis for citizens as a whole have spurred 
major regulatory changes designed, firstly, to tighten up prudential regulation so as to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  fresh  crises  in  the  future;  and,  secondly,  to  develop  new  resolution 
regulations  to  lower  and  allocate  more  fairly  the  cost  of  maintaining  financial  stability.  In 
Europe  the  application  of  the  regulatory  reform  coincides  in  time  with  a  far-reaching 
institutional change which has to lead to the creation of a banking union. And, in Spain, all 
these important regulatory and institutional changes are taking place against a background of 
deep reform of our financial sector which has involved the clean-up of balance sheets, the 
recapitalisation of vulnerable banks, progress towards greater consolidation of the industry 
and enhancement of regulations, particularly those governing savings banks. 
All  this  understandably  poses  a  huge  challenge  to  the  entire  financial  system  which, 
however,  will  emerge  much  stronger  from  a  process  of  adaption  that  will,  in  all  likelihood, 
make it sounder and more efficient. This will contribute to the sustainable recovery of Spain’s 
economy in an increasingly integrated Europe.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
