Sukhdave Singh: Global economic outlook and financial landscape – 
what has changed since the global financial crisis? 
Special address by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 18th Malaysian Banking Summit “Global Economic Outlook 
and  Financial  Landscape:  What  Has  Changed  Since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis?”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 20 June 2014. 
 I would like to thank ASLI for the invitation to address you today. Given that I am speaking 
right before your lunch, I do realise that I have been cast into the role of an appetiser and 
therefore, that I should be brief so that you can quickly get on to the main course. 
I plan to briefly go over the state of the global economy and its implications for the Malaysian 
economy.  The  news  here  is  largely  good.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  concerns  that 
could  impact  the quality  and  sustainability  of  growth  going forward,  and  I  will  also  discuss 
these. 
Global economic outlook and the changing financial landscape 
The good  news  is  that after five  years  of rather  turbulent  conditions  and  what  has  been  a 
rather  bumpy  economic  ride,  the  global  economy  seems  to  be  finally  on  the  verge  of 
sustained growth. The key to this development is the improved growth conditions that have 
emerged in many of the advanced economies (AEs), economies that were at the heart of the 
crisis. While we continue to believe that the growth in the advanced economies will remain 
low relative to historical levels, and there are a number of reasons for that, the signs are that 
these economies are finally able to achieve steady growth. And that is obviously good for the 
global economy. 
As for the emerging market economies (EMEs), they have done relatively well in the years 
since the crisis. Domestic demand had been supported by high commodity prices as well as 
expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. However, growth in the EMEs now seems to have 
hit  a  bump  in  the  road.  The  commodities  boom  has  tapered  off  and  this  has  impacted 
incomes. The fiscal stimulus has increased government debt making further fiscal expansion 
less sustainable. On top of that, the low interest rate environment has led to an increase in 
household  debt.  These  developments  are  now  beginning  to  act  as  a  brake  on  economic 
growth. This experience highlights the risks and limits of domestic demand driven by easy 
monetary policy, cheap credit and fiscal stimulus. Therefore, domestic demand in EMEs will 
grow at a slower pace. Nevertheless, EMEs will still be contributing a bigger share to global 
growth  than  the  AEs.  The  re-emergence  of  growth  in  the  crisis-affected  AEs  could  be 
expected  to  strengthen  external  demand  for  the  exports  of  EMEs,  thereby  mitigating  the 
effect of slower domestic demand. 
Among the Asian economies, we do expect to see similar trends. Again, sustained domestic 
demand, while lower than in the past, will continue to support growth. There has been a lot of 
concern  about  the  Chinese  economy  for  obvious  reasons  –  it  having  become  the  second 
largest  economy  in  this  world.  And  among  many  regional  economies,  it  is  now  their  most 
important trading partner. So, if the Chinese economy catches a flu, we will all feel the effects 
of  its  sneezing.  Having  said  that,  the  Chinese  economy  will  continue  to  grow  and  the 
policymakers there seem to be determined in ensuring that it does. 
Implications to Malaysia 
Malaysia  will  certainly  benefit from  the more  positive  growth  environment,  especially  given 
the  better  growth  of  its  major  trading  partner  economies.  The  Malaysian  economy  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
projected to grow by 4.5–5.5%. This outlook is supported by the strong growth of 6.2% in the 
first quarter  of  2014. The  outlook  has  improved  due  to  better  external  demand  conditions. 
After growing by only 2.4% in 2013, Malaysia’s exports have grown by almost 13% so far in 
2014. 
For a small open economy like Malaysia, and others like it, the experience of the crisis and 
the years since has certainly brought home the vulnerabilities and risks of being integrated 
with the global economy. But, I believe that it has also highlighted our dependence on the 
global economy and the need to be even more integrated with the global economy. At the 
risk of a slight diversion, allow me to elaborate a bit on this point. 
After  the  crisis,  there  was  some  excitement  about  domestic  demand  being  the  driver  of 
growth,  and  there  was  some  justification  for  such  enthusiasm.  There  was  certainly  a 
component  related  to  the  growth  in  incomes  and  private  demand.  But  there  was  also  a 
significant component related to public spending and the rapid growth of domestic credit. The 
outcome is higher debt levels for both households and the Government. This is clearly not a 
sustainable  strategy  for  growth.  Indeed,  the  experience  has  shown  that  there  are  limits  to 
how fast and how sustainably we can grow by relying on domestic demand alone. Therefore, 
going  forward,  while  domestic  demand  will  continue  to  support  growth,  we  really  need  to 
strengthen  our  integration  with  both  the  regional  and  global  economy,  and  by  implication, 
strengthen  our  overall  level  of  economic  competitiveness,  if  we  are  to  achieve  sustainable 
growth over the long term. 
Returning  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  good  news  is  that  we  are  seeing  more  sustained 
growth around the world and that is already beginning to benefit Malaysia and creating more 
balanced growth of the Malaysian economy. 
Now what are the potential clouds over this rather sunny outlook? There are several, but in 
the interest of time, I will just mention five. 
The first of this is the slow recovery of investment in the AEs after the crisis. 
It  has  been  noted  that  this  recovery,  unlike  recoveries  from  past  recessions,  has  been 
accompanied  by  rather  lackluster  investment.  This  is  despite  the  fact  that  companies  are 
sitting on large piles of cash. 
What have companies been using those cash piles for? Well, either they have been returning 
that  cash  in  bucket-fulls  to  shareholders  or  using  it  to  support  their  share  prices  through 
share  buy-backs.  It  was  reported  in  yesterday’s  Financial  Times  that  during  the  first  three 
months of this year alone, the S&P 500 companies in the US spent a record US$241 billion 
to repurchase shares and pay cash dividends. While this may help to keep share prices high, 
they  do  not  create  new  sources  of  growth.  Meanwhile,  capital  spending  by  the  S&P 
500 companies has grown by an average of just 3.6 percent per year over the last five years. 
Ultimately, the quantity and quality of investment will determine the quality of growth now and 
well into the future. 
The second issue facing these economies is that despite the drop in unemployment, 
productivity growth has remained weak. 
The way we understand the recovery process, when demand picks up, companies will first 
try  to  meet  it  using  its  existing  workers.  Productivity  increases.  However,  as  demand 
continues  to  grow,  the  increase  in  productivity  of  existing  workers  will  be  insufficient  and 
companies  have  to  hire  new  workers  to  increase  production.  So  employment  increases. 
Therefore,  an  increase  in  productivity  is  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  employment.  We 
have not witnessed that phenomenon this time. In the US, the unemployment rate has fallen 
from its peak of 9.8% to 6.3% in May 2014 but productivity was only growing 1%, less than 
half of what it was in the years prior to the crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There are a number of possibilities as to what is going on: 
• 
In  the  UK  and  US,  it  has  been  noted  that  the  number  of  business  start-ups  has 
increased  significantly  in  the  post-crisis  years.  One  interpretation  of  this  is  that, 
increasing  number  of  people  have  given  up  on  gaining  employment  and  have 
decided to become self-employed. If this is true, it would help to explain the decline 
in unemployment and low productivity growth. Being in business means you are no 
longer  unemployed  and  new  businesses  generally  do  not  have  very  high 
productivity. 
Another interpretation is that a significant part of the fall in unemployment has come 
not so much from more people being employed but rather from people leaving the 
labour force. The labour force participation rate in the US has fallen from 66% prior 
to the crisis to its current level of 63%. Essentially, the labor force is shrinking. In 
which case there would be no reason to believe that the decline in unemployment 
should  be  preceded  by  rising  productivity.  Another  factor  undermining  productivity 
could be the fact that the number of part-time workers has also increased – in the 
US, from 3% of the working population to 5% in 2014:Q1. 
The question of low productivity growth is not unrelated to the preceding issue of low 
investment.  The  rate  of  productive  investment  is  a  key  determinant  of  the  future 
growth and productivity of an economy. 
  Whatever the reasons, if productivity does not pick up, it would have a dampening effect on 
the growth  of  wages  and  incomes,  and consequently,  on  the  strength of  economic growth 
going forward. 
The third issue is related to the policy risk. 
There is what I call the “monetary policy pendulum”. In the post-crisis period, monetary policy 
in the AEs has gone where no central banker has gone before. My analogy to the pendulum 
simply means that the further out you pull on something in one direction, the further it is likely 
to  go  in  the  other  direction  when  you  let  go.  There  is  the  risk  that  the  process  of 
normalisation  from  the  extreme  policy  positions  could  create  undesirable  outcomes, 
especially given the level of risk taking that we have seen in the extended period of very easy 
global  liquidity  conditions  and  the  resulting  desperate  search  for  yields.  If  economic 
conditions  change  faster  than  currently  anticipated  by  policymakers,  would  a  rapid  and 
potentially large reversal of policy be possible, and if so, what could be the potential side-
effects? It would certainly not be helpful to stability in the global financial markets. There has 
been  increased  interest  among  policymakers  in  these  economies  in  also  using  macro-
prudential tools to manage the build-up of risks in the low interest rate environment. The use 
of such tools may be helpful in these economies, but it also poses a potential risk to the rest 
of the world. For example, it could push even more capital flows in the direction of emerging 
economies like Malaysia. 
The crisis has also stretched the fiscal position of governments, both in the advanced and 
emerging  economies.  In  some  cases,  such  deterioration  was  related  to  dealing  with  the 
effects of the crisis (e.g., from bank rescues) and the low GDP growth post-crisis, in others it 
reflects the outcome of years of unwise fiscal spending. Whatever the reasons, constrained 
fiscal positions mean a reduced capacity to support economic activity and a reduced ability to 
deal with future crisis and shocks. It also means that monetary policy may be called on to do 
more  than  it  can  realistically  deliver  –  a  phenomenon  we  are  already  witnessing  in  the 
advanced economies. 
A related policy issue has to do with structural reforms. 
This is a topic that has been much discussed in the post-crisis years. The trans-Atlantic crisis 
was a blow-up of large imbalances and distortions – both real and financial – built over many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
years.  It  reflects  policymakers  delaying  or  ignoring  needed  reforms.  The  experience  has 
once again provided the lesson that the longer such imbalances are ignored and allowed to 
pile up, the bigger the mess when the whole pile finally comes crashing down. 
Structural reforms are certainly needed in many of the crisis affected advanced economies. 
But they are also needed in many EMEs, including in Malaysia. They are needed to ensure 
that economic growth is based on strong foundations and therefore will be more sustained 
and sustainable. Yet, the pace of structural reforms in most economies has been very slow 
and has lacked momentum. The main reason behind this inertia is often the stranglehold of 
vested interest. 
On this point, let me quote Mr. Travis Kelanik, the founder of the taxi service app Uber, which 
last week caused the black cab drivers in London to go on strike. He was reported in the Wall 
Street Journal as saying: 
“…there’s  so  much  corruption  and  so  much  cronyism  in  the  taxi  industry  and  so  much 
regulatory  capture  that  if  you  ask  permission  up  front  for  something  that  is  already  legal, 
you’ll never get it. There’s is no upside to them.” 
Clearly, the taxi industry is not the only one that has this characteristics, nor is it the only one 
that would be resistant to competition and structural change. 
Another reason for the  inertia  is  that  structural  reforms  often  entail  short-term  pain  even  if 
they  do  provide  long-term  gain.  Note the  protests  that  have  occurred  in  the  crisis-affected 
economies in response to structural measures that governments in those economies have 
been forced to implement. The short-term pain makes structural reforms a politically difficult 
decision. There are sectors of society that would be adversely affected by these reforms and 
they will not take it kindly. Therefore, it takes political courage. The other point is that while 
reforms  are  occurring,  they  can  adversely  affect  the  pace  of  economic  growth  due  to  the 
dislocations caused. However, assuming that the Government has the fiscal strength, some 
of these dislocations can be mitigated through the use of fiscal policy. 
Therefore, in terms of the growth outlook, if countries seriously undertake structural reforms it 
may temporarily reduce growth, but would likely lead to much stronger longer-term growth. If 
such  reforms  are  not  undertaken,  it  would  create  a  low  and  unstable  growth  path  for  the 
affected  economies.  The  collateral  consequence  of  this  later  outcome  could  be  increased 
cross-border frictions. 
The fifth and final point I would like to mention has to do with income inequality. 
You cannot but have noticed that it has become a hot topic of discussion in the post-crisis 
period. The French economist Thomas Piketty, has become a superstar by writing a book on 
it. The reasons for this are obvious. Well-paid bankers caused the crisis and after the crisis 
most of them continue to have well-paid jobs. Many low and middle income workers lost their 
jobs,  suffered  sharp  declines  in  their  economic  welfare,  and  many  even  lost  their  homes. 
Furthermore, the crisis has highlighted the large disparities in income in the AEs, and the fact 
that  in  the  preceding  period  of  prosperity,  the  benefits  of  growth  have  largely  gone  to  a 
relatively small group in society. 
You can say that the crisis has let the genie out of the Gini-coefficient. 
How  governments  deal  with  this  income  disparity  will  not  only  be  reflected  in  social  and 
political outcomes, but also economic ones as it is the low and middle income groups that 
have the highest marginal propensity to consume. Similarly, a lack of success in dealing with 
the  high  youth  unemployment  in  the  crisis  affected  economies  could  have  lasting 
consequences  and  put  these  young  people  on  a  permanently  lower  earnings  path,  further 
contributing to both income inequality and weaker growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To conclude, let me summarise my key message: 
Economically,  things  are  looking  better  than  they  have  been  in  a  long  time.  However,  the 
legacy of the crisis remains and will remain with us for some time yet. And this will continue 
to cloud the outlook and will be a concern and challenge to policymakers as they try to steer 
the global economy out of the crisis on to a more sustained and sustainable growth path. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
