Andreas Dombret: What is going on in Europe? The view from within 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the New York Stock Exchange, New York, 26 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the New York Stock Exchange. It is a great honour and 
pleasure to be here today. 
In  1792,  a  few  stock  brokers  gathered  under  a  buttonwood  tree  at  the  lower  end  of  Wall 
Street. In this meeting, they signed an agreement which, in effect, marked the birth of the 
New York Stock Exchange. 
Today, more than 200 years later, the buttonwood tree is long gone; it fell during a storm in 
1865.  However,  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  is  still  going  strong  and  has  become  a 
guiding light in the financial and economic universe. 
In this role, it has witnessed its fair share of ups and downs, booms and busts, tranquillity 
and turmoil. However, the last seven years have mostly been characterised by downs, busts 
and  turmoil.  Since  2007,  we  have  lived  through  a  succession  of  crises:  a  global  financial 
crisis,  a  worldwide  recession,  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area  and,  most  recently, 
turbulence in some emerging markets. 
These  episodes  have  once  again  underscored  how  closely  interconnected  the  global 
economy has become. What drives growth and prosperity in good times can easily turn the 
other way in a crisis. In a globalised world, a problem at one side of the globe can quickly 
spread  to  the  other  side.  To  paraphrase Winston  Churchill:  “a  financial  crisis  gets  halfway 
around the world before policymakers have a chance to get their pants on”. 
In  a  globalised  world,  what  happens  in  the  United  States  is  relevant  to  Europe  and  what 
happens  in  Europe  is  relevant  to  the  United  States.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  wish  to  shed 
some light on the situation in the euro area and offer you an inside view. 
There is light at the end of the tunnel 
2. 
For nearly four years now, the state of the euro area has been defined by the sovereign debt 
crisis. However, I have good news for you – there is light at the end of the tunnel. 
Most importantly, the euro area as a whole has finally left recession. By now, we have seen 
three consecutive  quarters  of  positive growth,  and  looking  ahead, the outlook for this  year 
and next year is also quite encouraging. Projections by the ECB suggest that euro-area GDP 
will grow by just over 1% in 2014 and by 1½% in 2015. 
And  this  recovery  is  not  only  driven  by  the  “core  euro-area”  countries  such  as  Germany. 
Some  of  the  crisis-hit  countries  have  also  finally  embarked  on  the  path  to  recovery.  And 
those which have not can at least see the light at the end of the tunnel. 
It  seems  that  the  efforts  to  implement  structural  reforms  are  gradually  bearing  fruit. 
Competitiveness has improved in most peripheral countries over the past few years. Almost 
everywhere,  unit  labour  costs  have  fallen  substantially.  Improving  competitiveness  in  turn 
drives exports higher. All peripheral countries – except Cyprus – are projected to see some 
export growth this year. These achievements are reflected in current accounts increasingly 
reverting to positive balances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And Germany is part of this rebalancing equation. Since 2007, Germany’s current account 
surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has shrunk continuously from 4½% of GDP to 2% of GDP. As 
business investment in Germany is projected to pick up in 2014 and 2015, this rebalancing 
should continue. 
The progress that these abstract figures reflect is also visible in more concrete events. For 
example,  Ireland  and  Spain  have  exited  their  financial  support  programmes  without  any 
friction. And Portugal is planning to leave its adjustment programme in the first half of this 
year.  All  three  countries  recently  returned  to  the  sovereign  bond  markets  at  relatively  low 
yields. 
It seems that international investors are increasingly acknowledging the countries’ efforts and 
achievements. In the case of Ireland and Portugal, international investors have bought more 
than 80% of the newly issued bonds. At the same time, stock markets in these economies 
have  been  rising  for  some  time  now.  These  developments  underscore  the  progress  that 
some peripheral euro-area countries have made in adjusting their economies. 
However, due to different starting points some countries are naturally more advanced in their 
adjustment  process  than  others.  Especially  in  Greece  further  efforts  are  necessary  to 
manage the turnaround. 
The role of monetary policy 
3.  
Now, what is the role of monetary policy in this process? Monetary policy certainly helped to 
prevent the crisis from escalating. Still, there is one thing we should be clear about: monetary 
policy cannot solve the underlying causes of the crisis. 
Nevertheless, some observers propose an even more expansionary monetary policy. They 
are worried about the risk of deflation in the euro area. It is certainly true that current inflation 
rates  are  rather  low  but,  in  my  view,  the  risk  of deflation  is  limited.  And  on  this  issue,  the 
Bundesbank and the ECB agree. 
The argument rests on three pillars: 
• 
First, around two-thirds of the drop in inflation is due to falling prices for energy and 
food. These are exogenous factors and their effects are likely to be temporary. 
Second,  low  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  partly  the  result  of  necessary 
adjustments in the crisis-hit countries. These should also be one-off effects. 
Third, there are no signs of a self-enforcing downward spiral of prices and wages. 
Long-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored at a level that is in line with the 
ECB’s definition of price stability. Private households do not seem to be postponing 
expenditure in expectation of a further drop in prices. There are no indications of a 
substantial increase in the savings rate. 
  Fears  of  a  fate  similar  to  that  of  Japan  are  therefore  misplaced.  Moreover,  the  notion  of 
Japan’s “lost decades” needs to be seen in perspective. The weak growth in Japan is partly a 
natural consequence of the country’s changing demographics, as the working-age population 
there  has  been  shrinking  since  the  mid-1990s.  That,  incidentally,  is  an  economic  policy 
challenge  that  awaits  some  euro  area  economies  in  the  years  to  come  –  most  notably 
Germany. 
There are still some obstacles to overcome 
4.  
So, even after taking into account the issue of deflation, we can still see the light at the end 
of the tunnel. However, we have not reached it yet. There may still be some obstacles that 
could block the way – some of them we can already see, others we cannot see. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The latter are what Frank Knight, one of the founders of the Chicago school of economics, 
called  “unknown  unknowns”.  A  recent  example  is  the  political  crisis  in  Ukraine.  However, 
while this is an example of an “unknown unknown”, it has only limited potential to prevent us 
from reaching the end of the tunnel. Ukraine contributes only a quarter of a percent to global 
economic  output.  Furthermore,  the  exposure  of  European  banks  to  Ukraine  is  relatively 
small. According to data from the Bank for International Settlements it stands at about US$23 
billion. 
A  known  obstacle  that  could  block  our  way,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  prolonged  period of 
very low interest rates. But please do not misunderstand me: the current status of monetary 
policy is certainly adequate. Nevertheless, when interest rates stay very low for a very long 
time, we may experience unwanted side-effects. 
One of these side-effects is the search for yield. Investors may eventually increase the risk of 
their  investments  to  make  up  for  the  shortfall  in  yields  caused  by  low  interest  rates.  And, 
indeed,  it  seems  that  investors  already  began  their  search  for  yield.  In  corporate  debt 
markets,  for  instance,  valuations  are  already  somewhat  stretched.  And  in  the  global  low-
interest rate environment, ambitious valuations may well spread to other market segments. 
In  this  regard,  the  strong  recovery  in  the  property  markets  of  some  euro-area  countries 
should set us thinking. Take the German housing market, for example. Between 2009 and 
2012,  prices  in  large  cities  rose  by  almost  25%.  And,  in  2013,  they  increased  by  another 
8.9%. Calculations by the Bundesbank already point to overvaluations in urban areas. 
Nevertheless,  when  looking  at  the  German  market  as  a  whole,  the  situation  seems  less 
dramatic. In 2013, prices rose by an average of 4.5% – a figure that does not give too much 
cause for concern. Overall, prices in Germany have not yet moved away from fundamentals. 
For  me,  warning  bells  would  start  ringing  if  there  was  a  rapid  increase  in  housing  prices 
accompanied by a significant rise in lending. And even more warning bells would be ringing if 
this  rise  in  credit  was  accompanied  by  deteriorating  lending  standards.  Having  said  that, I 
can assure you that at this point in time I am surrounded by silence. 
But it is not only bond markets and housing markets we have to look at. Since we are at the 
NYSE, let us take a look at stock markets. In 2013, there was only one way for most stock 
markets to go and that was up. The EuroStoxx 50 increased by 18%, the FTSE 100 by 14%, 
the  Dow  Jones  by  28%,  and  the  Nikkei  skyrocketed  by  as  much  as  57%.  Market  volatility 
decreased, too. After years of risk aversion, sentiment switched to a “risk on” mode. 
Did  financial  markets  enter  a  new  phase  of  “irrational  exuberance”?  Such  a  verdict  is 
certainly  debatable.  But  financial  markets  are  at  least  anticipating  significant  further 
improvements  in  economic  fundamentals  and  prospects.  And  they  are  anticipating  that 
governments  around  the  world  will  continue  to  implement  the  necessary  reforms.  These 
expectations create vast scope for confidence shocks. 
This,  in  turn,  interacts  in  an  unfavourable  way  with  another  risk  arising  from  a  prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates.  A  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  could  set  the  wrong 
incentives. It could encourage banks to postpone necessary balance sheet adjustments. And 
it might induce governments to postpone necessary structural reforms and the consolidation 
of public finances. 
In my view, this could be the biggest threat to the recovery process. The improved outlook 
together with low interest rates could lead to complacency and reform fatigue. We cannot let 
this happen. We cannot let it happen because there is still a lot to do to put the euro area 
back on a solid footing. Reform at the national level must continue and, looking to the future, 
reform at the European level is equally important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
How do we get to the end of the tunnel? 
5.  
At the European level, the most important project is the banking union. The banking union is 
most certainly the biggest step since the introduction of the euro. And it is the most logical 
step  to  take.  A  single  currency  requires  integrated  financial  markets  and  this  includes  the 
supervision of banks. 
Consequently,  one  of  the  pillars  the  banking  union  rests  upon  is  a  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  –  that  is  European  bank  supervision  for  the  largest  banks.  Centralising 
supervisory  powers  in  such  a  way  can  foster  a  comprehensive  and  unbiased  view  upon 
banks. It also enables policy action that is not held hostage by national interests. Thus, it will 
contribute 
to  more  effective  supervision  and  better  cross-border  cooperation  and 
coordination. 
However, the banking union does not rest on one pillar alone. A second pillar is necessary to 
keep  everything  in  balance.  This  second  pillar  is  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism. 
European bank supervision requires European bank resolution – otherwise there would be 
an imbalance between liability and control. 
In  a  wider  sense,  resolution  mechanisms  are  essential  to  solve  the  too-big-to-fail-problem. 
Large  banks  must  be  able  to  fail  without  endangering  the  stability  of  the  whole  system. 
Otherwise,  the  government  would  have  to  step  in  to  prevent  a  systemic  crisis.  This  would 
create an asymmetry: If everything goes well, the bank wins. If everything goes downhill, the 
taxpayers  lose.  This  creates  moral  hazard  for  banks,  endangers  financial  stability  and 
threatens public finances. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  solve  this  problem.  It  will  allow  authorities  to 
restructure or resolve banks without putting taxpayers’ money at risk. In the future, whenever 
a bank fails, resolution costs will have to be borne first by shareholders and creditors. After 
that, a bank-financed resolution fund will come into play, and only as a last resort are public 
funds to be used and the taxpayer made to pay. 
And there is even more to do before the banking union starts. One of the biggest preparatory 
steps  is  undoubtedly  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  those  banks  which  will  fall  under 
European  supervision.  This  Comprehensive  Assessment  consists  of  two  elements:  a 
backward-looking Asset Quality Review and a forward-looking stress test. 
The  objective  of  the  Asset  Quality  Review  is  to  uncover  legacy  assets  in  banks’  balance 
sheets  that  were  accumulated  while  the  banks  were  under  national  supervision.  The 
objective of the stress test is to assess how resilient banks are to stress scenarios. 
Any capital shortfalls revealed by the Comprehensive Assessment have to be rectified before 
the banking union starts. Ideally, this would primarily involve private funds. If private funds 
should  not  be  available  and  the  bank  has  a  sustainable  business  model,  the  respective 
government could step in. Ultimately, it is a question of who is responsible for past failings in 
banking supervision – and that is the individual member states. 
The Comprehensive Assessment will allow the banking union to start with a clean slate. At 
the same time, it will support the necessary deleveraging of European banks. Balance sheets 
will eventually be “cleaned up” and any doubts regarding their quality will be removed. This 
will improve banks’ capacity to lend to the real economy and thus support economic growth. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  crucial  that  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  conducted  in  a 
tough and thorough manner. 
In this context, let me briefly compare the European stress test with the corresponding stress 
tests  for  the  United  States.  One  question  might  be:  which  of  the  two  is  stricter?  Well, 
comparing the strictness of these two stress tests is not that simple. In the United States, a 
threshold  of  5  per  cent of  capital  relative  to  a  bank’s  risk  weighted  assets  is  stipulated,  in 
Europe, it is 5.5 per cent. Does this mean the European stress test is stricter? In my mind, 
such a comparison is inadequate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A meaningful comparison should not only include the threshold for the capital, but also the 
macro scenario. However, the macro scenarios for the European stress test have yet to be 
finalised; they are due to be published at the end of April. But even if we knew the scenarios, 
a comparison would still be difficult: The scenarios do not take into account just one variable, 
such as GDP growth, but – in the case of the US stress test – 28 variables. What’s more, the 
horizon of both stress tests is not one year, but more or less three years. A large number of 
variables therefore have to be compared over a three-year horizon. 
In all likelihood, any comparison between the two stress tests would therefore be ambiguous. 
Sound stress testing methods are essential to correctly determine banks’ capital needs, and I 
am certain that the European stress test will fulfil this requirement. 
Conclusion 
6.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered a lot of ground in my speech today. Nonetheless, the 
central message is straightforward. The situation in the euro area is improving and there is 
light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel.  However,  there  is  no  time  for  complacency.  Risks  remain, 
among them reform fatigue and the side-effects of low interest rates. Thus, we must continue 
our efforts to put the euro area back on a sound footing. 
Two  weeks  ago,  ECB  president  Mario  Draghi  said  that  2012  and  2013  were  years  of 
stabilisation  for  the  euro  area  and  that  2014  and  2015  may  be  years  of  recovery.  If  we 
continue down the path of reform, his expectation will prove correct. 
But  as  I  said  at  the  beginning,  the  world  has  become  closely  interconnected  and  so,  too, 
have  risks  and  problems.  The  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  is  as  much  a  global 
problem as it is a European one. 
And one thing is certain: interest rates will rise again at some point. However, managing this 
turnaround will prove a formidable challenge that requires careful policy design and adequate 
communication. The recent turbulence in emerging markets in response to the Fed’s tapering 
decision was a case in point. 
It was a case in point which needs some qualification. In the end, it was domestic problems 
and a lack of progress in reforms that made some emerging markets vulnerable. To restore 
investors’  confidence,  they  should  address  domestic  vulnerabilities  by  strengthening 
macroeconomic policies and reinvigorating structural reform efforts. 
Although the turbulence in emerging markets does not have the potential to derail the global 
recovery it shows how sensitive markets are at the moment. There is still considerable scope 
for negative confidence shocks. 
Therefore,  the  ball  is  now  in  the  court  of  policy-makers  –  in  the  euro  area,  in  the  United 
States and in emerging economies. If they press ahead with the necessary reforms, we will 
eventually be able to leave the times of downs, busts and turmoil behind us. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
