Narayana Kocherlakota: Opening remarks 
Opening remarks by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis, at a “Conversations with the Fed” event, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, 9 January 2014. 
 Thank you all for coming out tonight to take part in this public discussion about the Federal 
Reserve,  monetary  policy  and  the  economy.  As many  of  you  know,  this event  is  part  of  a 
broader series that we call Conversations with the Fed, which has featured presentations on 
issues ranging from financial payments to the health of the banking industry to the size of the 
Fed’s balance sheet. All of these events have been well attended and, like good economists, 
we have duly noted this demand and plan to continue to supply these events in the future. 
Today’s conversation is taking place in the headquarters of the Ninth (of 12) Federal Reserve 
districts. But the Ninth District is a far-flung one that includes the states of Montana, North 
and South Dakota, Minnesota and parts of Wisconsin and Michigan. For that reason, we hold 
similar conversations throughout the Ninth District. Indeed, we’re redoubling those efforts this 
calendar  year  in  honor  of  the  centennial  of the opening  of the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the 
start of the work undertaken by the Federal Reserve System. The video that we just watched 
gives you an overview of some of that work by the people who are actually doing it: the many 
employees of the Federal Reserve System. We also have a new website we’ve created at 
federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, 
places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. 
There are some fascinating historical tidbits on the website that I could go on about at length, 
but I realize you all may not be quite as excited about Fed history as I am. I will say that if 
you  have  even  the  slightest  curiosity  about  things  like  how  the  cities  were  chosen  to  host 
Reserve  Banks, I  would  encourage  you  to  attend  an  installment  of  Conversations  with  the 
Fed on May 8. It will feature Niel Willardson, our general counsel and corporate secretary, 
who  be  talking  about  the  history  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  and  answering  the  perennial 
question of why Minneapolis and not St. Paul. 
I won’t steal Niel’s thunder for that presentation, but I do want to address one of the things 
that  I  think  has  changed  the  most  over  the  Federal  Reserve’s  history,  and  that  is  our 
communication with the public. A hundred years ago, Congress created a system that was 
designed  specifically  so  that  the  residents  of  Main  Street  would  have  a  voice  in  monetary 
policy. The ways in which we gathered information from Main Street have obviously changed 
considerably over the years, as new technologies have come into being, but this fact-finding 
continues to be an important part of how we conduct monetary policy. 
Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s 
communications  to  the  public  about  its  monetary  policy  actions  have  also  evolved  greatly. 
The  pace  of  change  has  been  especially  rapid  in  the  past  eight  years  under  Chairman 
Bernanke’s leadership. During that time, the Federal Reserve has specified an explicit target 
for  inflation,  begun  holding  regular  press  conferences  and  greatly  expanded  its  use  of 
forward guidance – that is, its communications about the likely future evolution of policy. 
So,  as  the  Federal  Reserve  System  plans  for  its  second  century,  I  would  say  that  the 
importance  of  two-way  communication  is  a  key  lesson  from  the  System’s  first  century.  In 
order  for  the  Fed  to  continue  to  be  effective,  it  needs  to  communicate  its  policy  decisions 
transparently to the public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input on how those policies 
are  affecting  them.  Events  like  the  one  today  are  a  key  part  of  fostering  that  two-way 
communication. 
With  that  as  context,  let  me  turn  now  to  the  business  at  hand:  the  current  state  of  the 
economy. Throughout my remarks, I’ll be referring to the Federal Open Market Committee, or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
FOMC.  It  meets  eight  times  per  year  to  set  the  course  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United 
States. The presidents of the 12 Reserve Banks and the governors of the Federal Reserve 
System  all  participate  fully  in  the  deliberations  at  those  meetings.  However,  only  the 
governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and four other presidents 
actually vote on the Committee’s actions. This last set of four presidents changes annually. 
In 2014, I will be a voting member, along with the presidents of the Philadelphia, Cleveland 
and  Dallas  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  As  you  listen  to  me  talk  about  the  economy  and  the 
stance of monetary policy, always remember: The views  you  will hear tonight are my own 
and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Congress  has  mandated  that  the  FOMC  make  monetary  policy  so  as  to  promote  two 
objectives: price stability and maximum employment. Beginning in 2012, the Committee has 
explicitly  translated  the  first  goal  into  a  2  percent  target  for  personal  consumption 
expenditure,  or  PCE,  inflation.  This  is  a  measure  of  inflation  that  includes  all  goods  and 
services,  including  those  related  to  food  and  energy.  The  Committee’s  second  goal  
– maximum employment – is less rigid, because long-run employment is influenced by many 
variables outside the control of monetary policy. However, most FOMC participants project 
that, over the longer run, unemployment will be between 5 percent and 6 percent if monetary 
policy keeps inflation close to 2 percent. 
It is useful to examine the recent evolution of the economy in light of these two objectives. 
First, I will show you data on the unemployment rate over the past 30 years or so. You can 
see that the unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent after the Great Recession. It has fallen 
disturbingly slowly. Indeed, you can see on this graph that the unemployment rate fell much 
more rapidly in 1983 and 1984 after peaking at over 10 percent. 
 
 
Second, I will show you data on PCE inflation. Since the beginning of the Great Recession, 
PCE inflation has averaged only 1.5 percent – well under the FOMC’s target of 2 percent. 
Note too that PCE inflation has trended downward since early 2012 and is currently running 
at close to 1 percent. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
These graphs show us the past, but what about the future? The FOMC has said that, under 
its current monetary policy stance, it expects the unemployment rate to decline gradually to 
desirable levels. It has said too that it expects inflation to move back toward 2 percent over 
the medium term. By easing monetary policy relative to its current stance, the FOMC could 
facilitate  a  more  rapid  fall  in  unemployment  and  more  rapid  return  to  2  percent  inflation. 
Hence, the Committee could do better with respect to both of its congressionally mandated 
objectives by adopting a more accommodative monetary policy stance. 
That concludes my formal remarks. Thank you all once again for joining us here tonight, and 
now I look forward to fielding your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
