Tongurai Limpiti: The changing role of central banks in the new financial 
world 
Opening plenary address by Ms Tongurai Limpiti, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, 
at  the  Asian  Financial  Services  Congress  2014  “Defining  the  Next  Decade”,  Bangkok, 
27 February 2014. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Fellow Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning. It is my pleasure and honor to be here. Since its inauguration in Bangkok in 
2005,  the  Asian  Financial  Services  Congress  has  evolved  to  become  one  of  the  region’s 
largest annual gatherings for the industry, where participants learn the latest industry trends, 
share  ideas  and  exchange  opinions,  as  well  as  to  network  with  others.  As  a  returning 
participant myself, I can assure you the benefits you will get from attending this event and 
personally also look forward to getting the most out of my two days here. 
In this address, I would like to share with you the direction, we central banks, are taking into 
the next decade regarding the maintenance of financial stability.  
In  particular,  I  will  talk  about  the  role  of  central  banks  in  the  areas  of  monetary  policy, 
regulation,  and  financial  sector  development.  When  talking  about  the  last  area,  I  will  also 
update you on the upcoming ASEAN financial integration under the formation of the ASEAN 
Economic Community or AEC. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The global financial crisis that erupted in 2008, or 2007 if you count the U.S. sub-prime crisis 
as  its  first  incidence,  has  brought  fundamental  changes  to  how  central  banks  approach 
economic and financial stability. In particular, the crisis has led to a general reorientation of 
central bank policies in three major directions. The first is the reorientation of monetary policy 
to take into account financial stability concerns. The second is the shift from “deregulation” to 
“re-regulation”. And the third is the supplementation of traditional microprudential regulation 
with macroprudential one. 
In  the  realm  of  monetary  policy,  the  pre-crisis  consensus  was  that  the  attainment  of  price 
stability,  or  low  and  stable  inflation,  was  enough  to  ensure  a  smooth  progress  of  the 
economy.  While  central  banks  were  well  aware  that  financial  disruptions  could  have  a 
serious negative impact on the economy, they were of a view that financial stability was the 
job  of  prudential  regulation  and  that  monetary  policy  should  focus  on  inflation  and  output 
stabilization. The dichotomy between monetary policy and financial stability policy was well 
observed  across  the  central  banking  community.  Central  banks  like  the  Bank  of  Thailand, 
which  also  looks  at  financial  imbalances  when  making  monetary  policy  decisions, 
represented only a small minority before the crisis. 
The global financial crisis has prompted a fundamental rethinking of central banks’ monetary 
policy conduct. Now it is recognized that price stability alone does not guarantee economic 
and financial stability and that there exists an intricate relationship between monetary policy 
stance and financial stability. Maintaining “too low for too long” interest rate policy leads to 
excessive risk taking that can sink the economy. This risk-taking channel of monetary policy 
now features prominently in the mainstream economic literature.  
Today, virtually all central banks are taking financial stability considerations seriously in their 
monetary  policy  deliberation.  Talk  of  risks  to  financial  stability  has  now  been  mentioned 
frequently in several central banks’ monetary policy statements. The takeaway from this is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  once  their  economies  get  back  to  normal,  central  banks  in  developed  economies  will 
consciously  avoid  keeping  the  policy  rate  too  low  for  too  long.  Financial  institutions  must 
therefore  prepare  for  a  higher  interest  rate  environment  as  well  as  volatility  during  the 
transition period. The recent emerging markets turmoil provides a fresh example of the latter, 
even though the current stage of QE tapering is just the tip of an iceberg of what is coming. 
Let  me  move  on  to  re-regulation.  The  pre-crisis  mantra  was  to  let  deregulated  financial 
markets take care of themselves. Alan Greenspan, the former Fed Chairman who pushed to 
have  derivatives  remain  unregulated,  expressed  that  he  was  in  “shocked  disbelief”  to  see 
what happened. In addition, a number of observers, including Nobel Prize winning economist 
Joseph  Stiglitz,  believe  that  the  repeal  of  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  in  1999,  which  allowed 
commercial banks to engage in investment banking activities, was among the major factors 
behind the crisis. 
By re-regulation, I don’t mean the return to tight control by regulators, but rather “smarter” 
regulation that focuses on systemic risks. Let me show my point with some examples. 
As a regulator, I would not be doing my job if I did not talk about Basel III. To avoid going 
overboard on its massive details, I will highlight just a few of its key features. 
In a nutshell, there are three parts to Basel III: capital requirement, liquidity risk management, 
and supervision of global systemically important financial institutions. Of the three, the capital 
part  is  in  the  most  advanced  stage  with  national  implementation  started last  year  in  many 
countries  including  Thailand.  It  is  expected  that  by  2019,  most  countries  will  be  in  full 
compliance with Basel III capital standards which include a countercyclical capital buffer that 
varies with credit cycles and a leverage ratio that limits excessive buildups of leverage.  
The  liquidity  part  is  new  and  aims  to  strengthen  banks’  management  of  liquidity  risk.  A 
stress-test-based  liquidity  coverage  ratio  and  a  longer-term  net  stable  funding  ratio  will  be 
mandated in 2015 and 2018, respectively. 
The final part of Basel III deals with supervision of global banks whose failure could trigger 
the  meltdown  of  the global  financial  system.  Identified  global  systemically  important  banks 
will  be  subject  to  an  additional  capital  surcharge  above  Basel  III  capital  requirement.  This 
extra  loss  absorption  capacity  is  to  be  met  with  common  equity  and  will  be  phased-in 
between 2016 and 2018. 
As another example, many of you have probably heard of the recently passed Volcker Rule, 
named after another former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker. The Volcker rule can be seen as a 
watered  down  version  of  the Glass-Steagall  Act.  Recognizing  that  it  is  difficult  to  separate 
investment  banks  and  commercial  banks  entirely,  the  Volcker  Rule  prohibits  commercial 
banks from short-term proprietary trading of securities, derivatives, futures, and options on 
these  instruments. The goal  is that  eliminating  these  risky  practices  will  make  banks safer 
and at the same time force them to refocus on core banking businesses which in turn should 
benefit consumers. 
Basel  III  and  the  Volcker  Rule  are  just  two  examples  of  re-regulation.  There  are  several 
others,  notably  the  U.S.  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  reform,  and  the 
proposed  oversight  and  regulation  of  shadow  banking.  Taken  all  together,  these  make  a 
comprehensive  set  of  regulatory  reforms  that  will  busy  both  regulators  and  financial 
institutions over the next several years. 
I  would  like  to  stress  however  that,  for  financial  institutions,  the  compliance  with  the  new 
regulations is not a one-way process, but a two-way one that you can help shape through 
industry consultation and collaboration with regulators. The challenges for country regulators 
are  whether  and  when  to  adopt  certain  parts  of  international  standards  that  may  be 
irrelevant, too stringent, or lead to new risks for the domestic industry. By working together, 
we  can  ensure  not  only  the  smooth  adoption  of  international  standards,  but  also  that  our 
financial system will not be burdened by unnecessary rules and unintended consequences. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  third  direction  is  the  emerging  role  of  macroprudential  regulation.  The  global  financial 
crisis  has  shown  that  traditional  or  microprudential  regulation  which  focuses  on  the  safety 
and soundness of individual financial institutions fell short of crisis prevention. While financial 
institutions may be individually safe, collectively they may be at risk due to herd behaviors 
and their interconnections. There is thus the need to look after the safety and soundness of 
the financial system in the aggregate, which is why the word “macro” in macroprudential. 
In  essence,  macroprudential  regulation  reduces  systemic  risks  by  building  up  resilience  of 
the  financial  system  during  periods  of  credit  boom  and  rising  leverage  as  well  as  limiting 
spillovers from interconnections of financial institutions. It is indeed easy to see that several 
aspects  of  Basel  III  are  macroprudential  in  spirit  such  as  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer 
and the requirement of large global banks to hold more capital.  
It is noteworthy that even before the global financial crisis, central banks in the Asia Pacific 
have  routinely  used  macroprudential  tools  such  as  the  loan-to-value  or  LTV  ratio  and 
minimum  income  requirement  for  credit  card  borrowers.  We  just  did  not  call  them 
macroprudential. In some way, it took the West their own crisis to realize the importance of 
restraining the buildup of systemic risks early on. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The final part of my talk concerns the developmental role of central banks. When it comes to 
financial  stability,  this  is  an  often  overlooked  and  underappreciated  role.  Looking  back  at 
history  however,  one  finds  a  number  of  financial  crises  were  associated  with  flawed  or 
ill-timed financial liberalization. Thus the path set forward for the financial sector by central 
banks may lead to destruction as well as prosperity. 
The  Thai  financial  crisis  in  1997  was  a  case  in  point.  Although  it  was  an  inconsistent 
macroeconomic policy mix that precipitated the crisis, it was the decision back in the 1970s 
to allow structurally risky finance companies to operate alongside with commercial banks and 
the creation of the Bangkok International Banking Facilities in the hope to transform Bangkok 
into  Asia  fourth  financial  center  after  Tokyo,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  that  made  the 
financial  sector  vulnerable  with  overloaded  risks.  Thus,  when  we  started  anew  with  our 
Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  to  guide  future  developments  of  the  Thai  financial  sector  in 
2004, the two structural weaknesses were the first two to be eliminated. 
Fast  forward  to  today,  all  eyes  are  now  on  ASEAN  financial  integration  under  the  AEC 
Blueprint  to  create  a  semi-integrated  financial  market  by  2020.  The  ASEAN  financial 
integration  framework  comprises  four  areas,  namely  financial  services,  payments  and 
settlements systems, capital account, and capital markets. It is noted that the target date is 
beyond 2015 for the AEC. This is because financial markets are much harder to integrate 
than  goods  markets  given  different  structures  and  policies  among  membership  and  the 
sector’s sensitive nature.  
Of the four areas, the first three are under central banks. Let me however touch on only the 
first two which I deem are most relevant to this audience. 
The first area, financial services liberalization will be done primarily through the creation of 
Qualified ASEAN Banks or QABs, indigenous ASEAN banks that are allowed to operate in all 
ASEAN  countries  under  the  dimensions  of  equal  access,  equal  treatment,  and  equal 
environment.  Currently, 
the 
qualification  of  such  banks  as  well  as  regulatory  and  supervisory  issues  to  ensure  the 
soundness of financial institutions. Bilateral negotiations for QABs may commence this year 
for countries which are ready. 
For  payments  and  settlements  systems,  the  AEC  vision  is  to  have  “integrated,  safe,  and 
efficient” systems that will “enable businesses and individuals to make or receive electronic 
payments with greater convenience.” 
focusing  QAB  discussions  on 
involved  regulators  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To achieve this vision, five key sub-areas are targeted: cross-border trade settlement, money 
remittances,  retail  payment  system,  capital  market  settlement,  and  standardization. 
Examples of specific goals in these areas are achievement of T+1 receipt of funds for cross-
border  payment,  full  regional  ATM  interoperability,  and  an  adoption  of  ISO  20022  as  a 
common standard for payment and settlement messages. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Given the limited time, it is impossible to get into fine details. Nevertheless, I hope that I have 
given you a big picture of the changing role of central banks post global financial crisis. This 
encompasses the reorientation of monetary policy and regulatory frameworks and to a lesser 
extent central banks’ financial-sector development role. 
As  I  outline  what  lies  ahead  in  the  policy  environment,  some  of  you  may  worry  about  the 
increasing  interest  rate  environment  and  higher  regulatory  costs,  outweighing  your 
excitement for the AEC. But let me assure you that these are healthy developments for the 
long run. With lower crisis risk, risk premia will be lower. And the most efficient and well-run 
financial institutions will be the ones who reap the most benefits from this new environment. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
