  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Sukuk as a viable fund-raising and investment 
instrument 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  HKMA-BNM  Joint  Conference  on  Islamic  Finance,  Hong  Kong,  14  April 
2014. 
 Much has been talked about the global financial crisis that had brought about unparalleled 
financial miseries, economic calamities and social grievances. While the focus has been on 
financial  reforms  and  economic  remedies,  the  thought  on  the  minds  of  governments  and 
regulators  is  how  to  create  a  more  sustainable  global  financial  landscape.  Emphasis  on 
ethics is key to this approach. Greater involvement in ethical-related business has made its 
strides  in  contributing  towards  the  overall  strength  of  the  global  financial  system.  Ethical 
investment itself has gained international recognition in recent years. Estimated to be worth 
more than USD13 trillion, the ethical investment market now represents over a fifth of total 
assets managed globally. Pension funds, sovereign wealth funds and institutional investors 
are leading the way. Europe, the United States of America and Canada make up 96% of the 
share of this market. In Asia, the market is still relatively small – at less than USD100 billion. 
As ethical investment catches on in Asia, so too has investment in sukuk. Sharing a close 
affinity,  they  optimise  financial  returns  while  maintaining  social  good  and  upholding  strong 
governance. 
It is my pleasure to be here today at this Joint Conference on Islamic Finance, organised by 
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and Bank Negara Malaysia. This inaugural conference is 
set  to  mark  a  significant  step  to  enhance  collaboration  and  deepen  financial  linkages  in 
Islamic  finance  between  Malaysia  and  Hong  Kong.  The  theme  “Sukuk  as  a  Viable  Fund-
Raising  and  Investment  Instrument”  is most  apt,  given  that  the  ethical-based fixed  income 
instrument  has  increasingly  gained  recognition  by  the  global  financial  community  as  an 
attractive source of funding for real sectors and long-term development. 
Adoption of best practices for sukuk issuance 
The growth of the global sukuk market has been very promising. It reached a stock value of 
USD268 billion at the end of 2013 and since 2000 has grown at a cumulative average rate of 
50% per annum. The creation of a sukuk market in Hong Kong is a timely initiative as it has 
the potential to further spearhead its foray into Islamic finance. Sukuk, as a new asset class, 
is ideal for portfolio diversification and is increasingly well-accepted all over the world. From 
our experience, the new venture by Hong Kong into the sukuk market may be able to deepen 
its bond market further and open the opportunity to tap the burgeoning investor pool seeking 
good quality Shariah compliant and ethical-based instruments. 
Being a player in an increasingly developed sukuk market, Hong Kong has the opportunity to 
adopt the best practices in sukuk issuances. Firstly, in the area of Shariah standards where it 
provides  principle-based  guidance  on  the  execution  of  Islamic  financial  contracts.  Such 
standards are designed to cover the needs of different jurisdictions. The adoption of these 
standards  would  contribute  towards  promoting  greater  transparency,  recognition  and 
consistency – thus facilitating greater cross-border Islamic financial transactions. 
We have given priority in promoting consistent and transparent standards on Islamic financial 
contracts.  The  development  of  Shariah  standards  is  aimed  as  a  point  of  reference  on  all 
Shariah principles governing Islamic financial contracts, and the standards is envisaged to 
become the globally preferred standards. The standards specify the requirement of Shariah 
and its application for product offerings. The standards are issued based on the three tenets 
of Shariah contract – the contracting parties; offer and acceptance; and subject matter of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  contract. The other part of these standards specifies the execution or the operational aspects 
of  the  contract  that  covers  the  regulations,  accounting,  risk  management,  the  appropriate 
legal  documentation  and  the  disclosure.  Hence,  these  standards  provide  greater  clarity, 
transparency and disclosure to each Islamic financial transaction. 
Secondly, is to have proper legal infrastructure and dispute resolution mechanism in place to 
safeguard  Islamic  finance  transactions  and  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  To  share  our 
experience, Malaysia enacted a complete set of legislation and guidelines for Islamic finance, 
and  instituted  tax  neutrality  in  order  to  create  a  level  playing  field  vis-a-vis  conventional 
finance.  Recently,  the  central  bank  introduced  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2013  to 
replace the existing Islamic banking and takaful laws. The comprehensive legal framework 
provides a clear focus on Shariah compliance and governance in the Islamic financial sector. 
A  dedicated  high  court  of  common  law  has  been  assigned  to  adjudicate  Islamic  finance 
cases  more  expeditiously,  giving  due  recognition  on  issues  surrounding  Shariah.  For  a 
complete  dispute  resolution  on  Islamic  finance,  the  Kuala  Lumpur  Regional  Centre  for 
Arbitration (or KLRCA) has introduced the i-Arbitration Rules. The first of its kind, the rules 
incorporate  a  reference  procedure  to  a  Shariah  Advisory  Council  or  Shariah  expert  for 
professional opinions whenever the arbitral tribunal has to form an opinion on a point related 
to Shariah principles. 
Thirdly,  is  to  develop  a  strong  governance  framework  for  Islamic  financial  institutions. We 
introduced a dedicated governance framework in 2010 that outlined the requirement for the 
Shariah  governance  structures,  processes  and  arrangements  to  ensure  that  all  the 
operations and business activities are in accordance with Shariah. This framework ensures 
that  talent  in  lead  arranging  of  sukuk,  among  others,  have  the  expertise  and  Shariah 
knowledge to ensure that the sukuk structures are in compliant with the necessary rules and 
principles. 
Areas of collaboration between Hong Kong and Malaysia 
There are a few areas where Hong Kong and Malaysia can collaborate for mutual benefit. 
Firstly, is to have both Hong Kong and Malaysian expertise to work together in the quest to 
launch  the  first  sukuk  out  of  Hong  Kong.  We  look  forward  to  sharing  our  Islamic  finance 
marketplace with Hong Kong in terms of expertise in structuring, managing and distributing 
the sukuk, as well as providing advice on legal and Shariah matters. In addition, Malaysian 
issuers can tap into the Renminbi and Dollar liquidity in Hong Kong. Past track records of the 
two  Renminbi  sukuk  issuances  by  Malaysian  entities,  Khazanah  and  Axiata,  had  shown 
strong interest from Hong Kong investors, with subscriptions for both sukuk at 55% and 26% 
respectively. 
Secondly,  is  to  initiate  a  dual  listing  for  the  sukuk  on  Bursa  Malaysia  and  the  Hong  Kong 
exchange to capture greater profiling, visibility and transparency in the bond market for the 
Asian investors. 
Thirdly, is to set up more global sukuk funds on a mutual cooperation basis to provide the 
buy-side support. Funds can tap the existing Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) between 
the Securities Commission of Malaysia and the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong 
Kong as a platform for both jurisdictions to distribute Islamic investment products to benefit 
investors in each other’s market. 
Fourthly, to bridge the gap in the availability of Islamic assets in Hong Kong, potential sukuk 
issuers  may  leverage  on  Malaysia’s  end-to-end  Shariah-compliant  commodity  murabahah 
platform, the Bursa Suq Al Sila’ (or B – SAS) for their fund raising exercises. With an average 
daily volume traded of USD1.5 billion, issuers can utilise this 24/7 web-based multi-currency 
facility through the BSAS members from over ten countries. Of course, there are other areas 
of  collaboration  that  can  benefit  both  markets  and  where  Hong  Kong  can  leverage  on  us 
given  the  experience  we  have  gained  over  the  years.  Examples  include  using  the  Kuala 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Lumpur Regional Centre for Arbitration that offers services as dispute resolution for Islamic 
financial  contracts;  Hong  Kong  issuers  tapping the  Ringgit sukuk  liquidity  for  cost-effective 
pricing given the depth of the sukuk market in Malaysia; as well as enhancing knowledge and 
expertise  in  Islamic  finance  through  our  higher  learning  education  centres  such  as  the 
International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (or INCEIF). 
Forward-looking scenario – A common trading platform for sukuk 
Future  growth  prospect  for  the  sukuk  market  is  tremendous.  Growth  is  expected  to  come 
from the GCC and Asian regions as infrastructure projects are estimated to be USD2 trillion 
and USD8.3 trillion respectively till 2020. Hong Kong, with its sizeable bond market to GDP 
of 72% can play a role in funding these projects. Moving forward, more efforts are needed 
towards  developing  financial  inter-linkages  between  our  two  markets.  One  area  is  for  our 
financial  communities  to  explore  a  common  sukuk  trading  platform  for  cross-border 
transactions. A common platform that incorporates international standards and best practices 
in all aspects of the sukuk trading is key to instil confidence in secondary markets. It can also 
increase cross-border activities. It has the potential to spur further diversification of product 
offerings, reduces cost of intermediation and boosts trading activities. This common platform 
would give both the Hong Kong and Malaysia financial markets the added critical mass for 
sukuk and boost liquidity in the secondary market, thus contributing towards the development 
of a global Islamic money market for a more efficient cross border liquidity management. 
The  benefits  that  can  be  realised  from  the  cooperation  between  our  two  markets  are 
enormous. On that note, I wish to thank HKMA for hosting this joint conference and I bid the 
participants a productive endeavour. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
