Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 4 September 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Katainen. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided 
today  to  lower  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  by 
10 basis points to 0.05% and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 10 basis points to 
0.30%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered by 10 basis points to –0.20%. In addition, 
the Governing Council decided to start purchasing non-financial private sector assets. The 
Eurosystem will purchase a broad portfolio of simple and transparent asset-backed securities 
(ABSs) with underlying assets consisting of claims against the euro area non-financial private 
sector  under  an  ABS  purchase  programme  (ABSPP).  This  reflects  the  role  of  the  ABS 
market  in  facilitating  new  credit  flows  to  the  economy  and  follows  the  intensification  of 
preparatory work on this matter, as decided by the Governing Council in June. In parallel, the 
Eurosystem will also purchase a broad portfolio of euro-denominated covered bonds issued 
by  MFIs  domiciled  in  the  euro  area  under  a  new  covered  bond  purchase  programme 
(CBPP3).  Interventions  under  these  programmes  will  start  in  October  2014.  The  detailed 
modalities of these programmes will be announced after the Governing Council meeting of 
2 October  2014.  The  newly  decided  measures,  together  with  the  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations which will be conducted in two weeks, will have a sizeable impact on 
our balance sheet. 
These  decisions  will  add  to  the  range  of  monetary  policy  measures  taken  over  recent 
months. In particular, they will support our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates 
and reflect the fact that there are significant and increasing differences in the monetary policy 
cycle between major advanced economies. They will further enhance the functioning of the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and  support  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  broad 
economy. In our analysis, we took into account the overall subdued outlook for inflation, the 
weakening  in  the  euro  area’s  growth  momentum  over  the  recent  past  and  the  continued 
subdued monetary and credit dynamics. Today’s decisions, together with the other measures 
in place, have been taken with a view to underpinning the firm anchoring of medium to long-
term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close 
to,  2%.  As  our  measures  work  their  way  through  to  the  economy  they  will  contribute  to  a 
return of inflation rates to levels closer to 2%. Should it become necessary to further address 
risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its 
commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following four quarters of moderate expansion, euro area real GDP remained unchanged in 
the second quarter of this year compared with the previous quarter. While it partly reflected 
one-off  factors,  this  outcome  was  weaker  than  expected.  With  regard  to  the  third  quarter, 
survey  data  available  up  to  August  indicate  a  loss  in  cyclical  growth  momentum,  while 
remaining consistent with a modest expansion. 
Domestic demand should be supported by the range of our monetary policy measures, the 
ongoing improvements in financial conditions, the progress made in fiscal consolidation and 
structural reforms, and lower energy prices supporting real disposable income. Furthermore, 
demand for exports should benefit from the global recovery. At the same time, the recovery 
is  likely  to  continue  to  be  dampened  by  high  unemployment,  sizeable  unutilised  capacity, 
continued negative MFI loan growth to the private sector, and the necessary balance sheet 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors.  Looking  ahead,  the  key  factors  and 
assumptions shaping the outlook for growth need to be monitored closely. 
These elements are reflected in the September 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 0.9% in 2014, 1.6% in 2015 
and  1.9%  in  2016.  Compared  with  the  June  2014  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections,  the  projections  for  real  GDP  growth  for  2014  and  2015  have  been  revised 
downwards and the projection for 2016 has been revised upwards. 
The Governing Council sees the risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area on 
the  downside.  In  particular,  the  loss  in  economic  momentum  may  dampen  private 
investment,  and  heightened  geopolitical  risks  could  have  a  further  negative  impact  on 
business  and  consumer  confidence.  Another  downside  risk  relates  to  insufficient  structural 
reforms in euro area countries. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.3% in August 
2014, after 0.4% in July. This decline reflects primarily lower energy price inflation, while the 
other main components remained broadly unchanged in aggregate. Inflation rates have now 
remained low for a considerable period of time. As said, today’s decisions, together with the 
other measures in place, have been taken to underpin the firm anchoring of medium to long-
term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2%. On the basis of current information, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain at 
low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. 
The September 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee annual 
HICP inflation at 0.6% in 2014, 1.1% in 2015 and 1.4% in 2016. In comparison with the June 
2014 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the projection for inflation for 2014 has 
been revised downwards. The projections for 2015 and 2016 have remained unchanged. 
The  Governing  Council,  taking  into  account  the  measures  decided  today,  will  continue  to 
closely monitor the risks to the outlook for price developments over the medium term. In this 
context,  we  will  focus  in  particular  on  the  possible  repercussions  of  dampened  growth 
dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange rate developments and the pass-through of 
our monetary policy measures. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  July  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying  growth  in  broad  money  (M3),  with  annual  growth  standing  at  1.8%  in  July, 
compared  with  1.6%  in  June.  The  growth  of  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  stood  at 
5.6%  in  July,  up  from  5.4%  in  June.  The  increase  in  the  MFI  net  external  asset  position, 
reflecting  in  part  the  continued  interest  of  international  investors  in  euro  area  assets, 
remained an important factor supporting annual M3 growth. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) remained negative at –2.2% in July, unchanged compared with the previous 
month.  However,  net  redemptions  were  again  sizeable  in  July.  Lending  to  non-financial 
corporations continues to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, 
credit  supply  factors  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector 
balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) was 0.5% in July, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
Against  the  background  of  weak  credit  growth,  the  ECB  is  finalising  the  comprehensive 
assessment of banks’ balance sheets, which is of key importance to overcome credit supply 
constraints. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  led  the  Governing  Council  to  decide  on  measures  to  provide 
further monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the real economy. 
With  regard  to  structural  reforms,  important  steps  have  been  taken  in  several  Member 
States, while in others such measures still need to be legislated for and implemented. These 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efforts  now  clearly  need  to  gain  momentum  to  achieve  higher  sustainable  growth  and 
employment in the euro area. Determined structural reforms in product and labour markets 
as  well  as  action  to  improve  the  business  environment  are  warranted.  As  regards  fiscal 
policies,  comprehensive  fiscal  consolidation  in  recent  years  has  contributed  to  reducing 
budgetary imbalances. Euro area countries should not unravel the progress made with fiscal 
consolidation and should proceed in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact acts as 
an  anchor  for  confidence,  and  the  existing  flexibility  within  the  rules  allows  the  budgetary 
costs of major structural reforms to be addressed and demand to be supported. There is also 
leeway to achieve a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. A full and consistent 
implementation of the euro area’s existing fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance framework 
is key to bringing down high public debt ratios, to raising potential growth and to increasing 
the euro area’s resilience to shocks. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
