Charles I Plosser: Perspectives on the US economy and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum 
(OMFIF), London, 6 March 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Summary 
• 
   President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He also expects the 
unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by 
the  end  of  2014.  Inflation  expectations  will  be  relatively  stable,  and  inflation  will 
move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. 
President Plosser believes the Federal Open Market Committee has to revamp its 
current forward guidance regarding the future federal funds rate path because the 
6.5 percent unemployment threshold has become irrelevant. 
President  Plosser  favors  providing  more  information  on  policymakers’  reaction 
function, which indicates how policy will evolve as economic conditions change. 
President  Plosser  favors  a  more  systematic,  less  discretionary  approach  to 
monetary  policy.  He  believes  it  is  time  to  switch  from  an  interventionist  mode  for 
monetary policy to one that is more systematic. 
Introduction 
I am honored to participate in the Golden Series lectures and to be here in such a historic 
hall. The Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum is a relatively new organization, 
yet it is already establishing itself as an important venue for the exchange of views and ideas 
among  policymakers  and  the  private  sector.  It  is  similar  to  the  Global  Interdependence 
Center, a think tank based in Philadelphia, which is hosting a conference at the Banque de 
France next week, where I will join my friend Governor Christian Noyer. I note with interest 
that Governor Noyer will be speaking to you in just a few weeks’ time. 
Our  venue  today  has  an  impressive  history.  The  Worshipful  Company  of  Armourers  and 
Brasiers has been operating at this location since 1346. That is nearly 350 years before the 
Bank of England was founded in 1694. Its original building survived the Great Fire of 1666, 
and this current building survived the 1940 Blitz. With so much history steeped in these halls, 
I hesitate to mention that the Federal Reserve is marking its 100th anniversary this year. The 
Federal Reserve Act of 1913 created a uniquely American approach to a central bank – a 
decentralized central bank – with 12 independent Federal Reserve Banks around the country 
and a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This unique governance structure requires 
that I forewarn you that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those 
of  the  Federal  Reserve System  or  my  colleagues  on the  Federal  Open Market  Committee 
(FOMC). 
Economic conditions 
The  U.S.  economy  is  now  nearly  five  years  into  a  recovery  that  began  in  June  2009. The 
recovery  has  been  lackluster  in  many  ways,  yet  it  has  made  considerable  progress 
nonetheless. The unemployment rate, for example, has fallen from its peak of 10.0 percent to 
6.6  percent.  Employment  gains  have  restored  some  7.8  million  jobs  since  the  trough, 
representing about 90 percent of the jobs lost since the peak. Stock prices have recovered, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
housing prices are up, and earnings at many businesses are healthy. It is my general view 
that the U.S. economy is on firmer footing today than it has been in several years. This is a 
cause for some optimism for continued progress in 2014. 
In recent weeks, there has been a blizzard of economic reports, which have come in weaker 
than expected. I believe that weakness largely reflects the severe winter weather rather than 
a  frozen  recovery.  So,  we  must  be  wary  of  attaching  too  much  significance  to  the  latest 
numbers.  As  a  monetary  policymaker,  I  prefer  to  take  a  longer  view  rather  than  let  our 
decisions be whipsawed by the most recent statistics, which are often noisy and subject to 
revision.  Because  monetary  policy  tends  to  work  with  a  lag,  we  must  keep  our  attention 
focused  on  the  intermediate-  to  longer-term  underlying  trends  if  we  are  to  make  wise 
decisions. 
Based  on  the  latest  GDP  numbers  revised  last  week,  the  U.S.  economy  performed 
noticeably better in the second half of 2013 than in the first half. Specifically, real output grew 
at a 3.3 percent pace in the second half of the year compared with 1.8 percent in the first 
half. 
While this is far from the robust growth that many would like to see, it continues to represent 
steady progress and an improving economy. My forecast calls for about 3 percent growth in 
2014. This is in line with the central tendency of 2.8 to 3.2 percent growth reported by my 
colleagues on the FOMC in December 2013. 
There has been discussion of some recent weakness in consumer spending, housing starts, 
and  housing  sales.  For  instance,  in  January,  total  retail  sales  fell  by  0.4  percent;  housing 
starts dropped sharply in January by 2 percent compared with the level of a year ago; and 
existing home sales dropped about 5 percent from a year ago. While some softening in home 
sales  might  be  expected  from  the  rise  in  mortgage  rates,  those  rates  are  still  very  low  by 
historical  standards,  and  new  home  sales  surged  in  January,  rising  to  their  highest  level 
since  2008.  Despite  the  mixed  housing  data,  continued  household  formation  constitutes  a 
source of growth in housing demand. So, I expect that housing will continue its recovery in 
2014, once we get past the severe weather. 
Consumer  spending,  which  accounts  for  more  than  two-thirds  of  U.S.  GDP,  proved  to  be 
quite resilient in 2013, despite the rise in payroll taxes at the start of the year, a government 
shutdown, significant uncertainties about future tax policy, and the implications of health-care 
reform. 
Going forward, I expect that there will be less fiscal drag on the economy in 2014 than we 
saw in 2013. Moreover, rising home prices and stock prices have helped improve consumer 
balance sheets. I have frequently noted that one reason for the less-than-robust growth in 
consumption  during  this  recovery  has  been  the  deleveraging  efforts  by  consumers.  With 
consumers  carrying  too  much  debt,  spending  was  inevitably  going  to  give  way  to  more 
saving as consumers attempted to restore the health of their balance sheets. That process 
has  been  playing  out,  and  the  drag  from  deleveraging  is  waning.  In  addition,  steady, 
moderate  job  growth  has  led  to  modest  increases  in  income.  I  foresee  somewhat  more 
robust spending by consumers in the coming year as these trends continue. 
Weather  also  affected  recent  manufacturing  numbers  in  the  U.S.  The  Philadelphia  Fed’s 
Business  Outlook  Survey  of  manufacturers  in  our  region  has  been  a  reliable  indicator  of 
national manufacturing trends in the U.S. In February, the diffusion index of current activity 
fell  into  negative  territory  for  the  first  time  in  nine  months.  However,  most  respondents 
attributed  the  weakness  to  the  severe  winter  weather.  Consistent  with  such  comments, 
expectations for manufacturing activity six months ahead increased in February. 
On  the  job  front,  the  January  employment  report  posted  payroll  gains  of  113,000  jobs, 
following  an  increase  of  75,000  jobs  in  December,  again  most  likely  reflecting  in  part  the 
effect of the unusually severe winter weather. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  we  look  at  the  employment  averages  over  several  months,  the  news  remains  positive. 
Based  on  the  latest  revision,  firms  added  an  average  of  194,000  jobs  per  month  in  2013, 
which  is  a  somewhat  better  pace  than  in  2012.  This  consistent  pace  of  job  growth  was 
enough  to  drop  the  unemployment  rate  to  6.6  percent  in  January.  I  expect  that  the 
unemployment  rate  will  reach  about  6.2  percent  by  the  end  of  2014,  and,  if  anything,  that 
may prove too pessimistic. Given the recent trends, an unemployment rate below 6 percent 
is certainly plausible. 
In terms of the other part of the Fed’s mandate, inflation has been running somewhat below 
the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-
over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. 
It came in at 1.1 percent last year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target both 
from below and above. Yet, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, 
that  inflation  will  move  back  toward  our  target  over  time.  Economic  growth  is  firming,  and 
some of the factors that have held inflation down, such as the one-time cut in payments to 
Medicare providers, are likely to abate over time. 
An  additional  and  important  determinant  of  actual  inflation  is  consumer  and  business 
expectations  of  inflation.  I  am  encouraged  that  inflation  expectations  remain  near  their 
longer-term  averages  and  consistent  with  our  2  percent  target.  Given  the  large  amount  of 
monetary accommodation that we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think 
there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. 
Of course, with any forecast, there are risks. While there continues to be some downside risk 
to growth, for the first time in years, I see the potential for more upside risk to the economic 
outlook. We need to consider this possibility as we calibrate monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
So  let  me  turn  to  some  issues  for  monetary  policy.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken 
extraordinary  policy  actions  to  support  the  economic  recovery.  The  Fed  has  lowered  its 
policy rate – the federal funds rate – to essentially zero, where it has been for more than five 
years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional 
accommodation through large-scale asset purchases. We are now in our third round of this 
quantitative easing. 
Since September 2012, the FOMC has added about $1.3 trillion in long-term Treasuries and 
mortgage-backed securities to its balance sheet through this program, buying at a pace of 
$85 billion a month in 2013. This program, known as QE3, is already twice the size of the last 
round of asset purchases initiated in November 2010, known as QE2. 
In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases 
from  $85  billion  to  $75  billion  per  month.  In  January,  it  announced  a  further  reduction  to 
$65 billion. The FOMC is now on a path of measured reductions, which, if continued, will end 
the  purchase  program  later  this  year.  If  the  economy  continues  to  improve,  we  could  find 
ourselves still trying to increase accommodation in an environment in which history suggests 
that policy should perhaps be moving in the opposite direction. 
In addition to asset purchases, the Fed is using forward guidance as a policy tool, which is 
intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In 
this dimension, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well 
past the time that the unemployment rate falls below the 6.5 percent threshold. The FOMC 
had  previously  indicated  that  this  was  the  earliest  point  at  which  it  would  consider  raising 
interest  rates,  especially  if  projected  inflation  continues  to  run  below  the  Committee’s 
2 percent target. 
Even though the FOMC has said that it doesn’t anticipate raising rates when the economy 
crosses  that  threshold,  I  believe  that  with  the  economy  so  close  to  the  unemployment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
threshold,  we  face  a  communications  challenge.  In  particular,  we  have  not  described  how 
policy will be conducted after the unemployment rate falls below 6.5 percent. 
Communication challenges 
But  before  we  offer  further  forward  guidance,  it  is  important  to  be  clear  about  what  this 
forward guidance is supposed to accomplish. As that famous American baseball player Yogi 
Berra is reported to have said, “You have to be careful if you don’t know where you’re going 
because you might end up somewhere else.” 
One  way  to  think  of  forward  guidance  is  that  it  is  just  another  step  toward  increased 
transparency and effective communication of monetary policy. This approach seeks to clarify 
how  policymakers  will  alter  policy  as  economic  conditions  change,  that  is,  to  describe  a 
reaction function.  By  being more  transparent  about  how  policy  will  evolve  as  a  function  of 
economic  conditions,  this  approach  can  help  the  public  form  more  accurate  expectations 
about the future path of monetary policy. 
Economists have learned that expectations play an important role in determining economic 
outcomes. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary 
policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If 
policymakers can  reduce  uncertainty  about the course  of monetary  policy,  the  economy  is 
likely to perform more efficiently. 
Of course, in order to communicate something about the reaction function, you have to have 
one. That means in order to succeed with this approach to forward guidance, policymakers 
must  be  able  to  agree  on  how  they  will  systematically  respond  to  changes  in  economic 
conditions. To be useful, however, the reaction function need not be mechanistic. Qualitative 
information  about  such  a  function  and  how  it  will  be  implemented  can  also  be  useful  and 
meaningful.  Nevertheless,  some  degree  of  commitment  to  abide  by  the  specified  reaction 
function is necessary if the communication is to achieve the desired result of reducing policy 
uncertainty and providing meaningful forward guidance. 
A somewhat different rationale or view of forward guidance is that it is a way of increasing 
accommodation  when  the  policy  rate  is  at  or  near  the  zero  lower  bound.  Some  models 
suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, or optimal, to indicate 
that future policy rates will be kept “lower for longer” than might otherwise be the case. Thus, 
policymakers may want to deliberately commit to deviating from what they would otherwise 
choose to do under normal conditions, such as following a Taylor-like rule. In these models, 
such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-term nominal 
rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. 
This  approach  asks  more  of  forward  guidance  than  just  articulating  a  reaction  function.  It 
takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence 
and  manage  the  public’s  beliefs  about  the  future  policy  path  that  differs  from  how 
policymakers behaved in the past. As I have indicated in previous speeches, this approach to 
forward  guidance  can  backfire  if  the  policy  is  misunderstood.1  For  example,  if  the  public 
hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret this news as policymakers 
saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If that is the interpretation of 
the  message,  then  the  forward  guidance  will  not  succeed  and  may  even  weaken  current 
spending. 
The  FOMC  has  not  been  clear  about  the  purpose  of  its  forward  guidance.  Is  it  purely  a 
transparency device, or is it a way to commit to a more accommodative future policy stance 
                                                
1   See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s 
(SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to add more accommodation today? This lack of clarity makes it difficult to communicate the 
stance of policy and the conditionality of policy on the state of the economy. 
I believe there is another – perhaps more fundamental – tension underlying forward guidance 
and  communication.  Forward  guidance  in  either  of  the  two  approaches  I  have  discussed 
requires  a  degree  of  commitment  to  conduct  future  policy  in  some  particular  manner. 
Commitment is central to the success of either approach. Yet, I would suggest that the old 
“rules versus discretion” debate is alive and well. This, of course, is not a new tension within 
the FOMC, nor is it one that is likely to go away in the near term. But the heightened weight 
and prominence given to forward guidance as a policy tool has certainly shined a spotlight on 
this longstanding debate. 
The desire to maintain flexibility to respond to “events on the ground” is a strong one. One 
can make the case that discretion is deeply ingrained in most policy institutions, particularly 
the Fed. Yet, the desire to maintain discretion is anathema to the commitment required for 
successful  forward  guidance.  Policymakers  cannot  maintain  discretion  and  simultaneously 
commit to forward guidance and expect that guidance to be effective. 
from 
increasing 
Conclusion 
In summary, I believe that the U.S. economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. 
We  are  likely  to  see  growth  of  around  3  percent  in  2014.  Prospects  for  labor  markets  will 
continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue to decline, reaching 
6.2  percent  or  lower  by  the  end  of  2014.  I  also  believe  that  inflation  expectations  will  be 
relatively  stable  and  that  inflation  will  move  up  toward  our  goal  of  2  percent  over  the  next 
year. 
On  monetary  policy,  we  must  back  away 
the  degree  of  policy 
accommodation in a manner commensurate with an improving economy. Reducing the pace 
of  asset  purchases  in  measured  steps  is  moving  in  the  right  direction,  but  the  pace  may 
leave us well behind the curve if the economy continues to play out according to the FOMC 
forecasts. 
Even  after  the  asset  purchase  program  has  ended,  monetary  policy  will  still  be  highly 
accommodative.  As  the  expansion  gains  traction,  the  challenge  will  be  to  reduce 
accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to 
our  target,  that  the  economy  continues  to  grow,  and  that  we  avoid  sowing  the  seeds  of 
another financial crisis. 
Let me conclude with this thought. Over the past five years, the Fed and, dare I say, many 
other  central  banks  have  become  much  more  interventionist.  I  do  not  think  this  is  a 
particularly healthy state of affairs for the central banks or our economies. The crisis in the 
U.S.  has  long  passed. With  a  growing  economy  and  the  Fed’s  long-term  asset  purchases 
coming to an end, now is the time to contemplate restoring some semblance of normalcy to 
monetary policy. 
In my view, the proper role for monetary policy is to work behind the scenes in limited and 
systematic ways to promote long-term growth and price stability. But since the onset of the 
financial crisis, central banks have become highly interventionist in their efforts to manipulate 
asset  prices  and  financial  markets  in  general  as  they  attempt  to  fine-tune  economic 
outcomes. This approach has continued well past the end of the financial crisis. While the 
motivations may be noble, we have created an environment where “it is all about the Fed.” 
Market  participants focus  entirely  too  much  on how  the  central  bank may  tweak  its  policy, 
and  central  bankers  have  become  too  sensitive  and  desirous  of  managing  prices  in  the 
financial world. I do not see this as a healthy symbiotic relationship for the long term. 
If  financial  market  participants  believe  that  their  success  depends  primarily  on  the  next 
decisions of monetary policymakers rather than economic fundamentals, our capital markets 
will cease to deliver the economic benefits they are capable of providing. And if central banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
do  not  limit  their  interventionist  strategies  and  focus  on  returning  to  more  normal 
policymaking aimed at promoting price stability and long-term growth, then they will simply 
encourage the financial markets to ignore fundamentals and to focus, instead, on the next 
actions of the central bank. 
I  hope  we  can  find  a  way  to  normalize  the  role  of  monetary  policy  to  one  that  is  less 
interventionist, less discretionary, and more systematic. I believe our longer-term economic 
health will be the beneficiary. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
