  Karnit Flug: A peek into the Monetary Committee room 
Main points of address by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the opening of 
the “Aharon Institute for Economic Policy” at the Herzliya Interdisciplinary Institute, Herzliya, 
16 March 2014. 
 I  am  very  happy  to  be  participating  at  this  event.  The  economic  discourse  on  matters  of 
policy in Israel is sometimes shallow, and there is no doubt that policy research can enrich it. 
That is why this institute is important. At the Bank of Israel, we certainly know how to value 
high-quality economic research that supports making good policy decisions. 
In this lecture, I will try to provide “a peek into the Monetary Policy room”. The name of the 
lecture was taken from an article written a few years ago by Prof. Rafi Melnick – “A peek at 
the Governor’s Office”. Prof. Melnick doesn’t need to peek, since he is a member within the 
Monetary  Policy  room.  I  will  try  to  illustrate  the  economic  thinking  and  analysis  that  stand 
behind policy decisions, thereby perhaps providing direction for the type of policy research 
this institute can undertake, thereby deepening and enriching the economic policy discourse, 
at least in this area. 
The Bank of Israel’s policy goals are derived from the Bank of Israel Law. The tools available 
to the Bank are, of course, the interest rate and the Bank’s ability to intervene in the foreign 
exchange  market.  In  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  also  used  the  authority  of  the 
Supervisor of Banks to take measures in order to reduce the risks in the mortgage market. 
In the process of making decisions on the interest rate, we discuss the situation assessment 
of  a  number  of  relevant  issues,  in  the  global  economy  and  in  the  domestic  economy.  For 
instance, in the most recent interest rate decision, we discussed developments in the global 
economy. We distinguished between the positive growth in leading indicators, mainly in the 
advanced economies, and some weakness and disappointment in the emerging economies. 
Global growth forecasts show a very gradual recovery – the entrenchment of growth in the 
US  with  continued  stagnation  in  the  European  economy.  A  very  important  variable  for  the 
Israeli economy is global trade, and it is expected to recover and to support economic activity 
in Israel. We looked at US data, and saw weakness in the labor market data there, although 
the argument was raised that it is a temporary weakness due to the weather. In general, data 
in  China  and  in  the  US  indicated  weakness,  mainly  in  manufacturing,  and  we  also  saw  a 
negative  turnaround  in  the  real  estate  industry  in  the  US,  which  was  one  of  the  growth 
engines  there  in  the  recent  period.  In  other  words,  the  global  picture  is  mixed  –  a  slight 
improvement  in  the  advanced  economies,  and  a  less  positive  picture  in  the  emerging 
economies. 
We also look at monetary developments around the world. We saw a continued decline of 
inflation, and the International Monetary Fund even recently indicated concern of deflation in 
Europe. In the emerging markets, mainly those with a current account deficit, we saw rapid 
depreciations, and in some of those countries, the interest rate was raised in order to deal 
with these depreciations. In contrast, the tapering process in the US continued, but both the 
US and Europe announced that the low interest rate would remain for a prolonged period. 
In  the  domestic  economy,  we  saw  weakness  in  the  growth  rate.  National  Accounts  data 
showed a slowdown in business sector product, which for the past two quarters has grown 
by about 1.6 percent. This is roughly the growth rate of the population, meaning that this is a 
weakness  in  terms  of  growth  of  economic  activity. We  saw  improvement  in  manufacturing 
and  in  exports  of  the  high  technology  industries,  but  weakness  continues  in  the  low 
technology industries, both in exports and in manufacturing for the domestic market. We saw 
weakness in the labor market. While the labor market aggregates seem quite positive – the 
historically low unemployment rate, and high employment and participation rates – we see 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that most of the positions were created in the public services and not in the business sector. 
The  wags  of  Israeli  workers  alone  are  at  a  standstill,  but  when  foreign  and  Palestinian 
workers  are  included,  there  is  a  slight  increase  in  wages.  Consumer  confidence  and 
business sector confidence indices also indicate weakness. So the labor market aggregates 
seem positive, but a deeper look at the developments in the various industries – wage and 
work hours data – show weakness in the labor market. 
Of  course,  we  also  look  at  inflation  data.  The  January  CPI  reading  showed  a  decline  of 
0.6 percent,  and  in  general,  inflation  in  the  past  year  is  below  the  target  range.  The  core 
inflation indices also indicate very moderate inflation, close to the bottom of the target range, 
and  expectations  of  inflation  in  the  future  are  quite  moderate.  In  other  words,  the  inflation 
environment  is  below  the  center  of  the  target  range,  which  supports  lowering  the  interest 
rate.  The  exchange  rate  is  in  an  appreciation  trend  –  we  saw  a  sharp  appreciation  at  the 
beginning of 2013 and moderation in the trend in recent months. 
Another  area  that  we  have  been  dealing  with  a  lot  recently  is  the  housing  market.  The 
volume  of  activity,  transactions  and  mortgages,  is  very  high,  housing  prices  continue  to 
increase,  and  there  is  significant  growth  in  the  volume  of  building  starts  and  building 
completions.  Should  it  continue  at  appropriate  levels,  this  growth  is  expected  to  lead  to 
moderation in the volume of homes, although we still do not see this moderation. We also 
look at various indicators that deal with financial stability. 
Beyond the collection of data that I have presented here briefly, we use a macroeconomic 
model  in  order  to  assess  the  developments  in  the  market,  and  to  discuss  the  effects  of 
various policy scenarios on activity in the market, inflation, and so forth. The framework in 
which we assess such scenarios is a very complex model, called the DSGE model, which is 
used  by  many  central  banks  operating  within  an  inflation  targeting  regime.  This  model 
combines  the  connections  between  the  various  economic  units  in  the  market  and  the 
economic  variables,  both  nominal  and  real,  within  one  coherent  framework.  The  model 
enables us to make simulations and examine what the effect would be of alternative policy 
paths, as well as exogenous shocks, on inflation and on economic activity. We look at the 
various transmission channels, as reflected in the model, from the Bank of Israel interest rate 
and  the  other  economic  variables  to  the  target  variables  –  inflation  and  the  volume  of 
economic activity. 
As such, this is the conceptual framework on the basis of which we make policy decisions. If 
we glance at the discussions during which we made the interest rate decision for March, we 
looked at a decline in the inflation environment, a slowdown in GDP and business product 
growth, weakness in the labor market, the cumulative appreciation of the shekel, and slow 
and moderate recovery within a low inflation environment and monetary accommodation in 
the  global  market.  All  of  these  considerations  supported  monetary  expansion,  meaning  a 
reduction in the interest rate. Against these considerations, there is, of course, the housing 
market and the continued increase in home prices. In this context, I will mention that there 
are  other  tools  available  to  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  in  order  to  reduce  the  risks  in  this 
market, and we have used these tools. 
So, this is the policy decision process that we employ at the Bank of Israel. We can think of 
various issues that studies written by the researchers at this institute can deal with, to help in 
making  policy  decisions.  For  instance,  I  mentioned  the  labor  market  and  the  low 
unemployment rate, and despite this, the sense of weakness in the labor market. We can ask 
to  what  extent  the  current  unemployment  level  that  we  see  is  structural  unemployment, to 
what  extent  it  is  frictional  unemployment,  and  in  the  context  of  developments  in  the  labor 
market, what is the correct monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
