  Geoff Bascand: Innovation and risk management – insights from 
Executive Management at Statistics New Zealand and the Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand 
Address  by  Mr  Geoff  Bascand,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Operations  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, and Mr Steve Gordon, Head of Risk Assessment and Assurance of 
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants, 
Wellington, 24 June 2014. 
 “A ship in harbor is safe, but that is not what ships are built for” (John A. Shedd, Salt from My 
Attic (1928)). 
Introduction and rationale for risk management 
Effective risk management provides an environment for calculated risk taking and innovation. 
Good risk management contributes to institutional success. To be effective it requires strong 
leadership and organisation-wide ownership. Talking about risks and communicating plans to 
mitigate  them  is  a  leadership  responsibility  and  an  important  part  of  a  successful  risk 
management  framework.  In  this  address,  we  will  share  our  insights  and  experiences  from 
Statistics New Zealand and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand to facilitate discussion about 
effective  approaches  to  risk  management  while  enabling  innovation  and  institutional 
progress. 
In  2003–2005,  Statistics  New  Zealand  set  about  modernising  the  collection  of  Household 
Labour  Force  Survey  (HLFS)  interview  data  through  computer  assisted  (face-to-face  and 
telephone) interviewing. It was not a success. 
A review of the project by John Smyrk in 2005 stated:1 
• 
• 
• 
As  a  result,  statistical  outputs  were  hard  to  interpret  and  the  statistical  series  and  the 
organisation  suffered  reputational  damage.  Operating  costs  rose  rather  than  declined  as 
expected. 
They say one learns better from mistakes than victories. As the euphemism goes: there were 
lots of learnings about risk (and project) management from the project! 
The HLFS estimates employment and unemployment and is one of Statistics New Zealand’s 
highest priority economic data series. It is a costly collection, both in financial terms and in 
the  burden  imposed  upon  survey  participants.  Like  other  household  surveys,  it  had  been 
collected  in  the  same  manner  for  over  20  years.  The  incentives  for  change  were 
considerable. A much expanded social survey programme was being introduced and there 
was  a  strong  desire  to  modernise  survey  collection  methods  to  reduce  costs,  speed 
processing,  and  introduce  innovation.  Rewards  were  in  prospect  but  risks  were  not 
adequately anticipated or managed. 
“threats to the project were not identified”; 
programs of pre-emptive and contingency actions were not assembled; 
“things kept going wrong” for which there was no allowance in the plan. 
                                                
1  J.  Smyrk, “Enhancing business projects in Statistics New Zealand: learning from the HLFS-CAI initiative, A 
Report on a Review of HLFS-CAI”, September 2005. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Innovation  is  critical  to  strong  business  performance  as  organisations  seek  to  enhance 
product  and  service  offerings,  lift  efficiency,  upgrade  technologies  and  increase  their 
resilience and adaptability. 
Without  innovation,  organisations  wither  and  customers  and  business  owners  suffer. 
Becoming  ideas  constrained  is  fatal,  but  there  are  risks  in  innovating.  As  Machiavelli  said 
centuries  ago,  “Never  was  anything  great  achieved  without  danger.”  Risk  and  reward  are 
inextricably intertwined. Leaving the boat safe in its harbour will not yield progress. 
Good  risk  management  is  imperative  for  managing  successful  change.  It  involves 
anticipating and diminishing threats; protecting sources of value; and enabling value-creating 
risks to be taken in a calculated way, with reduced likelihood of failure or loss.2 Done well, it 
enables  an  organisation  to  seize  opportunities  to  create  and  protect  value  for  all  its 
stakeholders. 
Good  risk  management  enables  an  organisation  to  move  forward,  because  the  downside 
risks of change are contained, and risk management provides a forward-looking orientation. 
It  allows  organisations to focus  their  competencies  on  value  creating  activity.  Done  well,  it 
informs  strategy, 
It  drives 
organisational direction and positioning. 
A second key benefit is that it reduces the likelihood and costs of adverse events that may 
damage organisational reputation, financial or business viability, and distract the organisation 
from achieving its goals. Novopay, and ACC’s privacy breaches, are familiar examples where 
the organisational and societal costs of risk management failures have been considerable. 
Good  risk  management  fosters  both  adaptability  and  resilience,  two  crucial  aspects  of 
enduring organisational performance. 
investment  prioritisation  and  business  decision-making. 
Types of risk 
Generally, three categories of risks are identified: strategic, operational and project risks. 
1. 
Strategic  risks  describe  the  impact  on  the  business  of  possible  changes  in  the 
wider environment, such as political, international, demographic, social, etc., and the 
dangers  of  business  strategies  not  being  adequately  aligned  to  their  operating 
environment.  They  also  entail  risks  to  the  accomplishment  of  key  business  goals 
through loss of focus, inappropriate investment or resourcing, and reputational and 
communication risks. 
Mitigations of strategic risks tend to be strategic choices and business  model approaches; 
investment  prioritisation  decisions  during  planning  processes,  often  resulting  in  project 
initiations; and communications and stakeholder management. 
Strategic  risks  are  often  perennial,  yet  may  be  volatile  due  to  changes  in  the  external 
environment. For example, in the Reserve Bank’s case, the risk of monetary policy settings 
not  achieving  the  inflation  goals  and  the  ensuing  reputational  damage  is  ever-present,  but 
these risks are accentuated by swings in exogenous factors such as commodity prices, fiscal 
policy,  immigration,  or  exchange  rate  movements.  Financial  stability  goals  are  similarly 
vulnerable.  Threats  to  financial  stability  are  always  present  but  are  usually  quiescent  until 
something goes wrong. The global financial crisis (GFC) was an extraordinary escalation of a 
                                                
2  Risks can be positive or negative. Almost exclusively in this paper, we focus on negative risks, reducing loss. 
Often  there  is  an  intent  of  managing  possible  eventualities  to  a  more  neutral  position  where  upside  and 
downside risks are “balanced” and we shall address this approach. Positive risks are commonly treated as 
windfall  gains.  More  sophisticated  approaches  are  applied  in  some  business  circumstances,  e.g.  financial 
markets, which we largely ignore for the purposes of this general exposition.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  tail-risk, yet smaller threats may occur intermittently, each of them posing a challenge to the 
Bank’s reputation for managing a sound and dynamic financial system. 
In Statistics New Zealand’s case, an enduring strategic risk is the loss of confidence in the 
organisation by failing to deliver timely and accurate statistics. Errors in GDP or the CPI, or 
substantial  unexplained  volatility,  as  has  occurred  with  the  HLFS  at  various  times,  if 
persistent, can undermine confidence in the statistics themselves and the organisation more 
broadly.  Consequently,  a  major  component  of  risk  management  is  the  quality  assurance 
framework  and  associated  processes,  along  with  strong  project  management  adapted  for 
“business as usual” scheduling and delivery. 
Other strategic risks may be more contemporary, and related to changes in the business’s 
operating environment. In Statistics New Zealand’s case, delivery of a major transformation 
programme  (Statistics  2020  Te  Kapehu  Whetu)  and  realisation  of  the  benefits  from  the 
investment  is  critical  particularly  in  the  window  from  financial  injection  (2011)  to  major 
systems and capability change (2017 say). Highly developed programme management and 
extensive  external  review  processes  seek  to  ensure  that  benefits  are  achieved  and 
milestones accomplished. 
For  the  Reserve  Bank,  the  recent  introduction  of  a  new  macro-prudential  policy  regime 
presented significant challenges for the organisation. The adoption of macro-prudential policy 
in New Zealand drew on international policy insights from the financial cycles that preceded 
and succeeded the GFC. Governments became more concerned about the financial stability 
risks  associated  with  credit  and  asset  price  cycles  and  introduced  new  counter-cyclical 
”macro-prudential” policy measures to lean against emerging risks. 
A  macro-prudential  policy  framework  was  agreed  between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the 
Minister  of  Finance  in  May  2013.  New  policy  frameworks  present  policy  challenges  in 
building understanding of their objectives and operation. Faced with accelerating house price 
inflation  on  top  of  already  over-valued  house  prices,  the  Bank  moved  quickly  to  introduce 
new  policy  measures,  including  new  capital  requirements  against  high  loan-to-value  ratio 
(LVR) lending and limits on the share of new high LVR lending that banks could undertake. 
The  challenge  confronting  the  Bank  was  the  risk  of  not  achieving  its  financial  stability 
outcome goals if it failed to act (with potentially very severe consequences) vis-a-vis the risks 
to  the  Bank’s  reputation  and  confidence  in  its  policy-making.  There  were  risks  and 
uncertainties  to  manage  in  introducing  an  important  policy  innovation  that  was  new  for 
households  and  banks.  A  classic  risk-reward  trade-off  –  one  that  required  significant 
evaluation and preparation by senior management. 
Several steps were taken to ameliorate possible downside risks. We set the scene for these 
measures in a number of on-the-record speeches and in remarks at press conferences, and 
in Monetary Policy Statements and Official Cash Rate statements expressing our concerns 
with  easier  lending  standards  and  house  price  inflation.  We  consulted  with  banks  and 
published  analyses  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  measures,  as  well  as  comparisons  with 
regimes  in  other  countries.  Following  their  introduction,  we  provided  assessments  of  the 
impact, rationale and objectives in further speeches, media interviews, and in the November 
2013 and May 2014 Financial Stability Reports. 
The  introduction  of  LVR  restrictions  has  attracted  commentary  from  different  quarters.  In 
some  commentators’  eyes,  there  has  been  a  blurring  of  financial  stability  and  monetary 
policy  objectives,  with  some  analytical  debate  about  the  merits  of  the  policy.  Others  have 
questioned  the  Bank’s  operational  policy  design  and  its  distributional  impacts.  Some  have 
credited the Bank with policy innovation and the willingness to act before a crisis eventuates. 
To  date,  the  impacts  have  been  broadly  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  expectations.  House  price 
inflation is moderating, along with the risks to financial stability (FSR, May 2014). 
2. 
Operational  risks  relate  to  the  achievement  of  business  plans  and  “business  as 
usual” results. They entail risks of failure to business operating systems, quality or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  service  failures,  integrity  and  conduct  risks,  security,  operator  error,  incident  or 
business continuity threats, etc. 
Operational  risks  are  managed  and  mitigated  through  measures  such  as  process  design, 
process controls,  policies  and  discretion  limits, back-up  and  redundancy  measures, quality 
assurance  processes  and  review/feedback  cycles,  alignment  of  skills  and  resources  with 
requirements, and investment in research and development and capital equipment. 
Mitigations  operate  on  both  likelihood  and  impact.  For  example,  payroll  authorities  and 
process controls are often designed so as to minimise the possibility of error or fraud, and 
limit the financial impact if such an eventuality occurs. Many business continuity measures 
are focused on reducing impact (for example back-up procedures for disaster recovery, as 
they  have  no  influence  on  event  probability),  whereas  others,  such  as  electing  higher 
standards, may reduce vulnerabilities. 
Among their enormous social and economic impacts, the Christchurch earthquakes were a 
tragic  wake-up  call  in  respect  of  disaster  recovery/business  continuity  planning  (BCP)  for 
many organisations. Statistics New Zealand was hit very hard in business terms by the three 
major quakes. The February quake severely damaged the main Christchurch office building 
and the separate census building. The quake of February 22, 2011 occurred 14 days before 
census day. After 48 hours assessing whether we could continue the five-yearly population 
and dwelling census, or usefully run it excluding Christchurch, we decided it was infeasible 
and I recommended that the government cancel it. $72 million spent, 7500 people employed 
and  then  let  go  (and  paid  out).  As  a  result  of  cancelling  the  census,  a  number  of  other 
national  post-censal  social  surveys  also  needed  to  be  abandoned,  specifically  the  Maori 
Social survey and the Disability Survey. 
Other economic and population statistical releases were delayed, and business was severely 
disrupted for subsequent weeks. In the week following the February quake, IT staff retrieved 
back-up tapes of data processed in January and February from the server room, which had 
been  scheduled  for  transfer  to  Auckland. We  operated  tape  back-up  in  Christchurch,  after 
having rejected proposals for network (WAN-based) back-up from that site3 due to cost and 
budget restrictions and an assessed lower-risk profile in Christchurch. The back-up data was 
important for timely release of GDP data on March 23. 
Notwithstanding  very  extensive  risk  planning  and  control  in  the  census  programme,  the 
organisation was unable to continue the census programme at that time. Some unforeseen 
risks  eventuate.  Their  impact  can  sometimes  be  mitigated  by  management  actions  but 
sometimes organisations just have to trust their resilience. 
About four  weeks  after  the  February  quake,  Statistics  New  Zealand’s  IT  Group  introduced 
remote  access  computing  for  staff.  Initially,  access  was  enabled  through  webmail  that 
provided limited access to non-secure corporate tools. Subsequently, fully access to secure 
internal  databases  and  statistical  software  was  introduced.  When  the  severe  after-shock 
struck  in  June,  all  240  Christchurch  staff  had  such  a  facility  and  “normal”  work  resumed 
quickly. 
Remote computing had been considered in Statistics New Zealand for many years but had 
been assigned as low priority due to security concerns and limited demand given our office-
based working norms. When the imperative arose, it was a quick and successful initiative. 
Sometimes innovation flows from risks that have already materialised. 
Reinforcing this point, when the census was re-run in March 2013, Statistics New Zealand 
sought to avail itself with the benefits of cloud computing, using Infrastructure as a Service 
for  database  management.  The  potential  security  and  loss  of  control  risks  from  third-party 
                                                
3 
It was operating between Wellington and Auckland, but not between Christchurch and Auckland.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the 
issue  was 
international 
triggered  by  a 
technical  problem  with 
storage  with  cloud  computing  were  a  concern,  but  from  a  full  systems-perspective,  the 
marginal  risks  and  costs  were  assessed  to  be  lower  than  those  entailed  in  Statistics  NZ 
replicating  the  security  environment  and  having  to  provide  its  own  disaster  recovery 
arrangements. Risk perceptions and the ability to manage them were definitely influenced by 
the experiences of 2011. 
The Reserve Bank sets very high standards for business continuity, and has strengthened 
these further in recent years, reflecting the importance of the 24/7 hours availability of the 
payments system and the need to maintain domestic liquidity and foreign exchange dealing 
operations. 
We have experienced several incidents that spurred further risk assessment and mitigation 
measures.  On  the  evening  of  24  April  2012,  several  banks  experienced  difficulties  in 
processing  retail  payments  (i.e.  exchanging  and  settling  payments  between  banks’  retail 
customers such as merchants, government departments etc.). Some payments missed being 
included in the end-of-day processing and banks had to post them late, in some cases as 
late as the afternoon of the April 25. As a result, some bank customers who accessed their 
accounts  on  the  morning  of  ANZAC  day  found  that  expected  transactions  had  not  been 
completed. 
The 
financial 
communications  network  (SWIFT)  and  affected  participants  in  the  new  Settlement  Before 
Interchange  (SBI)  arrangements  that  had  recently  been  implemented.  These  allow  banks 
and other parties to exchange files of payment instructions and send settlement instructions 
to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Exchange  Settlement  Account  System  (ESAS).  ESAS  operated 
normally,  but  because  of  the  fault  in  the  messaging  system  payments  instructions  were 
delayed or failed. The incident was the most significant disruption to the processing of retail 
payments for many years and the effects were felt by bank customers nationwide. 
This  incident  was  complex  due  to  the  multiplicity  of  parties  involved,  some  unclear  (at  the 
time)  responsibilities,  and  communication  between  parties  proving  problematic.  New, 
untested  contingency  arrangements  were  used  reluctantly  by  banks.  In  the  end  those 
arrangements proved crucial, allowing the SWIFT system to be by-passed, and payments to 
be  completed  through  NZClear.  Since  that  event,  the  industry  has  accepted  greater 
accountability for the collective responsibility to address issues and communicate effectively 
between the parties. As a result, subsequent incidents have been resolved more effectively. 
The Bank’s own payments system disaster recovery operations have been strengthened in 
recent years. In February 2011, the Bank established an office in Auckland as a full back-up 
to  its  payments  and  financial  markets  operations.  There  is  fail-over  capability  to  Auckland 
should  Wellington’s  operations  be  disrupted,  and  vice  versa.  Hardware,  database  and 
software  back-ups  exist  for  the  most  critical  systems.  The  Bank’s  BCP  programme  is 
extensive and regularly tested. 
The Reserve Bank, whilst perhaps better known for its monetary policy responsibilities, is a 
bank. It operates financial, lending and investment functions that are similar in a number of 
respects  to  those  of  commercial  banks.  And  it  holds  and  disburses  cash,  lots  of  it,  albeit 
almost entirely to intermediaries rather than the public directly. Some $9 billion of payments 
flow  through  the  interbank  settlement  and  payments  systems  (ESAS/NZClear)  each  day. 
Security risks are a very serious matter for the Bank. Recently, we extensively upgraded the 
security arrangements around our cash processing and storage functions. 
IT  security  is  an  ongoing  challenge.  IT  security  risks  arise  through  malware  (viruses  etc); 
cyber  attacks  (hacking  and  denial  of  service  attacks)  targeting  external-facing  publicly 
available  services  or  exploiting  vulnerabilities  in  our  infrastructure;  loss  of  data  through 
mobile  devices;  insider  breaches  of  privileges  or  authorities;  and  staff  introducing 
vulnerabilities through exploitable physical or social media. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Bank has a dedicated security function and the IT security framework (that is currently 
being updated) provides an integrated, organisation-wide program for managing information 
security  risks.  Extensive  control  measures  are  in  place,  including  technology-based 
mitigations and non-technical mitigations revolving around IT security policies, training, and 
incident management procedures. 
Systematic external and internal security monitoring and testing arrangements are in place. 
They  reveal  extraordinary  numbers  of  potential  threats.  Suspicious  events  triggering  alerts 
number  around  500  million  per  month.  These  comprise  a  mix  of  non-standard  but 
permissible  events  and  adverse  events.  The  security  and  network  control  task  is  to 
distinguish  these  and  exclude  the  adverse  anomalies,  while  enabling  the  acceptable 
abnormal. 
Operational  risks,  be  they  security,  business  continuity  or  service  delivery,  are  most 
effectively  managed  through  a  risk  management  approach  that  is  integrated  into  the 
business and culture of the organisation. Total quality management (TQM) is well recognised 
as everyone’s job, and the same is true of other operational risk management practices. 
3. 
Project risks are sometimes treated as a subset of operational risks and are linked 
to the achievement of project outcomes. They relate to benefits not being achieved, 
perhaps  because  of  delivery  failure,  key  assumptions  not  being  met,  scope  being 
poorly  defined,  delays  in  project  completion,  cost  escalation,  disruption  from 
extraneous events etc. 
Typical risk controls for projects include: the establishment of a project risk register with risks 
identified,  evaluated  and  controls  determined,  project  planning,  resourcing,  and  monitoring 
mechanisms, and governance arrangements. 
Risks often eventuate during change processes because existing processes were not fully 
understood  and  the  number  of  unknowns  is  allowed  to  be  greater  than  it  should  through 
inadequate planning, trialling and risk management. 
The  Bank  recently  upgraded  its  treasury  system  (Findur)  that  captures  financial  trading 
activity,  and  produces  financial  performance  reports  among  other  functions.  What  was 
expected to be a relatively simple and quick upgrade process took around 11 months and 
incurred  substantial  frustration  and  cost  –  directly  in  terms  of  additional  resources  and 
indirectly through deferment of other scheduled developments. Risks unfolded that were not 
anticipated.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  initial  project  planning,  testing  work  and 
collaboration  with  the  vendor  were  inadequate,  and  risk  mitigations  were  not  well  enough 
established in advance. The project has now been completed with very satisfactory business 
outcomes, but better risk management and planning could have yielded better outcomes at 
lower cost. 
It  need  not  be  like this. The (population  and  dwellings)  census  is  arguably  New  Zealand’s 
biggest project in any one year, involving over 7000 employees, every New Zealander, and a 
budget  of  approximately  $100  million.  Notwithstanding  the  cancellation  in  2011  due  to  the 
Christchurch earthquake, the census – which is four years in the planning and involves six 
weeks of collection and analysis for around a year – has been conducted successfully, on 
schedule, within (or close to) budget, and achieved its objectives, for over 100 years. 
The Bank is introducing new banknotes in 2015, as foreshadowed in the Statement of Intent. 
While  it  is  early  days  in  the  development  of  the  notes,  extensive  risk  planning  has  been 
undertaken. The project has been broken into multiple phases, with an actively managed risk 
register updated regularly, and aligned with the phasing of the project. The first two project 
phases have been concluded and the risks managed successfully. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Components of risk management 
There are a number of core components in any risk management regime. We identify the key 
elements as follows: 
• 
Risk  identification  –  risk  awareness  is  a  valuable  trait  that  is  sharpened  with 
practice,  but  various  disciplines  are  valuable  to  ensure  risks  are  anticipated 
effectively.  Risk  identification  is  something  every  employee  should  do.  The  risks 
identified will be influenced by role and perspective. Senior management must focus 
on  identifying  strategic  risks,  while  applying  their  assessment  to  operational  and 
project risks identified by others. 
Risk assessment – evaluation of likelihood and potential impact. Risks are pervasive 
but  not  all  risks  matter.  It  is  critical  to  evaluate  the  significance  of  risks  for  the 
business  and  for  a  specific  time  horizon.  Even  if  unimportant  now,  they  may  be 
significant  later.  Likelihood  can  change,  as  may  impact.  Risk  severity  shapes  the 
nature and extent of management action. 
Risk tolerance – what residual risk would be acceptable? Generally, risk cannot be 
eliminated  but  can  be  reduced.  Management  must  decide  what  level  of  risk 
reduction  is  required  and  what  adverse  outcomes  might  be  accepted.  Sometimes 
risk appetite statements may be developed. 
Risk  planning  and  mitigation  actions  are  identified  and  established  to  achieve  the 
desired residual risk level. Preventative and remedial actions should be considered. 
Risks may be prevented or rendered unlikely through various control measures, and 
impacts alleviated through appropriate plans and actions. 
Risk  management  is  assigned  –  risks  and  their  management  require  ownership 
within  the  business.  When  accountability  is  unclear,  risks  are  less  likely  to  be 
managed and more likely to materialise. Ownership should be assigned to the role 
or person who is best placed to manage the risk, acknowledging that impacts may 
be widespread. Even if the consequence for the organisation would be severe, it is 
best to allocate and manage the risk in the business area that has greatest scope 
for risk control. 
Monitoring  and  review  of  risks  regular  risk  review  is  required,  to  evaluate  any 
changes in the risk or control environment. Likelihood and impact vary as political, 
social and technological factors evolve, and in response to changes in the business 
and  the  mitigations  put  in  place.  Incidents  occur  and  provide  insight  into  risk 
assessment.  The  monitoring-feedback  loop  is  a  critical  part  of  keeping  risk 
management in focus. 
Reporting  and  escalation  procedures  –  as  risk  severity  changes,  incidents  occur, 
and  risks  materialise  into  issues,  it  is  important  that  reporting  and  escalation 
processes exist. These enable broader perspectives and judgement to be applied in 
the  evaluation  and  management  of  risks.  Project  governance  processes  are 
standard mechanisms for  project risks.  Supervisory  oversight  provides  a  reporting 
channel for operational risks and the senior leadership group should dedicate time 
to reviewing strategic risks, but more structured risk reporting processes for material 
changes  in  risk  should  be  considered.  A  risk  management  committee  may  be 
established as one way of reinforcing the review processes. 
      Enterprise risk management at the Reserve Bank 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  reviewed  its  enterprise  risk  management  framework  (ERM),  and 
some key insights can be gained from this experience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The  institution  has  one  of  the  broadest  sets  of  functions  amongst  its  global  central  bank 
peers. Amongst others, its activities include responsibility for monetary policy, regulation and 
supervision of the financial system, currency (cash management) operations, and operations 
of the payment systems infrastructure. There are considerable risks associated with each of 
these functions. 
At the Reserve Bank we openly acknowledge risk and recognise that an effective enterprise 
risk management capability is an integral part of successfully running our business. 
Our  ERM  model  was  developed  in-house,  following  an  extensive  review  of  the  relevant 
international  standards  and  research  into  how  other  institutions  were  approaching  risk 
management.  It  was  tailored  to  meet  two  critical  criteria.  Firstly,  it  had  to  be  the  right  “fit” 
relative to the look and feel of the institution. Businesses have unique cultures and values, 
ways of doing things, and accepted working protocols and ERM solutions need to blend in; 
otherwise they may not be embraced or effectively used. Secondly, the ERM model had to 
be capable of covering all broad policy and operational functions within the Bank, and factor 
in the related external New Zealand level risks. These matters were considered essential to 
winning the hearts and the minds of stakeholders and embedding the ERM model in the day-
to-day operation of the business. 
While  these  criteria  may  sound  fundamental,  ERM  initiatives  do  fail  due  to  these 
considerations  being  underplayed  or  bypassed.  Some  ERM  models  are  abstract  and  are 
captured  by  a  risk-by-list  mentality  that  ultimately  diminishes  their  relevance.  Others  don’t 
take the helicopter view across the broad spectrum of risks and therefore don’t pass muster 
at Board level as truly reflecting an institution’s risk profile. 
Stakeholder engagement is a major part of our ERM framework at the Bank and spans the 
Board, Governors, leadership team, and the wider staff population. There has been strong 
support  and  tone  at  the  top  at  the  level  of  the  Governors  and  the  Board.  Awareness, 
education, and reporting of results have been important in promoting the importance, power 
and value of sound enterprise risk management. At the senior management team level we 
now pass an important litmus test in that every member, whilst often focusing on their own 
specialist  departmental  level  activities,  can  articulate  in  detail  the  current  enterprise  risk 
profile across the institution and the main issues associated with each major project initiative 
that is linked to a strategic priority. 
Effective engagement requires ERM to connect to the day-to-day activities occurring across 
an institution. This provides the spark that gives substance to risk discussions, and promotes 
two-way  conversation  around  how  risks  are  being  seen,  managed,  and  where  necessary 
treated. This means that risk managers need to have a solid understanding of all parts of the 
business in the context of strategic, operational and project risks. 
Aligned to engagement, the development of capability across the institution is also a major 
component of the Bank’s ERM model. At the outset of our review, we established an ERM 
Lead  community  that  consists  of  selected  senior  staff  whom  collectively  represent  every 
function  across  the  Bank. This community  meets  regularly  and  provides  a  point of contact 
into every department for the purposes of building up and regularly refreshing the collective 
risk  profile.  ERM  Leads  reach  out  across  their respective  departments to  discuss  risk  and 
this provides ownership, comprehensive coverage, and capability across the entire Bank. 
Over time, as new and updated ERM initiatives develop, the ERM Lead community are a key 
engagement  point  to  disseminate  information  across  the  Bank.  As  a  mature  and  collegial 
community  there  are  also  healthy  cross-departmental  ERM  forums,  and  these  provide  a 
further layer of enterprise level risk focus and robustness. 
To  summarise,  getting  the  “people”  aspect  right  is  critical  for  successful  enterprise  risk 
management. Engage, communicate, teach, explain, and then do it again, and again. 
There is of course also a need for sound methodology that allows for effective, repeatable, 
and consistent assessment and reporting of all risks. This needs to be deployed in the same 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  manner  across  all  functions  to  provide  an  enterprise  wide  “apples  and  apples”  view  of 
respective  risks.  At  the  heart  of  our  methodology  at  the  Reserve  Bank  we  have  a  risk 
taxonomy, and associated risk likelihood and impact scaling system to classify and measure 
risk. This serves as a common language and is used to define and assess risks across the 
Bank’s  activities.  For  example,  the  Bank’s  leadership  team  can  meaningfully  discuss  and 
compare a physical banknote risk alongside a monetary policy risk. 
Standardised reporting provides a department-level risk profile snapshot and an aggregated 
whole-of-Bank  view.  At  the  whole-of-Bank  level  a  risk  trend  and  treatment  summary  is 
compiled  and  this  specifies  how  every  reported  risk  is  being  managed.  This  provides  the 
helicopter view in terms of where resources, spending and focus is being applied to manage 
specific risks. Importantly, this provides a level of comfort that we are knowledgeable about 
our risks and can consider opportunities and areas for innovation for the future. 
As  part  of  our  ERM  model,  we  have  given  considerable  thought  to  automation  and  data 
integration. This has resulted in an ERM data model that incorporates granular risk profiling 
that is integrated with internal audit issue log information and the Bank’s incident reporting 
records. In practice, any incident or audit issue arising is mapped to an enterprise risk, and 
over  time  a  comprehensive  view  can  be  formed  on  how  certain  risks  are  manifesting 
themselves  and  being  managed.  Enterprise  risks,  audit  issues,  and  incidents  all  use  the 
same risk taxonomy and risk rating system and therefore data can be analysed consistently 
across these information capture systems. Automation extends to data visualisation of these 
relationships  and  this  assists  in  identifying  emerging  trends  and  matters  for  further 
investigation. 
Incident  management  is  a  key  part  of  our  ERM  framework.  We  call  it  Proactive  Problem 
Management or PPM in its short form, and see it as a continuous improvement mechanism. 
While the initial focus is on escalating and risk managing the incident, considerable value is 
derived  from  the  phase  that  immediately  follows;  this  being  to  understand  root  cause  and 
insights from them. This typically drives various action plans to further strengthen processes 
and frameworks. 
Monthly PPM summary reporting is produced for the Bank’s leadership team and discussions 
between  the  risk  executive  and  Governors.  This  promotes  discussions  at  the  broader 
institutional level around matters such as opportunity to innovate and change the way we do 
things,  risk  culture  and  awareness,  general  robustness  of  process,  and  any  trends  or  hot 
spots for follow-up. Staff are expected, encouraged and thanked for raising incidents in an 
open and transparent manner. 
The final element of the Reserve Bank’s ERM framework that brings all of this together is 
business integration. To obtain this integration, we limit risk profiling to a relatively small set 
of  important  risks  that  align  to  our  objectives  and  initiatives  as  outlined  in  the  Bank’s 
Statement of Intent. These risks factor in strategic considerations and related project activity 
underway across the Bank. The Bank’s leadership team regularly review the risk profile, and 
the Board receive a formal report twice yearly for discussion. In addition, the Bank’s senior 
risk management executive meets weekly with the Governor of the Bank to discuss the risk 
profile and related matters of significance. 
In essence, enterprise risk management is highly visible and can be seen in action day-in-
day-out across the business. ERM is transparent and inclusive and allows the organisation to 
make informed decisions. Perhaps most importantly, it has helped instil an organisation-wide 
risk management culture. 
We are very satisfied with the recent refresh of our ERM model. But we know that there will 
always  be  more  to  do  to  deliver  a  tailored  best  practice  risk  management  solution  to  the 
institution.  With  this  in  mind  our  current  focus  is  on  further  refining  the  articulation  of  risk 
appetite and exploring our risk culture as it relates to leadership behaviours and overall staff 
engagement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  More  generally,  there  is  a  strong  sense  that  ERM  is  a  powerful  tool  that  can  continue  to 
identify  opportunity  and drive  innovation  across the  Bank. There  is  a  strong  sense  that  by 
connecting to stakeholders and the business even more we will reap greater rewards in the 
future. 
Insights and reflections on risk management from executive management 
With over twenty years of senior executive management experience between us, the authors 
have witnessed successful and not so successful risk management endeavours. This section 
summarises  our  thoughts  on  the  value  and  critical  success  factors  in  organisational  risk 
management. 
We  are  unashamed  advocates  of  risk  management:  done  well,  it  pays-off.  As  the 
Performance  Improvement  Framework  (PIF)  “Getting  to  Great”  document4  attests  from  its 
study of public sector agencies (and we see no reason to think it is different for the private 
sector) “The best performing agencies manage risk, while others tend to avoid it.” 
In summary: 
1. 
Risks  are  more  likely  to  eventuate  when  preparedness  is  inadequate.  This  is  the 
story  of  the  HLFS-Computer-Assisted  Interviewing  development  and  the  Findur 
upgrade. All too often, we are over-optimistic that things will go well. 
The  adverse  consequences  when  risks  eventuate  are  generally  worse  when  risk 
management is limited. For example, disaster recovery is a lot easier if measures 
are in place – even if they prove partial. The census data back-up was not perfect 
but it was much better than nothing. Reputational damage is lessened if measures 
exist  yet  are  inadequate  compared  with  the  situation  where  the  risks  were 
unidentified and uncontrolled, i.e. mitigations were absent. For example, The ACC 
privacy  breaches  were  accentuated  by  a  lack  of  privacy  management.  The 
payments  failure  –  while  it  still  occurred  –  would  have  been  much  worse  without 
contingency measures in place. 
Being risk aware and risk prepared (risk smart for short) supports innovation, rather 
than impeding it, as many fear. In many cases, opportunity and risk are shadows of 
one another. Both elements must be kept be in focus. When someone identifies an 
opportunity, we ask what risks exist, so that the gains will not be lost. When risks are 
raised, we ask what opportunity is there to move forward. 
Risk  management  is  a  whole  of  organisation  task  or  responsibility.  It  needs  to  be 
demanded  and  modelled  by  executive  management,  owned  and  applied  by 
business managers, and supported and monitored by a specialist risk management 
function. Accountability for risks should be assigned but everyone is responsible for 
risk  management.  Leadership  is  crucial  in  setting  the  risk/innovation  tone  and 
leading  the  organisational  dialogue.  An  enterprise  risk  management  framework 
helps  instil  widespread  organisational  ownership  and  builds  a  risk  management 
culture. 
Risk  management  tends  to  atrophy  if  one  is  not  careful.  Successful  risk 
management tends to undermine its own apparent value. A higher risk appetite can 
be sustained and greater risks may be taken, or complacency can set in because 
risks  have  been  successfully,  but  almost  unknowingly,  averted.  It  is  important  to 
develop the culture, disciplines, processes, and learning mechanisms that keep risk 
management fresh, e.g. quasi-incidents can be useful reminders perhaps via BCP 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
                                                
4  SSC,  “Core  Guide  3:  Getting  to  Great;  Lead  Reviewer  insights  from  the  Performance  Improvement 
Framework”, April 2013.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6. 
exercises,  security  penetration  testing,  and  external  review  etc.  Risk  management 
committees have a place in maintaining the focus. 
Engagement and conversations are vital. Risks need to be talked about. This builds 
awareness  and  action.  Developing  a  culture  in  which  risks  and  risk-taking  can  be 
discussed, managed and accepted is a key leadership challenge. 
 While  we  are  not  wedded  to  explicit,  whole  of  organisation,  risk  appetite  statements,  the 
conversations about risk tolerance for particular risks are crucial. It is important to send clear 
messages  to  an  organisation  about  whether,  why  and  which  risks  should  be  reduced  or 
relaxed a little. Some are below the waterline and must be averted. Others may be above it 
and permit greater risk taking. Strong, consistent senior leadership is vital. 
Often  staff  or  lay  observers  contend  that risk  management  will  tie  an  organisation  up  with 
process  and  overhead,  slowing  it  and  its  innovative  capacity  down.  This  need  not  be  the 
case.  Motor  racing  and  sail  boat  racing  enthusiasts  recognise  the  finely  balanced  science 
and art of incurring increased risk to increase speed, and then set about optimising the trade-
off. Recall Sir Peter Blake’s famous dictum that the black magic campaign was about doing 
everything to make “the boat go faster”, without making it unstable. 
Organisations  need  to  incur  risk  in  order  to  prosper. We  are  not  there  to  tie  down  all  the 
hatches  and  keep  the  sails  furled.  Our  goal  is  not  risk  avoidance  but  risk  awareness,  risk 
management and, indeed, calculated risk-taking.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
