Richard W Fisher: Beer goggles, monetary camels, the eye of the needle 
and the first law of holes 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  National  Association  of  Corporate  Directors,  Dallas, 
Texas, 14 January 2014. 
 With reference to Peter Boockvar, the Book of Matthew, Sherlock Holmes, “The Wolf of Wall Street” and Denis Healey.  
The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, George [Jones]. George is a great member of the Dallas Fed board of directors, 
and  I  am  honored  he  would  take  the  time  to  introduce  me. Waylon  Jennings  said  of  your 
namesake that “if we could all sound like we wanted to, we’d all sound like George Jones.”1 I 
often feel  that  way  about  George  at  our  board meetings.  He  gives  a  sharp,  crisp,  spot-on 
briefing of banking conditions in that deep, beautiful voice of his and I always think: I want to 
be just like George when I grow up. Again, thank you George for that kind introduction. 
During the holiday break, I spent a good deal of time trying to organize my thoughts on how I 
will  approach  monetary  policy  going  forward.  Today,  I  am  going  to  share  some  of  those 
thoughts that might be of interest to you as corporate directors. 
At the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), it was decided that the 
amount  of  Treasuries  and  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  we  have  been  purchasing 
should each be pared back by $5 billion, so that we would be purchasing a total of $75 billion 
a  month  (in  addition  to  reinvesting  the  proceeds  of  maturing  issues  we  hold)  rather  than 
$85 billion per month. In addition, it was noted that “if incoming information broadly supports 
the  Committee’s  expectation(s)  …  the  Committee  will  likely  reduce  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases  in  further  measured  steps  at  future  meetings.”  And  it  was  made  clear  that  the 
FOMC expects it will hold the base rate that anchors the yield curve – the federal funds rate, 
or  the  rate  on  overnight  money  –  to  its  present  near-zero  rate  well  past  the  time  when 
unemployment is reduced to 6½ percent. 
I was pleased with the decision to finally begin tapering our bond purchases, though I would 
have  preferred  to  pull  back  our  purchases  by  double  the  announced  amount.  But  the 
important  thing  for  me  is  that  the  committee  began  the  process  of  slowing  down  the 
ballooning of our balance sheet, which at year-end exceeded $4 trillion. And we began – and 
I use that word deliberately, for we have more to do on this front – to clarify our intentions for 
managing the overnight money rate. 
As  an  economist  would  say,  “on  net”  I  was  rather  pleased  with  the  decision  taken  at  the 
December FOMC meeting. 
Under the chairmanship of Ben Bernanke, all 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents, together 
with the sitting governors of the Federal Reserve Board, have input into the decision-making 
process. There is a formal vote – regardless of who is the Fed chair – that includes only five 
of the 12 regional Bank presidents plus the governors, but all of the principals seated at the 
table participate fully in the discussion of what to do. And yet, either because we will effect a 
change in the chairmanship starting in February or because at the last meeting we took the 
step of tapering back by a small amount our massive purchase of Treasuries and MBS, great 
attention is being placed on the voters for 2014, of which I am one. 
Two comments I recently read have been buzzing around my mind as I think about the many 
issues that will condition my actions as a voter. 
                                                
1 
“It’s Alright”, words and music by Waylon Jennings, copyright Waylon Jennings Music, 1980. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Beer goggles … 
The  first  was  by  Peter  Boockvar,  who  is  among  the  plethora  of  analysts  offering  different 
viewpoints  that  I  regularly  read  to  get  a  sense  of  how  we  are  being  viewed  in  the 
marketplace. Here is a rather pungent quote from a note he sent out on Jan. 2: 
“…QE [quantitative easing] puts beer goggles on investors by creating a line of sight where 
everything looks good…” 
For those of you unfamiliar with the term “beer goggles”, the Urban Dictionary defines it as 
“the  effect  that  alcohol  …  has  in  rendering  a  person  who  one  would  ordinarily  regard  as 
unattractive as … alluring”. This audience might substitute “wine” or “martini” or “margarita” 
for  “beer”  to  make  it  more  age-appropriate,  but  the  effect  is  the  same:  Things  often  look 
better  when  one  is  under  the  influence  of  free-flowing  liquidity.  This  is  one  reason  why 
William  McChesney  Martin,  the  longest-serving  Fed  chairman  in  our  institution’s  100-year 
history, famously said that the Fed’s job is to take away the punchbowl just as the party gets 
going.2 
… and the eye of the needle 
The other eye catcher for me was a cartoon in the Jan. 6 issue of The New Yorker. Sitting in 
a room are two businessmen who are apparently conversant with the New Testament’s book 
of Matthew. One says to the other, “We need either bigger needles or smaller camels”. 
Today, I want to muse aloud about whether QE has indeed put beer goggles on investors 
and whether we, the Fed, can pass the camel of massive quantitative easing through the eye 
of the needle of normalizing monetary policy without creating havoc. 
Free and abundant money changes perspective 
Boockvar is right. When money available to investors is close to free and is widely available, 
and there is a presumption that the central bank will keep it that way indefinitely, discount 
rates applied to assessing the value of future cash flows shift downward, making for lower 
hurdle rates for valuations. A bull market for stocks and other claims on tradable companies 
ensues; the financial world looks rather comely. 
Market operators donning beer goggles and even some sober economists consider analysts 
like Boockvar party poopers. But I have found myself making arguments similar to his and to 
those of other skeptics at recent FOMC meetings, pointing to some developments that signal 
we  have  made  for  an  intoxicating  brew  as  we  have  continued  pouring  liquidity  down  the 
economy’s throat. 
Among them: 
• 
Share  buybacks  financed  by  debt  issuance  that  after  tax  treatment  and  inflation 
incur minimal, and in some cases negative, cost; this has a most pleasant effect on 
earnings per share apart from top-line revenue growth. 
Dividend payouts financed by cheap debt that bolster share prices. 
The “bull/bear spread” for equities now being higher than in October 2007. 
Stock  market  metrics  such  as  price-to-sales  ratios  and  market  capitalization  as  a 
percentage  of  gross  domestic  product  at  eye-popping  levels  not  seen  since  the 
dot-com boom of the late 1990s. 
                                                 
2  See  “Address  of  William  McChesney  Martin,  Jr.,  Chairman,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  New  York  Group  of  the  Investment  Bankers  Association  of  America”,  Waldorf  Astoria 
Hotel, New York City, Oct. 19, 1955. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Margin debt that is pushing up against all-time records. 
In  the  bond  market,  investment-grade  yield  spreads  over  “risk  free”  government 
bonds becoming abnormally tight. 
“Covenant  lite”  lending  becoming  robust  and  the  spread  between  CCC  credit  and 
investment-grade credit or the risk-free rate historically narrow. I will note here that I 
am  all  for  helping  businesses  get  back  on  their  feet  so  that  they  can  expand 
employment  and  America’s  prosperity:  This  is  the  root  desire  of  the  FOMC.  But  I 
worry when “junk” companies that should borrow at a premium reflecting their risk of 
failure are able to borrow (or have their shares priced) at rates that defy the odds of 
that risk. I may be too close to this given my background. From 1989 through 1997, I 
was managing partner of a fund that bought distressed debt, used our positions to 
bring about changes in the companies we invested in, and made a handsome profit 
from the dividends, interest payments and stock price appreciation that flowed from 
the restructured companies. Today, I would have to hire Sherlock Holmes to find a 
single distressed company priced attractively enough to buy. 
And then there are the knock-on effects of all of the above. Market operators are once again 
spending money freely outside of their day jobs. An example: For almost 40 years, I have 
spent  a  not  insignificant  portion  of  my  savings  collecting  rare,  first-edition  books.  Like  any 
patient  investor  in  any  market,  I  have  learned  through  several  market  cycles  that  you  buy 
when  nobody  wants  something  and  sell  when  everyone  clamors  for  more.  During  the 
financial  debacle  of  2007–09,  I  was  able  to  buy  for  a  song  volumes  I  have  long  coveted 
(including  a  mint-condition  first  printing  from  1841  of  Mackay’s  Memoirs  of  Extraordinary 
Popular  Delusions,  which  every  one  of  you  should  read  and  re-read,  certainly  if  you  are 
contemplating  seeing  the  movie  The  Wolf  of  Wall  Street).  Today,  I  could  not  afford  them. 
First editions, like paintings, sculptures, fine wines, Bugattis and homes in Highland Park or 
River Oaks, have become the by-product of what I am sure Bill Martin would consider a party 
well underway. 
I  want  to  make  clear that  I  am  not  among  those  who  think  we  are  presently  in  a  “bubble” 
mode for stocks or bonds or most other assets. But this much I know: Just as Martin knew by 
virtue  of  his  background  as  a  noneconomist  who  had  hands-on  Wall  Street  experience, 
markets for anything tradable overshoot and one must be prepared for adjustments that bring 
markets back to normal valuations. 
This need not threaten the real economy. The “slow correction” of 1962 comes to mind as an 
example: A stock market correction took place, and yet the economy continued to fare well. 
Here is the point as to the market’s beer goggles. Were a stock market correction to ensue 
while I have the vote, I would not flinch from supporting continued reductions in the size of 
our  asset  purchases  as  long  as  the  real  economy  is  growing,  cyclical  unemployment  is 
declining  and  demand-driven  deflation  remains a  small  tail  risk;  I  would  vote for  continued 
reductions in our asset purchases, with an eye toward eliminating them entirely at the earliest 
practicable date. 
How large is the camel? 
Let’s turn to the camel, by which I mean the size of the Fed’s balance sheet. 
A  little  history  provides  some  perspective.  We  began  to  grow  our  balance  sheet  as  we 
approached  year-end  2008.  On  Sept.  10,  2008,  the  amount  of  Reserve  Bank  credit 
outstanding  was  $867  billion.  On  Nov.  25,  2008,  we  announced  a  program  to  purchase 
$100 billion  of  securities  issued  by  the  housing-related  government-sponsored  enterprises, 
together with our intent to purchase up to $500 billion in MBS in order to goose the housing 
market.  I  supported  these  initiatives,  recognizing  that  the  economy  was  in  the  throes  of  a 
financial panic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  order 
to  provide 
longer-term  Treasuries 
Following our December 2008 meeting, the FOMC announced that it had cut the target range 
for the fed funds rate to 0-to-1/4 of 1 percent, and being thus “zero bound”, we floated the 
idea  of  purchasing 
further  monetary 
accommodation (when we buy Treasuries or MBS and agency debt, we put money into the 
financial  system,  substituting  for  further  interest  rate  cuts).  On  March  18,  2009,  we 
announced additional purchases of up to $750 billion of agency MBS and up to $100 billion 
of agency debt, plus purchases of up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over 
six months. That day, our balance sheet was marked at $2 trillion. 
There are some details that impacted our balance sheet, which I have omitted so as not to 
bore  you  or  entangle  you  in  the  entrails  of  central  bank  operations:  For  example,  liquidity 
swaps  with  other  central  banks  declined  from  a  peak  occasioned  by  the  financial  crisis  of 
$583  billion  the  week  ended  Dec.  10,  2008,  to  $330  billion  the  following  March,  thus 
somewhat mitigating the growth of our balance sheet over that period.3 
From my perch, I considered a balance sheet of $2-plus trillion and a base lending rate of 
0-to-1/4  of  1  percent  more  than  sufficient  to  stimulate  not  just  the  housing  market  but  the 
stock  market,  too,  thus  placing  us  on  the  path  of  what  economists  refer  to  as  “the  wealth 
effect”  –  the  working  assumption that  rising  prices for  homes,  stocks  and  bonds floats  the 
income boat of all Americans. 
I basically said so publicly on March 26, 2009, in a speech to the RISE Forum, an annual 
student investment conference. At the time, the S&P 500 was priced at 814, the Nasdaq at 
1,529 and the Dow at 7,750. The mindset of investors at that moment was summarized at an 
earlier FOMC meeting by one of my most esteemed colleagues at the Fed, who quipped that 
in looking at the balance sheets of most financial institutions, “nothing on the right is right and 
nothing  on  the  left  is  left”.  As  I  looked  at  the  faces  of  the  students  gathered  in  that  vast 
auditorium, I could see in their eyes a reflection of the gloom and doom of the time. 
Here is what I told these young investors that dark morning: “… the current economic and 
financial predicament represents a potential gold mine rather than a minefield. Historically, 
great  investors  have  made  their  money  by  climbing  a  wall  of  worry  rather  than  letting  a 
woeful consensus cow them. … Your job as investors is … to ferret out from the general-
market malaise good financial and business operators whose franchises and prospects are 
overdiscounted  at  current  prices.  Were  I  you  …  I  would  be  licking  my  chops  at  the 
opportunities that always abound in times of adversity. … There are a lot of dollar bills that 
can  be  found  in  the  debris  of  the  current  markets  that  can  be  picked  up  for  nickels  and 
dimes.” 
Of course, I would not mention this today had I been wrong! Currently, the right hand side of 
the  balance  sheet  of  most  any  well-managed  market-traded  business  is  chock-full  of 
restructured, cheap debt and leaner common stock, while the left side is bulging with surplus 
cash. The S&P closed yesterday at 1,819, the Nasdaq at 4,113 and the Dow at 16,258 – a 
plateau over two times above the valley into which they had descended in 2009. 
And, again, there are the signs of conspicuous consumption I mentioned earlier that reflect a 
fully robust stock market. If there is indeed a wealth effect that spreads from clever market 
operators to the working people of America, a $2 trillion balance sheet might well have been 
sufficient to have performed the trick.  
The FOMC is a committee, however, and the majority of my colleagues have disagreed with 
me on this point. We have since doubled our balance sheet to $4 trillion. This has resulted 
not  only  in  saltatory4  housing,  bond  and  stock markets,  but  a  real  economy  that  is  on  the 
mend, with cyclical unemployment declining and inflation thus far held at bay. 
                                                
3  Liquidity swaps continued to fall after March, hitting zero in February 2010. 
4  Merriam-Webster’s dictionary defines saltatory as “of or relating to dancing; proceeding by leaps”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Here  is  the  rub.  We  have  accomplished  the  last  $2  trillion  of  balance-sheet  expansion  by 
purchasing unprecedented amounts of longer-maturity assets: As of Jan. 8, 2014, 75 percent 
of Federal Reserve-held loans and securities had remaining maturities in excess of five years. 
A narrow needle eye 
The brow begins to furrow. To be sure, Treasury and MBS markets are liquid markets. But 
the  old  market  operator  in  me  is  conscious  that  we  hold  nearly  40  percent  of  outstanding 
eligible  MBS  and  of  Treasuries  with  more  than  five  years  to  maturity.  Selling  that 
concentrated an amount of even the most presumably liquid assets would be a heck of lot 
more complicated than accumulating it. 
Currently,  this  is  not  an  issue.  But  as  the  economy  grows,  the  massive  amount  of  money 
sitting on the sidelines will be activated; the “velocity” of money will accelerate. If it does so 
too quickly, we might create inflation or financial market instability or both. 
The 12 Federal Reserve Banks house the excess reserves of the depository institutions of 
America: If loan demand fails to grow at the same rate as banks accumulate reserves due to 
our hyperaccommodative monetary policy, the resultant excess reserves are deposited with 
us at a rate of return of 25 basis points (1/4 of 1 percent per annum). 
Here  is  some  math  confronting  policymakers:  Excess  reserves  are  currently  65  percent  of 
the monetary base and rising. The only other time excess reserves as a percentage of the 
base have come anywhere close to this level was at the close of the 1930s, when the ratio 
hit 41 percent. We are in uncharted territory. 
To  prevent  excess  reserves  from  fueling  a  too-rapid  expansion  of  bank  lending  in  an 
expanding economy, the Fed will need to either drain reserves on a large scale by selling 
longer-term  assets  at  a  loss  or  provide  inducements  to  banks  to  keep  reserves  idle,  by 
offering  interest  on  excess  reserves  at  a  rate  competitive  with  what  banks  might  earn  on 
loans to businesses and consumers. Or we might employ more widely new techniques we 
are currently testing, such as “reverse repos”, complex transactions in which  we, in effect, 
borrow cash overnight from market operators while posting securities as collateral. 
Such  inducements  to  control  the  velocity  of  the  monetary  base  might  expose  the  Fed  to 
intense scrutiny and criticism. The big banks that park the lion’s share of excess reserves 
with us are hardly the darlings of public sentiment. Raising interest payments to them while 
scaling back our remittances to the Treasury might raise a few congressional eyebrows. And 
as  to  our  repo  operations,  we  have  never  implemented  them  on  anywhere  near  the  scale 
envisioned. 
Of greatest concern to me is that the risk of scrutiny and criticism might hinder policymakers 
from acting quickly enough to remove or dampen the dry inflationary tinder that is inherent in 
the massive, but currently fallow, monetary base. 
In the parlance of central banking, the “exit” challenge we now face is somewhat daunting: 
How do we pass a camel fattened by trillions of dollars of longer-term, less-liquid purchases 
through the eye of the needle of getting back to a “normalized” balance sheet so as to keep 
inflation under wraps and yet provide the right amount of monetary impetus for the economy 
to keep growing and expanding? 
The first law of holes 
I have great faith in the integrity and brainpower of my fellow policymakers. I am confident 
that the 19 earnest women and men that make up the FOMC will do their level best under 
Chairwoman Janet Yellen’s leadership to accomplish a smooth exit that keeps prices stable 
and  the  economy  in  a  job-creating  mode.  But  my  confidence  will  be  bolstered  if  my 
colleagues adopt the First Law of Holes espoused in the late ’70s by then-British Chancellor 
of the Exchequer Denis Healey: “If you find yourself in a hole, stop digging”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  housing  market  is  well  along  in  repair;5  the  economy  is  expanding;  cyclical 
unemployment  is  declining.  To  be  sure,  there  will  be  individual  data  points  that  appear  to 
challenge confidence, like the just-released employment report for December. But I believe 
the odds favor continued economic progress. And I believe that continuing large-scale asset 
purchases  risks  placing  us  in  an  untenable  position,  both  from  the  standpoint  of 
unreasonably  inflating  the  stock,  bond  and  other  tradable  asset  markets  and  from  the 
perspective of complicating the future conduct of monetary policy. 
The eye of the needle of pulling off a clean exit is narrow; the camel is already too fat. As 
soon as feasible, we should change tack. We should stop digging. I plan to cast my votes at 
FOMC meetings accordingly. 
Thank you.  
                                                
5  See “The Long-Awaited Housing Recovery”, by John Duca, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Special Report, 
January 2014, www.dallasfed.org (note: the report will be available online on Jan. 15). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
