  
 
R Gandhi: Role of financial sector in the growth of the Southern Region – 
a question of balancing 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at FINSEC 2014, 
2nd  Financial  Sector  Conclave,  organised  by  the  Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of 
Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Hyderabad, 14 July 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Shri S. Arunachalaraman is gratefully acknowledged. 
Accompanying tables can be found at the end of the speech. 
1. Good Morning Ladies and Gentlemen! 
2. The importance and the lead role of financial sector for economic development attracted 
the  attention  of  economists,  policy  makers  as  well  as  executors.  According  to  Goldsmith 
(1969:400), “mobilizing liquid resource accelerates economic growth and improves economic 
performance to the extent that it facilitates the migration of funds to the best user, i.e. to the 
place in the economic system where the funds will find the highest social return”. 
3. In the analysis of financial institutions in Schumpeter’s work, banking was considered as 
one of the primary and essential factors for economic development. In the whole process of 
development, Schumpeter (1933 and 1939) regarded the banking system as one of the two 
key agents (the other being entrepreneurship). Given this impetus, it is worth mentioning that 
the correlation between bank credit and economic growth is resilient. 
4.  It  is  thus  the financial  system  that  has  been tasked to  intermediate  to  usher  in  efficient 
allocation of resources. Banking system has, in fact, become special with its main functions 
of mobilizing savings of public and its efficient allocation for various productive activities and 
providing  access  to  those  sections  of  entrepreneurs  who  are  unable  to  find  any  formal 
financial service. In the Indian context, such allocation of resources for economic activity is 
done mainly by banks, but the Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), the Co-operative banks and 
the Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) also contribute in fulfilling this task. In India, 
the guidance/directions given to the banking system, with regard to the social banking in the 
1970s and 1980s and with the introduction of comprehensive economic and financial sector 
reforms in the 1990s helped in addressing the gaps in financing economic activities. Further, 
the  introduction  of financial  inclusion  and  the  related  policy  measures  initiated  both  by  the 
Government of India and by Reserve Bank of India in recent decade enabled banks to reach 
the  extra  mile  and  not to  distinguish  between  micro  and  small  enterprises,  street  vendors, 
small business entrepreneurs, etc. 
5.  India  being  such  a  large  country  that  it’s  different  regions  are  at  different  states  of 
economic  development  and  have  been  growing  at  different  speeds.  Public  policy  does 
recognize this and therefore, has provisions that strategies suiting the levels and speeds of 
economic growth in the regions be pursued. 
6. Today, I will be focusing on the “Role of Financial Sector in the Growth of the Southern 
Region”. Since banks are the major players in the financial system, my talk will be centred on 
the  role  of  banks  for  economic  growth  and  its  future  prospects  for  the  region.  I  have 
organized my talk as follows: 
(a)  
(b)  
I will briefly discuss about major economic parameters of the southern region. 
then I will be analyzing the linkage to growth based on (i) Deposits to GSDP (Gross 
State Domestic Product) (ii) Banks’ Credit to GSDP (Gross State Domestic Product) 
(iii)  C/D  ratio  and  (iv)  Urban  Cooperative  Banks  (UCBs)  in  the  allocation  of 
resources for economic activities in the region (v) role of NBFCs and (vi) financial 
inclusion – general trend in the region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 (c)  
Thereafter,  I  will  discuss  the  scope  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  emerging 
developments of the region and what more can be done by the banks to further the 
growth in the region. 
 Economic growth 
7.  During the  pre  –  reform  period  of  1980s,  the  growth  rates  of  the  states  in  the  southern 
region  were  generally  less  than  the  all  India  growth  rate.  During  the  1990s,  after  the 
economic  and  financial  sector  reforms,  these  states  performed  better  than  the  all-India 
growth rate. The growth rates were still higher, during the last 10 years or so when greater 
push had been given for financial inclusion. (Pl see Table 1). 
Per capita income 
8. Let us now look at another indicator of economic prosperity viz., per capita income. The 
per  capita  income  of  the  region  over  the  last  three  decades  compared  with  other  regions 
showed that this region has performed very well. In fact, during 1980s, this region’s average 
per capita income was below the national average. During the 1990s, while Kerala and Tamil 
Nadu  surpassed  the  national  average,  AP  and  Karnataka  were  just  below  the  national 
average.  However,  during  the  2000s,  the  entire  region  was  much  more  than  the  national 
average. (Pl see Table 2) 
Banking indicators 
Number of offices 
9. Let us now turn to the role played by the commercial banks as part of the financial system 
for  the  progress  of  the  region.  Commercial  banks,  which  are  involved  in  providing  credit 
facilities  and  making  investments  for  productive  activities  as  well  as  broadening  banking 
practices  under  financial  inclusion,  have  expanded  their  offices  across  the  region.  The 
number  of  offices  (including  Regional  Rural  Banks)  expanded  in  the  region  by  moving  up 
sharply  from  17,613  end-March  1999  to  29,135  at  end-March  2013  (excluding  U.Ts  of 
Pudhucherry and Lakshadweep). 
Role of banks 
10. I would like to highlight the involvement of commercial banks in the development of the 
region. For measuring the role of banks, the following parameters have been considered by 
me: (a) deposits to GSDP, (b) credit to GSDP and (c) C/D ratio. The role played by banks 
has been analysed under these categories in terms of: (a) prior to the introduction of financial 
sector reforms; (b) post financial sector reform period and (c) inclusive growth period. Prior to 
1991, the deposit to GSDP of combined Andhra Pradesh in 1981 was hardly 28.0 per cent, 
credit to GSDP ratio was 21.1 per cent and Credit to Deposit ratio was 75.3 per cent. This 
moved  up  to  an  impressive  level  of  52.8  per  cent,  58.1  per  cent  and  109.9  per  cent, 
respectively, in 2013, underscoring banking penetration for the growth in the combined State 
of Andhra Pradesh (Table 4). In fact, banks have played deeper role, even better in the rest 
of the region like Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala states. 
Urban co-operative banks 
11.  Another  important  institutional  set  up  in  the  financial  system  allocating  funds  for 
economic activities is by Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs). As at end- March 2014, a total of 
557 UCBs under both scheduled and non-scheduled categories were operating in the region. 
These UCBs put-together have mobilized public deposits totaling   48,461.41crore as at end-
March  2014  and  funded  various  activities  in  the  region  amounting  to 
  32,146.15  crore  at 
end-March (Table 5).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Role of NBFCs in the Region 
12. As at end-March 2014, there were 995 non-banking financial companies in the category 
of deposit taking, non-deposit taking and core investment companies in the Southern Region 
as  against  12,029  for  all-India.  Among  the  states  in  the  region,  deposits  taking  financial 
companies are very active in the State of Tamil Nadu (Table Nos. 6 and 7). 
13.  As  regards  funding  for  economic  activities,  for  deposit  taking  as  well  as  non-deposit 
taking companies, lending was high in Tamil Nadu, followed by Kerala and then combined 
Andhra Pradesh. They have lent about   1.90 lakh crore as at end of March 2014. (Table 8). 
Financial inclusion in the Southern Region 
14.  In  India,  even  today,  we  have  a  huge  slice  of  our  populace,  comprising  mainly  less 
privileged people that remains largely excluded from the formal financial system. In order to 
take  the  banking  service  to  the  so  far  financially  excluded  society,  constant  and  special 
measures  have  been  taken  by  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Reserve  Bank  under  the 
‘Financial Inclusion’ programme whereby a roadmap has been set to achieve 100 per cent 
Financial Inclusion in the entire country. 
15. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank, in January 2006, permitted banks to engage Business 
Correspondents  (BCs)  and  Business  Facilitators  (BFs)  as  intermediaries  for  providing 
financial and banking services. Reserve Bank has also from time to time enlarged the list of 
eligible  individuals  /  entities  who  can  be  engaged  as  BCs. The  BC  model  allows  banks  to 
provide door step delivery of services especially cash in – cash out transactions at a location 
much closer to the population, thus addressing the last mile problem. 
16. In our efforts to achieve sustained, planned and structured financial inclusion, we have 
advised  all  public  and  private  sector  banks  to  put  in  place  a  Board  approved  Financial 
Inclusion Plan (FIP) to achieve the target latest by March 2016. In addition, we have asked 
banks  to  integrate  approved  FIPs  with  their  business  plans  and  to  include  the  criteria  on 
financial inclusion as a parameter in the performance evaluation of their staff. 
17. As a result, banks have made further stride in providing banking services to the people. I 
am happy that commercial banks under ‘Financial Inclusion’ agenda are moving in tandem 
with the target in the entire Southern Region. While the villages under population above 2000 
have been covered, the process for ensuring complete coverage of villages with population 
below 2,000 is progressing well. 
18. As per CRISIL’s financial inclusion index called Inclusix, which covers three parameters 
of  branch  penetration,  deposit  penetration  and  credit  penetration,  on  a  scale  of  100,  the 
highest financial inclusion of 66.1 points has been achieved by the Southern Region in 2012, 
as against 42.8 for all-India. This also indicates that more extension and expansion of the 
country as a whole, and even in this region. 
What more for the region – a balancing act? 
19.  Let  us  now  discuss  what  more  the  banking  system  can  do  for  the  region.  There  are 
several  expectations  by  the  region  out  of  the  banking  system  and  there  are  several 
compulsions  on  the  banking  system.  Further,  there  are  certain  peculiar  specialities  in  this 
region. A standard response by the banking system will be to skip these. In my opinion, the 
banking  system  should,  instead,  find  a  fine  balance  between  managing  these  peculiarities 
and adhering to set best practices. 
• 
First of course, is that the region expects continued support from the banks for its 
growth lead to be maintained. That is, the region expects to maintain the more than 
100% CDR. While the banking system will be willing to be partnering this, it will have 
to do so by balancing the expectations from the rest of India. Every region competes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      for  greater  flow  of  credit  and  financial  services  and  the  banking  system  has  the 
responsibility in addressing this. 
Second, this region is susceptible to vagaries of nature and natural calamities strike 
this region in a severe way, affecting especially the agricultural sector. Maintaining 
steady flow of credit to the agricultural sector is a challenge. Complicating this is the 
ineffectiveness of agricultural insurance. This region has the peculiar, but popular, 
habit of gold loans smothering the agricultural loans. In that process, the farmers do 
not  get  the  benefits  of  agricultural  insurance.  The  banking  system  has  to  find  a 
solution for this vexed problem of balancing their need to secure their interests vis a 
vis the protection for the farmers. I will return to discuss another variant of this gold 
loan related problems in a minute. 
Third, like any other region, this region also wants increased flow of credit for the 
Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  sector.  As  is  well  known,  despite 
continuous increase in the bank credit for the MSME sector, the formal credit flow 
for  this  sector  is  very  meager  compared  to  the  enormous  number  of  units  in  this 
sector  and  the  banking  sector  should  tap  the  great  potentials  of  this  sector.  The 
biggest hurdles facing the banking system are its requirements of documentation, its 
traditional models of assessing the credit needs of the MSMEs and many a time, the 
gap in the attitude and sensitivity of the bank officials. It is heartening to note that 
the non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) in this region have found a balanced 
answer to skirt around these hurdles and their flow to this sector has recorded good 
growth in recent times. Perhaps, the banking sector can also find such a balance. 
Fourth,  another  speciality  of  this  region  is  the  preponderance  of  non-formal  and 
informal, but riskier avenues for savings. This region is replete with history of the so-
called blade companies, varieties of formal and informal chit funds, ponzi schemes, 
emu farms and other types of attractive schemes. These schemes have time and 
again  captured  the  imagination  of  gullible,  and  even  not-so-gullible  people  of  this 
region,  very  often  lured  them  into  losing  their  hard  earned  savings.  These  ever 
running  episodes  only  clearly  establish  the  failure  of  the  formal  financial  system, 
including the banking system, in catering to the savings, investment and risk taking 
needs  and  appetite  of  these  masses.  They  very  pithily  indicate  that  there  are 
savings  to  be  mobilised  in  an  orderly  manner;  and  there  are  people  whose  risk 
appetite is more than ordinary or normal and the formal financial system can offer 
them well regulated risky financial products. The banking system should come out 
with innovative and customized savings and financial products. This way they can 
balance  their  business  opportunities  with  the  niche  needs  of  these  people  in  the 
region. 
Fifth,  another  speciality  of  this  region  is  very  note  worthy  and  heartening.  That 
relates to the number of Self Help Groups (SHGs), especially of the women which 
operate in this region. In fact, the southern region leads by leaps and bounds in this 
respect. The readiness, the enthusiasm and the dedication and discipline of these 
women SHGs are the backbones of their success. In the wake of their successes, 
certain  unhealthy  practices  and  certain  overreactions  to  them  had  resulted  in  a 
slowdown,  even  in  stoppage  of  credit  flow  to  this  segment.  Further,  quite  many 
SHGs, before they have matured enough to handle credit and finance, have been 
exposed  to  credit.  Concomitantly,  the  credit  discipline  that  had  been  assiduously 
built  painstakingly  over  the  years  has  been  ruptured.  Restoring  that  spirit,  while 
ensuring continued flow of credit is another balance the banking system has to find. 
Conclusion 
20. Now, to conclude, we have seen how the regional economy did a turnaround in the post 
reform  and  financial  inclusion  period  as  compared  to  the  pre-reform  period;  the  regional 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy has not only posted better growth but also has surpassed certain all-India numbers. 
We also saw how the banking system has, by allocating the mobilised resources, contributed 
to the steady and sustained economic growth of the region over the last three decades. We 
have  also  seen  the  role  played  by  the  urban  cooperative  banks  and  the  non  –  banking 
financial  companies  in  providing  access  to  financial  products  and  services  and  helping  in 
allocation  of  credit.  Finally,  we  discussed  some  peculiarities  and  specialities  of  the  region 
and  their  impact  on  the  banking  operations  and  how  banks  need  to  undertake  a  tightrope 
balancing while handling these peculiarities. 
21. Thank you one and all for your kind attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
