  Njuguna Ndung’u: Promoting private sector credit and mortgage finance 
in Kenya 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
launch of Metropol Consumer and SME Bureau Scores, Nairobi, 24 July 2014. 
 Mr. Peter Kebati, Chairman, Board of Directors, Metropol Credit Reference Bureau; 
Mr. Sam Omukoko, Managing Director, Metropol Credit Reference Bureau; 
Board Members; 
Representatives of Commercial Banks, Microfinance Banks and other Financial Institutions; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  join  you  this  morning  to  witness  the  roll-out  of  another 
innovative financial product, Metropol’s Consumer and SME Bureau Scores. At the outset, I 
wish to express my gratitude to the Directors and Management of Metropol Credit Reference 
Bureau (CRB) for inviting me to this auspicious occasion. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  roll-out  of  full  file  banking  sector  credit  information  sharing 
effective February 2014 is already yielding positive results. We are gathered here today for 
the inauguration of Consumer and SME Bureau Scores, which has been made possible by 
the  expanded  credit  information  sharing  (CIS)  mechanism.  I  take  this  opportunity  to 
congratulate  Metropol  CRB  for  quickly  seizing  the  opportunity  to  develop  a  customer’s 
scoring  mechanism,  that  will  contribute  to  the  growth  of  the  credit  market  in  Kenya. 
Introduction  of  credit  scoring  by  Metropol  CRB  will  not  only  enrich  the  value  of  its  credit 
reports to the lenders but will greatly improve the lenders credit risk management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: When the CIS mechanism was launched in 2010, the viability of the 
licensed  CRBs  hinged  primarily  on  the  volume  of  credit  reports  accessed  by  the  lenders. 
However,  with  the  introduction  of  full  file  credit  information  sharing,  CRBs  are  now  well 
positioned  to  introduce  value  add  products  such  as  credit  scoring  that  will  not  only  propel 
their  success  but  will  contribute  to  the  development  of  the  financial  sector;  especially  the 
dynamic  and  changing  profile  of  collateral  technology  and  pricing  credit  in  our  financial 
market. 
As  you  are  aware,  a  high  level  Committee  was  established  under  the  leadership  of  the 
Cabinet  Secretary  to  the  National Treasury  in  January  2014  to  explore  ways  of  increasing 
private  sector  credit  and  mortgage finance  in  Kenya.  The formation  of  the  Committee that 
comprised  of  representatives  from  the  National  Treasury,  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  Kenya 
Bankers  Association  and  other  private  sector  representatives  and  market  players,  was 
informed by the Government’s desire pursuant to Vision 2030 to transform the country to a 
middle income status by 2030. Countries that have attained a middle income status, such as 
Malaysia and South Africa, have reported private sector credit to GDP ratios of more than 
100%. Kenya’s current ratio of private sector credit to GDP of about 40% is way below those 
of  middle 
In  addition,  Kenya  has  only  about 
20,000 mortgage  accounts  concerted  efforts  to  improve  the  situation  were  thus  deemed 
necessary. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  Committee  finalized  its  task  in  April  2014.  The  various 
recommendations  made  by  the  Committee  are  already  being  implemented.  As  we  gather 
here, the banking sector is at the deep end of rolling out a transparent pricing mechanism, 
whereby all banks are required to price their loans based on a common reference rate, the 
Kenya  Banks’  Reference  Rate  (KBRR).  This  was  the  first  of  the  recommendations  by  the 
Committee. To supplement the KBRR, the banking industry has also rolled out the use of the 
income  and  comparable  countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  all-inclusive Annual Percentage Rate (APR) in loan pricing. This is loan pricing that includes 
the  interest  rate  on  the  loan  and  other  fees  and  charges  such  as  appraisal,  legal  and 
valuation fees. 
KBRR is computed as an average of the Central Bank Rate (CBR) and a two-month moving 
average  of  the  91-day  Treasury  bill  rate,  and  announced  by  MPC.  The  CBR  reflects  the 
monetary policy direction consistent with inflation profile, while the 91-day Treasury bill rate 
reflects the return on short term risk free assets. Prior to this every bank had its own base 
rate, whose composition was not known to the borrowers. This now opens a transparency 
window for borrowers who can compare and negotiate lending rates across banks. 
Banks are now required to explain to their customers and the Central Bank the composition 
of the premium (k) they charge above KBRR. The Central Bank will periodically publish on its 
website details of the premium (k) obtained through returns from the banks. The CBK has 
already developed a template for this information capturing process. This will in turn promote 
transparency  and  competition  in  the  pricing  of  credit.  Borrowers  are  now  empowered  to 
compare interest rates offered by banks as they shop for the cheapest credit facilities. This is 
the surest way of increasing credit in the market to the productive and profitable sectors. 
The contribution by Metropol’s credit scoring is to help customers know their risk profile and 
how their loans will be priced but also empower them with tools to negotiate for better rates. 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  Apart from  the  introduction  of  KBRR, the  Committee  made  other 
recommendations that require the Government and other players including the Central Bank 
to  implement  certain  policy  and  institutional  reforms  to  promote  private  sector  credit  and 
mortgage finance in Kenya. These reforms will have an overarching objective of reducing the 
cost of doing business. These recommendations include: 
Promotion of sharing of infrastructure by banks. 
• 
Fast tracking of the on-going modernization of the Lands and Companies Registries 
• 
to facilitate quicker collateral process. 
Establishment  of  a  legal  framework  for  creation  of  an  electronic  moveable  assets 
register. 
Enhanced financial services consumer protection and education. 
Ensure  that  Government  borrowing  does  not  crowd  out  private  sector  as  well  as 
adopting  alternative  sources  of  funding  such  as  sovereign  bonds.  (This  has  been 
done with success). 
Fast  tracking  capital  markets  reforms  to  make  capital  markets  more  efficient  and 
attractive alternative sources of long term funding. 
Facilitate  lines  of  credit  for  large  housing  development  projects  targeted  at  lower 
income buyers for owner occupation. 
    These recommendations are at different levels of implementation. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Integrity  and  sanctity  of  information  shared  under  the  credit 
information  sharing  mechanism  and  building  information  capital  are  critical  in  promoting 
confidence  in  the  mechanism.  Once  individuals  and  participating  entities  are  assured  of 
sanctity of the mechanism, application will increase and more innovative ideas will be shared 
to enrich the mechanism. This is the reason why consumer protection measures under the 
CIS mechanism were strengthened under the revised Credit Reference Bureau Regulations, 
2013 that became operational in February 2014. In the same vein, I urge Metropol CRB and 
other CRBs to ensure that their value add products are introduced within the same precincts 
of consumer protection. Any blot on consumer confidence may ruin a noble cause that has 
taken several years to establish. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I conclude, it is worth noting that we are yet to reach the optimal 
level in credit information sharing. There are still several credit providers who currently are 
only able to contribute data but cannot access credit reports directly. We need to bring all 
financial  sector  and  non-financial  sector  credit  providers  into  the  ambit  of  the  CIS 
mechanism.  The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  support  market  development  and  market 
players  in  the  development  of  an  all-encompassing  CIS  mechanism. This  will  undoubtedly 
increase  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  to  support  Kenya’s  growth  and 
development as envisaged under Vision 2030; but more importantly, increasing supply must 
go hand in hand with declining and appropriate pricing of this credit. But above all this credit 
must  be  destined  to  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  to  make  a  difference  to  an  all-
inclusive growth. 
With  these  few  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  distinguished  honour  to 
declare the Metropol CRB Consumer and SME Bureau Scores officially launched. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
