  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Policy challenges amid an evolving investment 
environment 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Inaugural Philippines Investment Summit, organized 
by the Financial Times in partnership with First Metro Investment Corporation, Makati City, 
19 May 2014. 
 Good  afternoon.  Let  me  first  thank  the  Financial  Times  and  First  Metro  Investment 
Corporation for inviting me to address this inaugural Philippine Investment Summit. 
The  Summit  couldn’t  have  come  at  a  better  time.  Today,  emerging  market  economies, 
including the Philippines and other Asian countries, face a “new wave of market volatilities”. 
In the first quarter of this year, many EMEs saw large capital outflows, which resulted in EME 
currencies  depreciating,  bond  yields  rising,  and  equities  coming  under  pressure.  Although 
some  of  these  trends  have  somewhat  dissipated  in  the  last  few  weeks,  risks  from  the 
underlying reasons for the volatilities remain. 
I therefore welcome this opportunity to share some of our thoughts on the remaining risks. 
Against  this  background,  I  will  discuss  the  outlook  for  the  Philippine  economy  as  well  as 
financial market concerns and the BSP’s approach to safeguard against financial instability. 
This new wave of market volatilities 
Let  me  begin  by  considering  what  I  see  are  the  principal  sources  of  the  impulses  for  this 
“new wave” of market volatilities. 
First, the series of Fed announcements and actions. Go back to May 2013 and the “taper 
tantrum”. Flash forward to Fed Reserve’s announcement in December the same year of the 
start of taper. And then the eventual commencement of the taper in January this year. With 
additional Fed asset purchases now down to only $45B from $85B at the end of 2013, and 
the taper seen to be fairly on course, the market has found itself at a stage where the betting 
has turned to when the “lift off” would happen. In other words, markets are speculating when 
the Fed would begin to hike the Fed Funds target rate. Indeed, markets would like to find the 
next reason to put on a new trade! 
A second source of impulses is the still-patchy structural reform-dependent growth paths of 
key  trading  partner  Asian  economies,  particularly  Japan  and  China.  Although  growth  in 
Japan has picked up as the first two arrows of Abenomics have found their target, the third 
arrow  of  structural  reforms  still  has  to  be  firmly  in  place  for  the  economy  to  successfully 
transition  to  self-sustained,  deflation-free  growth.  For  China,  while  the  scenario  of  a  hard 
landing is not high on many economists’ radar screens, the full implementation of the reform 
agenda  that  would  help  accelerate  economic  rebalancing  toward  private  consumption  and 
deliver more sustained growth is yet to materialize. 
Third source of volatility impulses is Europe. The markets continue to watch what the ECB 
would actually do to fight deflation and curb the strong euro, whether it would in fact unleash 
its own version of QE. Analysts say Super Mario isn’t “bluffing”. 
There are a number of other impulses, including geopolitical concerns, but in the interest of 
time,  let  me  just  round  out  this  list  with  this  –  market  differentiation  within  the  EME  debt 
space. 
Differentiation  is  really  the  market  manifestation  of  the  aforementioned  macro  impulses. 
Because the current breed of market participants are hard-wired as binary – either risk is “on” 
or “off”, market volatility could be amplified depending on which of the earlier impulses would 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  be stronger at a point in time. Capital flows could shift from AEs to EMEs, in general, and 
more strongly into specific EMEs, in particular. And depending on the news, we may see a 
rebalancing  within  the  EME  space,  a  return  of flows  to  AEs,  and  the  cycle  could  continue 
where funds would flow back to EMEs. 
EME policy focus: how do we guard against the new wave? 
Amid  this  “new  wave  of  volatilities”,  therefore,  the  key  priority  of  policymakers  in  EMEs, 
including those in Asia, should be to continue focusing on promoting macroeconomic stability 
by  strengthening  buffers  against  potential  risks  to  financial  stability,  and  equally  to  the 
outlook for inflation and growth. 
In  a  word,  in  the  uncertainty  created  by  market  reaction  to  AEs,  EMEs  must  develop  an 
internal anchor. For this, there is no substitute for sound domestic macrofundamentals. 
Our assessment: how would we fare during the new wave? 
For the Philippines, our assessment is that the economy remains well-positioned to deal with 
these challenges. In the years following the global financial crisis, the confluence of strong 
economic growth, low and stable inflation, ample liquidity, and broad market confidence has 
allowed policymakers to pursue structural reforms to strengthen our buffers against external 
and domestic sources of headwinds. 
Disciplined fiscal policy has also yielded good dividends, as the government now has wider 
headroom to undertake critical social and physical infrastructure that could in turn improve 
the  investment  climate  for  more  enduring  growth  over  the  long  haul.  Further,  prudent 
monetary policy has helped safeguard non-inflationary growth and financial stability, creating 
a  predictable  environment  for  growth  in  consumption  and  investment,  thus  fueling  the 
economy’s momentum. 
Indeed, the underlying story of the economy’s sound growth prospects remains intact. 
Policy prescriptions: how did we get here? 
In the next few minutes, allow me to briefly describe some of the principles underlying the 
BSP approach in dealing with the (external) volatilities the country faces. 
First,  to  avoid  policy  confusion,  we  use  tools  from  our  enhanced  tool  kit  distinctly.  For 
instance, we carefully calibrate policy rates to respond to inflationary pressures. At the same 
time,  we  use  macroprudential  tools  selectively  to  address  financial  stability  pressures, 
including those related to potential exchange rate volatility. To illustrate, in our last two policy 
meetings, we raised the reserve requirements because we needed to pre-emptively address 
strong  liquidity  growth  that  could  lead  to  potential  asset  bubbles.  Meanwhile,  even  as  the 
balance  of  risks  remained  tilted  to  the  upside,  we  kept  policy  rates  steady  because  the 
assessment  is  that  inflation  over  the  policy  horizon  would  still  be  manageable.  Together, 
these moves would make any future monetary policy move more effective. 
Second,  in  addition  to  keeping  our  regulations  in  step  with  the  global  regulatory  reform 
agenda, we work with other government agencies, like the SEC, to curb market conduct in 
economic  transactions  that  are  not  under  BSP  supervision,  such  as  those  by  real  estate 
companies, other non-financial entities and asset managers. Examples of the latter are the 
frameworks for good governance of institutions and consumer protection that we have put in 
place in collaboration with co-regulators under the ambit of the Financial Sector Forum. As 
for the former, an example is our full shift to Basel III capital adequacy requirements – as 
with other countries in the region. 
Third, we sharpen market surveillance. For instance, we have refined some of our reportorial 
requirements  to  allow  us  to  see  things  somewhat  differently,  with  emphasis  on  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stability implications of specific activities. We recently expanded the definition of real estate 
exposures that banks would report to us to help us better appreciate the real estate sector, 
particularly in relation to the financial sector. 
Finally,  we  aim  to  keep  our  communication  simple.  Not  too  much  guidance  to  avoid 
confusion, not too little either so as to enhance credibility. Just like Goldilocks. Right now our 
message to our markets is that we prefer early, measured action – as opposed to chunky 
reactions to global developments as they happen. We believe this strategy is less disruptive, 
and  will  help  insulate  us  from  the  toggle  of  AE  normalization.  The  availability  of  good 
information is of course crucial in this regard. 
Keeping the house in order with integration in mind 
Our  own  goal  has  always  been  to  keep  our  own  house  in  order  and  strengthen  it  so  that 
when shocks do occur, we have buffers to shield us. Recently our efforts to keep our house 
in  order  have  gained  more  urgency  in  light  of  our  preparations  for  ASEAN  economic  and 
financial integration. 
The  BSP  recognizes  the  potential  of  integration  but  we  likewise  remain  cognizant  of  the 
challenges that this initiative entails. We support the underlying principles of “readiness and 
reciprocity” espoused under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework or ABIF. But there is 
need to ensure that the implementation of the principles is fair and balanced. 
The  BSP  has  prepared  the  groundwork  by  creating  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment 
and putting in place a sound regulatory framework consistent with the global reform agenda. 
We have also proposed amendments to RA 7721 (i.e., the law that liberalized entry of foreign 
banks into the country) that would open up the window again for the entry of foreign banks to 
establish their own branches or subsidiaries here. The BSP has also started discussions with 
the various banking organizations, which should provide further clarity and level expectations 
among  their  member-banks  and  give  them  the  chance  to  craft  their  respective  forward-
looking competition strategy. 
In  response to  BSP’s  actions,  some  Philippine  banks  have  already  expanded  their  branch 
networks,  especially  in  underserved  markets,  to  build  up  their  domestic  presence  in 
preparation for the potential entry of foreign banks. Some are also shoring up their capital 
positions,  further  improving  their  risk  management  practices,  or  considering  merger  and 
acquisition opportunities to support their expansion plans. In lock-step, the BSP will continue 
to maintain a regulatory environment that supports growth while at the same time remaining 
mindful of potential systemic risks. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, the ongoing rebalancing of growth across the globe as  well as the 
challenge  of  preparing  for  greater  integration  with  our  ASEAN  neighborhood  will  require 
continued vigilance on the part of the BSP and more active involvement from our banks. 
Most of the policy directions I have outlined are geared to sustain what we have started even 
before  the  global  financial  crisis.  We  believe  that  this  strategy  remains  appropriate  amid 
heightened volatility in the market. 
Today’s Summit issues a timely notice for us to be flexible and adaptive to shifting market 
dynamics.  For  investors  in  particular,  a  good  strategy  is  to  recognize  and  seek  out  new 
opportunities. The Philippines offers a host of them, and it is our hope that you also see and 
positively respond to their great, untapped potential. 
Thank you, and have a pleasant afternoon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
