Yuba Raj Khatiwada: Business ethics for a prosperous Nepal 
Remarks  by  Dr  Yuba  Raj  Khatiwada,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nepal,  at  the 
programme on “Business ethics for a prosperous Nepal”, organized by the World Forum for 
Ethics in Business, Kathmandu, 17 January 2014. 
 Rt. Hon’ble Chairman of Council of Ministers 
His Holiness Sri Sri Ravi Shanker jee, 
Distinguished Participants, Ladies and gentlemen 
Let me thank the organizers for rendering me the honour to speak on ethics in 
business amid this high profile gathering in the presence of Sri Sri Ravi Shanker jee. As I 
stand to speak on this topic, we have a question to ourselves as to whether we can really 
apply in our practical life the words we speak and hear at this event here, and adhere to the 
noble principles and values raised in this discourse. 
We  understand  that  business  ethics  are  moral  principles  that  guide  the  way  a  business 
behaves.  Acting  in  an  ethical  way  involves  distinguishing  between  “right”  and  “wrong”  and 
then  making  the  “right”  choice.  While  it  is  relatively  easy  to  identify  unethical  business 
practices,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  create  similar  hard-  and-fast  definitions  of  good  ethical 
practice. 
Making  money  is  not  unethical,  but  doing  the  same  in  an  immoral  way  is  unethical.  A 
business company must make a profit for competitive return to its shareholders’ capital and 
treat its customers, employees and other stakeholders fairly. Strong returns for shareholders 
capital  should  not  be  achieved  at  the  expense  of  social,  environmental  and  moral 
considerations. Indeed a business can thrive in the long-term only if it also takes into account 
the needs  of  other  stakeholders  such  as governments,  employees,  suppliers,  communities 
and  customers.  Further,  any  business  should  minimize  any  harm  to  the  environment  and 
work in a way that does not damage the communities in which it operates. 
In  the  present  day  world,  many  companies  maximize  profits  unethically  via  unhealthy 
marketing,  slashing  employee  expenses,  lowering  product  quality  or  impacting  the 
environment negatively. Use of violence, sex, and other unethical means to draw attention to 
a  product  or  service  is  an  example  of  unhealthy  marketing.  Such  unethical  business 
practices can lead to smeared public relations and a loss of trust and respect to business 
people from the consumers. 
Distinguished Participants, 
As  we  have  witnessed  the  birth  of  new  entrepreneurial  and  so  called  knowledge  based 
economic  age,  we  have  also  seen  a  growing  moral  and  spiritual  problem  of 
disconnectedness. While globalization has made the world smaller, and rapid expansion in 
transportation and communication technology has connected people from around the world, 
it has also accelerated a detachment of business entities from their community, society, and 
nation. This is particularly true with the multinational companies where the intense pressure 
to maximize shareholders’  wealth disconnects the firm from its non-business stakeholders. 
The  dominance  of  capital  over  labor  has  generated  an  increasing  tension  and  disconnect 
between  labor  and  capital  which  has  undermined  the  virtue  of  justice,  loyalty  and  trust. 
Practice  of  using  human  resource  in  an  inhuman  way,  lack  of  safety  at  work,  weak  social 
security, and outsourcing and bogus contract in labour market are some of the examples in 
this regard. With little loyalty to the company, employees feel disconnected from their own 
company which damages the relationship between labour and capital. Due to this, industrial 
relation has worsened and factor productivity has often been adversely affected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We know that business ethics of today has to be broadly viewed from free market approach 
which is based on the premise that the economy works best when it is left to its own course. 
For  this  thought,  profit  is  the  invisible  hand  which  best  allocates  resources  and  produces 
most  efficient  results.  But  we  have  observed  that  while  maximizing  wealth  through  profit 
accumulation,  ethical  and  moral  standards  are  often  undermined,  and  norms  are  violated. 
Although  the  current  financial  crisis  has  given  a  setback  to  the  free  market  notion  and 
reestablished the role of the state, government regulations are, for the most part, viewed as 
constraining  growth  and  adding  unnecessary  costs.  This  notion  has  enhanced  the 
disconnection  between  private  sector  led  economic  growth  and  justice,  equality  and  mass 
wellbeing. 
Empirical  studies  show  that  companies  with  better  codes  of  business  ethics  and  conduct 
produce  an  above-average  performance  when  measured  against  a  similar  group  without 
codes.  However,  while  the  link  between  ethics  and  performance  is  certainly  found  strong, 
that  does  not  prove  that  one  causes  the  other.  It  might  be  the  case  that  high-performing 
companies adopt codes of ethics rather than the other way round. Either way, by strongly 
suggesting  that  there  is  no  inherent  contradiction  between  being  good  and  doing  well, 
research findings signal to a shift of debate on ethics to more productive terrain i.e. having a 
code of business ethics might be one hallmark of a well-managed and sustainable company 
rather than simply a waste of shareholders’ money. 
Distinguished participants, 
Let  me  briefly  touch  upon  the  financial  industry  while  talking  ethics  in  business.  Financial 
services are rapidly expanding over years due to the financialization of economic activities, 
larger global economic integration, extended use of information technology, and liberalization 
of  foreign  exchange  regimes.  Although  this  industry  is  highly  regulated,  ethical  lapses  do 
occur,  and  there  are  reasons  why  these  misdeeds  may  happen.  First,  self-interest 
sometimes translates into greed and selfishness. This greed becomes a kind of accumulation 
fever and if accumulation becomes the addiction, there’s no end of it. Second, we too often 
reduce everything to an economic entity and say that the fundamental purpose of a business 
is to make money, maximize profit, or “maximize shareholder value”, or something like that.  
The recent financial crises have revealed that the elements of greed, followed by unethical 
practices, and excessive risk taking unobserved by the regulators have been instrumental to 
destabilize the global financial system and a lot of question has been raised on the efficiency, 
rationality, and morality of those involved in financial services. The professional ethics of the 
board  members,  senior  executives,  supervisors,  valuators,  surveyors,  auditors,  rating 
agencies, brokers, and market makers relating to financial institutions and services has often 
come to question following the systemic failure of the financial service industry in the recent 
past.  As  legal  provisions  are  never  enough  in  order  to  fully  address  unethical  practices, 
professional  ethics  has  to  be  maintained  if  a  socially  responsible  financial  industry  is  to 
foster. 
Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
While  we  are  talking  about  business  ethics  for  a  prosperous  Nepal,  we  have  to  think  of 
happiness, dignity, wellbeing, and an enlightened citizenry. Prosperity necessitates economic 
development which comes from economic growth and a fair distribution of income, assets, 
and opportunities. High economic growth requires investment; and in a country like ours, we 
need  a  lot  of  foreign  investment.  If  there  is  an  unethical  practice  in  the  judiciary,  in  the 
government, and in the professional jobs like project appraising, accounting, auditing, rating, 
valuating, surveying or agency functioning, it would be difficult to mobilize foreign resources 
for higher economic growth. Even international trade can be adversely affected if unethical 
means  are  applied  to  produce  goods  and  services  meant  for  exports.  Overall,  prosperity 
earned by unethical means would fall short of happiness and social justice. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  doing  socially  responsible  business  leads  toward  ethical 
business  practices.  Doing  things  legally  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient  for  such  business 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
practice. We often equate moral behavior with legal behavior; but even if an action may not 
be illegal, it still may not be a moral one. Also, unethical business practice can trigger on the 
demands of the clients or stakeholders, as sometimes the push to act unethically comes from 
them.  Often  clients  demand  forged  bills  of  payments,  overvaluation  of  their  assets  for 
collateral against loansfrom banks, manipulating survey of insurance claim; window dressed 
balance  sheets  of  companies  to  borrow  from  banks,  etc.  And,  service  providers  are 
compelled to do the same, or else, financial services executives feel that adhering to ethical 
standards  inhibits  career  progression  at their  company.  However,  this  situation  arises  only 
when we are marred by unethical business thinking everywhere. Events like this are there to 
change such an environment. 
Finally, I thank the organizers for having commenced such a useful discussion. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
