  Deepak Mohanty: Unconventional monetary policy and the Indian 
economy 
Paper presented by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, in 
the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Colombo, 24 July 2014. 
 The assistance provided by Rajeev Jain in preparation of this paper is acknowledged. The views expressed in this 
paper are personal and not necessarily that of the Reserve Bank of India. 
I thank Governor Cabraal for this opportunity to share with you our experience in handling 
the  spillover  from  unconventional  monetary  policy  being  followed  by  many  advanced 
economies.  Conventionally,  central  banks  operate  monetary  policy  with  an  interest  rate 
instrument. For example, they raise the policy interest rate to signal a tighter monetary policy 
and vice versa. However, this procedure has limits. In abnormal times, if central banks were 
to sharply loosen their monetary policy, they cannot go beyond a point as the nominal policy 
interest rate cannot be lowered below zero. We saw this phenomenon play out in full force 
following  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008.  As  the  zero  lower  bound  began  to  constrain 
conventional  monetary  policy  of  major  central  banks,  they  had  to  deploy  unconventional 
monetary  policy  measures  to  provide  further  monetary  accommodation.  Unconventional 
monetary  policy  essentially  relates  to  the  balance  sheet  policy  of  central  banks.  However, 
entry and exit from such policies have strong externalities and spillovers as we have been 
experiencing for some time now. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  will  begin  by  discussing  the  broad  contours  of  unconventional 
monetary policy and possible channels of cross-border spillovers. I will then focus on India’s 
experience  after  the first  announcement  on  early  quantitative  easing  (QE)  tapering  in  May 
2013 and our response. I will end by drawing a few broad conclusions. 
Unconventional monetary policy 
The limitation of transmission of conventional monetary policy through interest rate led major 
central banks to undertake measures which were monetary in nature but unconventional in 
their  instruments  and  operational  targets.  For  example,  a  crisis  may  impair  the  normal 
functioning  of  financial  markets.  In  such  a  situation,  central  banks  can  resort  to  direct 
financial asset purchases and/or loosen collateral standards to expand their balance sheets. 
In  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  most  advanced  country  central  banks  resorted  to 
unconventional  monetary  policy.  Although  the  design  of  unconventional  monetary  policy 
measures varied across central banks, they included lending to financial institutions, targeted 
liquidity  provisions  for  credit  markets,  outright  purchases  of  public  and  private  assets, 
purchase  of  government  bonds  and  forward  guidance  (Annex  1).  These  measures  were 
aimed at lowering longer-term bond rates and ease monetary conditions, and were intended 
to signal a policy shift towards maintaining interest rates at lower levels for a longer period. 
Spillovers to EMEs 
It is widely perceived that in absence of unconventional monetary policy measures, financial 
sector meltdown and recession, particularly in advanced economies, would have been more 
severe,  which  in  turn  could  have  significantly  impacted  the  global  economy.1  However, 
opinion remains divided on the efficacy of prolonged recourse to unconventional monetary 
policy.  It  is  argued  that  greater  risk  taking  behaviour  as  an  outcome  of  unconventional 
measures could undermine financial stability. Furthermore, there is the risk of postponement 
                                                
1  
IMF (2013), Global Impact and Challenges of Unconventional Monetary Policies, IMF Policy Paper, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial  vulnerabilities  across  EMEs, 
of  necessary  fiscal  reforms  that  were  otherwise  required.  More  importantly,  there  are 
concerns of cross-border spillovers in terms of capital flows, exchange rates and other asset 
prices, particularly in emerging market economies (EMEs). This was fully in evidence as the 
Fed  communicated  its  intention  of  undertaking  tapering  earlier  than  anticipated  which 
increased 
though  subsequent  communication 
somewhat  eased  the  pressure.  These  policy  developments,  however,  have  significantly 
altered the external financial environment in many EMEs, including India. 
Even  before  the  tapering  talk,  the  impact  of  policy  changes  in  systemically  important 
advanced  economies  on  the  rest  of  the  world  through  various  channels  was  in  evidence. 
Unconventional monetary policy measures not only supported domestic economies, but also 
boosted  a  broad  range  of  asset  prices  globally,  especially  equity  and  bond  markets  in 
EMEs. In fact, recent literature suggests that besides domestic pull factors in EMEs, push 
factors – monetary policy in advanced economies and global risk appetite – were important 
determinants of capital flows to EMEs.2 
While  the  presence  of  cross-border  spillovers  from  policy  changes/announcements  in 
advanced economies is well recorded in the literature, the more recent debate has been on 
the degree and kind of spillovers across EMEs and how these could be minimised. Governor 
Rajan  argued  that  capital  flows  pushed  into  EMEs  due  to  ultra-accommodative  monetary 
policy  in  source  countries  tend  to  increase  local  leverage  not  only  through  cross-border 
banking  flows  but  also  through  appreciating  domestic  currencies  and  escalation  in  asset 
prices. The exit from a prolonged use of unconventional monetary policy also poses the 
risk  of  asset  prices  overshooting  on  the  downside  which  can  cause  significant  collateral 
damage.3 
According  to  the  IMF,  EMEs  received  much  larger  net  private  financial  flows  of  about 
US$ 3.0 trillion  in  the form  of  direct  and  portfolio  investment  during  2009–13  as  compared 
with  US$  1.8  trillion  during  2004–08.4  With  indications  of  likely  normalisation  of  monetary 
policy  in  the  US,  concerns  regarding  potential  outflows  were  expected.  As  long-term  US 
interest rates rose immediately after the tapering announcement, risk aversion among foreign 
investors  for  EME  markets  escalated.  Capital  flight  from  the  bond  segment  of  financial 
markets weakened currencies in EMEs, which in turn triggered equity sell-offs. This suggests 
that despite the fact that equity and debt are two different classes driven largely by growth 
premium  and  yield  differentials,  both  were  affected  by  shifts  in  broad  sentiment  towards 
EMEs (Chart 1). 
                                                
2   Fratzscher, M., LoDuca, M., & Straub, R. (2013), “On the International Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing”, 
Discussion Papers 1304, German Institute for Economic Research. 
Lim,  J.,  Mohapatra,  S.,  &  Stocker,  M.  (2014),  “The  Effect  of  Quantitative  Easing  on  Financial  Flows  to 
Developing Countries”, Global Economic Prospects H1, World Bank. 
 3   Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2014),  “Competitive  Monetary  Easing:  Is  it  yesterday  once  more?”,  Remarks  at  the 
Brookings Institution, April 10. 
International Monetary Fund (2014), World Economic Outlook Database, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
4  
2 
    The multilateral institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), have done significant research on the issue of spillover. Most 
studies  found  that  EMEs  with  better  domestic  fundamentals  and  deeper  financial  markets 
were  relatively  more  resilient  to  adverse  shocks  from  US  Fed  tapering.5  There  was  also  a 
view that foreign investors did not differentiate EMEs based on macro fundamentals. Rather 
the EMEs with larger and deeper markets were under more pressure.6 On balance, it would 
seem that most EME currencies depreciated and countries with weaker fundamentals were 
affected more (Chart 2). 
Keeping  in  view  the  complex  interaction  of  global  spillovers  and  domestic  vulnerabilities, 
EMEs  deployed  a  variety  of  policy  measures. These  policy  responses  were  in  the  form  of 
monetary,  capital  flow  measures  and  other  structural  policy  actions.  For  example,  while 
Indonesia and Turkey made greater use of their forex reserves to curb downward pressures 
in their currencies, others like South Africa used exchange rate as the main shock absorber. 
Many  EMEs  had  to  raise  policy  rates  to  curb  capital  reversals  and  contain  downward 
pressure  on  exchange  rates  (e.g.,  Turkey,  Brazil,  South  Africa  and  India).  Subsequently, 
greater  clarity  on  tapering from  the  Fed  coupled  with  domestic  policy  action  helped  EMEs 
                                                
5   Mishra,  Prachi;  Kenji  Moriyama  ;  Papa  M’B.  P.  N’Diaye  ;  Lam  Nguyen  (2014),  “Impact  of  Fed  Tapering 
Announcements on Emerging Markets”, IMF Working Paper No. 14/109. 
  Nechio,  Fernanda  (2014),  “Fed  Tapering  News  and  Emerging  Markets”,  FRBSF  Economic  Letter,  
2014–06 March 3. 
6   Eichengreen, Barry and Gupta, Poonam (2014), “Tapering talk: the impact of expectations of reduced Federal 
Reserve  security  purchases  on  emerging  markets,”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  Series  6754, World 
Bank. 
  Aizenman,  Joshua;  Mahir  Binici  and  Michael  M.  Hutchison  (2014),  “The  Transmission  of  Federal  Reserve 
Tapering News to Emerging Financial Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 19980, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  gradually  stabilise  their  markets.  Since  January  2014,  market  conditions  in  EMEs  have 
improved  and  most  of  the  EME  currencies  have  appreciated  albeit  with  some  exceptions. 
This may suggest that since the actual tapering phase, pull factors were more dominant as 
evident from increasing investors’ discrimination across countries (Chart 3). 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Impact on India 
Let  me  briefly  give  you  a  background  of  our  domestic  macroeconomic  conditions  before 
discussing  the  impact  of  the  recent  tapering  announcement.  Until  the  emergence  of  the 
global crisis in 2008, India had witnessed a phase of high growth along with low and stable 
inflation.  Growth  was  largely  supported  by  domestic  demand  emanating  from  growing 
domestic  investment  financed  mostly  by  domestic  savings  and  sustained  consumption 
demand.  Better  macroeconomic  performance  was  also  attributed  to  sequential  financial 
sector  reforms,  move  towards  a  rule-based  fiscal  policy  and  forward-looking  monetary 
policy.7 
During  the  initial  phase  of  the  crisis,  Indian  financial  markets  remained  relatively  insulated 
from  global  developments  due  to  negligible  exposure  to  illiquid  securitised  assets.  The 
impact  on  broader  financial  markets,  however,  was  severe  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008. Consequently, India could not remain unscathed for long and 
was  eventually  impacted  significantly  through  all  the  channels  –  financial,  real  and  more 
importantly, the confidence channel. 
Taking cognizance of deteriorating economic and financial conditions, the Reserve Bank, like 
most  other  central  banks,  took  a  number  of  conventional  and  unconventional  policy 
measures  to  contain  the  adverse  spillover  of  global  developments.  These  included 
augmenting domestic and foreign exchange liquidity and a sharp reduction in the policy rate. 
The  Government  also  supported  the  economy  by  fiscal  stimulus  packages,  reversing  the 
earlier efforts at fiscal consolidation. 
                                                
7   Mohanty, Deepak (2014), “Unconventional Monetary Policy: The Indian Experience with Crisis Response and 
Policy Exit”, RBI Bulletin, Vol. LXVIII No. 1, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Supported  by  substantial  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  the  domestic  economy  recovered 
quickly. In the process though, inflation also picked up, partly aggravated by spurt in global 
commodity prices, particularly oil (Table 1). Consequently, the Reserve Bank shifted policy 
focus to exit from accommodative monetary policy in a calibrated manner. Fiscal policy was 
also  tightened.  At  the  same  time  the  economy  was  confronted  with  a  number  of  supply 
constraints. In this process growth slowed, inflation still remained at levels not conducive to 
sustained  high  growth  and  current  account  deficit  expanded  which  made  the  Indian  rupee 
more vulnerable to external shocks. 
 In the financial year 2012–13, growth had slowed to its lowest level since 2003–04 at 4.5 per 
cent, current account deficit (CAD) had expanded to its highest level at 4.7 per cent of GDP, 
gross fiscal deficit of the central government was 4.9 per cent of GDP and consumer price 
inflation  remained  in  double  digits.  Hence,  macroeconomic  conditions  were  weak.  Into  the 
financial  year  2013–14,  volatility 
the 
announcement  in  May  2013  of  the  Fed’s  intention  of  likely  tapering  of  QE.  The  impact  of 
announcement  of  tapering  was  evident  in  the  form  of  tightening  of  liquidity  and  higher 
volatility  in  all  market  segments  along  with  sharp  decline  in  stock  prices.  Portfolio  capital 
inflows which were buoyant till the third week of May 2013 began retreating as US yield rates 
hardened and yield spread narrowed significantly (Chart 4). 
financial  markets  returned 
following 
the 
in 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for 
foreign 
investors.  This  apparently  amplified 
At the time when the tapering was announced, domestic concerns pertaining to high CAD, 
low  growth,  high  fiscal  deficit,  high  inflation  and  policy  uncertainty  were  already  major 
concerns 
tapering 
announcement  on  foreign  flows  to  India  which  in  turn  caused  downward  pressure  on  the 
Indian  rupee.  The  rupee  which  was  hovering  around  Rs.55  per  US  dollar  in  March  2013 
depreciated by about 20 per cent and touched a low of ` 68.4 per US dollar as on August 28, 
2013.  However,  with  proactive  measures  by  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank,  the 
rupee recovered significantly by November 2013 and turned less volatile (Chart 5). Let me 
now turn to the specifics of our policy response. 
impact  of 
the 
 Policy response during taper talk phase 
Taking  into  account  the  spillovers  of  global  developments  on  Indian  markets,  the  Reserve 
Bank  the  Government  announced  various  policy  measures  since  June  2013.  The  policies 
can be broadly categorized into: (i) currency intervention, (ii) monetary policy, (iii) trade policy 
and  (iv)  capital  flow  management  measures.  A  chronology  of  policy  measures  is  given  in 
Annex II. 
Currency intervention and monetary policy 
In order to stabilize the domestic currency market, the Reserve Bank intervened in the forex 
market by selling dollars during June to September 2013 (Chart 6). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  As  the  downward  pressure  on  rupee  continued  despite  the  initial  rounds  of  intervention  in 
forex market, monetary tightening measures were undertaken to stem speculation by making 
it expensive to build up long positions in dollars. Accordingly, the upper bound of the policy 
rate corridor (i.e., MSF rate) was raised by 200 basis points and the quantity of central bank 
liquidity available through the RBI’s overnight liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) window was 
restrained. In addition, the level of daily average maintenance of required cash reserve ratio 
(CRR) was raised. These had the desired effect of tightening the monetary conditions and 
raising the effective policy rate sharply to the MSF rate (Chart 7). 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  order  to  signal  the  transitory  nature  of  these  measures  and  avoid  hardening  of  interest 
rates  at  the  longer  end,  a  form  of  operation  twist  was  tried  by  conducting  outright  OMO 
purchase  of  government  securities  alongside  sale  of  short-term  government  cash 
management bills. This inverted the yield curve, though accompanied by some increase in 
long-term rates. 
Simultaneously,  steps  were  taken  to  augment  foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  this  regard, 
banks were incentivized to mobilize fresh non-resident foreign currency [FCNR(B)] deposits 
and swap those directly with the Reserve Bank. The overseas borrowing limit of banks was 
also increased from 50 to 100 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital with the option of 
swap with the Reserve Bank. Under this scheme, the banks mobilized US$ 34.3 billion and 
swapped  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  This  helped  in  bolstering  foreign  exchange  reserves 
despite some outflow on account of directly meeting the foreign exchange requirement of oil 
imports. 
Trade policy 
The  single  largest  component  of  imports  is  oil  which  accounts  for  nearly  one-third  of  total 
imports.  The  Reserve  Bank  opened  a  forex  swap  window  to  meet  the  entire  daily  dollar 
requirements of three public sector oil marketing companies (IOC, HPCL and BPCL). Under 
the  swap  facility,  the  Reserve  Bank  undertook  to  sell/buy  USD-INR  forex  swaps  for  fixed 
tenor with the oil marketing companies. 
Recognising  that  high  gold  imports  were  a  key  source  of  stress  in  India’s  external  sector, 
customs duty on gold imports was raised and importers were required to set aside at least 
20 per  cent  of  their  gold  import  for  exports.  These  measures  helped  in  moderating  gold 
imports from 1,014 tonnes in 2012–13 to 666 tonnes in 2013–14. As international gold prices 
also  moderated  significantly,  the  decline  in  imports  from  US  $  54  billion  in  2012–13  to 
US$ 29  billion  in  2013–14  was  substantial  which  helped  to  bring  down  CAD  within  a 
sustainable range. 
Capital flow management 
The  limit  on  foreign  investment  in  government  dated  securities  was  enhanced  to 
US$ 30 billion.  Public  sector  financial  institutions  were  allowed  to  raise  quasi-sovereign 
bonds to finance long term infrastructure requirements. PSU oil companies were allowed to 
raise additional funds through ECBs and trade finance. 
FDI norms were modified for a number of sectors. For instance, FDI limit was raised from 
74 per  cent  to  100  per  cent  in  telecom  sector  and  asset  reconstruction  companies.  The 
extant FDI limits in sectors such as petroleum and natural gas, courier services, commodity 
exchanges,  infrastructure  companies  in  the  securities  market  and  power  exchanges  were 
placed under automatic route. 
Besides these, the Reserve Bank restricted banks to trade only on behalf of their clients in 
currency  futures/options  markets,  tightened  of  exposure  norms,  and  raised  margins  on 
currency  derivatives  to  check  speculative  activities;  reduced  the  limit  for  overseas  direct 
investment  (ODI)  under  automatic  route;  and  lowered  the  limit  on  remittances  by  resident 
individuals under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS). 
Unwinding of temporary measures 
As portfolio capital outflows  waned and the balance of payments (BoP) situation improved 
significantly, stability returned to the foreign exchange market in the second half of 2013–14. 
This prompted the Reserve Bank to withdraw many exceptional measures. Swap scheme for 
fresh  FCNR(B)  deposits  and  overseas  borrowings  of  banks  were  closed,  the  forex  swap 
facility  for  public  sector  oil  companies  was  phased  out,  the  interest  rate  ceiling  on  foreign 
currency  deposits  were  reverted  to  its  earlier  level,  and  the  limit  for  overseas  direct 
investment under automatic route was restored. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Monetary  policy  was  also  normalised  by  restoring  the  policy  interest  rate  corridor  to  its 
original position and the repo rate to its signalling role of policy. Though the policy repo rate 
was increased by 25 basis points each in September 2013, October 2013 and January 2014, 
this was more on considerations of growth and inflation outlook. 
Actual tapering 
When the Fed started actual tapering in January 2014 by gradually reducing its volume of 
asset  purchases,8  the  impact  on  most  EMEs,  including  India,  was  relatively  muted.  There 
could  be  two  broad  explanations.  First,  after  the  initial  shock global  financial  markets  may 
have better internalised taper and inferred that despite QE withdrawal monetary conditions 
still  remain  and  are  likely  to  remain  accommodative  in  the  advanced  countries.  This  is 
reflected  in  easing  of  US  bond  yields  since  the  actual tapering  in  January  2014  (Chart  8). 
Further, the European Central Bank’s indication to keep interest rate lower to spur economic 
activity has also added to market comfort. Consequently, the downtrend in yield rates in US 
bond market have led investors again to embrace EME equity and bond markets in search of 
higher yields. 
 Second, various policy measures helped improve domestic fundamentals. For instance, with 
sharp reduction in CAD, external financing requirement has reduced, resulting in accretion to 
foreign  exchange  reserves  thus  improving  various  external  sector  vulnerability  indicators 
(Table  2).  The  Reserve  Bank’s  commitment  to  a  monetary  framework  focused  on  inflation 
coupled  with  adoption  of  consumer  price  inflation  as  the  nominal  anchor  and  the 
Government’s  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  may  also  have  helped  in  mitigating 
macroeconomic concerns of foreign investors. Further, with a stable central government in 
place,  political  risk  has  also  abated.  Nevertheless,  headwinds  to  growth  from  domestic 
constraints  continue  to  pose  downside  risks,  and  vulnerabilities  in  India’s  external  sector, 
though mitigated, have not totally disappeared. 
                                                
8   Beginning in July 2014 (fifth round of tapering), the Fed will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed 
securities  at  a  pace  of  US$15  billion  per  month  rather  than  US$20  billion  per  month,  and  will  add  to  its 
holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of US$20 billion per month rather than US$25 billion per 
month. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
Let me conclude. First, the stance of monetary policy in advanced economies has spillover 
effects  on  EMEs.  This  is  now  increasingly  recognised  in  academic  literature  and 
acknowledged by international institutions such as the IMF and BIS. One of the key channels 
of  transmission  of  vulnerability  seems  to  be  through  accentuation  of  cyclicality  in  global 
capital flows. In an upswing while there is an upward pressure on asset prices and exchange 
rate, in a downswing the downward pressure on exchange rate could be quite severe. This is 
not  to  deny  that  relatively  open  capital  accounts  have  their  benefits  but  one  has  to  be 
cognisant of risks which could arise essentially from exogenous events. 
Second, while spillover is unavoidable, domestic fundamentals are important to cushion its 
adverse  impact,  particularly  for  countries  with  greater  external  financing  requirement  as 
reflected in their current account deficits. It will, therefore, be desirable to contain the CAD 
around its sustainable level. For example, our average CAD of around 4.5 per cent of GDP 
during the two year period 2011–13 was far in excess of our estimated sustainable level of 
around  2.5  per  cent  of  GDP.  Hence,  we  were  more  vulnerable  to  external  shocks.  Since 
then, our CAD has improved to 1.7 per cent of GDP in 2013–14 imparting greater resilience 
to our external sector. 
Third, in the event of sudden capital outflow as happened towards end-May 2013, domestic 
foreign  exchange  reserves  become  the  first  line  of  defence  to  contain  volatility  without 
resisting  depreciation  pressure.  It  is  therefore  important  to  have  adequate  reserves.  It  is, 
however,  difficult  to  say  how  much  of  reserves  is  adequate.  For  example,  India’s  foreign 
exchange reserves stood at US$ 292 billion in mid-May 2013, even that level was perhaps 
considered inadequate by international investors and markets. 
Fourth, capital outflows in a way reflect an imbalance in terms of surge in demand for foreign 
currency vis-à-vis domestic currency. Hence, the price of domestic currency needs to go up 
to  provide  some  defence  against  capital  outflows,  though  it  may  have  adverse  impact  on 
growth. Accordingly, monetary tightening becomes a standard response. 
Fifth, in the event of a shock, external stability takes precedence over domestic objectives. In 
such  situations,  there  is  no  single  instrument  to  address  the  challenge.  Drawing  from  the 
recent  Indian  experience,  I  could  say  that  there  is  a  need  to  use  multiple  instruments 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  including  drawdown  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  monetary  tightening,  augmentation  of 
reserves  and  administrative  measures  to  dampen  speculative  outflows  and  encourage 
inflows to stabilise market conditions. At the end it is difficult to say what worked and what 
did not work and how best to sequence these policies; but surely once the pressure abates it 
is important to reverse extraordinary measures to reinforce market confidence. 
Thank you. 
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Unconventional monetary policy during the crisis 
Annex I: 
Central Bank 
Liquidity Provision 
Instruments 
Collaterals 
ECB  
  Bank of England  
 Bank of Japan  
 US Fed  
  Long-term 
Refinancing 
Operations 
(LTROs) 
Securities Markets 
Programme 
Outright Monetary 
Transactions 
(OMTs) 
Asset Purchase 
Program (AAP)  
Funding for 
Lending Scheme 
(FLS) 
Comprehensive 
monetary easing 
programmes  
Quantitative and 
Qualitative 
Monetary Easing 
(QQME) 
Term Auction 
Facility (TAF)  
Large Scale Asset 
Purchase (LSAP) 
Operation Twist 
govt. Bonds  
Sovereign paper 
Marketable debt 
instruments 
Long term govt. 
bonds and private 
assets  
ABS, MBS, 
covered bonds, 
and sovereign and 
central bank debt 
Japanese govt. 
bonds (JGBs), 
corporate bonds, 
CPs, exchange 
traded funds 
(ETFs), Japanese 
real estate 
investment trusts 
(J-REITS)  
JGBs of longer 
maturity, ETFs, 
J-REITS 
ABS, MBS, 
treasuries, agency 
bonds  
Treasuries, 
agency bonds, 
MBS 
longer term 
treasuries 
Counterparties 
Banks  
Counterparties 
eligible for 
Eurosystem 
monetary policy 
operations 
Non-banks, with 
banks as 
intermediaries  
Banks and 
Building societies 
Banks and 
financial 
institutions (FIs)  
Forward 
Guidance 
Yes, Qualitative 
“open-ended” 
guidance  
  Yes Explicit 
guidance linked to 
unemployment 
and inflation 
threshold 
Yes, “Open-
ended” guidance 
linked to 
qualitative and 
quantitative 
easing  
Banks/FIs 
 All depository 
institutions  
Including Non-
banks 
 Yes Move from 
“open-ended” to 
“time-contingent” 
to “state- 
contingent” 
threshold based 
guidance 
Source: 1. IMF (2013), “Unconventional monetary policies – recent experience and prospects”, April 18.     2. Bank 
of England (2013), “Monetary policy trade-offs and forward guidance”, August.  
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Annex II: 
A chronology of major policy measures during  
June to September 2013 
June 5: Customs duty on gold imports was raised to 8 per cent from 6 per cent.  
June 12: Limit on foreign investment in government dated securities raised by US$ 5 billion to 
US$ 30 billion.  
July 8: Banks were prohibited from proprietary trading in the currency futures / exchange traded 
currency options markets. [Proprietary trading in ETCD market was allowed within banks’ net open 
position limit and any limit imposed by the exchanges on June 20, 2014.]  
July 15: Upper bound of the policy rate corridor (i.e., MSF rate) raised by 200 basis points. Quantity 
of central bank liquidity available through the LAF window restricted to 1.0 per cent of net demand 
time liabilities (NDTL) of banks. [The interest rate corridor was realigned to normal policy operations 
by end-October 2013.]  
July 22: Gold importers were required to make available 20 per cent of their gold imports for 
exports.  
July 23: Liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) by way of repos at each individual bank level was 
restricted to 0.5 per cent of its own NDTL. Maintenance of daily cash reserve ratio (CRR) balance 
raised to 99 per cent of the requirement from 70 per cent earlier.  
[Daily CRR requirement was reduced to 95 per cent w.e.f September 21, 2013.]  
August 13: Customs duty on gold imports was further raised to 10 per cent.  
August 14: Limit on overseas direct investment under (ODI) through automatic route reduced from 
400 per cent to 100 per cent. Limit on remittances by resident individuals under the Liberalised 
Remittance Scheme (LRS) reduced from US$200,000 to US$75,000 per financial year. [Limit under 
LRS scheme was enhanced to US$ 125,000 without end use restrictions except for prohibited 
transactions in June 2014 and ODI limit was restored to 400 per cent in July 2014.]  
August 22: FDI limits/routes were relaxed for select sectors.  
August 28: Forex swap window with the Reserve Bank to meet the entire daily dollar requirements 
of three public sector oil marketing companies. [Since December 2013, oil companies have sourced 
their entire dollar demand from market.]  
September 4: ECB norms were liberalised making it available for general corporate purposes.  
September 6: Banks were offered a window to swap their fresh FCNR (B) dollar funds with the 
Reserve Bank. The overseas borrowing limit for banks was also raised from 50 to 100 per cent of 
unimpaired Tier I capital with option to swap with RBI. These schemes mobilised US $34.3 billion. 
[Swap schemes were closed by end-November 2013.]  
 
 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
