Sayuri Shirai: Monetary easing and communication policy – a review 
based on several surveys 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a seminar 
held at Columbia University, New York City, 27 February 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great honor to be here today and have the opportunity to speak at Columbia University. 
I would like to add how very nice it is to return to this university, where I received my Ph.D. in 
economics, and I am looking forward to exchanging views with professors and students after 
my  presentation.  Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  communication  on  monetary  policy  –  a 
topic of growing interest among central banks – in the context of the Bank of Japan. 
To begin with, let me pose a question: why do central banks pay special attention to their 
communications  on  monetary  policy  with  the  public  (meaning  market  participants  and  the 
general  public)?  I  think  there  are  at  least  three  reasons:  (1)  to  ensure  central  bank 
accountability;  (2)  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy;  and  (3)  (in  a  narrower 
sense) to make active use of communication as a nontraditional monetary easing measure 
among central banks in the face of the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates. 
Communication plays a crucial role in successful conduct of monetary policy by the Bank. I 
would like to highlight three reasons why this is so. First, the Bank adopted its 2 percent price 
stability target in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) 
in January 2013. There is an inherent challenge in convincing households of the benefits of 
this  target, since  they tend  to  see  a  rise  in  inflation  as  unfavorable. This  is  especially  true 
when a rise in wages does not take place immediately, or expectations of future wage growth 
are not fulfilled. Thus, communication is important in this regard. Second, as stipulated in the 
Joint  Statement  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and 
Achieving  Sustainable  Economic  Growth,  released  in  January  2013,  the  Bank  recognized 
that  the  inflation  rate  consistent  with  price  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  would  rise  as 
efforts by a wide range of entities to strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of 
Japan’s  economy  progressed  (Chart  1).  Based  on  this  recognition,  the  Bank  set  the  price 
stability target at 2 percent. In this spirit, quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) 
was  introduced  in  April  2013.  Thus,  promoting  continuous  dialogue  with  the  government, 
firms, and financial institutions is essential to achieving the target. Third and finally, the Bank 
is  actively  using  its  communication  strategy  to  generate  monetary  accommodation  under 
QQE. 
Let  me  outline  the  sequence  of  my  speech.  I  will  first  explain  the  Bank’s  current 
communication practices. Next, to examine the effectiveness of QQE from a communication 
perspective, I will review a range of data, such as those regarding inflation expectations, and 
the  results  of  several  surveys  targeting  households,  firms,  market  participants,  and 
economists. 
The Bank’s monetary policy communication practices 
II. 
I  will  begin  by  describing  in  three  steps  the  Bank’s  communication  practices  on  monetary 
policy. First, I will explain the legal requirement with regard to communication. Second, I will 
focus  on  the  current  communication  practices  on  monetary  policy.  Third  and  finally,  I  will 
discuss the active use of communication as a nontraditional monetary easing measure under 
QQE, that is, forward guidance with regard to the continuation of monetary accommodation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Legal requirement to ensure communication accountability 
A. 
The  Bank  enjoys  independence  regarding  monetary  policy  under  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act 
(hereafter referred to as the Act). The Act stipulates that the mandate of monetary policy is to 
achieve price stability.1 Monetary policy  is determined by a majority of votes of the Bank’s 
Policy Board at regular Monetary Policy Meetings (MPMs). The Policy Board comprises nine 
members (the Governor, two Deputy Governors, and six other members). All the members 
are appointed by the Cabinet, subject to the consent of Japan’s House of Representatives 
and the House of Councillors, with a five-year term. The schedule of MPMs for the coming 
twelve months is made public in June and December each year. 
Given that monetary policy affects the daily lives of the public, in a democratic society it is 
essential  to  conduct  such  policy  with  accountability.  Therefore,  the  Act  stipulates  that  the 
Bank  endeavor  to  clarify  to  the  public  the  content  of  its  decisions,  as  well  as  its  decision-
making process, regarding currency and monetary control (that is, monetary policy). To meet 
this accountability requirement, the Act requires the Bank to promptly publish the minutes of 
the  MPM,  which  provide  a  summary  of  discussions  held  at  each  MPM,  and  to  publish  a 
transcript  (available  only  in  Japanese)  of  each  MPM.  The  minutes  of  each  MPM  are 
approved  at  the  following  MPM  and  released  three  business  days  later.  The  transcript  of 
discussions held at each MPM, which shows the details of each participant’s remarks along 
with  the  names  of  speakers,  is  made  public  ten  years  after  the  MPM  concerned. 
Furthermore, pursuant to the Act, the Bank periodically submits a Semiannual Report on 
Currency  and  Monetary  Control  to  the  Diet  (Japan’s  national  government  body)  on  its 
policies. In addition, the Governor and the Bank’s other officers appear frequently before the 
Diet to explain current monetary policy. 
Communication policy to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy 
B. 
There is growing consensus among central banks that communication should be enhanced 
to  improve  transparency  for  the  public.  This  reflects  the  view  that  it  is  best  to  minimize 
“surprises” in financial markets that are triggered by unexpected monetary policy decisions, 
to  boost  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Increasing  transparency  on  future  monetary 
policy  stances  should  improve  public  comprehension  of  financial  forecasting,  helping  the 
public to form views on future monetary policy stances similar to those of central banks. In 
other words, such a communication policy aims to inform the public about the “normal” policy 
reaction function of monetary policy or the conduct of traditional monetary policy in a normal 
economic environment where the zero lower bound is absent. 
This  practice  may  favorably  influence  financial  markets  in  several  ways.  First,  clear 
understanding by the public of a central bank’s policy reaction function may help the public to 
adjust their future short-term interest rate expectations accordingly. This would affect long-
term interest rates, since the yields reflect the average of expected future short-term interest 
rates.  Second,  in  some  cases  clear  public  understanding  may  decrease  the  level  of 
uncertainty and thus reduce volatilities in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and financial 
asset prices. Finally, there may be instances where the public believes that a central bank 
has specialized information that can be used to assess future prices and economic activity. 
In such cases, a central bank could favorably affect financial markets by making public such 
detailed information. 
The Bank’s current monetary policy communication practices 
Let  me  now  explain  the  Bank’s  current  communication  practices  with  regard  to  monetary 
policy. As stated earlier, monetary policy decisions are made at the MPMs, which are held 
                                                
1  The Act states that monetary policy should be “aimed at achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the 
sound development of the national economy.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
14 times  each  year;  these  are  held  on  a  regular  basis,  and  additional  unscheduled 
emergency meetings may also be held. Of the 14 MPMs, there are twelve two-day meetings 
held  on  a  monthly  basis  with  two  one-day  meetings  at  the  end  of  April  and  October  each 
year. The Bank releases a public statement immediately after each MPM. For the two-day 
monthly  MPM, the statement contains (1) the policy decisions made at the MPM including 
the  guideline  for  money  market  operations;  (2)  a  summary  of  the  assessment  of  current 
economic activity and prices, as well as the outlook (up to about six months ahead); (3) an 
assessment  of  upside  and  downside  risks;  and  (4)  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  For 
example,  current  QQE  policy  decisions  are  made  at  each  MPM  on  whether  the  annual 
monetary base increase (namely, about 60–70 trillion yen) will be maintained until the next 
MPM. 
During  the  one-day  MPMs  at  the  end  of  April  and  October,  the  Policy  Board  members 
prepare  forecasts  for  real  GDP  growth  and  core  CPI  inflation  (CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh 
food) over the coming three fiscal years. For example, in the case of fiscal 2013 (beginning in 
April  2013),  projections  were  prepared  for  fiscal  2013–15,  and  were  released  immediately 
after the MPM at the end of April 2013 (forecasts for real GDP growth rate for the previous 
fiscal year – that is, fiscal 2012 – were also released in April). The median and the range of 
the forecasts are disclosed together with the forecast distribution charts that are based on 
the aggregated probability distributions compiled from the individual members’ distributions. 
The  semiannual Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the 
Outlook  Report)  contains  the  Bank’s  View  on  the  outlook  and  risk  factors  for  economic 
activity  and  prices  over  the  coming  three  fiscal  years,  as  well  as  its  views  on  the  future 
course  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank’s  View  is  approved  at  the  MPM  and  published  at 
3:00 p.m. after the MPM, while the public statement is released immediately after the MPM. 
Interim  assessments  of  the  outlook  as  laid  out  in  the  previous  Outlook  Report  are 
undertaken during the respective January and July  MPMs, and these interim assessments 
are included in the public statements. 
The  Governor  of  the  Bank,  as  Chairman  of  the  Policy  Board,  holds  a  press  conference 
usually  from  3:30  p.m. on  the  last  day  of  each  MPM  and  explains  the  thinking  behind  the 
decisions  made.  A  press  conference  summary  (available  only  in  Japanese)  is  then 
released  on  the  following  business  day.  Furthermore,  a  Monthly  Report  of  Recent 
Economic and Financial Developments is released on the next business day after the first 
MPM  of  each  month,  and  contains  a  detailed  background  of  the  Bank’s  assessment  of 
economic activity and prices, as well as financial developments on which policy decisions are 
based. 
Strengthened communication with the adoption of the 2 percent price stability target 
I  mentioned  that  the  Bank  improved  its  transparency  in  January  2013  by  adopting  the 
2 percent target. This target replaced an earlier, broader target – “price stability goal in the 
medium to long term” – which was defined as a positive range of 2 percent or lower with a 
goal of 1 percent having been set for the time being. This broader expression was chosen to 
cover the diverging views of the Policy Board members with respect to the appropriate level 
of long-term inflation. I take the view that the word “goal” (especially the connotation of the 
related term medo that was adopted in the Japanese version) and the ambiguous references 
to the range suggested a degree of passivity. As a result, the public was unsure whether the 
Bank  was  genuinely  pursuing  the  2  percent  level  or  targeting  a  lower  figure.  Against  this 
background,  the  adoption  of  the  2  percent  target  in  January  2013  eliminated  such 
ambiguities. 
C. 
Communication strategy as a nontraditional accommodative monetary policy 
It  is  widely  known  that  theoretically  one  alternative  accommodative  monetary  policy  under 
the zero lower bound is to introduce forward guidance by committing to the continuation of a 
more  accommodative  policy  than  would  otherwise  have  been  anticipated  with  the  normal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
policy  reaction function. That  is, forward  guidance  is  used  as  a communication  strategy  to 
generate additional monetary accommodation. This commitment to a longer accommodative 
monetary  policy  is  needed  to  compensate  for  the  period  constrained  by  the  zero  lower 
bound.  In  general,  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  adopted  forward  guidance 
with a somewhat more flexible interpretation than suggested by theory. 
Forward guidance adopted under QQE 
Forward  guidance  constitutes  an  important  element  of  QQE.  The  Bank  released  a  public 
statement in April 2013 that introduced QQE and contained two descriptions of the time span 
of monetary accommodation. The first description was a statement of the Bank’s intention 
to achieve the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon 
of about two years. The second description was a statement of its intention to continue with 
QQE as long as it was necessary for maintaining the 2 percent target in a stable manner. 
This  description  also  added  a  condition  that  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic 
activity and prices would be examined, and that adjustments would be made as appropriate 
(Chart 2). 
The purpose of the first description was to signal to the public the Bank’s determination to 
achieve its 2 percent target within a time horizon of about two years, normally pursued by 
other central banks under an inflation targeting framework. Mentioning the specific time span 
was considered essential to gain the confidence of the public as part of the Bank’s intention 
to  overcome  mild  deflation.  To  fulfill  this  objective,  the  main  operating  target  for  money 
market operations was switched from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the monetary 
base; it was then decided that the size of the monetary base would rise at an annual pace of 
about 60–70 trillion yen, to be doubled in two calendar years (2013–14). Under this monetary 
base  target,  the  Bank  currently  purchases  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  of 
approximately  50  trillion  yen  (on  an  outstanding  basis)  each  year  to  double  the  amount 
outstanding in two years.2 Some market participants considered the first description to be a 
strong  calendar-based  commitment  with  a  time  limit,  from  the  way  the  Bank  presented  its 
QQE in April 2013. My personal view is that the first description could be interpreted as both 
calendar-based  (about  two  years)  as  well  as  state-contingent  (2 percent)  guidances. 
However, in this case, the time horizon of “about two years” should be interpreted with some 
flexibility rather than as a rigid “two years.” 
The second description is related to a conditional commitment, because the continuation of 
QQE  is  subject  to  the  examination  of  upside  and  downside  risk  factors.  It  is  also  state-
contingent  guidance  (to  maintain  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable  manner),  linked  to  the 
continuation of QQE, and plays a greater role than the first description in stabilizing long-term 
inflation  expectations  at  around  2  percent,  thus  helping  to  reduce  long-term  interest  rate 
volatility and preventing its overshooting. 
The first description can be considered as a “necessary condition” for achieving the second 
description, if the first description is regarded as referring to the achievability of the 2 percent 
target  and  the  second  as  referring  to  the  maintenance  of  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable 
manner.  While  the  time  horizon  of  these  two  descriptions  could  overlap,  the  second 
description implies that time horizon is somewhat longer and that the asset purchases may 
not come to an end after two years. Thus, these two descriptions are mutually non-exclusive. 
Based on the framework I have described, the Bank holds the baseline scenario that core 
CPI inflation (excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) is expected to reach 
around  2  percent  toward  the  latter  half  of  the  projection  period  of  fiscal  2013–15.3  The 
                                                
2  The Bank also purchases treasury discount bills (T-Bills), exchange-traded funds (ETFs), Japan real estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs), and other assets. 
3  The consumption tax rate in Japan is scheduled to increase from 5 percent to 8 percent in April 2014 and 
further  to  10  percent  in  October  2015.  The  hikes  are  expected  to  raise  CPI-based  inflation  by  about 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts is 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for 
fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015 (Chart 3). 
Personally, I am aware of the possibility that it may take some time to achieve the 2 percent 
target, since the duration depends crucially on “the pace of improvement in the employment 
and  income  situation  in  Japan.”  Moreover,  it  is  possible  that  it  may  take  even  longer  to 
achieve a situation where the 2 percent target is maintained in a stable manner, considering 
the duration required to judge whether the condition described as “in a stable manner” is met. 
During this period, support from monetary policy is likely to be necessary. As I pointed out 
earlier  in  the  joint  statement  of  the  government  and  the  Bank,  bear  in  mind  here  that  the 
Bank  adopted  the  2  percent  target  in  January  2013,  assuming  that  such  an  inflation  rate 
should be sustainable. Hence, the Bank’s decisions on the necessity and measures of future 
monetary  easing  should  be  judged  in  line  with  the  objective  to  pursue  a  society  with 
2 percent price increase in a stable manner. 
Contrast with forward guidance adopted by other major central banks 
You may notice that the form of forward guidance adopted by the Bank differs greatly from 
the forms adopted by other major central banks (Chart 4). First, the Federal Reserve applies 
forward guidance to maintain a very low federal funds rate. Asset purchases are regarded as 
a separate monetary easing policy tool and are  supplementing the interest rate policy and 
forward  guidance.  In  contrast,  the  Bank  applies  forward  guidance  to  QQE  as  a  package. 
Under QQE, the monetary base is the main operating target for money market operations, 
and various assets (mainly JGBs) are purchased to fulfill the monetary base target.4 
Second, the views of the Bank and other central banks differ in regard to long-term inflation 
expectations.  Forward  guidance  issued  by  the  Federal  Reserve  assumes  that  longer-term 
inflation expectations have been anchored at around 2 percent. The Bank of England (BOE) 
includes a similar view in one of its conditional forward guidance “knockouts.” Therefore, one 
of the main tasks for these central banks is to continue with monetary easing measures to 
seek  economic  recovery,  while  ensuring  that  the  anchored  inflation  expectations  are 
maintained.  In  contrast,  the  Bank  has  not  yet  successfully  anchored  long-term  inflation 
expectations  at  around  2  percent.  Thus,  the  Bank  must  focus  on  first  transforming  the 
deflation-oriented  mindset  and  then  increasing  inflation  expectations  to  a  higher  level  than 
the current one. 
Third, Federal Reserve and BOE forward guidance includes employment-related thresholds. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  dual  mandate  of  promoting  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment,  so  the  reason  for  this  is  clear.  The  BOE  sees  price  stability  as  its  primary 
mandate;  however,  the  inclusion  of  employment-related  conditions  may  have  reflected  the 
need  to  clarify  its  views  on  the  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  In  contrast, 
there  is  a  relatively  small  need  for  the  unemployment  threshold  to  be  used  in  the  Bank’s 
guidance. The unemployment rate for December 2013 was 3.7 percent, close to the lowest 
point  in  recent  years  of  3.6  percent,  which  was  attained  in  July  2007.  Some  labor  issues 
exist,  such  as  the  differential  treatment  of  regular  and  non-regular  workers  and  firms’ 
demand for increased flexibility over labor market regulations. However, these are structural 
issues that are beyond the scope of monetary policy. 
                                                                                                                                                   
2 percentage points for fiscal 2014 and by 0.7 percentage point for fiscal 2015, respectively. When assessing 
the inflation rate, the Bank disregards the effects of these increases as they are temporary. 
4  The Bank has charged 0.1 percent on excess reserves since October 2008. Thus, this interest rate functions 
largely as a floor for the interbank market interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Performance of QQE in light of communication on monetary policy 
III. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  current  performance  of  QQE  in  light  of  the  public’s 
perceptions of monetary policy and price developments. 
A. 
Households’ understanding of the QQE framework and inflation expectations 
Households  are  important  economic  entities  that  undertake  consumption  and  residential 
investment. Thus, understanding their current and future behavior is essential to examining 
the transmission mechanism of monetary easing. Moreover, changes in households’ inflation 
expectations  are  likely  to  influence  actual  inflation  by  affecting  their  consumption  and 
residential investment demand (and thus the output gap) as well as wage negotiations. 
Awareness of the 2 Percent Target and QQE 
In relation to the public’s knowledge of QQE, the quarterly Opinion Survey on the General 
Public’s  Views  and  Behavior  conducted  by  the  Bank  posed  a  new  set  of  questions  in  its 
September and December 2013 surveys. These included (1) whether respondents knew of 
the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  and  (2)  whether  respondents  knew  that  the  Bank  had 
embarked on QQE.5 The first question results indicated that 78 percent of the respondents 
were aware of the 2 percent target in the September survey (Chart 5); however, the detailed 
analysis revealed that only 37 percent said that they “know about it” while 41 percent said 
that they “have read or heard of it, but do not know much about it.” In the December survey, 
the  overall  awareness  of  the  2  percent target  dropped  significantly  to  60  percent  and  only 
29 percent of the respondents said that they “know about it” and 31 percent said they “have 
read or heard of it, but do not know much about it.” 
Regarding the second question results, the September survey indicated that 72 percent of 
the  respondents  were  aware  of  QQE;  however,  the  detailed  analysis  showed  that  only 
29 percent said that they “know about it” while 43 percent said that they “have read or heard 
of it, but do not know much about it.” In the December survey, those claiming awareness of 
QQE dropped slightly to 69 percent, with 39 percent saying they “have read or heard of it, but 
do not know much about it.” However, the proportion of respondents who answered that they 
“know about it” increased slightly from the September survey, accounting for 30 percent. 
Moreover,  one  of  the  regular  questions  in  the  same  survey  was  whether  the  respondents 
perceived  the  present  price  levels  to  have  risen  compared  with  one  year  earlier.  In  the 
September  and  December  surveys,  about  67  percent  of  the  respondents  said  that  prices 
“have gone up” (either “significantly” or “slightly”). Furthermore, more than 80 percent of the 
respondents  that  stated  prices  “have  gone  up”  described  the  price  rise  as  “rather 
unfavorable” in both surveys, while that proportion has followed a long-term declining trend 
(Chart 6). 
These various survey results suggest that QQE is fairly widely known to the public. At the 
same time, it is striking to note that the majority view price rises as unfavorable. This implies 
that  the  importance  of  achieving  the  2  percent  target  may  not  be  widely  understood  and 
shared by households. Thus, it is vitally important for the Bank to clearly explain to the public 
and respond to questions as to why the Bank aims to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target and how this will  improve daily lives in the medium to long term. This is particularly 
important given that a consumption tax hike is scheduled in April this year, and the inflation 
rate may temporarily exceed 2 percent, together with the effects of monetary easing. 
                                                
5  The survey sample size is 4,000 people living in Japan who are at least 20 years of age, with about 56 percent 
providing valid responses. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Long-term inflation expectations and sources of inflation used to form expectations 
Now let us look at households’ long-term inflation expectations to see whether they tend to 
rise  reflecting  the  impact  of  QQE.  The  Bank  usually  forms  its  understanding  of  inflation 
expectations based on various indicators, but for the sake of simplicity I will use the Bank’s 
aforementioned  opinion  survey  as  a  crude  indicator  to  measure  long-term  inflation 
expectations. In doing so, I will focus on the median of the respondents with regard to their 
inflation expectations over the next five years (changes in price levels per year on average). 
The data should be interpreted with caution, since an empirical analysis based on the Bank’s 
opinion survey has pointed out that households’ inflation expectations are upward-biased.6 It 
should  be  noted  that  the  responses  exclude  the  potential  impacts  of  the  consumption  tax 
hikes  from  the  June  2013  survey.  Chart  7  shows  that  households’  long-term  inflation 
expectations have remained steady at around 2.0–2.5 percent since the middle of 2011, and 
thus there is no rising trend to date. The same survey also asks about present price level 
perceptions  (change  in  price  levels  compared  with  one  year  ago)  and  the  results  show  a 
clear rising trend since early 2013.7 
Some might wonder about the source of information used by households when forming long-
term inflation expectations. The September 2013 survey included a special set of questions 
about the “basis for the perception” of the present price levels as well as the outlook for price 
levels  over  the  next  five  years.  Respondents  could  choose  up  to  three  answers  from  pre-
defined choices. An interesting result was that the respondents relied more on general price-
related 
inflation 
expectations than when forming perceptions on present price levels. For example, they relied 
heavily on “media reports on individual prices of goods and services and prices in general,” 
“developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  such  as  depreciation/appreciation  of  the  yen,” 
“developments in stock prices and land prices,” and “the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy” 
(Chart  8).  In  contrast,  it  showed  that  they  relied  heavily  on  “developments  in  prices  of 
frequently purchased items such as foodstuffs” and “developments in gasoline prices” when 
forming perceptions of the present price levels. 
These  observations  may  suggest  that  households  tend  to  use  rational  expectations  –  in 
addition  to  adaptive  expectations  –  when  forming  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  For 
example, past research shows that about 40 percent of households’ inflation expectations is 
allocated to adaptive expectations and nearly 60 percent to rational expectations.8 Hence, a 
deeper understanding of the QQE framework as well as the actual and past price increases 
may  help  raise  households’  inflation  expectations  and  increase  the  achievability  of  the  2 
percent target. 
information  and  various  other  sources  when 
longer-term 
forming 
Firms’ views on the 2 percent target and inflation expectations 
B. 
Firms are very important economic entities, since they are not only producers and investors 
but  also  major  borrowers  from  financial  markets.  Moreover,  they  are  price  setters  that 
                                                
6  Note here that households who hold negative inflation expectations tend to choose zero rather than the true 
value. See Koichiro Kamada, “Downward Rigidity in Households’ Price Expectations: An Analysis Based on 
the Bank of Japan’s ‘Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior,’” Bank of Japan Working 
Paper Series, No. 13-E-15, 2013.  
7  The same survey also provides information on short-term inflation expectations over the next twelve months; 
these showed an increase in the March 2013 survey (but not to as high a level as after 2010) and have since 
remained at the same level as the June 2013 survey. On the other hand, the Consumer Confidence Survey 
compiled by the Cabinet Office showed a clear rise in the pace of increase in short-term inflation expectations 
(in the next twelve months) from the beginning of 2013. However, it is not clear whether such expectations 
included the tax effects. 
8  See Ko Nakayama and Kazuo Oshima, “Infure Kitai no Keisei ni Tsuite (On Inflation Expectations),” Bank of 
Japan Working Paper Series, 99–7, 1999 (available only in Japanese). The paper uses short-term inflation 
expectations (one year ahead). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
significantly  influence  actual  inflation.  During  the  period  of  prolonged  mild  deflation,  firms 
tended to  set their  sales  prices  according to their  competitors’  and  clients’  demand,  rather 
than in response to the output gap or cost developments. This was partly attributable to an 
increase  in  the  price  elasticity  of  demand  caused  by  intensified  competition  at  home  and 
abroad, and a series of negative demand shocks. Thus, in aiming to achieve the 2 percent 
target,  it  is  important  to  examine  firms’  recognition  of  QQE  and  inflation  expectations  to 
analyze whether their price-setting behavior is changing. 
Views on the achievability of the 2 percent target 
Regarding  the  recognition  of  QQE  by  firms,  we  could  look  at  QUICK  Tankan,  a  monthly 
statistical survey compiled by QUICK Corp., which is often used as an early indicator of the 
Bank’s  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan).  QUICK  Tankan 
included a special question in its January 2014 survey on “the achievability of the 2 percent 
target” (Chart 9).9 The result indicated that 62 percent of the respondents stated “an even 
chance,”  followed  by  “the  probability  is  low”  (23  percent)  and  “the  probability  is  high” 
(15 percent). This may suggest that, compared with households, firms generally have higher 
recognition  of  QQE  and  hold  a  better  outlook  for  its  achievability.  Looking  at  sector 
breakdowns,  approximately  60  percent  of  both  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  firms 
stated “an even chance” and approximately 20 percent of both stated that “the probability is 
low.” In contrast, 50 percent of financial institution respondents stated “an even chance” and 
40 percent stated “the probability is low.” The fact that the majority of firms responded “an 
even chance” suggests that their perception could swing either way. Nonetheless, those with 
indecisive views could be adjusted toward “the probability is high,” as the collective efforts of 
all  economic  entities  to  overcome  mild  deflation  make  further  progress  and  as  firms  gain 
greater confidence in QQE through the Bank’s further communication efforts. 
Inflation expectations and sources of inflation used to form expectations 
The most frequently used indicator of firms’ inflation expectations is obtained from the Bank’s 
quarterly Tankan.10 Generally, it uses the diffusion index (DI) of “rise” minus “fall” with respect 
to  output  prices  for  the  next  quarter.  In  addition,  the  difference  between  this  DI  and  the 
correspondent DI for input prices is often used as a proxy for profit margins (Chart 10). It is 
known that the DI for output prices tends to be downward-biased and the DI for input prices 
tends  to  be  upward-biased,  so  the  interpretation  of  these  indicators  needs  to  take  these 
tendencies into account.11 The drawback of this approach is that the data are only available 
for  the  next  quarter,  so  only  very  short-term  inflation  expectations  can  be  measured.  The 
chart shows that there are some signs of an increase in firms’ inflation expectations based on 
the DI for output prices, but the indicator has leveled off very recently. Fortunately, the Bank 
will begin publishing a survey of firms’ longer-term inflation expectations (looking one, three, 
and five years ahead) beginning with the March 2014 Tankan survey. It is expected that this 
will  promote  a  better  understanding  of  firms’  inflation  expectations  and  their  price-setting 
behavior. 
Regarding  factors  contributing  to  firms’  inflation  expectations,  the  Annual  Report  on  the 
Japanese Economy and Public Finance 2013, compiled by the Cabinet Office, conducted an 
interesting survey in February 2013. It showed that firms tend to raise their outlook for sales 
                                                
9  The respondents covered 367 listed firms. Approximately 56 percent were nonmanufacturing firms, 41 percent 
were manufacturing firms, and the remainder were financial institutions.   
10  The survey population encompasses about 210,000 firms (excluding financial institutions) that have at least 
20 million yen in capital. More than 11,000 firms are sampled in each survey.  
11  See,  for  example,  Koichiro  Kamada  and  Kentaro  Yoshimura,  “Kigyo  no  Kakaku  Mitoshi  no  Kochokusei: 
Tankan  DI  wo  Mochiita  Bunseki  (Rigidity  in  Firms’  Price  Expectations:  An  Analysis  Based  on  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s Tankan [Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan] DI),” Bank of Japan Working Paper 
Series, No. 10-J-3, 2010 (available only in Japanese). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
prices of goods and services over the next year when they project that market prices over the 
same  period  will  increase.12  This  response  was  provided  by  approximately  70  percent  of 
manufacturing respondents and more than 50 percent of nonmanufacturing respondents. In 
other words, if an increase in demand for goods and services leads to a rise in market prices, 
this  may  induce  firms  to  raise  their  sales  prices.  This  situation  is  more  likely  to  occur  if  a 
sustainable expansion of the domestic market is projected. 
In  addition,  firms  may  reflect  more  adaptive  expectations  than  households  when  forming 
inflation  expectations.  For  example,  it  should  be  noted  here  that  about  50–70  percent  of 
firms’ inflation expectations is allocated to adaptive expectations and about 50–30 percent to 
rational  expectations.13  Hence,  the  actual  and  past  price  performances  may  be  the  most 
important element in raising firms’ inflation expectations to achieve the 2 percent target, while 
at the same time, a deeper understanding of the QQE framework could also be of help. 
C. 
Market participants’ and economists’ views on the 2 percent target and 
inflation expectations 
In addition to the views of households and firms, it is important to pay attention to the views 
of market participants and economists. After all, financial markets do influence the behavior 
of  households  and  firms  through  changes  in  interest  rates,  foreign  exchange  rates,  and 
financial  asset  prices.  Moreover,  the  financial  market  indicators  reflect  financial  asset 
valuations  by  market  participants  and  economists  as  well  as  their  expectations  of  future 
inflation and economic developments. These indicators respond directly to monetary policy 
measures,  the  release  of  the  latest  macroeconomic  data,  news  items,  and  exogenous 
shocks. 
Views on achievability of the 2 percent target 
Generally, market participants and economists are familiar with the QQE framework. Thus, 
the focus is on their views regarding whether the Bank will be able to achieve the target and, 
if  so,  when  the  target  will  be  achieved.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank’s  latest  baseline 
scenario says that core CPI inflation is expected to reach around 2 percent toward the latter 
half of the projection period of fiscal 2013–15. 
Two surveys were conducted recently regarding the achievability of the 2 percent target. One 
was the ESP Forecast Survey undertaken by the Japan Center for Economic Research on 
about  40  economists.  In  the  January  and  February  2014  surveys,  a  question  on  the 
achievability of 2 percent within two years (around March or April 2015) was posed. In the 
January survey, 2 percent of the respondents (one economist) stated “yes/can be achieved,” 
85 percent (34 economists) stated “no/cannot be achieved,” and the remaining 13 percent 
(five  economists)  stated  “difficult  to  say.”  The  results  improved  slightly  in  the  February 
survey,  with 5 percent of the respondents (two  economists) stating “yes/can be achieved,” 
80 percent (33 economists) stating “no/cannot be achieved,” and the remaining 15 percent 
(six  economists)  stating  “difficult  to  say”  (Chart  11).  Chart  12  shows  the  evolution  of  the 
economists’ forecasts for inflation (including the tax effects) over the period of fiscal 2013–15 
by  plotting  the  distribution  of  their  forecasts  for  each  fiscal  year.  It  reveals  that  the 
economists’  forecasts  for  inflation  were  adjusted  toward  the  higher  levels  with  greater 
probability  for  fiscal  2013  as  the  observation  point  approached  the  end  of  the  observation 
year  concerned.  A  similar  but  more  moderate  pattern  was  present  for  fiscal  2014.  The 
average of the economists’ forecasts and the median of the Bank’s Policy Board members’ 
forecasts  were  then  compared  in  Chart  13.  This  suggested  the  presence  of  a  clear 
convergence for fiscal 2013, as a result of adjustments made mainly by the economists. A 
                                                
12  The sample size was 6,000 listed and unlisted firms, with a 20 percent response ratio.  
13  See Ko Nakayama and Kazuo Oshima, “Infure Kitai no Keisei ni Tsuite (On Inflation Expectations),” Bank of 
Japan Working Paper Series, 99–7, 1999 (available only in Japanese).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
moderate degree of convergence was also observed for fiscal 2014, while a relatively large 
difference remained for fiscal 2015. 
The second survey was conducted by Bloomberg News on about 35 economists. This survey 
posed a question regarding when the Bank should start the “tapering” process subsequent to 
judging that the 2 percent target would be maintained in a stable manner. The survey results 
for  February  2014  reported  that  6  percent  of  the  respondents  (two  economists)  stated  “in 
2015,” 21 percent (seven economists) “in 2016,” 9 percent (three economists) “in 2017,” and 
21  percent  (seven  economists)  “in  2018  and  beyond,”  while  41  percent  (14  economists) 
responded “cannot be foreseen” (Chart 14). Hence, there is a large gap between the Bank’s 
view and those of economists. Nonetheless, the ratio of respondents who have recognized 
the possibility of achieving the target in the medium to long term increased, compared with 
the November 2013 survey results. 
These survey results indicate that most market participants and economists feel that it will 
take some time for the Bank to achieve the 2 percent target, and to achieve  it in a stable 
manner,  while  their  confidence  in  its  achievability  is  gradually  spreading.  To  reduce  the 
perception gap between the Bank and these groups, it is important for the Bank to further 
enhance its dialogue with them by (1) exchanging views on forecasting methods as well as 
(2)  providing  clearer  explanations  about  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing 
(including background analysis) and the direction of QQE for achieving the target. 
Survey-based and market data-based long-term inflation expectations 
Now  I  would  like  to  present  some  indicators  related  to  long-term  inflation  expectations. 
Chart 15  shows  three  survey-based  indicators  with  projections  made  by  (1)  economists 
based  on  the  ESP  Forecast  Survey  for  two  to  six  years  ahead,  (2)  economists  based  on 
Consensus Forecasts released by Consensus Economics Inc. for six to ten years ahead, and 
(3) bond market participants based on the QUICK Bond Monthly Survey for two to ten years 
ahead. Chart 16 shows two types of market data-based indicators: (4) the breakeven inflation 
(BEI) rates for inflation-indexed JGBs (about five years and ten years); and (5) inflation swap 
rates (five-year rate and implied five-year forward rate five years ahead). 
These indicators recently show a general increase in inflation expectations. However, they 
require caution in interpretation, as an increase in the inflation expectations may reflect the 
potential impacts of the consumption tax hikes. The ESP Forecast Survey excludes the tax 
effects from the October 2013 survey, while the QUICK Bond Monthly Survey includes the 
tax effects from the September 2013 survey.14 The BEI and inflation swap rates reflect the 
tax hikes. The BEI indicator also reflects the differences in liquidity between fixed-rate and 
inflation-indexed bonds. A rising trend in long-term inflation expectations based on the ESP 
Forecast Survey even after excluding the tax effects is encouraging, but is still well below the 
2 percent target (Charts 15 and 16). Other indicators also show an increase, but the levels 
(after excluding the tax effects) are similar to pre-global financial crisis figures. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
I  have  talked  today  about  communication  on  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  Several  survey 
results have indicated that some among the public remain unaware of the QQE framework 
and  uncertain  about  the  achievability  of  the  target.  Such  public  views  may  be  reflected  in 
inflation expectations, which are generally rising but still well below 2 percent. Nevertheless, 
survey results have also indicated some encouraging signs of improvement, and the current 
progress  in  actual  price  and  economic  performance  may  further  improve  the  public’s 
recognition  of  and  confidence  in  the  target  achievability.  At  the  same  time,  gaining  the 
public’s understanding of the Bank’s policy intention may strengthen the process. 
                                                
14  The tax effects are irrelevant for the Consensus Forecasts data for six to ten years ahead. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While the Bank has been increasing its efforts to promote communication, I believe there is 
still room for further enhancement of communication practices. The results of various surveys 
showed that there are differences among households, firms, as well as market participants 
and economists in their understanding of the QQE framework and their views on achievability 
of  the  2  percent  target.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  could  consider  communicating  more 
effectively with targeted approaches that take these differences into account. For example, 
the  Bank  needs  to  review  published  documents  to  include  clearer  language  and 
explanations.  Increased  contact  with  a  range  of  social  groups  and  local  communities  in 
collaboration with the Bank’s 32 branches and 14 local offices, as well as more effective use 
of  the  media  and  its  web  site,  would  likely  be  effective  in  reaching  out  to  firms  and  the 
general  public.  On  the  other  hand,  for  market  participants  and  economists,  increased 
dialogues  to  explain  forecasting  methods  and  the  Bank’s  view  backed by  analytical  output 
would be a powerful tool to enhance understanding of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
A  successful  example  of  such  communication  practices  was  seen  during  April-July  2013, 
when the JGB market became unstable. The Bank responded by holding several dialogues 
with market participants, which led to the adoption of a flexible operational framework and 
helped to stabilize the market. All such enhanced communication efforts are considered to be 
essential steps to achieving the 2 percent target in a stable manner. 
This brings me to the end of my speech. Thank you very much for listening. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
  14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
 18 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
 20 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
 22 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
