  Stefan Ingves: Monetary policy and financial stability in a globalised 
world 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Stockholm School of Economics, organised by the 
Swedish Economic Association, Stockholm, 28 May 2014. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me.  This  meeting  at  the  Swedish  Economics  Association  is  one  of 
relatively few occasions during the year when I have the opportunity to discuss rather more 
academic questions that I personally find interesting, but which there may not always be time 
to  consider.  At  present,  however,  I  am  struggling  in  my  day-to-day  work  with  a  number  of 
issues  where  better  research  support  is  needed,  so  today  I  would  like  to  raise  both  very 
concrete  issues  that  are  currently  on  the  economic  policy  agenda,  and  more  theoretical 
questions about the shaping of the policy. 
There is an overall theme in what I intend to say today, and that is “cooperation”. I will talk 
about  cooperation  between  different  authorities  and  policy  areas  in  Sweden  as  well  as 
cooperation at an international level. One reason why I have chosen to put a certain focus on 
cooperation  is  that  I  perceive  that  it  has  become  increasingly  difficult,  or  at  least  more 
complicated, to conduct a completely independent policy – partly because of the boundaries 
between the different policy areas having become less clear, and partly because of individual 
countries being affected perhaps more than ever by international events. 
The  need  for  increased  cooperation  between  different  policy  areas  and  between  countries 
may make the tasks of central banks around the world more complicated, but it is important 
that  this  does  not  paralyse  us.  Rapid  and  concrete  measures  are  required  to  make  the 
financial system more robust. 
The crisis in the early 1990s was a trigger in several respects 
Let me start my discussion with a very abridged and selective look back at the past twenty-
twenty-five  years.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  Sweden  suffered  a  crisis,  or  rather  a 
number of linked crises. This entailed a financial and property crisis that rocked the entire 
Swedish banking system and required government intervention. It also entailed a currency 
crisis, or rather a crisis for the stabilisation policy regime of the time, where the anchor was 
the  fixed  exchange  rate.  In  addition,  there  was  a  sovereign  debt  crisis,  with  dramatically 
rising budget deficits and an increasing government debt. All of this is not dissimilar to what a 
number of other countries have experienced in recent years. 
One result of this development was that we were forced to let the krona float and in January 
1993 we changed over to the inflation-targeting regime that we have now. Another result was 
that  we  began  designing  the  framework  for  a  long-run  sustainable  fiscal  policy  that  has 
served us so well. One consequence of the fiscal and property crisis was that we began to 
build up an apparatus to help us monitor and maintain financial stability. For instance, the 
Riksbank’s analysis of the financial sector became more structured and systematised, and 
from 1997 we began to present our analysis in the form of Financial Stability Reports. This 
financial  stability  work  was,  however,  far  from  fully-developed  when  a  new  financial  crisis 
broke out just over six years ago, this time on a global scale. For instance, we still lacked a 
system for crisis management. We also failed to prevent a too rapid credit boom in the Baltic 
region, at the same time as Swedish banks proved to have liquidity problems when the dollar 
market froze. 
As the new crisis was deeper and affected a much larger number of countries than the crisis 
at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  it  also  acted  as  a  stronger  and  more  worldwide  signal  that 
major efforts were needed to avoid financial imbalances causing problems in the economy as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  a whole. The most concrete expression of this opinion was the emergence of the policy area 
that came to be known as macroprudential policy, which aims to take the overall view of the 
financial system as a whole that was lacking prior to the crisis. 
In this context, it is worth pointing out that in Sweden the boundary between macroprudential 
policy and supervision of individual banks, microprudential policy, is not particularly distinct 
because of the market structure we have, with four dominant major banks. If the stability of 
one of these banks is threatened, it also entails a threat to the stability of the financial system 
as a whole. To this extent, one can say that we in Sweden have actually been dealing with 
macroprudential analysis for quite a long time. But this does not mean that there has been a 
ready-developed, fully-functioning framework for macroprudential policy. On the contrary, it is 
only fairly recently that the allocation of responsibility for macroprudential policy was made 
clear, and the framework that includes the Financial Stability Council, which had its second 
meeting a couple of days ago, was established. 
“Learning by doing” in macroprudential policy – as when inflation targeting was 
introduced 
The situation with regard to macroprudential policy today is in many ways like the situation 
when the inflation-targeting policy was introduced just over twenty years ago – a new type of 
policy is to be launched without really knowing how successful it will be. When we introduced 
the  inflation-targeting  policy  in  Sweden  in  1993,  there  was  not  much  guidance.  Some 
countries, such as New Zealand, Canada and the United Kingdom, had introduced such a 
policy  before  us,  but  they  in  turn  had  not  really  had  time  to  gain  much  experience.  It  was 
quite simply difficult to know how to conduct the new policy, where the interest rate should be 
used to steer inflation towards a quantified target – and to know how well it would succeed. 
The situation today is thus similar, with countries around the world contemplating how best to 
conduct macroprudential policy. In some areas, particularly in some emerging markets, they 
already  have  some  experience  of  what  could  be  described  as  macroprudential  policy. 
However,  the  results  have  been  somewhat  mixed  and  it  is  unclear  what  lessons  can  be 
learned. The research on macroprudential policy has now begun in earnest, but it is still quite 
new and has not yet generated any very clear conclusions on which to base a policy. It is 
probably unavoidable, therefore, that practical policy-making in coming years will consist to a 
great extent of “learning by doing” – with the emphasis on both “learning” and “doing”. 
Stabilisation of the financial cycle 
One of the two main tasks of macroprudential policy is to counteract the build-up of financial 
imbalances in the economy. This task can be described as macroprudential policy trying to 
stabilise something I here choose to call the financial cycle. The academic literature on this 
subject contains other similar concepts such as “credit cycle” and “leverage cycle.”1 What this 
means in simple terms is that the volume of loans, indebtedness, asset prices and attitude to 
risk in the economy vary over time in a way that is not necessarily linked to the economic 
cycle.  One  usually  calls  this  the  cyclical  dimension,  or  time  series  dimension,  of 
macroprudential policy. 
The  second  task  of  macroprudential  policy  is  to  manage  structural  risks,  or  cross-section 
risks, which could for instance mean that close links between different parts of the financial 
system at any given time will affect the risk of a crisis affecting the system as a whole. Here, I 
will primarily focus on the cyclical dimension of macroprudential policy. However, it is not so 
easy to draw any clear boundary between structural and cyclical problems on the financial 
markets, just as in other areas, such as the labour market. 
                                                 
1   For a few examples, see Geanakoplos (2009), Aikman, Haldane and Nelson (2010) and Borio (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In  Figure  1,  the  red  line  represents  the  normal  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  economy,  the 
business cycle. The second curve in the figure represents the financial cycle. As I noted, the 
economic cycle and the financial cycle need not coincide, but can develop differently. Often, 
the  financial  cycle  is  assumed  to  have  a  lower  frequency,  fluctuate  more  slowly,  than  the 
business cycle, as illustrated in the figure.2 
Links between the financial cycle and the business cycle can create problems 
A situation where both cycles definitely coincide is when the financial cycle shows a rapid 
downturn, as at the end of the figure. This was what happened in many countries during the 
financial crisis, and in Sweden during the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. Exactly how 
the  problems  will  take  shape  can  vary,  but  it  is  almost  always  a  question  of  some  sector 
having become “over-leveraged”, which sooner or later leads to problems. Here I will assume 
that it is household indebtedness that is the main problem. 
At  some  stage,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  credit  boom  and  the  increased  indebtedness 
have been based on too optimistic expectations and calculations. A lot more people will want 
to sell rather than buy the asset that formed the basis for the credit expansion and its price 
therefore falls. Let us assume that, as with the most recent crisis, it mainly concerns housing. 
The banks become cautious and reduce their lending, as the value of the collateral declines. 
Households’ assets have now fallen in value substantially, but the size of the loans remains 
unchanged. To attain a better balance between assets and debts, households reduce their 
consumption and begin to save. In addition to the fact that the credit supply declines as a 
result  of  the  banks  becoming  more  cautious,  the  demand  for  loans  also  declines.  This 
adjustment in households’ balance sheets gives a fall in demand, which in practice has often 
proved  fairly  prolonged.3  This  process  often  leads  to  a  substantial  weakening  in  public 
finances, too, partly because of the rapid decline in economic activity and partly because the 
banking system may in a worst case scenario require support. 
This development means that the business cycle and the financial cycle take a simultaneous 
downturn, as in Figure 1. However, the main reason is that the financial cycle has “gone off 
the  rails”  –  first  through  a  rapid  expansion  in  credit  and  debt,  and  then  through  a  sudden 
contraction when conditions and expectations have changed. If one had been able to prevent 
or mitigate the upturn, the economic downturn would not have been so deep. Stabilising the 
financial cycle is therefore an important part of the general stabilisation policy. There is fairly 
good  empirical  support  for  this  description.  The  more  households  and  companies  borrow 
during an economic upturn, the greater the risk appears to be that the upturn will be followed 
by a deep recession and a slow recovery.4  The cost to society when financial imbalances are 
to  be  corrected  is  often  very  substantial.  The  cost  of  the  global  financial  crisis  has  been 
estimated at between 1 and 3.5 times the total production of goods and services in the whole 
world during one year.5 
One argument put forward after the financial crisis is that it is mainly macroprudential policy 
that  is  responsible  for  stabilising  the  financial  cycle,  while  monetary  policy  shall  focus  on 
stabilising the economic cycle and inflation. Personally, I am very doubtful as to whether one 
can  make  such  a  division.  My  doubts  are  based  on  both  theoretical  arguments  and 
assessments of what one can physically achieve with different policy instruments. I will now 
take up some theoretical arguments, after which I will make the discussion more concrete by 
giving some examples. 
                                                 
2   See, for example, Borio (2012). 
3   See, for instance, Mian and Sufi (2011), Dynan (2012) and Jauch and Watzka (2013).  
4   See, for example, Schularick and Taylor (2012). 
5   Haldane (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   (cid:2019)(cid:2870)(cid:3435)(cid:1858)(cid:3047) − (cid:1858)∗(cid:3439)(cid:2870)], 
Given the links: How can responsibility be divided between monetary policy and 
macroprudential policy? 
From a strictly theoretical perspective, one may argue that coordination of macroprudential 
policy and monetary policy is always at least as good as not coordinating them. The following 
reasoning is a means of showing why this is so.6 
Let  us  assume  that  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  can  be  conducted  either 
coordinated  or  separately.  When  both  types  of  policy  are  coordinated,  let  us  call  this 
alternative A, the interest rate r and macroprudential policy tool c are set at the same time to 
minimise 
E ∑ (cid:2010)(cid:3047)[((cid:2024)(cid:3047)−(cid:2024)∗)(cid:2870)+ (cid:2019)(cid:2869)((cid:1877)(cid:3047) − (cid:1877)∗)(cid:2870)+
(cid:2998)(cid:3047)
(cid:2019)(cid:2870)(cid:3435)(cid:1858)(cid:3047) − (cid:1858)∗(cid:3439)(cid:2870)]. 
 
where   is  a  discounting  factor,  the  first  term  in  the  square  bracket  represents  stabilising 
inflation, the second represents stabilising resource utilisation or the real economy, and the 
third  represents  stabilising  the  financial  cycle.  The  interest  rate  and  the  macroprudential 
policy  tool  are  thus  set  together  so  that  a  weighted  sum  of  the  economic  cycle,  inflation’s 
deviation  from  target  and  the  financial  cycle  in  the  coming  period  will  be  as  small  as 
possible.7 
The second possibility, alternative B, is that monetary policy and macroprudential policy are 
conducted  entirely  separately.  The  interest  rate  r  is  set  to  minimise  fluctuations  in  the 
economic cycle and inflation   
  
while c is set to stabilise the financial cycle 
E ∑ (cid:2010)(cid:3047)[((cid:2024)(cid:3047)−(cid:2024)∗)(cid:2870)+ (cid:2019)(cid:2869)((cid:1877)(cid:3047) − (cid:1877)∗)(cid:2870)]
(cid:2998)(cid:3047)
E ∑ (cid:2010)(cid:3047)[(cid:2998)(cid:3047)
 
A  theoretical  result  is  that  coordination,  that  is,  alternative  A,  is  in  general  preferable  to 
separating the two types of policy. The reason is that alternative B is a special case of A. A 
policy-maker who can choose both r and c to stabilise both economic activity and inflation as 
well as the financial cycle (or two policy-makers who can fully coordinate their decisions on r 
and  c)  always  has  the  possibility  to  separate  the  decisions,  that  is,  to  go  from  A  to  B. 
A should therefore not reasonably be able to lead to a poorer result than B. 
This does not necessarily mean that coordination is always a good idea in practice. It may be 
the case that, in reality, there are costs linked to coordination that can be reduced or avoided 
if one separates the decisions on monetary policy and macroprudential policy. For instance, 
it may be more difficult to evaluate and forecast economic policy if different instruments are 
used at the same time to try to attain different targets.8 
A  related  argument  in  favour  of  separating  both  types  of  policy  concerns  the  risks  of  a 
decline in confidence in monetary policy. Let us assume that alternative A means that it is the 
central bank that accounts for both monetary policy and macroprudential policy (instead of 
the  central  bank  and  the  financial  supervisory  authority  coordinating  them).  If  the  central 
bank  fails  to  stabilise  the  financial  cycle,  some  argue  that  this  could  also  jeopardise 
confidence  in  the  bank’s  ability  to  attain  its  traditional  price  stability  target.9  It  is  therefore 
                                                  
6   The example is taken from Bryant, Henderson and Becker (2012). 
7   Here one should regard the task as being to ensure that the financial cycle does not “go off the rails” rather 
than keeping it completely stable all of the time. In Figure 1, for instance, measures would need to be taken in 
connection with the last financial cycle, but not with the first.  
8   See, for example, Svensson (2011). 
9   See, for example, Smets (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  better that another authority than the central bank should have responsibility for stabilising 
the financial cycle. 
That coordination is in theory preferable does not say anything about how great the benefits 
may  be  in  practice.  To  illustrate  the  quantitative  links  between  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy, we need the help of macroeconomic models based on data for the 
specific  country.  Such  models  are  currently  being  developed  within  several  central  banks. 
We  at  the  Riksbank  has  also  used  one  such  model  to  better  understand  the  interplay 
between the two policy areas – mainly because macroprudential policy could have effects on 
economic activity that monetary policy may need to take into account.10 The conclusion from 
this exercise so far is that there are no easy answers and that the benefits of coordination 
may vary, depending on which shocks are driving the economy and making the authorities 
take action. 
the  Bank  of  England  has  been  given  responsibility 
How have the roles been allocated in reality? 
So  how  have  different  countries  in  reality  chosen  to  organise  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential  policy?  As  usual,  it  is  difficult  to  draw  straight  lines  between  theory  and 
reality.  One  country  that  comes  fairly  close  to  model  A  with  regard  to  coordination  is  the 
United  Kingdom,  where 
for 
macroprudential  policy.  The  decisions  on  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  are 
taken  by  two  different  committees  in  the  bank,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the 
Financial Policy Committee, which is more in line with model B, but there is nevertheless an 
explicit aim to coordinate, for instance, in the way the committees are composed.11 
In Sweden we have chosen a solution that in institutional terms is closer to B, in the sense 
that  Finansinspektionen  has  been  given  the  main  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy 
tools. Now, I do not believe that the differences in the practical solutions chosen in different 
countries  should  be  exaggerated.  An 
regarding 
macroprudential  policy  in  Sweden  is  a  close  cooperation  between  Finansinspektionen,  the 
Government, the Riksbank and the Swedish National Debt Office, with regard to the analysis 
of current issues. These four are also represented on the Financial Stability Council, which 
meets regularly to discuss issues of financial stability and how financial imbalances can be 
counteracted. 
I believe that it is much more important that there is actually someone who is responsible for 
the  macroprudential  policy  tools  and  prepared  to  take  action,  than  that  this  is  perfectly 
coordinated with monetary policy. My hope is that the discussions in the Financial Stability 
Council will lead to the decision that need to be made actually being made – and being made 
in time. This will probably at times involve decisions that are politically uncomfortable, and 
have  direct  consequences  for  people’s  wallets.  This  makes  considerable  demands  with 
regard to integrity and independence – not just in the formal sense – of those who are to 
make the decisions. 
important  part  of 
the  process 
Does monetary policy need to help? 
There is an intensive international discussion on whether monetary policy can be separated 
completely from the stabilisation of the financial cycle, or whether it may in certain situations 
                                                 
10   See Jonsson and Moran (2013). 
11   See H M Treasury (2013), which points out, for instance, that “The Government intends that the frameworks 
for  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy,  operated  by  the  MPC  and  FPC  of  the  Bank  of  England 
respectively, should be coordinated” (p. 5), and “In order to foster coordination between monetary and macro-
prudential  policy,  there  is  overlap  between  the  membership  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the 
Financial Policy Committee” (p. 10). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  need to provide support to macroprudential policy when it comes to counteracting the build-
up of financial imbalances.12 
One  argument  in  favour  of  monetary  policy  needing  to  provide  support  to  macroprudential 
policy  is  that  there  will probably  always  be  incentives  to  try  to  circumvent  macroprudential 
policy measures, as it may be profitable for the party that succeeds, in much the same way 
that there are always incentives to avoid paying taxes. We do not yet know how successful 
the  systems  for  macroprudential  policy  now  being  implemented  around  the  world  will  be. 
However,  we  do  know  that  changes  in  policy  rates  are  significantly  more  difficult  to 
circumvent.13  It  may  therefore  be  necessary  to  use  the  policy  rate  in  certain  situations, 
despite a side-effect being that some areas of the economy that do not need a higher interest 
rate will also be affected. Failure to take macroprudential policy measures, or measures that 
are too weak, will put more pressure on monetary policy in this respect. 
One  circumstance  that  may  also  play  some  role  in  the  effectiveness  of  macroprudential 
policy is that it may be the case that macroprudential policy measures are perceived as more 
dramatic, not least for the banks, and as a larger intervention than an increase in the policy 
rate. The pressure not to act may thus be particularly strong in the field of macroprudential 
policy, and it may be fairly difficult to resist, particularly if the financial supervisor does not 
have a high degree of statutory independence. This could lead to an “inaction bias” – that 
one  waits  so  long  before  taking  measures  that  it  is  already  too  late  by  the  time  they  are 
implemented.14  Hopefully,  these  are  problems  that  will  decline  as  macroprudential  policy 
becomes  more  established  and  perceived  as  less  dramatic  –  roughly  in  the  same  way  as 
inflation-targeting gradually became more established and accepted. 
A further reason why macroprudential policy may need support is that monetary policy could 
in itself contribute to the problem. If monetary policy is very expansionary over a long period 
of time, this could contribute to distorted expectations of how high interest rates will be in the 
future and how the housing market will develop, and lead to an increase in risk taking in the 
economy.15  This could set in motion forces that macroprudential policy may find difficult to 
counteract on its own. 
What  I  consider  to  be  particularly  important  to  bear  in  mind  from  all  this  is  that  there  is 
currently a fairly lively discussion internationally among academics and experts, both on the 
need  to  coordinate  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  and  on  the  question  of 
whether  monetary  policy  may  need  to  be  used  in  certain  situations  to  counteract  financial 
imbalances – even when macroprudential policy is in place. For some reason, one does not 
see  much  of  this  discussion  in  the  Swedish  debate.  Here  it  seems  rather  that  there  is  an 
assumption from the start that macroprudential policy and monetary policy are not related in 
any  critical way  and  can  be  conducted  more  or  less  independently  of one  another  without 
problem. But internationally, this is seen as far from obvious. 
                                                 
12   See, for example, Bayoumi,  et al. (2014),  Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2013), Carney (2013), Smets 
(2013) and Stein (2013, 2014) for discussions of this. 
13   This is an argument that I myself and others at the Riksbank have highlighted on various occasion, see for 
instance, Ingves (2010). 
14   For a discussion of “inaction bias” in macroprudential policy, see Chapter 9 in ESRB (2014). 
15   For instance, Summers (2014) writes: “[A] strategy that relies on interest rates significantly below growth rates 
for long periods of time virtually guarantees the emergence of substantial bubbles and dangerous build-ups in 
leverage. The idea that regulation can allow the growth benefits of easy credit to come without the costs is a 
chimera.  It  is  precisely  the  increases  in  asset  values  and  increased  ability  to  borrow  that  stimulate  the 
economy  that  are  the  proper  concern  of  prudential  regulation.”  The  hypothesis  that  there  is  a  risk-taking 
channel  for  monetary  policy  is  not  undisputed,  but  it  has  become  increasingly  accepted  and  the  empirical 
support for it is increasing (see, for instance, Altunbas et al., 2014 and Gungor and Sierra, 2014, for a couple 
of recent contributions).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Let us be more concrete – some simple calculations 
So far, I have spoken about monetary policy and macroprudential policy in theoretical terms. 
Let  me  now  go  on  to  talk  about  them  in  more  concrete  terms  with  regard  to  resolute 
decisions. 
An  obvious  problem  we  need  to  deal  with  immediately  is  the  high  and  increasing 
indebtedness  in  the  Swedish  household  sector.  On  aggregate,  household  debt  currently 
amounts  to  174  per  cent  of  their  total  income.16  However,  this  figure  is  based  on  all 
households, regardless of whether or not they have any loans. If we only include households 
that actually have loans, the figure is higher, 263 per cent, which is shown by data from the 
eight largest banks in Sweden gathered by the Riksbank. The same data show that the figure 
has risen to 313 per cent, if we only include households with mortgages. These figures give 
cause for concern, and should not just be allowed to continue growing; we will unfortunately 
need to deal with this situation in the foreseeable future. The debt ratio has almost doubled in 
twenty years and this is not a sustainable development. There is a risk that overly optimistic 
expectations  of  low  interest  rates  for  a  long  time  to  come  have  contributed  to  increased 
indebtedness. And a rapid growth in debt, together with optimistic expectations, is a pattern 
that  has  often  preceded  financial  crises.  Even  without  a  crisis,  a  large  debt  overhang  will 
hamper economic developments when conditions change. 
If one wants to influence the incentives for households to take on debt, how effective might 
the potential measures be? And how do measures in the new field of macroprudential policy 
compare  with  other  possible  measures?  Here  we  are  still  to  a  large  extent  on  uncharted 
ground.  But  even  if  we  cannot  base  our  decisions  on  extensive  theoretical  and  empirical 
research, we can at least gain a rough idea of the potential effects to be expected, by using 
some simple calculations. I would like to emphasise that the figures I will mention refer to 
partial and statistical calculations that are based on a number of simplifying assumptions and 
that  they  must  therefore  be  taken  with  a  pinch  of  salt.  At  the  same  time,  the  calculations 
illustrate the conditions for taking practical decisions. 
Ordinary households in Luleå, Upplands Väsby and central Stockholm 
Let  us  look  at  some  “typical  households”,  ordinary  Swedish  households  consisting  of  two 
adults and two children. Let us say that one of them comes from the municipality of Upplands 
Väsby outside Stockholm and one from the city of Luleå in Norrbotten. After a quick look at 
the  statistics,  we  can  conclude  that  an  average  household of  this  type in  Upplands  Väsby 
has a total income of around SEK 44,000 a month after tax and a first mortgage of around 
SEK  1.75  million.  A  corresponding  household  in  Luleå  can  be  assumed  to  have  a  total 
income  of  approximately  SEK  39,000  a  month  and  a  mortgage  of  approximately 
SEK 1.1 million.  I  am  here  talking  about  two  average  households  without  extremely  high 
incomes or loans. The debt ratio, that is, the loan in relation to disposable income, is in this 
case  331  per  cent  for  the  family  from  Upplands  Väsby  and  235  per  cent  for  the  family  in 
Luleå.17. For the family in Upplands Väsby this is just above the average in the country for 
households with mortgages, while the family in Luleå is well below average. 
At  the  same  time,  we  know  that  it  is  not  unusual  for  households  to  have  debt  ratios  of 
600 per  cent,  for  example  in  central  Stockholm.  Let  us  therefore  include  one  of  these 
households in our comparison. For a similar family with two children in central Stockholm, 
with a total income after tax of almost SEK 55,000 per month, a loan of almost SEK 4 million 
entails a debt ratio of around 600 per cent. 
                                                 
16   According 
to 
to  around 
SEK 3,300 billion, while their disposable income amounts to a total of around SEK 1,900 billion, according to 
the National Accounts. 
the  Financial  Accounts,  Swedish  households’  debt  currently  amounts 
17   Here we are referring to total debt as a percentage of annual disposable income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  How could various measures be expected to influence expenditure – in terms of direct loan 
costs, such as interest, and other loan-related cash flows, such as amortisation payments – 
for these households? 
We  can  assume  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  that  the  interest  rate  on  the  mortgage  loan  is 
initially 4 per cent for all households. We also assume that our households have a variable 
interest rate, that they do not amortise their loans at all and that they have no savings. 
Capital buffers have limited effects on wallets 
One of the more accepted macroprudential policy tools is the so-called countercyclical capital 
buffers, which are being introduced as a result of the new Basel regulatory framework. This 
means  that  it  will  be  possible  to  make  an  extra  capital  adequacy  demand  of  the  banks  in 
good (read: overheated) times that can be reduced again in less good times. Say that the 
banks  are  now  subjected  to  countercyclical  capital  buffers  and  increase  their  capital 
adequacy ratio by a total of 2.5 percentage points. Say also that the banks pass on all of the 
cost  for  the  increased  capital  adequacy  requirement  to  their  mortgage  customers.  An 
increase  in  the  capital  buffer  of  2.5  per  cent  could  then,  under  slightly  simplifying 
assumptions,  be  translated  into  an  increase  in  the  banks’  lending  rate  of  around 
0.2 percentage  points  at  most.18  Higher  capital  adequacy  thus  reduces  the  risk  taken  by 
shareholders  and  other  financiers  and  should  thus  lead  to  a  reduction  in  the  banks’  yield 
requirements  and  borrowing  costs.  The  increase  in  lending  rates  could  therefore  also  be 
lower. 
For the family in Upplands Väsby, this means that interest expenditure increases by SEK 204 
per month after tax. For the family in Luleå, with a slightly smaller mortgage, the increase is 
SEK 128 per month after tax. For the family in Stockholm with the larger mortgage, interest 
expenditure  increase  by  SEK  461  per  month  after  tax.  Expressed  as  a  percentage  of 
disposable  income,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers  entail  higher  loans  costs  for  our 
households corresponding to 0.3–0.8 per cent of their disposable incomes. 
These relatively marginal effects on the wallet will probably not influence the incentives for 
debt in our standard households to any great degree. To influence households’ indebtedness 
the capital adequacy requirements made of the banks would need to be raised much more 
than  is  now  being  suggested.  On  the  other  hand,  the  increased  capital  adequacy 
requirement means that the banks’ resilience is strengthened, which is desirable in itself and 
an important purpose of the regulation. 
Elimination of tax relief would have greater effect 
If one wants to influence the incentives, there are other measures that could be much more 
effective.  Kuttner  and  Shim  (2013)  have  made  a  panel  study  covering  57  countries  and 
stretching  across  more  than  three  decades,  which  investigates  the  effect  on  debt  and 
housing prices of various tools. According to their study, the tools that appear to have the 
most obvious effect on debt include the elimination of tax relief on interest payments and the 
introduction of a mortgage cap. 
Let us try to estimate what effects these measures would have on our standard households 
here.  Say  that  the  tax  relief  for  mortgages  was  abolished.  Changes  to  the  tax  relief  are 
nothing new – at the end of the 1980s, the tax regulations were changed so that tax relief 
was almost halved for certain groups of households. 
For the family in Luleå, with loans worth SEK 1.1 million, the loan costs would rise, if they did 
not adapt their level of indebtedness, by around SEK 1,100 per month, or almost 3 per cent 
                                                 
18   The  calculation  is  based  on  assumptions  of  unchanged  yield  requirements  for  the  banks  of  15  per  cent, 
unchanged borrowing costs for the banks and the allocation of the banks’ costs on the basis of risk weights. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  of  their  disposable  income.  And  for  the  family  in  Upplands  Väsby,  the  abolition  of  the  tax 
relief would increase their loan costs by SEK 1,750, or around 4 per cent of their disposable 
income. For our more heavily-indebted family in Stockholm, loan costs would rise by almost 
SEK 4,000 per month, or just over 7 per cent of their disposable income. 
The increased loan cost that the abolition of the tax relief entails in this example corresponds 
to  roughly  the  increased  loan  cost  that  would  arise  if  the  mortgage  rate  instead  rose  by 
1.7 percentage points.19 
We can thus see that abolishing the tax relief would have much greater effect on households’ 
loan  expenditure  than  raising  the  capital  adequacy  requirement  for  banks  by  the  amount 
currently being discussed. If one wants to influence household indebtedness, changes in the 
tax relief would have greater potential to directly affect households’ incentives. 
Uncertain what effect the mortgage cap has 
There is also some support for the mortgage cap having an effect on the loan appetite from 
the preliminary evaluation made by Finansinspektionen after the introduction of its mortgage 
cap in October 2010.20 The mortgage cap is not a cap in the total sense, but it means that a 
person who wants to borrow a large amount must take a larger share of unsecured loans, 
which usually have a higher interest rate than first loans and moreover have to be amortised 
at a faster rate. Of course, not all households are affected by changes in the mortgage cap. 
Say  that  the  mortgage  cap  is  reduced  from  85  to  75  per  cent.  And  say  that  the  standard 
households  are  affected  by  this  and  must  therefore  take  on  a  larger  share  of  unsecured 
loans  at  an  interest  rate  of  6  per  cent  and  moreover  pay  off  the  unsecured  loan  over 
10 years. This would entail increased interest expenditure corresponding to between 0.4 and 
1  per  cent  of  disposable  income,  and  amortisation  corresponding  to  between  2.8  and 
7 percent  of  disposable  income.  The  total  increase  in  expenditure  in  this  example  thus 
corresponds to between 3.2 and 8 per cent of disposable income. This is comparable with 
how much household expenditure would increase if the mortgage rate instead increased by 
just over 1.9 percentage points. 
Amortisation as a form of saving 
Many of you will know that regulations of this type have often been circumvented in various 
ways. One way for the banks to make the mortgage cap less binding for their customers and 
enable them to take on more loans, for instance, is not to require amortisation on first loans. 
When  it  comes  to  amortisation  culture,  we  in  Sweden  differ  quite  substantially  from  what 
seems  to  be  common  in  many  other  countries.  In  Sweden,  around  40  per  cent  do  not 
amortise  at  all.  Of  those  who  do,  a  good  40  per  cent  do  it  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  take 
50 years or more before they are free of debt. 
Let us imagine that our households – which we assumed did not amortise at all to begin with – 
are  forced  to  amortise  their  loans  over  a  period  of  50  years.  If  the  households  began  to 
amortise in this way, it would on the one hand initially mean increased expenditure for the 
households corresponding to between almost 5 and a good 12 per cent of their disposable 
income. To achieve the same effect with an interest rate increase, the mortgage rate would 
need to increase by almost 3 percentage points. On the other hand, the amortisations would 
mean  that  interest  expenditure  fell  as  the  loan  was  paid  off.  As  amortisation  is  a  form  of 
saving, this measure means in the long run that the loan cost falls and that the household 
improves its balance sheet or financial position. In this example we have assumed that the 
                                                 
19   With a tax deduction of 30 per cent, an interest rate increase of 1.7 percentage points means that the interest 
after tax increases by 1.2 percentage points. This is as much as abolishing the tax relief would increase costs 
if the interest rate was 4 per cent to start with.  
20   http://www.fi.se/upload/43_Utredningar/20_Rapporter/2011/effekt_bolanetak_delstudie.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  households  do  not  have  any  savings,  in  practice  of  course  they  would  also  be  able  to 
manage changes in amortisation requirements by reducing other saving. 
Comparisons with the interest rate 
A  relevant  comparison  is  what  a  direct  increase  in  the  interest  rate  would  entail  for  our 
households.  Say  that  the  banks’  lending  rate  increases  by  2  percentage  points  from  4  to 
6 per cent and, as in the other examples, our households have variable interest rates. It is 
becoming  increasingly  common  that  households  borrow  at  a  variable  interest  rate.  At  the 
beginning of the 2000s, one quarter of all mortgages were at variable interest rates, now the 
figure  is  one  half.  This  situation  means  that  changes  in  interest  rates  have  a  faster  and 
increasingly severe impact on households with a high level of indebtedness. 
For  our  household  in  Upplands  Väsby,  interest  expenditure  would  increase  by  just  over 
SEK 2,000  per  month,  or  by  4.6  per  cent  of  disposable  income,  given  our  assumptions  in 
general.  For  our  households  in  Luleå,  interest  expenditure  would  increase  by  almost 
SEK 1,300, which corresponds to 3.3 per cent of disposable income. For our highly-indebted 
Stockholm household, the effect is much greater, of course, namely SEK 4,600 per month 
after tax, which is 8.4 per cent of disposable income. 
To summarise, there are thus several measures that could be taken to influence households’ 
incentives to take loans. 
With  regard  to  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  the  rough  calculations  I  have  presented 
indicate that they would need to be raised quite a lot more than the 2.5 per cent we have 
estimated to have the same effect on households as an interest rate raise of 2 percentage 
points. But as I pointed out, increased capital adequacy requirements are of course important 
and reasonable in themselves as they strengthen the banks’ resilience. 
Abolishing the tax relief would have a greater effect. In my example, abolishing the right to 
tax  relief  would  have  roughly 
increasing  mortgage  rates  by 
1.7 percentage points. 
Cutting the mortgage cap from 85 to 75 per cent would not affect all households, but in my 
examples  it  would  affect  the  households’  expenditure  through  higher  interest  rates  and 
amortisations on the parts of the loan that are not the first loan. The effect of lowering the 
mortgage cap by ten percentage points as in my example corresponds for our households 
the cost of an increase in the mortgage rate of just over 1.9 percentage points. 
In the examples I have given, the introduction of an amortisation requirement would have the 
largest effect of all. If our households, which at the start did not amortise at all, were to be 
obliged  to  pay  off  their  loans  over  50  years,  the  increase  in  their  expenditure  would 
correspond  to  the  increase  that  would  arise  if  the  mortgage  rate  instead  rose  by  almost 
3 percentage points. 
the  same  effect  as 
Some conclusions 
I wish to emphasise once again that what I have just presented are very simple calculations 
of the direct effects of various measures on some standard households’ expenditure. To be 
able to compare different course of action, one really needs more accurate calculations that 
can  take  into  account  how  households’  behaviour  changes  over  time  as  a  result  of  the 
various  measures.  I  nevertheless  think  that  one  can  draw  some  conclusions  from  these 
exercises: 
Firstly: Whatever the authorities do in terms of macroprudential policy measures, changes in 
fiscal policy or in monetary policy, it will affect the price of money in the economy, that is, 
loan costs, and thereby the incentives for indebtedness. This means that measures taken in 
one area must take into account what is being done in other areas. The one hand must be 
aware of what the other is doing, even if they are not completely coordinated. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Secondly:  It  is  clear  that  of  the  measures  now  being  discussed,  some  have  much  greater 
potential  than  others  for  influencing  the  incentives  for  households  to  borrow.  Here  the 
challenge will be to find measures that are sufficiently forceful, but will not be the actual straw 
that breaks the camel’s back. What one wants to achieve is a controlled adjustment. 
Thirdly: If we are to deal with the excessively high indebtedness, it is unavoidable that this 
will have an effect on individual households and entail costs for the economy as a whole – 
although of course the benefits will ultimately  weigh heavier, if we can avoid a really poor 
outcome. Let me be clear that I do not believe it is enough to solely implement measures that 
affect the supply and demand for credit through increased loan costs for households. Other 
measures are also needed. I and my colleagues on the Executive Board, like many others, 
have  also  highlighted  the  poor  functioning  of  the  housing  market  and  the  fact  that  a  low 
supply has pushed up prices and thus household debt. So measures that increase the supply 
of housing are also needed, but I have talked about this before and do not intend to go into it 
any further today. 
Fourthly: It is important to act as soon as possible. If indebtedness and housing prices keep 
on increasing they will gradually reach levels that involve even greater risks and where the 
economy will be even more sensitive to shocks. The costs could then be even greater. We 
have  previously  published  estimates  of  what  might  happen  in  the  economy  when  a  shock 
occurs and indebtedness is high.21  Such estimates are always very uncertain, but it could be 
a  question  of  rises  in  unemployment  of  around  5  percentage  points  when  the  economy 
suffers  a  financial  crisis.  If  we  look  out  at  today’s  Europe,  where  there  has  been  negative 
growth and high unemployment for many years, I think that the alternative, hiding our heads 
in the sand, is not a good idea. 
One can also argue that the shock the actual policy measures entails, what one might call 
the  direct  adjustment  cost,  will  be  less  with  lower  interest  rates.  If,  in  the  prevailing  low 
interest  rate  situation,  one  takes  measures  that  seriously  affect  households’  incentives  to 
borrow,  such  as  abolishing  tax  relief,  interest  expenditure  would  increase  considerably. 
Given  the  current  aggregate  household  debt,  interest  expenditure  would  increase  by 
SEK 30 billion.22  Households’  disposable  incomes,  which  are  expressed  in  a  simplified 
manner as the result of salaries after tax plus capital incomes minus interest expenditure, are 
currently  around  SEK  1,900  billion.  If  we  assume  that  incomes  will  remain  unchanged, 
abolishing  the  tax  relief  would  thus  reduce  households’  disposable  incomes  by  around 
1.6 per cent.23   A simple calculation shows that household consumption would then decline 
by 1.3 per cent. If one only uses consumption’s share of GDP, this corresponds to a 0.5 per 
cent lower GDP.24 
                                                 
21   Monetary Policy Report, July 2013. 
22   At present, the average mortgage rate households pay is around 3.1 per cent, so that households pay interest 
of  around  2.2  per  cent  after  the  tax  relief  of  30  per  cent.  If  the  tax  relief  were  abolished,  in  other  words, 
households’ interest expenditure would rise by around 0.9 percentage points. As households aggregate debt 
is around SEK 3,300 billion, this corresponds to an increase in interest expenditure of SEK 30 billion. 
23   The ratio between the increase in interest expenditure and the aggregate disposable incomes, that is 30/1900. 
The effect on disposable income is here less than for our standard households as it is calculated on aggregate 
debt data for the entire population.  
24   To  estimate  the  effect  on  household  consumption,  one  can  use  a  so-called  consumption  equation,  which 
relates  changes  in  consumption  to  changes  in  wealth  and  disposable  income.  According  to  this  equation, 
consumption falls by around 80 per cent of the decline in disposable income, that is, around 1.6*0.80 = 1.3 per 
cent. Consumption comprises around 50 per cent of GDP. However, consumption also contains an imported 
content  of  around  25  per  cent,  which  means  that  if  consumption  falls  by  1  per  cent,  GDP  falls  by  roughly 
0.5*(1–0.25) = 0.38 per cent. In the example, thus, GDP falls  by  1.3*0.38, or  around  0.5 per cent. A  more 
thorough calculation should also take into account indirect effects that arise over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  If, on the other hand, one waits to take measures, the adjustment costs for households when 
the measures are actually taken will be greater. If interest rates have risen to twice what they 
are  now,  which  is  not  at  all  inconceivable,  the  effects  of  abolishing  the  tax  relief  will  be 
correspondingly greater. In my opinion, it is thus much better to try to do something about 
household debt now, when interest rates are low and the conditions in general are relatively 
favourable, than to be forced to take measures further ahead, when conditions may be less 
benevolent and the adjustment costs for both individual households and society as a whole 
will be unnecessarily high. 
A step in the right direction: more amortisation 
So how should we deal with the debt problems? 
I  have  discussed  and  compared  a  number  of  different  possible  measures  to  counteract 
excessively  high  debt  in  the  household  sector.  Essentially,  it  is  a  question  of  making 
households and the financial system less sensitive to shocks. One measure that immediately 
comes  to  mind  is  a  change  in  the  amortisation  culture.  If  households  amortise  their 
mortgages  to  a  greater  extent,  the  debt  ratio  will  decline.  If,  moreover,  this  means  that 
households adjust their savings and use some of what they save now to pay off their loans 
instead, we hopefully will not need such major changes in consumption. The real economic 
consequences could be limited, at the same time as indebtedness and the risks linked to it 
could be held in check. 
The most natural thing would be for the banks to require that customers amortise their first 
loans.  As  a  direct  effect,  the  stock  of  existing  mortgages  would  then  decline.  This  would, 
moreover,  give  households  stronger  incentives  to  borrow  less.  This  type  of  requirement 
would  be  reasonable  and  something  that  is  considered  self-evident  in  many  parts  of  the 
world. 
International coordination on stability issues 
So  far  I  have  talked  about  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  and  the  potential 
effects of the measures taken from the perspective of an individual country. But there is also 
a world outside that each country needs to relate to. 
With  regard  to  financial  stability  issues,  there  has  long  been  extensive  international 
cooperation. There are a number of forums in the central banking and financial supervision 
circles in which issues are discussed, and some of them draw up regulations and standards 
in  the  financial  stability  field.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  was 
formed in 1974, in the wake of the Herstatt incident25, has been setting the norms for banks’ 
capital  adequacy,  for  instance,  since  the  1980s.  With  regard  to  financial  legislation, 
harmonised regulations have long been drawn up for banks and other financial companies 
within the framework of the European Union. 
However, there is no doubt that the international cooperation has further intensified since the 
global financial crisis. The focus has more clearly been on a systemic perspective, or, if you 
will,  a  macroprudential policy  perspective.  After  the  crisis,  it  became  a  natural  task  for  the 
Basel Committee to make a thorough review of the requirements with regard to capital and 
liquidity. The results of this review include the guidelines that are known as Basel III. The 
G20 countries’ reform agenda now includes, within the framework of the work conducted 
by 
for  so-called 
the  Financial  Stability  Board,  special  capital 
requirements 
                                                 
25   On  26  June  1974,  the  West  German  authorities  revoked  the  Cologne-based  Herstatt  Bank’s  licence  to 
conduct  banking  activities.  On  that  date,  several  banks  released  payments  in  D-mark  to  Herstatt  Bank  in 
Frankfurt, in exchange for US dollars, which were to be delivered in New York. A time lag arose between the 
different time zones, where operations ceased before the counterparts in New York had received their dollars. 
The Herstatt incident is a famous case that is often used as an example of so-called settlement risk. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  systemically-important institutions as well as new guidelines as to how these institutions can 
be  liquidated  in  an  orderly  manner  in  the  event  of  a  solvency  crisis.  One  also  looks  in 
particular  at  how  OTC  trading  in  derivatives  will  be  conducted  and  how  the  financial 
operations outside of the traditional banking sector – the so-called shadow banking sector – 
shall be supervised and regulated. 
A lot of effort has also been put into creating an organisation that enables the discovery and 
management of risks in the financial system that could affect several countries at the same 
time. In January 2011, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was formed, with the task 
of  identifying  threats  to  financial  stability  within  the  EU  and  of  issuing  warnings  and 
recommendations to individual countries about such systemic risks. The ESRB cooperation 
has  also  included  developing  models  to  assess  systemic  risks  and  also  macroprudential 
policy tools to counteract these risks. 
Moreover,  the  earlier  European  financial  supervisory  committees  have  now  received  the 
status of public authorities and been given the task of developing technical standards and 
guidelines in a large number of areas. They shall also play a mediating role, if member states 
are unable to reach agreement with regard to financial supervision. 
Recently, important steps have also been taken within the euro area towards the so-called 
banking  union,  with  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  as  joint  financial  supervisor  for  all 
banks in the member countries. The idea is that the banking union would also include a joint 
crisis management mechanism and a joint deposit guarantee. The negotiations in this field 
are difficult, and the shape the banking union is to take has not yet been decided in detail. 
There has also long been an extensive cooperation on financial stability within the Nordic-
Baltic  region.  This  cooperation  has  also  intensified  since  the  crisis.  Today  there  is,  for 
instance,  a  Nordic-Baltic  macroprudential  policy  forum,  which  includes  the  central  bank 
governors and the heads of the financial supervisory authorities in the different countries of 
the  region.  There  is  also  extensive  Nordic-Baltic  cooperation  on  the  preparedness  to  deal 
with financial crises. 
Given the fact that capital and financial agents are able to move relatively freely around the 
world, it is logical that there should be an international coordination of macroprudential and 
microprudential policy and of the regulation of the financial markets. A lot of decisions are 
made within all of these international standard-setting bodies that we in Sweden are obliged 
to follow or at least take a stance on in some way or another. When it comes to monetary 
policy, however, we have a higher degree of autonomy. 
Debate on the need for cooperation within monetary policy too 
When  it  comes  to  the  central  banks’  other  main  task  –  monetary  policy  –  international 
cooperation is nowhere near as widespread. Since the Bretton-Woods agreement collapsed 
in the early 1970s, monetary policy has largely been conducted by countries (and currency 
unions)  individually.  There  have  been  sporadic  exceptions,  usually  in  times  of  crisis.  One 
example is the coordinated interest-rate cut made by a number of central banks, including 
the  Riksbank,  on  8  October  2008,  during  the  financial  crisis.  But  as  I  said,  these  are 
exceptions. 
However, recently there have been discussions as to whether more international monetary 
policy  coordination  is  needed  even  under  more  normal  circumstances.26  In  brief,  the 
background is that the ongoing integration of the global financial markets means that large 
volumes  of  capital  can  be  quickly  moved  to  where  the  return  is  expected  to  be  relatively 
higher. One of the driving forces behind these capital flows could be the policy conducted in 
large, leading countries. These flows can make it difficult to conduct monetary policy in the 
                                                 
26   See, for example, Eichengreen, et al. (2011), Caruana (2012) and Rajan (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  recipient  countries  and  may  have  consequences  for  the  economic  and  financial  stability 
there.  Some  therefore  feel  they  see  a  motive  for  international  coordination  of  monetary 
policy.  It  should  be  emphasised  that  the  debate  being  conducted  has  largely  concerned 
emerging markets and the problems that have arisen there.27  However, the mechanisms as 
such are a matter of principle and advanced economies are also affected to varying degrees, 
particularly if they are small and open. My view is that Sweden is no exception. 
Interest rates are now determined to a large extent directly or indirectly by the conditions on 
the  global  financial  markets.  This  makes  it  more  difficult  for  central  banks  in  individual 
countries  to  affect  the  domestic  long-term  rate  through  the  expectations  hypothesis  –  the 
interest-rate channel becomes less predictable. Moreover, the large capital flows can have 
effects on the exchange rate and risk premiums that complicate monetary policy’s exchange 
rate  channel.  If  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  previously  had  a  reasonably 
close connection with the short-term rate, one can say that they are now affected to a large 
degree by factors abroad. 
Monetary policy can also be complicated by the capital flows affecting financial stability. One 
hypothesis  that  has  some  support  in  empirical  research  is  that  the  capital  flows  can  be 
regarded as part of a global financial cycle.28  It appears that one of the driving forces behind 
the cycle is the monetary policy conducted in large countries, particularly the United States. 
In terms of Figure 1, it may thus be the case that the financial cycle is to a large extent driven 
by global factors. Of course, the global financial cycle does not need to be in tune with the 
macroeconomic conditions in individual countries. When I discussed the economic cycle and 
the financial cycle in an individual country, I noted that these do not need to be synchronised. 
And  if  the  financial  cycle  is  moreover  affected  by  global  conditions,  this  conclusion  will  of 
course be reinforced. 
Free capital movement makes it more difficult to isolate a country from the global financial 
cycle – and indirectly thereby from monetary policy in large countries – even if they have a 
floating exchange rate. Some go so far as to say that developments on the financial markets 
imply  that,  regardless  of  the  exchange  rate  regime,  there  are  only  two  alternatives.  Either 
one has free capital movement and accepts that it is then difficult or impossible to conduct a 
monetary policy of one’s own, or one conducts one’s own monetary policy but counteracts 
the free movement of capital.29  However, this appears too strong a conclusion. The main line 
of inquiry so far is that countries with floating exchange rates can conduct a monetary policy 
of  their  own,  but  that  domestic  monetary  and  financial  conditions  have  become  more 
sensitive to shocks from abroad, and that it has thus become more complicated to pursue a 
well-balanced monetary policy.30 
How can international spillover effects be managed? 
If  one  now  considers  that  spillover  effects  from  larger  countries’  monetary  policy  via  the 
global financial markets are a problem, how can one resolve it? One possibility, at least on 
paper, would be for central banks around the world to coordinate their policy. 
I am personally not particularly optimistic about the possibilities or the usefulness of trying to 
achieve  an  international  coordination  of  monetary  policy  in  any  more  formal  sense. 
Ultimately, the national central banks have the task of fulfilling mandates that are determined 
                                                 
27   See, for example, Rajan (2014). 
28   See Rey (2013). 
29   See Rey (2013). 
30   See  Kamin  (2010)  for  a  compilation  of  the  empirical  research  into  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  monetary 
policy. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  nationally,  and  if  they  were  to  try  to  take  into  account  the  spillover  effects  of  their  policy 
abroad, this would mean having to set aside the national objectives, at least temporarily. It 
would probably be difficult to get the domestic support and understanding that is ultimately 
needed for such a policy. It would moreover probably be difficult to both estimate and reach 
agreement internationally on the size of the effects – different countries will most likely have 
different opinions.31  Having said this, I believe there are good reasons to take global aspects 
into account in models and monetary policy analyses, to a greater extent than is the case 
today –spillover– and feedback effects that individual countries’ monetary policy may lead to. 
Just as the financial crisis started a research agenda on how financial conditions should be 
included in macro models to a greater extent, I believe that the increased globalisation will 
create a need for further development work with regard to the analysis of monetary policy in 
open economies. But it remains to be seen how far this will lead and whether it will have an 
impact on the practical policy, and if so, how large an impact. In any case, I believe that the 
financial  globalisation  and  the  way  it  affects  the  conditions  for  monetary  policy,  including 
coordination  with  macroprudential  policy,  is  a  question  that  will  continue  to  be  discussed 
intensively in coming years. 
As an important problem is that exaggerated credit growth can arise in the countries to which 
capital  flows,  financial  stability  can  hopefully  be  guaranteed  by  the  frameworks  for 
macroprudential policy that are now being built up.32  We will see how well these frameworks 
can  resist  the  global  forces  in  the  “learning  by  doing”  process  we  are  facing  in  the 
macroprudential policy area. 
A more complicated world after the crisis 
Let me try to summarise. The fact that I have chosen cooperation as something of a theme is 
because,  as  I  said  initially,  our  world  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  appears  more 
complicated than it was before – or at least more complicated than we thought it was. I think 
it has become more evident that monetary policy in individual countries is dependent on both 
what happens in other policy areas and on monetary policy in other countries. 
Of course, there has always been a need to get different policy areas to interact and support 
one another, and nor is it anything new that there are links between the monetary policies 
conducted in different countries. But my feeling is nevertheless that the financial crisis has in 
a way brought these relationships to a head. 
The crisis gave rise to a new policy area – macroprudential policy – which partly works by 
influencing the volume of credit in the economy, in roughly the same way as monetary policy. 
To me, it is fairly obvious that these two policy areas need to interact. If monetary policy is to 
carry out its tasks well, then macroprudential policy must function properly and most likely 
also vice versa. 
The crisis also made necessary a monetary policy that was in many leading countries more 
expansionary  than  ever  before,  and  which  was  conducted  in  ways  not  previously  tested. 
Given  this,  the  debate  that  has  arisen  on  international  monetary  policy  spillover  effects  is 
perhaps not particularly remarkable. 
We do not yet know what our final conclusions will be with regard to these two areas. These 
are a couple of the loose threads that I am not able to tie up here today. However, a certain 
amount of new thinking will probably be required, both with regard to monetary policy and 
financial  supervision  and  the  regulation  of  the  financial  markets  –  but  also  concrete 
                                                 
31   See Ostry and Ghosh (2013). 
32   A further possibility that I will not take up here, but which has been tested in emerging markets in particular, is 
to  use  capital  regulation.  For  a  detailed  and  partly  critical  review  of  the  efficiency  of  capital  regulation,  see 
Klein (2012).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  measures. It is difficult to say exactly what an appropriate policy mix should look like, as we 
are  on  relatively  uncharted  ground  here.  There  will  be  a  lot  of  “learning  by  doing”.  New 
research  will  contribute to  the  learning,  but  bearing  in  mind  the  risks, we  will  also  have  to 
increase the pace at which the reforms are implemented. There will not be so much learning 
if  we  do  not  add  a  little  more  doing.  The  measures  needed  will  probably  have  tangibly 
negative effects on private consumption and growth in the short term, but are necessary to 
reduce the risks of an even worse outcome further ahead. 
References 
Aikman, David, Haldane, Andrew G. and Nelson, Benjamin (2011), Curbing the Credit Cycle. 
Paper  presented  at  the  Columbia  University  Center  on  Capitalism  and  Society  Annual 
Conference “Microfoundations for Macroeconomics”, New York. 
Altunbas,  Y.,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marques-Ibanez  (2014),  Does  Monetary  Policy  Affect 
Bank Risk? International Journal of Central Banking, March 2014. 
Bayoumi, Tamin, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Karl Habermeier, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, Fabián 
Valencia  and  an  IMF  Staff  Team  (2014),  Monetary  Policy  in  the  New  Normal,  IMF  Staff 
Discussion Note 14/3, International Monetary Fund. 
Bryant,  Ralph  C.,  Dale  W.  Henderson  and  Torbjörn  Becker  (2012),  Maintaining  Financial 
Stability in an Open Economy. SNS Förlag. 
Borio,  Claudio  (2012),  The  Financial  Cycle  and  Macroeconomics:  What  Have  We  Learnt? 
BIS Working Papers No. 395. 
Carney,  Mark  (2013),  Monetary  Policy  After  the  Fall.  Speech  at  the  University  of  Alberta 
1 May 2013. Bank of Canada. 
Caruana,  Jaime  (2012),  Policy  Making  in  an  Interconnected  World.  I  The  Changing  Policy 
Landscape, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 2012. 
Dynan, Karen (2012), Is a Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption? Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012. 
Eichengreen,  B.,  M.  El-Erian,  A.  Fraga,  T.  Ito,  J.  Pisani-Ferry,  E.  Prasad,  R.  Rajan, 
M. Ramos,  C.  Reinhart,  H.  Rey,  D.  Rodrik,  K.  Rogoff,  H.S.  Shin,  A.  Velasco,  B.  Weder  di 
Mauro and Y. Yu (2011), Rethinking Central Banking, Brookings Institution. 
ESRB  (2014),  The  ESRB  Handbook  on  Operationalising  Macro-prudential  Policy  in  the 
Banking Sector . European Systemic Risk Board. 
Geanakoplos,  John  (2009),  The  Leverage  Cycle.  Cowles  Foundation  Discussion  Paper 
No. 1715. 
Gungor, Sermin and Jesus Sierra (2014), Search-for-Yield in Canadian Fixed-Income Mutual 
Funds and Monetary Policy. Bank of Canada Working Paper 2014-3. 
Haldane,  Andrew  (2010),  The  $100  Billion  Question,  speech  on  30  March  2010,  Bank  of 
England. 
H M Treasury (2013), Review of the monetary policy framework. March 2013. 
Ingves,  Stefan  (2010),  Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  –  some  future  challenges. 
Speech at the Swedish Economics Association, Stockholm, 17 May. 
Jauch,  Sebastian  and  Watzka,  Sebastian  (2013),  The  Effect  of  Household  Debt 
Deleveraging  on  Unemployment  Evidence  from  Spanish  Provinces.  Conference  paper, 
Beiträge  zur  Jahrestagung  des  Vereins  für  Socialpolitik  2013:  Wettbewerbspolitik  und 
Regulierung in einer globalen Wirtschaftsordnung. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Kamin, Steven B. (2010), Financial Globalization and Monetary Policy, International Finance 
Discussion Papers Number 1002, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Klein, Michael W. (2012), Capital Controls: Gates vs Walls. Brookings papers on Economic 
Activity, Fall 2012, 317–355. 
Kuttner,  Kenneth  N.  and  Ilhyock  Shim  (2013),  “Can  Non-Interest  Rate  Policies  Stabilize 
Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies”, BIS Working Papers No 433. 
Mian, Atif, Rao, Kamalesh and Sufi, Amir (2013), Household Balance Sheets, Consumption 
and the Economic Slump. Quarterly Journal of Economics (128)4, 1687–1726. 
Ostry, Jonathan, D. and Atish, R. (2013), Obstacles to International Policy Coordination, and 
How to Overcome Them. IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/11, International Monetary Fund. 
Rajan, Raghuram (2014), Competitive Monetary Easing: Is it Yesterday Once More? Speech 
at the Brookings Institution, 10 April. 
Rey, Hélène (2013), Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence.  I  Global  Dimensions  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 2013. 
Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor  Alan  M.  (2012),  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008. NBER Working Paper 15512. 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  interlinked? 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3. Jubilee issue. 
Stein, Jeremy C. (2013), Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy 
Responses. Speech at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter”,  research  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, 7 February. 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2014),  Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary 
Policy  Framework.  Speech  at  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington, D.C., 21 March. 
Summers, Lawrence (2014), Washington Must Not Settle for Secular Stagnation. Financial 
Times, 5 January. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2011), Monetary policy after the crisis. Speech at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco, 29 November. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
Figure 1 
Business cycle and financial cycle 
Business cycle
Financial cycle
  Table 1 
Increases in expenditure for standard households  
due to policy measures 
SEK and per cent 
Disposable income (SEK/month) 
Total debt (SEK) 
Debt ratio (%)
Increase in expenditure in SEK
Countercyclical capital buffer
Tax relief
Mortgage cap
Amortisation expenditure
Interest expenditure
Amortisation
Increase in interest rate
Increase in expenditure as a percentage of disp. income
Countercyclical capital buffer
Tax relief
Mortgage cap
Amortisation expenditure
Interest expenditure
Amortisation
Increase in interest rate
Source: The Riksbank. 
Luleå
Upplands Väsby
39 000
1 100 000
235
44 000
1 750 000
331
Central Stockholm 
(high debt ratio)
55 000 
3 950 000 
598
128
1 100
1 229
1 078
151
1 833
1 283
0.3
2.8
3.2
2.8
0.4
4.7
3.3
204
1 750
1 956
1 716
240
2 917
2 042
0.5
4.0
4.4
3.9
0.5
6.6
4.6
461
3 950 
4 415 
3 873 
542
6 583 
4 608 
0.8
7.2
8.0
7.0
1.0
12.0 
8.4
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
