Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Enabling market-based solutions toward 
financial inclusion 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  IIF  (Institute  of  International  Finance)  Conference 
entitled the G20 Agenda under the Australian Presidency, Sydney, 21 February 2014. 
 It  is  an  honor  and  a  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  High-Level  Public-Private  Sector 
Conference. I thank the organizers – the Institute of International Finance (IIF) and Australia 
as President of the G20 – for inviting me to this event. Ladies and gentlemen, as mentioned 
earlier, there are an estimated 2.5 Billion1 people living without access to financial services, 
according  to  the  World  Bank  and  other  sources.  Three  quarters  of  the  world’s  poor  are 
unbanked.  Traditional  financial  products  and  delivery  channels  have  not  been  able  to 
address the needs of this market. There is therefore a need for new business models and 
fresh thinking on how this market can be best served. This presents a large untapped market 
and a source of vast opportunities. 
The  private  sector,  with its  inherent  agility,  is  well  placed  to  respond to such  opportunities 
with commercial potential. It has the capacity to innovate and develop new and sustainable 
business models. 
Microfinance is a good example. The large numbers of low income micro entrepreneurs were 
once  thought  to  have  very  high  credit  risk  to  which  commercial  financial  institutions  have 
traditionally  been  averse.  With  appropriately  priced  and  designed  products,  microfinance 
institutions  have  proven  the  profitability  of  serving  a market that  was  previously  viewed  as 
unbankable.  In  the  last  ten  years,  some  microfinance  institutions  have  gone  public2  and 
mainstream financial service providers are now in the microfinance space. In microfinance, 
commercialization  was  seen  as  an  accepted  prerequisite  to  viable  and  sustainable 
microfinance operations.3 
More  recently,  the  interest  of  mobile  telecom  operators  in  playing  a  role  in  the  delivery  of 
financial  services  has  ushered  in  a  wave  of  innovative  business  models.  According  to  a 
McKinsey study (Beshouri and Gravråk, 2010), bringing financial services to the unbanked is 
a  strategic  shift  for  mobile  operators  as  it  presents  significant  commercial  potential. 
Research4 shows that about one billion people in emerging markets have a mobile phone but 
no access to banking services. The study therefore estimated that in just two years $5 billion 
could be generated annually in direct revenue, primarily from fees for financial services such 
as  transactions  and  cash  out,  and  an  additional  $3  billion  annually  in  indirect  revenue, 
including reduced churn and higher average revenues per user for traditional voice and short 
message  service  (SMS).  In  2012,  GSM  Association  reported  over  200  mobile  money 
deployments globally in 83 countries. 
These solutions can only flourish within an enabling policy and regulatory environment that 
allows innovation and new ideas to thrive rather than stifle them. There is a need for policy 
makers and regulators to fully understand the new business models to be able to provide the 
appropriate and proportionate guidance. 
                                                
1  World Bank, 2012 Note: Adult Population is at 4.7 Billion.  
2 
3  Commercialization of Microfinance: Philippines, Asian Development Bank, 2003. 
4  Covering 147 countries conducted by the GSM Association (GSMA) and the Consultative Group to Assist the 
Initial Public Offering of Compartamos Mexico in 2007 and SKS India in 2010.  
Poor (CGAP). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This approach has characterized the way the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas crafted our policies 
on microfinance and more recently on electronic money and mobile financial services. 
In microfinance, our approach is to mainstream its practice in the banking system. Integral to 
this approach is the safety and soundness of the bank which we believe will allow it to viably 
innovate  and  serve  new  markets.  With  this,  the  application  of  prudential  standards  is  not 
compromised but instead tailor fitted to better address the risks in the given activity. 
In our mobile financial services framework, we developed an electronic money ecosystem. 
We  clearly  differentiated  e-money  from  a  deposit  which  allowed  a  proportionate  approach 
toward electronic money issuers. These efforts paved the way for an efficient retail payment 
system  upon  which  various  use-cases  can  be  developed.  Examples  include  electronic 
payment of the government conditional cash transfers (G2P) and the electronic payment of 
taxes to the government (P2G). There remains vast potential for other functionalities. 
Indeed, progress has been made in financial inclusion. The challenge now is to continue to 
take the agenda forward by leveraging on strategic partnerships and linkages: 
1) 
Linkages  in-country  which  are  important  to  ensure  a  coordinated  approach. 
Alignment of the policies and activities of relevant agencies and institutions will be 
necessary to optimize linkages and reduce duplications. 
Partnerships across countries that enable sharing of experiences and the ability to 
leapfrog  in  developing  policy  solutions.  Peer  learning  platforms  such  as  those 
enabled  through  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  network  make  such 
exchanges possible. 
Engagement with global bodies such as Standard Setting Bodies and international 
agencies  as  a  productive  means  to  promote  a  cohesive  and  consistent  financial 
inclusion global framework. 
2) 
3) 
Financial  inclusion brings to fore innovative models, new products and new players. While 
international  standards  are  designed  to  be  applied  flexibly  in  all  country  contexts,  the 
application has tended to be focused on traditional constructs and activities that cater to the 
“already served” market. There is therefore a need for a commensurate evolution in thinking 
on  proportionality  –  the  acceptable  points  of  balance  between  the  policy  objectives  of 
financial  stability,  inclusion  and  integrity.  This  concept  of  proportionality  has  been  aptly 
identified as one of the G20 Principles of financial inclusion. 
The BSP has been involved in the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion particularly 
in the Sub-Group on Principles5 and Standard Setting Bodies Our involvement has allowed 
the  sharing  of  experiences  particularly  on  balancing  the  risks  and  benefits  of  financial 
inclusion  through  the  application  of  internationally  accepted  prudential  and  supervisory 
standards. 
Financial inclusion is a gargantuan task which can only be achieved through well-coordinated 
and meaningful partnerships. We are already seeing some evidence of success... 
In  Kenya,  seventeen  million6  are  able  to  send  and  receive  money  through  their  Safaricom 
mobile phones using M-PESA, a small-value electronic payment and store of value system.7 
In  Brazil,  commercial  banks  have  banked  each  of  the  5,564  municipalities  through  their 
banking  agents.8  A  state-of-the-art  biometric  enabled  smart  card  and  battery  operated 
                                                
5  Principles  –  Leadership,  Diversity, 
Proportionality and Framework.  
Innovation,  Protection,  Empowerment,  Cooperation,  Knowledge, 
6  Out of a population of 40.5 million (World Bank FIndex, 2012). 
7  Safaricom Limited Annual Report, Year Ended 31 March 2013. 
8  Branchless Banking in Brazil, CGAP, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
authentication devise has allowed ICICI to provide micro-savings accounts to the unbanked 
in India.9 In the Philippines, banks are providing microfinance loans and deposit products to 
over a million clients, majority of whom claim to have never had the opportunity to save in a 
formal financial institution in their lives. 
At the end of the day, we are starting to see more people participate in the financial system. 
With  this  access  to  finance,  households  are  better  able  to  manage  their  finances,  guard 
against shocks and take advantage of economic opportunities. The financial system is able 
mobilize broader based savings and channel such funds to productive activities. These can 
contribute not only to financial resiliency, and stability but also to inclusive growth. There is a 
growing body of literature on the benefits of financial inclusion. 
It is therefore important that policy makers and regulators pay serious attention to financial 
inclusion  side  by  side  our  traditional  objective  of  maintaining  financial  stability.  A  stable 
financial system will gain more meaning if it serves the needs of the majority, especially the 
three quarters of the world’s poor that have been unserved too long. 
Thank you very much and good morning.  
                                                
9  Financial Inclusion Efforts of the Group, ICICI website. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
