R Gandhi: Danger posed by shadow banking systems to the global 
financial system – the Indian case 
Address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at ICRIER’s (Indian 
Council  for  Research  on  International  Economic  Relations)  International  Conference 
“Governance & Development: Views from G20 Countries”, Mumbai 21 August 2014. 
Assistance provided by Shri SM Pillai and Shri Raj Rajesh is gratefully acknowledged. 
 What is shadow banking? 
1. 
Shadow banking is a universal phenomenon, although it takes on different forms. In 
advanced  economies  where  the  financial  system  is  more  matured,  the  form  of  shadow 
banking  is  more  of  risk  transformation  through  securitization;  while  in  the  economically 
backward economies where financial market is still in a developing stage, the activities are 
more  of  supplementary  to  banking  activities.  However,  in  both  the  structures,  shadow 
banking operates outside the regular banking system and financial intermediation activities 
are  undertaken  with  less  transparency  and  regulation  than  the  conventional  banking.  In  a 
sense, shadow banks are like icebergs – more deeply spread than what they seem to be. 
2. 
In the context of developing economies, shadow banks play a gainful role in credit 
delivery and financial inclusion as they can facilitate credit availability to certain sectors that 
might  otherwise  have  difficulty  in  access  to  credit.  They  play  both  a  substitute  and 
complementary role for commercial banks as they are able to map the financing needs of the 
borrowers with the financing provision where the formal banking systems are confronted with 
regulatory constraints and/or where the formal banking system's requirements are onerous 
for the clients to comply with. 
3. 
The term “shadow bank” was coined by Paul McCulley in 2007, by and large, in the 
context  of  US  non-bank  financial  institutions  engaging  in  maturity  transformations  (use  of 
short-term deposits to finance long-term loans). However, a formal touch to the institutions of 
shadow banking was given by the Financial Stability Board1, which defined ‘shadow banking’ 
as  the  “credit  intermediation  involving  entities  and  activities  (fully  or  partially)  outside  the 
regular banking system”. Shadow banking activities, thus, include credit intermediation (any 
kind of lending activity where the saver does not lend directly to the borrower, and at least 
one  intermediary  is  involved),  and  liquidity  transformation  (investing  in  illiquid  assets  while 
acquiring funding through more liquid liabilities) & maturity transformation (use of short-term 
liabilities  to  fund  investment  in  long-term  assets)  that  take  place  outside  the  regulated 
banking  system.  Focusing  on  the  pre-requisites  for  sustenance  of  shadow  banking, 
Claessens and Ratnovski (2014) have described shadow banking as all financial activities, 
barring  traditional  banking,  which  require  a  private  or  public  backstop  (in  the  form  of 
franchise value of a bank or insurance company, or in the form of a Government guarantee) 
to operate. 
4. 
In the last two to three decades, growing innovations in the financial sector, changes 
in regulatory framework and growing competition with non-bank entities caused banks to shift 
a part of their activities outside the regulatory framework. This contributed to the growth of 
shadow banks. As a result, shadow banking activities have evolved over time in response to 
newer  set  of  regulation  and  supervisory  guidelines  and  spread  in  the  domains  where  the 
scope for regulatory arbitrage was higher. It emerged not only as an avenue for exploiting 
                                                 
1  See Financial Stability Board (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
regulatory  arbitrage  but  also  in  response  to  market  demand  for  innovative  financial 
instruments that could mitigate risks and yield higher returns.  
5. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  brought  to  fore  the  need  for  monitoring  and 
regulating  the  activities  of  shadow  banking.  There  is,  nevertheless,  a  concern  that  the 
forthcoming  implementation  of  Basel  III,  which  has  more  stringent  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  for  the  banks,  might  further  push  the  banks  to  shift  part  of  their  activities 
outside of the regulated environment and therefore increase shadow banking activities. 
Size of shadow banks 
6. 
One  cannot  precisely  gauge  the  size  of  shadow  banking  as  the  activities  lack 
transparency. According to the FSB report (2013), size of global shadow system expanded to 
US$ 71 trillion2 in 2012. In 2012, the assets of other financial intermediaries, which undertake 
non-bank financial intermediation, accounted for about 24 per cent of total financial assets, 
about  half  of  banking  system  assets  and  117  per  cent  of  GDP  of  the  above-said 
25 jurisdictions. The largest system of non-bank financial intermediation in 2012 was found in 
the USA, which had assets size of US$ 26 trillion, followed by the euro area (US$ 22 trillion), 
the  UK  (US$  9  trillion)  and  Japan  (US$  4  trillion).  The  size  of  shadow  banking  in  a  large 
number  of  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  was  found  to  have  increased  in  2012, 
nevertheless,  the  share  of  non-bank  financial  intermediation  remained  relatively  smaller  at 
less than 20 per cent of GDP. As per the report, for a number of EMEs, non-bank financial 
intermediation  remains  relatively  small  as  compared  to  the  level  of  GDP.  In  India,  Russia, 
Argentina,  Turkey,  Indonesia,  and  Saudi  Arabia  the  amount  of  non-bank  financial  activity 
remained below 20 per cent of GDP at the end of 2012. However, the sector was growing 
rapidly in some of these jurisdictions. 
How are shadow banks dissimilar to banks? 
7. 
Shadow banks, like conventional banks undertake various intermediation activities 
akin to banks, but they are fundamentally distinct from commercial banks in various respects. 
First,  unlike  commercial  banks,  which  by  dint  of  being  depository  institutions  can  create 
money,  shadow  banks  cannot  create  money.  Second,  unlike  the  banks,  which  are 
comprehensively and tightly regulated, the regulation of shadow banks is not that extensive 
and  their  business  operations  lack  transparency.  Third,  while  commercial  banks,  by  and 
large, derive funds through mobilization of public deposits, shadow banks raise funds, by and 
large,  through  market-based  instruments  such  as  commercial  paper,  debentures,  or  other 
structured  credit  instruments.  Fourth,  the  liabilities  of  the  shadow  banks  are  not  insured, 
while  commercial  banks’  deposits,  in  general,  enjoy  Government  guarantee  to  a  limited 
extent. Fifth, in the times of distress, unlike banks, which have direct access to central bank 
liquidity, shadow banks do not have such recourse.  
8. 
While  there  may  be  stark  differences  in  the  way  the  shadow  banks  operate  as 
compared to banks, sometimes there is only a thin line separating the two. For instance a 
regulated bank may float a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to hold some specific assets, with 
a view at removing them from its balance sheet. 
Regulation of shadow bank activities 
9. 
While  the  role  of  the  shadow  banking  generated  apparent  economic  efficiencies 
through  financial  innovations,  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  shadow  banking  created  new 
                                                 
2  This is the magnitude of non-bank financial intermediation, which is a conservative proxy of the global shadow 
banking system based on data from 25 countries - 5 euro area economies and 20 non euro area jurisdictions. 
For 2011, FSB had reported the size of shadow banking to be around US$ 66 trillion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
channels  of  contagion  and  systemic  risk  transmission  between  traditional  banks  and  the 
capital markets. Therefore, globally a need was felt to bring such unregulated entities under 
the regulatory architecture. United States of America passed the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010 that 
strengthened the arms of Federal Reserve to regulate all institutions of systemic importance. 
In order to put a control on the burgeoning shadow banking activities, the European Union 
has  also  put  in  place  some  measures,  which  inter  alia  include  prudential  rules  concerning 
securitisation,  regulation  of  credit  rating  agencies,  etc.  Further,  at  the  request  of  G-20 
countries, at international level, FSB has been working towards strengthening the oversight 
and regulation of the shadow banking system so that the risks emanating from them may be 
mitigated.  Various  other  countries,  including  India  are  working  towards  improving  the 
regulatory  framework  so  as  to  curb  the  shadow  banking  activities,  which  pose  a  risk  to 
financial stability. 
Challenges posed by shadow banks 
10. 
Though the focus of regulation on shadow banking activities emerged in the wake of 
their  alleged  role  in  the  recent  global  crisis,  shadow  banking  system  is  not  a  new 
development. Even in the late 1950s and early 1960s, concerns emanating from the growth 
of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  had  been  highlighted  [Thorn  (1957);  Hogan  (1960)]. 
Thorn (1957) had advocated same degree of control over credit expansion by the NBFIs as 
that  of  the  banks.  Hogan  (1960)  found  that  from  late  1930s  to  1950s,  while  the  role  of 
banking system in Australia was declining, that of the financial intermediaries was rising and 
he called for controlling the liquidity of the non-banking sector. 
11. 
The  biggest  challenge  for  the  regulators  is  to  gauge  the  magnitude  of  shadow 
banking  as  this  landscape  is  continually  evolving  by  arbitraging  the  gaps  in  the  regulatory 
framework  that  otherwise  seek  to  control  them.  Furthermore,  unlike  the  banking  sector, 
which have a very good statistical coverage, consistent database on shadow banking is not 
available  given  the  heterogeneous  nature  of  shadow  banking  entities,  instruments  and 
activities.  
12. 
economies, in general, are as follows: 
Some  of  the  challenges  posed  by  the  shadow  banks  to  the  global  economy  and 
Financial stability and systemic risk concerns 
a. 
13. 
Across various economies, regulatory arbitrage was used to create shadow banking 
entities. In many instances, banks themselves composed part of the shadow banking chain 
by  floating  a  specialized  subsidiary  to  carry  out  shadow  banking  activities.  Banks  also 
invested in financial products issued by other shadow banking entities. Since shadow bank 
entities have no access to central bank funding or safety nets like deposit insurance, they 
remain vulnerable to shocks. Given the huge size of shadow bank activities and their inter-
linkages with other entities of the financial sector, any shock in the shadow banking segment 
can  get  amplified,  giving  rise  to  systemic  risk  concern.  The  capacity  of  shadow  banks  to 
precipitate systemic crisis was manifested in the recent global financial crisis. 
Regulatory arbitrage spread across geographical jurisdictions 
b. 
14. 
Different  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  across  geographical  jurisdictions  also 
pose  a  significant  handicap  in  curbing  the  shadow  banking  activities,  which  are  spread 
across  borders.  For  instance,  high  taxation  in  some  jurisdictions  sometimes  generates  tax 
avoidance  strategies  by  financial  firms.  Tax  haven  countries  with  their  eye  on  attracting 
foreign capital and creation of jobs in their economies keep their tax rates low. Firms in high 
taxation countries restructure their financial activity by shifting some high tax activities to low 
tax countries. This, at times, generates large and significant hot money flows, which itself, is 
a  source  of  instability  for  both  set  of  countries  from  where  it  outflows  to  where  it  flows  in. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This,  at  times,  has  an  adverse  effect  on  financial  stability,  especially  at  a  time  when  the 
whole global economy is far more integrated than ever. 
c. 
Challenges in the conduct of monetary policy  
15. 
Opaqueness  of  its  structure,  size,  operations  and  inter-linkages  of  shadow  banks 
with  commercial  banks and  other  arms  of  the  financial sector  might  distort  the  information 
content of monetary policy indicators and thereby undermine the conduct of monetary policy. 
For instance, a Central Bank might lose control over the credit aggregate (as these entities 
broadly  remain  outside  the  regulatory  purview),  which  might  weaken  the  monetary  policy 
transmission through credit channel. This concern was highlighted even in the 1950s. Thorn 
(1957)  advocated  some  form  of  control  over  credit  abilities  of  the  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries for the successful implementation of monetary policy as these entities remain 
immune  to  direct  central  bank  control.  Hogan  (1960)  had  also  advocated  controlling  the 
liquidity of the non-banking sector through a flexible interest rate policy that could influence 
the behavior of the NBFIs in Australia.  
Shrestha (2007) found that growing level of intermediation activities of the non-bank 
16. 
financial intermediaries (NBFIs) causes a shift in deposits from banks to non-banks in South-
East Asian Countries. He observed that since the deposits of the NBFIs are not included in 
the  monetary  aggregates,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  gets  undermined  for  regimes, 
which follow monetary targeting framework.  
17. 
A  Deutsche  Bundesbank  study  (2014)  contended  that  the  growing  activities  of 
shadow banks might weaken the transmission of monetary policy measures via commercial 
banks (through interest rate and bank credit channel), but, on the contrary, the asset prices 
channel may become effective in the monetary policy transmission process. An expansionary 
monetary  policy  might  fuel  asset  prices,  which,  in  turn,  might  increase  the  leverage  of  the 
shadow banks, expand their balance sheets, reduce their risk premium and thereby increase 
lending to non-financial sector and finally the level of real activity3. 
Procyclicity and amplification of business cycles 
d. 
18. 
Shadow banking activities, which broadly remain less regulated, have been reported 
to act pro-cyclically, which might amplify financial and economic cycles. Their leverage would 
rise during booms (as they face little problem in arranging funds) as assets price rise and 
margin/ haircuts on secured lending remain low. On the contrary, during the downturn phase 
(as the funding becomes difficult) as asset prices fall and margins/ haircuts on secured loan 
become tighter, shadow bank get compelled to undertake deleveraging.  
19. 
Pro-cyclicality  of  shadow  banks  may  also  get  exacerbated  owing  to  their  inter-
connectedness with the banks. FSB (2012) observed that inter-connectedness of the shadow 
banks  with  the  banks  might  aggravate  the  pro-cyclical  build-up  of  leverage  and  thereby 
heighten the risks of asset price bubbles, especially when the investment assets of the two 
systems are correlated. This pro-cyclicality in the financial system might amplify financial and 
business cycles. High pro-cyclicality of the shadow banking sector has implications for the 
real sector, which might also get affected adversely as funding by the shadow banks to the 
real economy during the economic downturn might take a hit.  
Shadow banking and Indian economy 
20. 
The type of entities which are called shadow banks elsewhere are known in India as 
the Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs). Are they in fact shadow banks? No, because 
                                                 
3  See also Adrian, et al (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
these institutions have been under the regulatory structure of the Reserve Bank of India, right 
from 1963 i.e. 50 full years before many in the world are thinking of doing so! 
Evolution of regulation of NBFCs in India 
21. 
In the wake of failure of several banks in the late 1950s and early 1960s in India, 
large number of ordinary depositors lost their money. This led to the formation of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation by the Reserve Bank, to provide the necessary safety net for the bank 
depositors.  The  Reserve  Bank  did  then  note  that  the  deposit  taking  activities  were 
undertaken by non-banking companies also. Though they were not systemically as important 
as the banks, the Reserve Bank initiated regulating them, as they had the potential to cause 
pain to their depositors.  
22. 
Later in 1996, in the wake of the failure of a big NBFC, the Reserve Bank tightened 
the regulatory structure over the NBFCs, with rigorous registration requirements, enhanced 
reporting and supervision. Reserve Bank also decided that no more NBFC will be permitted 
to raise deposits from the public. Later when the NBFCs sourced their funding heavily from 
the banking system, thereby raising systemic risk issues, sensing that it can cause financial 
instability, the Reserve Bank brought asset side prudential regulations onto the NBFCs.  
NBFCs of India 
23. 
The “NBFCs” of India include not just the finance companies, but also a wider group 
of companies that are engaged in investment, insurance, chit fund, nidhi, merchant banking, 
stock broking, alternative investments etc. as their principal business. NBFCs being financial 
intermediaries are playing a supplementary role to banks. NBFCs especially those catering 
to  the  urban  and  rural  poor,  namely  NBFC-MFIs  and  Asset  Finance  Companies  have  a 
complimentary role in the financial inclusion agenda of the country. Further, some of the big 
NBFCs  viz;  infrastructure  finance  companies  are  engaged  in  lending  exclusively  to  the 
infrastructure sector, and some are into factoring business, thereby giving fillip to the growth 
and development of the respective sector of their operations. In short, NBFCs bring the much 
needed diversity to the financial sector.  
Profile of NBFCs 
24. 
The  total  number  of  NBFCs  as  on  March  31,  2014  are  12,029  of  which  deposit 
taking  NBFCs  are  241  and  non-deposit  taking  NBFCs  with  asset  size  of  ₹ 100  crore  and 
above  are  465,  non-deposit  taking  NBFCs  with  asset  size  between  ₹ 50  crore  and  ₹ 100 
crore are 314 and those with asset size less than ₹ 50 crore are 11009. As on March 31, 
2014,  the  average  leverage  ratio  (outside  liabilities  to  owned  fund)  of  the  NBFCs-ND-SI 
stood  at  2.94,  return  on  assets  (net  profit  as  a  percentage  of  total  assets)  stood  at  2.3%, 
Return on equity (net profit as a percentage of equity) stood at 9.22% and the gross NPA as 
a percentage of total credit exposure (aggregate level) stood at 2.8%. 
Asset liability composition: 
Liabilities* of the NBFC sector: Owned funds (23% of total liabilities), debentures 
25. 
(32%),  bank  borrowings  (21%),  deposit  (1%),  borrowings  from  Financial  Institutions  (1%), 
Inter-corporate  borrowings  (2%),  Commercial  Paper  (3%),  other  borrowings  (12%),  and 
current liabilities & provisions (5%). 
26. 
bank balances (3%), other current assets (7%) and other assets (1%). 
 Assets*:  Loans  &  advances  (73%  of  total  assets),  investments  (16%),  cash  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 *The  data  pertains  to  only  reported  deposit  taking  NBFCs  and  those  non-deposit  taking 
NBFCs with asset size of ₹ 100 crore and above. All figures are as on end March, 2014. 
The dangers and the regulatory challenges 
The growing size and interconnectedness of the NBFCs in India also raise concerns 
27. 
on financial stability. Reserve Bank’s endeavour in this context has been to streamline NBFC 
regulation,  address  the  risks  posed  by  them  to  financial  stability,  address  depositors’  and 
customers’ interests, address regulatory arbitrage and help the sector grow in a healthy and 
efficient manner. Some of the regulatory measures include identifying systemically important 
non-deposit taking NBFCs as those with asset size of ₹ 100 crore and above and bringing 
them under stricter prudential norms (CRAR and exposure norms), issuing guidelines on Fair 
Practices Code, aligning the guidelines on restructuring and securitization with that of banks, 
permitting NBFCs-ND-SI to issue perpetual debt instruments, etc.  
28. 
Just  as  the  shadow  banks  (i.e.  the  NBFCs)  in  India  are  of  a  different  genre,  the 
dangers posed by them are also of different genre. Consequently, the regulatory challenges 
that we face today are different which are as follows: 
29. 
First, there are law related challenges viz. i. there are a number of companies that 
are registered as finance companies, but are not regulated by the Reserve Bank, ii. there are 
unincorporated  bodies  who  undertake  financial  activities  and  remain  unregulated,  iii. there 
are incorporated companies and unincorporated entities illegally accepting deposits, iv. there 
are  entities  who  camouflage  deposits  in  some  other  names  and  thus  illegally  accepting 
deposits.  The  law  as  it  stands  today  is  inadequate  to  deal  with  these  issues.  In  order  to 
correct these and initiate action against violations, we need to bring in suitable amendments 
to  the  statutory  provisions.  Reserve  Bank  is  working  with  the  government  for  such 
improvements in the law. 
30. 
Secondly,  as  the  entities,  especially  the  unincorporated  ones,  can  sprung  in  any 
nook and corner of the country and can operate with impunity unnoticed, but endangering 
their  customers  interest,  we  need  arrangements  and  structured  for  effective  market 
intelligence gathering. The Reserve Bank is restructuring its organisational setup, especially 
in its regional offices, for gathering market intelligence. 
Thirdly, empowering law and gathering intelligence by themselves are not sufficient. 
31. 
Enforcement  of  the  law  is  a  challenge.  This  is  primarily  because  of  the  various  agencies 
involved  in  regulating  the  non-banking  financial  activities of  entities. Right  from  the  central 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
government  ministries  like  finance  and  corporate  affairs,  agencies  like  CBI  and  FIU-IND, 
regulatory  agencies  like  the  Reserve  Bank,  SEBI,  the  Registrar  of  Companies,  the  state 
government agencies like the police and others, all have to share information and coordinate 
and  cooperate  to  bring  in  an  effective,  timely  and  unified  enforcement  of  the  law.  The 
Reserve Bank's State Level Coordination Committees (SLCC) are being strengthened and a 
National level Coordination Committee is also being considered.  
32. 
Fourthly, the international requirement is that the shadow banks be brought under 
tighter regulations. G-20 has already expressed it as a mission to be achieved by 2015. In 
our case, bringing them under regulation is not the issue, as they already are. The challenge 
for us is how differentially or how closely we should regulate the NBFCs?  
Conclusion 
33. 
To summarise, the shadow banks in India (i.e. the NBFCs) are of a different type; 
they  have  been  under  regulation  for  more  than  50  years;  they  subserve  the  economy  by 
playing a complimentary and supplementary role to mainstream banks and also in furthering 
financial inclusion. Yet, they do pose dangers, but of different variety; it primarily relates to 
consumer  protection.  It  is  the  constant  endeavour  of  Reserve  Bank  to  enable  prudential 
growth of the sector, keeping in view the multiple objectives of financial stability, consumer 
and  depositor  protection,  and  need  for  more  players  in  the  financial  market,  addressing 
regulatory arbitrage concerns while not forgetting the uniqueness of NBFC sector.  
34. 
Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
References: 
Tobias  Adrian,  Emanuel  Moench,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2010),  “Macro-risk  Premium  and 
Intermediary Balance Sheet Quantities”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, 
no 428, January. 
Bakk-Simon,  Klára;  Borgioli,  Stefano;  Girón,  Celestino;  Hempell,  Hannah;  Maddaloni, 
Angela; Recine, Fabio and Simonetta Rosati (2012), “Shadow Banking in the Euro Area: An 
Overview”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 133, April. 
Birnbaum,  Eugene  A.  (1958),  “The  Growth  of  Financial  Intermediaries  as  a  Factor  in  the 
Effectiveness  of  Monetary  Policy”,  International  Monetary  Fund  Staff  Papers,  Vol  6,  No  3, 
November, pp. 384–426. 
Claessens,  Stijn  and  Lev  Ratnovski  (2014),  “What  Is  Shadow  Banking?”,  IMF  Working 
Paper, WP/14/25, February. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), “The shadow banking system in the euro area: overview and 
monetary policy implications”, Monthly Report, March. 
Financial Stability Board (2012). Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2012. 
Financial Stability Board (2013). Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2013. 
Ghosh, Swati; Mazo, Ines Gonzalez del; and İnci Ötker-Robe (2012), “Chasing the Shadows: 
How Significant Is Shadow Banking in Emerging Markets?”, Economic Premise, World Bank, 
Number 88, September. 
Gorton,  Gary  and  Andrew  Metrick  (2010),  “Regulating  the  Shadow  Banking  System”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall. 
Hogan,  Warren  P.  (1960),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Intermediaries”,  The  Economic 
Record, December, pp 517–529. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (2013),  “Report  on  Trend  and  Progress  of  Banking  in  India  –  
2012–13”. 
Shrestha, Min B. (2007), “Role of Non-Bank Financial Intermediation: Challenges for Central 
Banks in the SEACEN Countries”, SEACEN Centre, Malaysia. 
Thorn  Richard  S.  (1957),  “Nonbank  Financial  Intermediaries,  Credit  Expansion,  and 
Monetary Policy”, International Monetary Fund Staff Paper.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
