Jwala Rambarran: Trinidad and Tobago – reinforcing dialogue with the 
private sector 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Inaugural  Monetary  Policy  Forum  with  the  Penal/Debe  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Debe, 18 December 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today  is  another  historic  day  for  the  region  of  Penal/Debe.  For  the  first  time  in  nearly 
50 years  the  Central  Bank  has  ventured  outside  of  its  traditional  comfort  zone  in  Port  of 
Spain, arriving at Penal/Debe to deliver its monetary policy message. I must, therefore, thank 
the  Penal/Debe  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  graciously  agreeing  to  host  our  Inaugural 
Monetary  Policy  Forum.  We  intend  to  meet  with  other  Chambers  of  Commerce  across 
Trinidad and in Tobago to host similar events.  
I  strongly  believe  that,  especially  in  these  unusual  times,  greater  dialogue  with  the  private 
sector is critical. Such insights feed into the Central Bank’s understanding of the workings of 
the Trinidad and Tobago economy, and thus into our policy deliberations. Equally important, 
these events allow the Bank to explain the thinking behind its monetary policy actions and to 
account to the national community, who we are here to serve.  
So, why did we choose Penal/Debe as our first port of call? On reflection, the answer seems 
self evident. The region of Penal/Debe is demonstrating the type of self-sustaining economic 
growth that the entire country requires at this point in time. Such economic growth is being 
manifested through both the expansion of existing companies and the creation of new ones. 
It reflects increasing confidence among businesses and entrepreneurs.  
As  you  drive  along  the  SS  Erin  Road  under  almost  every  home  is  a  small  business, from 
furniture shops that I understand supply big furniture chains in Port of Spain, to large home 
town supermarkets. At least four new outdoor shopping complexes have been constructed in 
the community.  
The  construction  of  one  of  government’s  mega  project  –  the  UWI  South  Campus  –  is 
expected to drive growth in the area, as government looks to create a second education city 
centred on this campus in the Penal/Debe area. Construction of a Metal Industries Company 
training  facility  on  Petrotrin  lands  a  few  miles  away  will  also  help  generate  technical  and 
vocational opportunities  in the area. This building – the NESC Debe  Campus – opened in 
October 2012 year and has already graduated 72 students in IT and autotronics. It is the only 
MICROSOFT certified training facility in the country.  
And it would be certainly remiss of me if I did not mention “Debe Doubles”. Debe is one of 
the  few  communities  to  practically  trademark  and  brand  doubles  to  the  wider  country, 
highlighting the innovative nature of the people and the ability to tap into creative capital.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I probably do not need to remind anyone in this audience that we are 
indeed living in unusual times. Central banks and other policymakers around the world have 
been  grappling for  more  than  half  a  decade  with  an  economic crisis  which  has  repeatedly 
mutated, and it is still not clear in what direction the crisis is going to change shape.  
Since  May  2013,  sentiment  has  shifted  dramatically  in  global  financial  markets  when 
US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke made a small announcement that had 
big  unintended  consequences.  The  overreaction  of  financial  markets  to  an  earlier-than-
expected start to the reduction of monetary stimulus in the United States resulted in large-
scale capital outflows from major emerging markets economies such as India, Indonesia and 
Brazil, prompting several central banks to take defensive actions. Unexpected backtracking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  in  September  gave  global  financial  markets  some  temporary 
comfort.  
As I speak the US Federal Reserve’s crucial December meeting is underway in Washington 
DC. Later today after 2 pm, we would get a better sense if and when the US Fed will start 
reducing  its  monetary  stimulus.  Economists  are  divided  over  whether  the  Fed  will  decide 
today to begin “tapering”, with some saying that recent economic data is strong enough to 
warrant  a  move,  and  others  that  policymakers  need  to  see  more  evidence  that  growth  is 
durable.  
Such  volatility,  however,  about  the  future  path  of  US  monetary  policy  may  well  signal  the 
start of a new mutation of the ongoing global financial crisis. It may well be a forerunner to 
the new risks that could materialize when the U.S. Federal Reserve begins to scale back its 
unconventional monetary policy that has been in place for the past five years or so.  
As 2013 comes to an end, it looks like the world economy will be stuck in a subdued growth 
phase.  Economic growth  in  the  United  States, while  held  back  unnecessarily  by  Congress 
political  brinksmanship,  has  again  outpaced  that  of  Europe  and  Japan,  both  of  which  are 
struggling  to  cross  the  1  per  cent  annual  growth  threshold.  The  main  emerging  market 
economies  of  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China  are  all  slowing,  with  Russia  practically  at  a 
standstill.  
So, this morning I want to talk about three things:  
• 
First, outline some of the key developments in the Trinidad and Tobago economy 
over 2013;  
Second, explain the monetary policy actions of the Central Bank in the context of 
evolving economic conditions; and  
Third,  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  short  term  outlook  for  Trinidad  and 
Tobago.  
  Economic developments in 2013  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  begin  with  a  brief  overview  of  the  evolution  of  domestic 
economic  conditions.  Here  the  news  is  very  encouraging;  it  is  definitely  not  all  doom  and 
gloom.  
The  Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy  has  shown  tremendous  resilience  against  a  turbulent 
global backdrop, and we are seeing signs of a gradual recovery from the sharp downturn that 
started in late 2008.  
Our preliminary estimates suggest that the Trinidad and Tobago economy grew by 1.3 per 
cent in the first nine months of 2013, compared with a contraction of 0.3 per cent in the first 
nine months of 2012.  
On-going  large  scale  maintenance  and  safety  upgrades  at  energy  companies  posed  a 
considerable drag on the recovery process throughout 2013, especially in the third quarter 
when the energy sector underwent the largest co-ordinated maintenance effort to date. The 
subsequent  sharp  shortfall  in  natural  gas  production  while  anticipated  adversely  affected 
both  refining  activity  and  output  of  petrochemicals,  generating  a  decline  of  4  per  cent  in 
energy output, and an estimated contraction of ½ per cent in real GDP.  
Intervention  by  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Energy  Affairs  was  critical  to  the  maintenance 
work  that  involved  bpTT  and  BG  taking  the  bpTT  Cassia  B  hub  and  BG  Dolphin  facilities 
offline.  These  turnarounds  were  co-ordinated  with  Atlantic  LNG’s  Train  3  and  nine  major 
plants at the Point Lisas Industrial Estate.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Were it not for the planning and co-ordination of these maintenance events, we estimate that 
the  contraction  in  energy  output  would  have  been  severe  enough  to  halt  the  recovery 
underway and push the economy back into negative growth territory for all of 2013.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  non-energy  sector  continued  its  slow  but  steady  pace  of  revival, 
providing support to the overall economy but still not enough to fully offset the drag posed by 
maintenance  activities  in  the  energy  sector.  In  fact,  the  non-energy  sector  has  registered 
growth for the past ten quarters to September 2013, supported by the finance, construction 
and distribution sectors.  
Growth in the finance sector was driven mainly by an expansion of commercial bank deposits 
and  loans.  The  increase  in  construction  activity  was  likely  related  to  several  public  sector 
projects including highway construction and housing, and perhaps to a lesser extent some 
private sector projects. Local sales of cement – a key indicator of construction activity – were 
up by 12½ per cent (on a year-on-year basis) in the third quarter of 2013. The performance 
of the distribution sector reflected increased retail sales  in several industries, including dry 
goods, supermarkets and groceries and motor vehicles. Regarding the latter, sales of new 
motor  vehicles  have  been  running  at  double  digit  rates  into  the  third  quarter  of  2013. The 
PDA motor vehicle series was ended within a record 3 months.  
In  the  face  of  still  weak  private  demand,  the  government  budget  has  served  as  the  main 
stimulus  to  economic  activity  over  the  past  few  years.  Given  the  country’s  strong  foreign 
exchange  reserves  and  low  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio,  I  believe  that  the  Government  has 
enough  fiscal  space  to  run  temporary  budget  deficits.  In  fact,  since  2010  the  central 
government  has  realized  moderate  fiscal  deficits  not  exceeding  3  per  cent  of  GDP. 
Nevertheless, it is important for the Government to respect its own plan for moving to fiscal 
balance over the medium term, and to accelerate these plans, once conditions permit.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  our  public  debt  remains  within  manageable  levels.  After  a  decade 
long  absence,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  successfully  returned  last  week  to  the  international 
capital  markets  with  international  investors  demonstrating  overwhelming  confidence  in  the 
country’s  medium  term prospects. We  were  able  to  issue  a  US$550 million  Eurobond  that 
was oversubscribed by a factor of almost ten times.  
Indeed,  I  see  this  tremendous  vote  of  confidence  by  foreign  investors  as  a  much  needed 
wake-up call to the local private sector. The message is clear. The local business community 
must get back into the game; stop watching and commenting from the sidelines.  
Some  commentators  have  questioned  the  rationale  behind  this  bond  issue.  One  concern 
relates to the government’s decision to access the international capital markets rather than 
use the ample liquidity available in the domestic financial system. Another concern is that this 
bond issue could jeopardize our public debt situation. Let me put to rest these concerns.  
First, Trinidad and Tobago enjoys the second strongest credit rating in Latin America and the 
Caribbean,  after  Chile.  We  need  to  leverage  our  investment  grade  credit  rating  to 
differentiate  ourselves  from  other  countries  in  the  region,  who  are  still  struggling  from  the 
global  crisis,  and  to  highlight  the  quality  of  our  economic  management  amidst  the  global 
uncertainty.  
Second, it is true that government could have easily raised this volume of financing on the 
domestic capital markets but this option would not have allowed us to exploit our credit rating 
to re-establish a presence on the international capital market by issuing a benchmark bond. 
Moreover,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  2013/2014  budget,  which  was  approved  by 
Parliament, projected that almost $3 billion of the near $6.4 billion deficit would be financed 
through foreign borrowing including commercial borrowing.  
Third,  even  with  the  bond  issue  the  country’s  external  debt  dynamics  stay  well  within 
comfortable levels. External debt is projected to rise slightly to a still very manageable 9 per 
cent of GDP from about 8 per cent of GDP prior to the bond issue. External debt service is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
expected to consume just about 2 per cent of export earnings from 1 ½ per cent prior to the 
bond issue. Few countries in the world can boast these impressive debt metrics.  
So the Eurobond issue allows us to differentiate ourselves from our neighbours, re-establish 
a  presence  on  the  international  markets  and  does  not  compromise  our  hard  won  prudent 
debt profile.  
A key mandate of the Central Bank is price stability,  which roughly translates into keeping 
underlying inflationary pressures well contained. Inflationary pressures have eased over the 
course  of  2013.  After  beginning  2013  at  just  over  7.0  per  cent  (year-on-year),  headline 
inflation  slowed  to  about  4  ½  per  cent  by  November  2013.  The  slowdown  in  inflation  was 
largely  associated  with  a  steady  fall  in  food  price  inflation  reflecting  increased  domestic 
production  of  agricultural  supplies,  more  favorable  weather  conditions,  and  an  easing  of 
global food prices.  
Meanwhile core inflation, which excludes food prices, has been low and stable over the first 
eleven  months  of  the  year,  ranging  between  2–3  per  cent,  and  indicative  of  relatively 
subdued demand pressures.  
Of concern is that we are yet to see a broader pick up in business lending. Business loans 
granted  by  the  banking  system  contracted  for  eight  consecutive  months,  falling  by  about 
3 per cent in September 2013. In such a situation, small businesses should not be facing a 
financing  constraint.  Money  is  available  at  very  low  interest  rates  to  finance  business 
expansion, subject to an evaluation of credit risk.  
Meanwhile,  we  have  seen  relatively  strong  growth  in  consumer  lending,  especially  for 
purchases of motor vehicles, home renovation and debt consolidation.  
Aggressive  marketing  campaigns  and  lower  mortgage  rates  continue  to  contribute  to 
increasing  demand  for  real  estate  mortgage  loans.  Although  real  estate  mortgage  loans 
granted  by  banks  have  recorded  double  digit  growth  for  thirteen  consecutive  months  to 
September  2013,  there  is  no  compelling  evidence  of  overheating  in  the  property  market. 
More importantly, commercial banks have maintained their mortgage lending standards, with 
still conservative loan-to-value and loan service-to-income ratios.  
On the external side, the demand for imports of goods and services has been quite robust, 
prompting the Central Bank to intervene deliberately in the foreign exchange market. In the 
first  eleven  months  of  2013,  the  Central  Bank  sold  US$1.3  billion  to  authorized  dealers 
compared  with  US$1.7  billion  one  year  ago.  With  the  Bank  calibrating  its  sales  of  foreign 
exchange to address imbalances in the foreign exchange market, the level of gross official 
reserves rose to US$9.3 billion at the end of November 2013. This represented more than 
11 months’ import cover.  
Central Bank monetary policy actions  
Before I turn to the Central Bank’s monetary policy actions, I would like to reiterate the major 
changes made over the past year to the Bank’s monetary policy decision making framework. 
These were as follows:  
• 
Inclusion  of  two  external  members  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  to  ensure 
that  the  MPC  benefits  from  specialized  expertise  and  diverse  viewpoints  in  its 
policymaking deliberations.  
Changing the MPC meeting frequency from once a month to every two months to 
give  the  MPC  a  better  opportunity  to  fully  consider  economic  and  financial 
conditions, including important issues and policy alternatives; and  
Communication of the Bank’s monetary policy decisions, including the setting of the 
repo  rate,  to  the  public  in  the  form  of  a  “Monetary  Policy  Announcement”  on  the 
Friday evening of the week in which the MPC meeting is held.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
 Given the gradual pace of economic recovery and the stability of core inflation, the Central 
Bank has maintained a monetary stance geared towards supporting economic activity. This 
accommodative stance is reflected in the fact that the Bank has maintained its policy rate, 
the repo rate, at a historical low of 2.75 per cent for the past fifteen months.  
However, with liquidity levels in the banking system high, the Central Bank took actions to 
help  curb  the  excess  liquidity.  Over  the  first  eleven  months  of  2013,  commercial  banks’ 
excess reserves increased to a monthly average of $6.1 billion, up from a monthly average of 
$3.6 billion in the corresponding period of 2012. The main source of this liquidity is generated 
from  the  financing  of  the  government’s  net  domestic  budget  deficit.  These  fiscal  injections 
amounted to $9.6 billion over the first eleven months of 2013.  
Having reached the legal limit on the issue of treasury securities for the purposes of open 
market  operations,  the  Central  Bank  sought  and  received  approval  from  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  the  Economy  to  facilitate  the  issue  of  two  Treasury  bonds,  whose  proceeds 
were sterilized. The first Treasury bond was issued in May 2013 at a face value of $1 billion 
and the second in August 2013 with a face value of $559.3 million taken from a $1 billion 
offering.  
The  Bank  also  rolled  over  for  one  year,  the  commercial  banks’  fixed  deposits  held  at  the 
Central  Bank  which  matured  to date  in  2013.  In  addition,  the  Bank  indirectly  removed  just 
over $8.0 billion from the system via the sales of foreign exchange to the banking system in 
the first eleven months of 2013.  
In early December 2013, the Central Bank’s liquidity management framework was enhanced 
with  an  increase  in  the  borrowing  limits  under  the  Treasury  Bills  Act  (to  $30  billion  from 
$15 billion) and the Treasury Notes Act (to $15 billion from $5 billion).  
I wish to emphasize that these Treasury securities are purely for the purposes of monetary 
policy, not fiscal policy. The proceeds of the securities are locked away in a blocked account 
at  the  Central  Bank  and  only  re-enter  the  financial  system  upon  maturity  of  the  existing 
securities. These funds are not used to finance the government’s budget or any government 
program.  
I also wish to emphasize that this practice is not new. In January 2003, Parliament approved 
an increase in limits for both Treasury bills (from $2 billion to $5 billion) and Treasury notes 
(from $1 billion to $3 billion). In August 2006, Parliament again approved an increase in limits 
for both Treasury bills (from $5 billion to $15 billion) and Treasury notes (from $3 billion to 
$5 billion).  By  2008,  or  within  two  years,  these  new  limits  were  already  reached  and  the 
Central Bank had to resort to rolling over existing maturities to mop up the excess liquidity.  
Short-term prospects  
I would now like to turn to the outlook for 2014.  
It is fairly evident that uncertainty continues to weigh heavily on external conditions. Perhaps 
the  most  immediate  downside  risks  to  emerging  markets,  including  Trinidad  and  Tobago, 
relates to shifting expectations about the future path of US monetary policy.  
With  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations,  the  Central  Bank  is  giving  more  weight  to  an 
accommodative monetary stance until a firm domestic economic turnaround is established. 
However, we are paying close attention to the possibility of normalization of monetary policy 
in the United States. Should the outlook for inflation, growth, or financial stability change, we 
will take appropriate action.  
Here at home, certain domestic factors seem to suggest a more optimistic outlook for 2014.  
• 
First,  as  noted  earlier,  the  significant  maintenance  work  in  the  energy  sector  has 
been  completed.  Output  in  the  upstream  and  downstream  energy  industries  is 
expected to return to more normal levels in 2014, providing a strong boost to overall 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
economic overall growth. In addition, drilling in the shallow water blocks, which were 
awarded in 2010, should commence in 2014. Further, the recent on-shore bid round 
attracted  11  bids,  representing  the  highest  level  of  interest  in  around  30  years. 
Awards  for  these  bid  rounds  will  lead  to  increased  exploration  activity  in  these 
blocks in late 2014 or early 2015.  
Second, there have been indications of a modest improvement in the pace of project 
implementation  at  the  level  of  the  central  government.  On-going  public  sector 
projects include the Point Fortin Highway, the Accelerated Housing Programme, the 
Education Modernization Programme and the Roads and Bridges Construction and 
Rehabilitation  Project.  In  addition,  the  Caroni  GREEN  Initiative  is  expected  to 
continue the enhancement of production in the Agriculture sector. Several projects 
undertaken by both the public and private sectors are expected to boost non-energy 
activity, while spill over effects from improving energy output should also positively 
impact non-energy growth.  
Third, for the most part businesses should not be facing major credit constraints. A 
final resolution to the long-standing CLICO issue, if successfully negotiated, should 
give  a  cautious  boost  to  overall  confidence  and  reinforce  the  positive  economic 
growth trend.  
  On this basis, the Central Bank is projecting real GDP growth of around 1 ½ per cent for all 
of 2013. We expect economic growth to strengthen to 2 ½ percent in 2014.  
Though  increased  demand  side  pressures  created  by  the  pick-up  in  economic  activity  can 
lead to some up-tick in inflation, we expect core inflation to remain stable. Recent initiatives 
to increase domestic food production should continue to help reduce food inflation, barring 
shocks such as unfavourable weather conditions.  
Sharp contraction in economic growth  
Soaring food price inflation  
Declining external reserve position  
Weak business confidence  
Conclusion  
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Trinidad and Tobago has been steadily navigating the 
choppy  waters  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  But  this  is  not  the 
message that we seem to be absorbing as a nation. Instead, it usually tends to be one of 
negative sentiment.  
When I assumed office just over 15 months ago, I faced the following economic conditions:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Today:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Therefore  is  not  all  doom  and  gloom.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  not  complacent.  We 
recognize the inflection point faced by the global economy. We recognize the considerable 
economic  challenges  facing  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  especially  diversifying  away  from  the 
heavy reliance on the energy sector.  
The  Central  Bank  is  absolutely  committed  to  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  so  the 
business sector can continue to make longer-term decisions in an environment of increasing 
Economic growth is slow but steady  
Food price inflation is down to within single digits  
External reserves have stabilized  
Business confidence is returning, albeit slowly  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
confidence.  By  explaining  the  cross-currents  at  work  in  our  economy,  our  projections  for 
what’s ahead, and our monetary policy response, we are doing our part to help strengthen 
business confidence.  
So now it is your turn to be the positive change you want to see in Trinidad and Tobago.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
