Mugur Isărescu: Relations between euro and non-euro countries within 
the Banking Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  before  the 
UniCredit 15th International Advisory Board, Rome, 10 July 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first thank UniCredit and Mr. Romano Prodi for inviting me to make this address in 
front of such a distinguished audience. I was asked to talk about the soon-to-be-operational 
Banking  Union,  specifically  about  the  relations  between  the  euro  area  and  non-euro  area 
members and, generally, its anticipated impact on investor confidence across the European 
Union.  
As you probably know, in my capacity as Governor of the National Bank of Romania, I have 
argued in favour of the Banking Union project. I see the Banking Union as a substitute for the 
fiscal counterpart of the Monetary Union required for the proper functioning of the latter. It is 
hardly  imaginable  that  a  consensus  on  fiscal  union  is  achievable,  particularly  in  today’s 
Europe,  where  both  payers  and  recipients  are  known  beforehand.  Consequently,  to  target 
first the Banking Union has the distinct advantage of actually being feasible. In this context, I 
am in favour of Romania’s entering the Banking Union before joining the Euro area through 
the close cooperation arrangement with European Central Bank.  
My  speech  will  endeavour  to  outline  the  arguments  that  support  the  opt-in  decision  for 
Romania, but I believe that, despite the slightly different circumstances, the reasoning also 
holds true for other non-euro area countries – such as Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic 
or Bulgaria.  
General remarks 
Before dealing with the arguments underpinning our position regarding the Banking Union, 
let me give you a short account of Romania’s recent economic history that should enable all 
of you to better understand our particular circumstances. 
No  doubt  the  crisis  has  taken  its  toll  on  Romania’s  economy,  given  the  large  imbalances 
which had been steadily accumulating during the boom years. Whether the crisis has ended 
or not on the European level is still a matter of debate. What may be said for certain is that 
Romania  undertook  the  necessary  adjustments  during  the  2009–2012  period  and  the 
preconditions for sustainable growth are now in place. 
Indeed,  the  outcome  of  these  adjustments  may  already  be  seen  in  the  2013  economic 
performance, which hopefully marks a turnaround in Romania’s economic development: 
• 
rapid  (judged  by  the  current  standards  in  the  European  Union)  economic  growth, 
namely 3.5 percent, 
sizeable  adjustment  of  the  current  account  deficit,  from  the  double-digit  area 
(between 2006 and 2008) to 1.1 percent, 
historically low inflation (1.55 percent at the end of the year), 
fiscal deficit well below 3 percent. 
• 
• 
Improving fundamentals led to an upgrade in sovereign ratings, so that Romania is now rated 
again  investment grade by  all  major  rating  agencies.  This  shift  in  perception  is  one  of  the 
reasons why Romania weathered comparatively well the portfolio rebalancing prompted by 
the  political  turmoil  in  Turkey  and  is  now  receiving  increased  capital  inflows,  despite  its 
proximity to the Ukraine and the associated geopolitical tensions. Other reasons are probably 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
related  to  the  relatively  low  importance  of  trade  with  both  Russia  and  Ukraine  (less  than 
5 percent  of  total  exports),  as  well  as  the  comparatively  high  degree  of  self-reliance  as 
regards natural gas consumption – Romania imported in 2013 only 15 percent of its natural 
gas consumption, far less than most other countries in the European Union. 
From a financial standpoint, there are no direct links between the Romanian banking system 
and the Russian and the Ukrainian ones. There is no Russian or Ukrainian capital present in 
the Romanian banking system, and exposures of Romanian registered banks to entities in 
the two above-mentioned countries are marginal. However, there are potential indirect spill 
overs  that  could  materialize  through  the  common  lender  channel,  given  the  presence  of 
banking units owned by some Austrian and French banking groups in the two systems. The 
comfortable  solvency  and  liquidity  buffers  in  the  Romanian  banking  system  should  help 
alleviate the effects of potential spill overs. 
Euro adoption and Banking Union 
For  a  non-euro  area  country  the  issue  of  participating  in  the  Banking  Union  is  intrinsically 
linked to that of euro adoption. After the crisis broke out, all non-euro area EU countries in 
Central and Eastern Europe with floating exchange rate regimes, as well as Bulgaria, shifted 
to  a  wait-and-see  approach  as  regards  euro  adoption,  even  though,  in  most  of  them,  the 
Maastricht criteria were already fulfilled or within reach. 
This  state  of  affairs  may  appear  paradoxical,  given  that,  shortly  after  these  countries’ 
accession  to  the  European  Union,  their  euro  adoption  target  dates  were  very  ambitious, 
despite the scant progress at the time in fulfilling the Maastricht criteria – 2008 in Hungary, 
2008/2009  in  Poland,  2009/2010  in  the  Czech  Republic,  2010  in  Bulgaria  and  2014  in 
Romania. None of these deadlines were met. 
Currently, virtually all new Member States outside the euro zone lack a euro adoption target 
date, which is indicative of a substantial shift in approaching the euro changeover as a 
whole rather than their inability or difficulty to comply  with the reference values of nominal 
convergence. How did this change come about? 
This shift in approach occurred amid euro adoption benefits becoming less obvious, to 
which  added  the  increasingly  evident  costs.  This  is  also  reflected  by  the  Flash 
Eurobarometer, which indicates a significant decline in the number of those who believe that 
adopting  the  euro  is  beneficial  for  their  country.  Figures  differ  across  countries  –  with  the 
lowest  numbers  in  the  Czech  Republic  (around  20  percent)  and  the  highest  in  Romania 
(above 50 percent) – but the tendency is the same. 
Referring to the benefits of euro adoption, one of the prominent ones, namely the lower 
financing costs, is no longer obvious. 
The  incomplete  institutional  setup  of  the  European  project  in  general  and  the  European 
Monetary Union in particular – weak fiscal rules and the lack of any transnational instruments 
that  would  have  enabled  monitoring  cross-border  private  capital  flows  –  gave  rise  to  a 
number of vulnerabilities which the recent crisis has exposed. 
To  be  more  specific,  what  sets  the  European  Union  apart  from  the  other  industrialized 
economies is precisely the fact that the initial banking crisis which hit everybody here gave 
birth to fears of sovereign default, which reinforced banking system vulnerability and sapped 
investor confidence further, thus deepening the recession. 
The consequence of all that was the financial fragmentation issue, which is precisely the 
reason  why  the  lower  financing  cost  benefit  of  euro  adoption,  seems  to  have 
vanished.  Another  unfortunate  consequence  was  that  the  benefits  brought  about  by 
commercial integration were significantly diminished by lack of growth in the euro area. 
The fixes proposed to the institutional architecture of the European Monetary Union, such as 
the setup of the European Stability Mechanism and even that of the Banking Union, brought 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about  direct  costs  of  adopting  the  euro.  The  issue  here  is  not  only  the  financial  effort 
involved, but also the difficulty, from a political perspective, to explain to the public the need 
for a financial contribution to mechanisms benefiting wealthier countries for the time being. A 
case in point is the fall of the Radičová cabinet in Slovakia in 2011. 
Euro adoption – a conclusion 
In my view, euro adoption is in the best interest of EU Member States in the long run – given 
the high degree of business cycle correlation and market integration –, but several essential 
preconditions, added to the nominal criteria, need to be cumulatively fulfilled in order to make 
the most of these benefits. 
I have been on this job long enough to remember a time when the dominant view was that 
fulfilling nominal convergence criteria was enough for successful euro area membership. The 
paradigm  appears  to  have  shifted.  First,  the  emphasis  falls  now  on  the  sustainability  of 
nominal  criteria  fulfilment.  Second,  achievement  of  a  relatively  high  degree  of  income  per 
capita convergence, prior to joining the euro area, is considered increasingly important, since 
too much catching-up in terms of real convergence poses the risk of more intricate economic 
cycle management in the absence of independent monetary policy. 
Third, another essential prerequisite is that the new institutional framework of the euro area 
has to prove its efficacy in preventing and addressing the imbalances menacing economic 
activity.  Until  then,  to  paraphrase  the  conclusion  of  a  very  recent  article  by  Simon  Tilford, 
having a seat at the top table, where the big decisions are made, comes at the cost of taking 
on much more economic risk. 
To sum up, each and every Member State should put their houses in order before joining 
the euro area so as to be able to seize the opportunities of the single currency. I share the 
opinion that thorough preparedness is essential. 
In  Romania,  a  political  consensus  has  emerged  recently,  as  both  the  President  and  the 
Government  stated  publicly  their  support  for  1  January  2019  as  a  target  date  for  euro 
adoption.  The  objective  was  subsequently  included  in  the  latest  Convergence  programme 
update (April 2014), but a detailed roadmap is still pending. 
Personally, I think that setting a target date is a good idea and I have publicly supported it 
myself.  I  believe  that  having  such  a  target  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  thorough 
preparedness, provided that the process is well-managed. Let me elaborate. 
First, the opportunity to have a political consensus on a topic of national interest cannot be 
missed  in  a  country  such  as  Romania,  where  political  passions  run  high  and  general 
disagreement – over almost any issue – is much more common than agreement. 
Second,  such  an  objective  –  feasible,  yet  ambitious  –  acts  as  both  a  policy  anchor,  thus 
fostering coherent policy action, and a catalyst for the needed structural reforms. At this point 
in time, Romania is fulfilling three out of the four Maastricht criteria, namely the sustainability 
of  the  fiscal  position,  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange  rate  stability 
(although  we  are  not  technically  in  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism).  Meeting  the  price 
stability criterion is probably just a matter of months, until the recent low inflation numbers 
feed into the 12-month average rate used as a reference. 
I  am  fully  aware  that  we  still  have  a  long  and  difficult  road  ahead,  as  several  years  of 
relentless efforts are needed in order to ensure a lasting fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria, 
to make further progress in the catching-up process in the area of real convergence, as well 
as to push forward the structural reforms required for enhancing the resilience and flexibility 
of the domestic economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Banking Union 
Obviously,  euro  adoption  automatically  implies  Banking  Union  membership  and 
therefore,  since  Romania  has  already  set  the  changeover  target  date,  joining  the 
Banking Union is merely a matter of timing: should it occur on the euro adoption date or 
as soon as possible? 
There  are  strong  arguments  in  favour  of  rapidly  joining  the  Banking  Union.  First  and 
foremost, I believe it is always preferable to have a voice in the setup of a mechanism the 
working  of  which  will  affect  all  EU  countries  anyway,  irrespective  of  whether  they  are 
members  or  not.  Participating  will  also  have  the  added  advantage  to  have  first-hand 
knowledge  of  the  decisions  made  in  this  context  and  thus  avoid  having  partial  and/or 
distorted  information  communicated  by  parent  banks  in  accordance  with  group-level 
agendas. 
The second argument relies on the fact that, in many of the non-euro area new  Member 
States,  the domestic banking systems are dominated by banks headquartered in the 
euro area – in the case of Romania, for example, euro area banks account for 80 percent of 
the banking system’s assets; the same is true for the Czech Republic and Hungary (where 
foreign-controlled banks hold above 80 percent of total assets) and to a lesser – though still 
significant  –  extent  in  Bulgaria  and  Poland  (around  70  and  60  percent  respectively). 
Subsidiaries  and  branches  of  these  banks  are  often  important  enough  so  that  they  are 
deemed  systemic  at  the  host  country  level,  even  though  their  balance  sheets  are  small 
relative to their parent entities. 
Non-euro countries are therefore already well integrated into the European financial market. 
Clearly, the objective of preserving the integrity and ensuring the smooth functioning of the 
European financial market is not something that concerns only the euro area, but is relevant 
at the EU level. 
In  this  context,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  Romania  embraced  the  Banking  Union  idea  –  it 
makes perfect sense that the reality of a significant, even systemic, cross-border presence in 
the  banking  systems  of  non-euro  area  countries  is  matched  by  effective  cross-border 
supervisory and regulatory institutions. 
A third argument is that Banking Union membership should benefit participating countries 
through  the  removal  of  an  incentive  for  deleveraging  on  the  part  of  banks  with  foreign 
capital.  The  on-going  cross-border  deleveraging  process,  while  reflecting  balance  sheet 
repair  in  host  countries,  as  well  as  constrained  demand  for  new  borrowing,  must  be 
monitored carefully. To give you an idea of the size of the phenomenon, as compared to the 
beginning  of  the  crisis,  external  funding  from  parent  banks  has  decreased  in  Romania  by 
35 percent,  about  half  of  the  reduction  occurring  last  year.  The  rebalancing  of  bank 
funding  away  from  parent-subsidiary  lines  of  credit  and  more  towards  domestic 
funding is necessary and appropriate (inter alia, it reduces loan-to-deposit ratios and the 
stock  of 
financial  stability 
favourably), but must not be unduly accelerated in the short and medium term, especially 
when  superimposed  on  an  on-going  fiscal  consolidation  effort,  as  this  puts  excessive 
downward pressure on economic growth. 
As  a  fourth  argument  for  Banking  Union  membership,  there  are  also  potential  benefits 
which  relate  to  eliminating  the  possibilities  of  jurisdictional  arbitrage  (for  example,  by 
preventing  the  widespread  potential  conversion  of  foreign-owned  bank  subsidiaries  into 
branches), as well as to creating a more competitive market by reducing distortions and 
entry  barriers.  There  is  a  lot  of  potential  for  increased  efficiency  of  the  banking  sector  by 
virtue of being a member of the Banking Union. A more efficient banking sector cannot but 
bolster  the  long-run  growth  potential  of  an  economy.  A  single  supervisor  with  a  single 
rulebook  entails  that  supervisory  and  regulatory  activities  should  be  implemented  in  a 
harmonized  and  consistent  manner,  therefore  lowering  or  eliminating  the  current  cost  of 
compliance for banks with cross-border operations. 
indebtedness,  both  processes 
foreign  private 
impacting 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Currently, there are widespread differences in terms of the interpretation and application of 
regulatory and prudential definitions across Member States, and especially in what concerns 
supervisory forbearance. In terms of the latter, the National Bank of Romania has chosen a 
very  transparent  and  tough  approach,  with  the  result  that  non-performing  loans  indicators 
have soared. At the moment, the non-performing loan ratio calculated based on prudential 
regulations  stands  above  22  percent.  However,  considering  the  new  indicator  on  asset 
quality  defined  by  the  European  Banking  Authority,  which  covers  both  government  and 
non-government exposures, the ratio declines to around 17 percent and is seen falling even 
further when fully provisioned non-performing loans are written off. 
In this context, the recent increase in provisioning by the Romanian subsidiary of Erste Bank 
should not be interpreted as a tightening of the supervisor’s stance in the run-up to the asset 
quality  review,  but  simply  as  business  as  usual,  in  the  sense  that  the  bank  is  correctly 
applying the same regulations and accounting standards as the rest of the system. 
Fifth and final argument, apart from the potential benefits mentioned so far, I believe that 
not  opting  for  the  Banking  Union  may  entail  significant  costs  for  non-euro  area 
countries  as  they  are  vulnerable  to  contagion  effects.  This  means  that,  if  such  effects 
materialize, they can only rely on their own mechanisms, resources and instruments, which 
may  prove  not  up  to  the  task,  a  situation  not  unlike  the  one  in  some  of  the  Eurozone 
countries during the recent crisis – the very event the Banking Union idea sprang from. 
The strong presence of foreign banks in the banking systems of non-euro area countries also 
generates  opportunity  costs  for  not  participating  in  the  single  resolution  mechanism.  A 
solution  for  dealing  with  an  ailing  bank,  which  takes  into  account  only  home  country’s 
interests, is definitely a sub-optimal outcome from the perspective of a host country. What I 
can say based on Romania’s recent experience during the Cypriot crisis is that, even though 
in  the  end  the  issue  of  the  Romanian  branch  of  the  Bank  of  Cyprus  was  solved  in  a 
satisfactory manner, having in place a single resolution mechanism would have considerably 
improved  the  situation  by  enhancing  home-host coordination  during  the resolution  process 
and by preventing the restriction of access of Bank of Cyprus’ Romanian depositors to their 
funds. 
Open issues regarding the Banking Union 
An open issue regarding the single resolution mechanism refers to the treatment of residual 
losses  to  be  covered  from  public  funds  before  the  required  amounts  have 
accumulated  to  the  single  resolution  fund.  In  my  opinion,  a  balance  must  be  sought 
between the structure of ownership of a credit institution in resolution and the origin of the 
public funds which may be used in the process, with home country fiscal authorities covering 
the  majority  of  the  proceeds,  once  the  asset  quality  review  has  proven  that  host  country 
supervision was carried out correctly and effectively. 
I hope that an appropriate solution will be found to this matter, the same as in the case of the 
concerns voiced by some non-euro area countries in the early stages of the Banking Union 
project. 
What I have in mind is the issue of the representation in the decision-making mechanisms 
and that of the contribution requirements in the event of their opting in the Banking Union. 
Both concerns have been addressed during the negotiations. Specifically, the unequal status 
of  non-euro  area  countries  in  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  decision-making  bodies  – 
given  their  lack  of  representation  in  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
even though they enjoy representation in the Supervisory Board – has been addressed by 
establishing a mediatory body which would intervene in case a decision of the Supervisory 
Board is overturned by the Governing Council. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Furthermore, the current decision-making setup of the Single Resolution Mechanism ensures 
equal  treatment  of  the  countries  participating  in  the  Banking  Union,  regardless  of  whether 
they are Eurozone countries or countries that have established “close cooperation”. 
Finally,  the  concerns  of  non-euro  area  Member  States  that  the  European  Central  Bank’s 
capital key would be used as a reference for raising fund contributions have been addressed 
by the decision to make them proportional to bank liabilities, less own funds and guaranteed 
deposits, which significantly reduces the participation costs of countries with relatively lower 
degrees of financial intermediation, such as Romania (34.8 percent of GDP in 2013) or even 
Poland (53.2 percent of GDP). 
Still, I think there is one particular issue where equal treatment of euro area and non-euro 
area members of the Banking Union is not ensured, namely the access to euro liquidity. 
Unlike euro area countries, which have access to financing from the European Central Bank, 
in  non-euro  countries  liquidity  will  have  to  be  provided  by  their  respective  central  banks, 
including in euro. 
I believe there is a need to start discussions with the European Central Bank on short-term 
access  to  euro  liquidity  against  non-euro  collateral  of  appropriate  quality  for  domestically-
owned credit institutions. Of course, I see this access as an emergency facility, which can be 
tapped only under severe or imminent stress to non-Eurozone host country financial stability. 
The issue is relevant for Central and Eastern European countries, among which Romania, 
where a significant degree of currency substitution in euro persists from before 2008 in terms 
of the stock of both loans and deposits (in Romania, more than 50 percent in the case of 
loans  and  30  percent  in  the  case  of  deposits).  Such  restricted  access  would  effectively 
remove  any  distortions  between  the  treatment  of  credit  institutions  that  are  domestic  legal 
persons, but have majority Eurozone capital ownership (where access to euro liquidity may 
be done via parent banks), and the treatment applicable to banks which do not have capital 
originating in the Eurozone. 
Concluding remarks 
Summing  up,  it  is my  view  that  Romania  should  be  part  of  all  three  pillars  of the  Banking 
Union – despite the sequenced manner in which they will inevitably come into being, all of 
them are required for the Banking Union to function effectively. I trust that adhering to this 
European  project  will  strengthen  financial  stability,  further  increasing  confidence  in  the 
national  banking  sector  (through  the  harmonisation  of  supervisory  practices  and  deposit 
guarantee  schemes),  as  well  as  fostering  sustainable  lending  and  economic  growth  (by 
reducing fragmentation of European financial markets). 
My  opinion  that  Romania  should  participate  in  the  Banking  Union  may  seem  overly 
optimistic,  but  as  a  long-standing  supporter  of the  European  project,  I believe  that  staying 
positive is the only way forward. Such an attitude was actually inspired by the many meetings 
I  had  over  the  years,  in  Frankfurt,  Basel  or  Brussels,  with  some  of  the  leading  minds  of 
Europe,  among  which  Tomasso  Padoa  Schioppa,  who  said  that  “the  crisis  will  possibly 
generate the means that are now lacking and get us closer to an accomplished Union”. 
I do think that the severity with which the crisis hit the European Union and the scramble for 
solutions  that  followed  do  not  indicate  that  the  European  Union  is  an  intrinsically  flawed 
project, but rather an incomplete one. In other words, going only halfway does not pay off. 
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
