  Mario Draghi: Interview in De Telegraaf 
Interview  with  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  De  Telegraaf, 
published 21 June 2014. 
 When Mario Draghi took over as President of the European Central Bank in November 2011, 
he  stepped  into  the  eye  of  the  hurricane.  The  euro  area  was  confronted  with  serious 
problems.  After  the  financial  misery  in  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland,  larger  countries  like 
Spain  and  Italy  were  also  threatening  to  collapse.  Panic  was  widespread,  both  among 
politicians and among investors. 
As of his very first day in office as the President of the central bank, the Italian had to take 
crisis  measures.  The  most  serious  concerns  are  a  thing  of  the  past,  but  Europe  is  still 
experiencing economic woes. Draghi remains outwardly calm despite the turbulence he has 
had to deal with. Did he ever have doubts about taking on the job? “No, no, I never hesitated. 
Things happen.” 
Mario Draghi is 66 years old and has a further five and a half years ahead of him in Frankfurt. 
He met the reporters of De Telegraaf for an exclusive interview on the 35th floor of the ECB 
tower. In the near future, he will be moving to gleaming new premises, but at the moment he 
is still surrounded by what his predecessors Jean-Claude Trichet and Wim Duisenberg have 
left him. “Only the books are different – they are mine.” 
He is happy to take up the Dutch debate on the euro. He doesn’t think much of politicians 
who promise the earth outside the single European currency. “Some people think we should 
move back in time, thirty or forty years back. I prefer to go forward.” And that also means to 
continue to build up Monetary Union because it has by no means been completed. 
Minister Dijsselbloem said recently that the crisis was over. What is your view? 
“The recovery has now been ongoing for around nine months. It is still weak and unevenly 
distributed across the euro area. And it is vulnerable. Accidents could happen in the global 
economy that can quickly change the situation. That might be a disruption on the financial 
markets, or geopolitical risks. In addition, unemployment has now been stabilising for some 
six months. Very slowly it has been going down. Also in crisis countries such as Portugal. But 
the level of unemployment is still very high. That alone poses a risk to the recovery because 
it leads to lower consumer demand.” 
You would thus define a recovery as any growth above zero? 
“No, but economic activity is gradually, though slowly, picking up. Both manufacturers’ and 
consumers’ confidence has been quite good in recent times. However, in the first quarter of 
this year we saw slower growth.” 
The troubles in Iraq are causing oil prices to surge. How much of a risk is that? 
“Our mandate is to ensure price stability. If inflation in the medium term is higher than the 
target of close to, but below, 2%, we are concerned. But we are also concerned if it is far 
lower. We are constantly asking ourselves why inflation is so low in the euro area. Initially, 
this  was  due  to  lower  energy  and  food  prices.  Later,  US  dollar  prices  of  these  products 
stabilised, but the euro appreciated, causing inflation to fall still further. Higher oil prices are 
sure to have an impact on inflation, at least if we do not experience a further appreciation of 
the euro. But it is also good news for the countries that produce energy, as in the case of the 
Netherlands with its gas.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
At least if the winter is not too mild, since that cost the Netherlands quite a bit in terms 
of gas sales at the beginning of the year. 
“Yes,  indeed.  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  the  significant  fall  in  economic  activity  in  the 
Netherlands  in  the  first  quarter  was  due  primarily  to  this  fact?  Many  people  simply  don’t 
realise just how large the energy sector is. Incidentally, one has to acknowledge that too low 
inflation, while being generally negative for growth and especially so in the euro area, does 
support real disposable incomes. That is one of the reasons why consumption in the euro 
area is rising.” 
Compared  with  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States,  economic  activity  in 
Europe is still rather weak. 
“Our recovery is in an earlier stage that that in the United States, the United Kingdom and 
Japan.  That  is  why  the  ECB  adopted  a  number  of  policy  measures  on  5  June:  a  lower 
interest rate (and for banks a negative deposit rate), the introduction of support for banks that 
is linked to the provision of credit, the so-called TLTROs and preparations for a programme 
for purchases of packaged corporate loans, asset-backed securities. In April, I already said in 
Amsterdam that there are three situations that could induce the ECB to take action. One was 
an unwarranted tightening of the monetary policy stance that is reflected in an increase in 
short-term interest rates. That could lead to higher medium-term interest rates, and thus also 
impact  economic  growth  and  price  stability.  The  second  was  an  ongoing  deterioration  of 
lending. That was also a matter for our attention because lending has now been weak for a 
very long time. The third development was a deterioration of the prospects for price stability 
over the medium term.” 
And all three occurred at one and the same time? 
“No, we responded primarily to the first two. We have not seen any deflation in the sense of 
prices  declining  across  the  whole  spectrum  in  the  euro  area,  with  households  and  firms 
postponing consumption and investment because they are waiting for lower prices. What we 
do see is that low inflation persists for a long time. If it lasts too long, adjustment in the crisis 
countries is made more difficult. In a situation of low inflation, wages in these countries need 
to really decline in absolute terms in order to improve their competitiveness.” 
Does the fact play a role that debt weighs more heavily when inflation is low? 
“Certainly,  that  is  yet  another  consequence  of  low  inflation.  The  reduction  of  debt  levels, 
which  is  of great  importance  in  large  parts  of the  euro  area,  becomes more  difficult  in  the 
event of low inflation.” 
Private and public sector debt? 
“Yes, both private and public debt.” 
Low interest rates are detrimental for savers, and for people’s pensions. How would 
you answer such concern? 
“It  is  a  very  understandable  concern.  Many  life  insurance  policies  and  pension  plans 
promised far higher value at the time they were agreed.” 
How long will interest rates continue to remain low? 
“We  have  prolonged  banks’  access  to  unlimited  liquidity  up  to  the  end  of  2016.  That  is  a 
signal. Our programme in support of bank lending to businesses will continue for four years. 
That shows that interest rates will remain low over a longer period. But thereafter they will 
increase when the recovery will firm up.” 
If the United States were already to raise interest rates in spring 2015, would Europe 
have to wait until spring 2017? 
“We will have to wait and see what happens, but the extension to the end of 2016 is a signal. 
Incidentally, the United States has reduced the growth figure for the first quarter.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In view of the impairment of pension entitlements, people are spending less because 
they have to set more aside. 
“We do not see this. There is no lack of spending in the countries that are affected most by 
the low interest rates. I understand the concerns about the low interest rates, but on the other 
hand, they are what leads to more investment and higher growth. And we need to take into 
account precisely which interest rate we are talking about. These pension products invest in 
government  bonds  with  long  maturities.  Many  of  the  reasons  why  interest  rates  on 
government bonds are low have nothing to do with the ECB. They are low because countries 
such  as  the  Netherlands  and  Germany  have  become  safe  havens.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  life 
insurers  invested  in  bonds  issued  by  all  countries,  both  ‘core’  countries  and  ‘non-core’ 
countries. The interest earned on their investment was thus higher because weaker countries 
had also been included. The crisis created financial fragmentation in that insurers all used 
government bonds issued by their own countries to fulfil obligations. That caused insurers in 
the north to be confronted with low yields. Returns in the south were particularly good. Once 
there  is  renewed  confidence  in  the  euro  area,  the  northern  countries  will  no  longer  be the 
only safe havens. Money will then again flow freely and the recovery of confidence will lead 
to higher yields in the northern countries. Besides that, we have to conduct monetary policy 
for the whole euro area. We cannot consider only one single point of interest.” 
Do you have any understanding for the fact that people in the north feel that they are 
having to pay for the mistakes made by the south? 
“I am well aware of this conflict. Some months ago, I held a lecture on Monetary Union in the 
United  States.  I  said  then  that  there  were  major  imbalances  between  various  euro  area 
countries,  large  debtor  and  large  creditor  countries.  I  said  that  it  was  never  a  goal  of 
Monetary Union to create permanent creditors and permanent debtors. That would have to 
change in order to have a balanced Union. An American in the audience responded to this by 
saying ‘what you are saying does not hold water because here in the United States, the State 
of Oklahoma has always been a debtor, while New York has always been a creditor, and that 
is no cause for us to worry. So why should you be worried about it?’ I think that this touches 
on the heart of the matter. The debts of US citizens are all treated equally, irrespective of 
where they come from.” 
Because the United States is a political union. 
“Indeed. The Dutch have a problem with paying for the Greeks, but not with paying for other 
Dutch. But let’s look at that ‘paying’. It is not at all clear what some countries have really paid 
for other countries. In Greece, there was a write-off on debts held by the financial sector, but 
there was no further default. It has cost the euro area countries far more to save their own 
banks.” 
Will Greece ever be able to repay its debt? 
“If  Greece  continues  with  its  structural  reforms,  restores  order  to  its  public  finances  and 
improves its competitiveness, growth there will increase. If that happens, Greece will be able 
to  do  so. Greece  has  less  debt to  service  over  the  next five  years  than  Belgium.  Much  of 
Greek debt has a very low interest rate and very long maturities.” 
The ECB has taken many measures, but has not undertaken any quantitative easing, 
i.e. has not purchased bonds. What needs to happen before you would start doing so? 
“That  would  be  the  answer  to  the  third  situation  that  I  mentioned  in  Amsterdam,  a 
deterioration  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  term.  At  the  moment,  however,  we 
are focusing on the measures announced on 5 June.” 
Is it legally possible to buy up government bonds? There is still a court case pending 
on this issue. 
“This is indeed possible within our mandate, namely if the purchases are aimed at ensuring 
price stability. We are not permitted to provide Member States with monetary financing.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
You were very happy about the unanimity of the decision taken on 5 June. Would a 
unanimous decision also be possible on quantitative easing? 
“Any guess would be premature. Quantitative easing can include not only government bonds, 
but also private sector loans. We will discuss that when the time comes.” 
Your statement “whatever it takes”, to save the euro at any cost, made at the time of 
the  announcement  of  a  new  government  bond  purchasing  programme,  marks  a 
turning point in the euro crisis. Do you feel that you no longer need to follow through 
on it? 
(Smiles)  “In  contrast  to  both  the  initial  purchases  of  government  bonds  and  possible 
quantitative easing, the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) is aimed at a 
very specific risk, namely the so-called tail risk of the euro area falling apart.” 
Did you ever fear that that might happen? 
“In July 2012, there were more than enough reasons for concern. In my short statement in 
London, I said that one of the mistakes many people make is to underestimate how much 
political capital has already been invested in the euro. I was very much aware of that fact. 
Just before I made that statement, the political leaders had fully committed themselves to the 
euro at the European Summit, within the scope of which the Banking Union was created.” 
Are the OMTs some kind of nuclear bomb, a threat that will never be carried out? 
“The markets reacted in a way that made it unnecessary to use the programme. The spreads 
between  the  interest  rates  [on  bonds]  of  southern  euro  area  countries  and  Germany 
narrowed  sharply.  That  was  something  that  could  not  have  been  achieved  by  any  other 
monetary policy measure.” 
Were you surprised by this effect? 
“By the magnitude of the effect? Yes, certainly. We were all surprised.” 
Or  were  you  relieved  that  you  had  merely  had  to  promise  action  without  following 
through with it? 
“In order to be credible, we also had to be sure that we could actually use the instrument. We 
were not bluffing, most certainly not.” 
The other side to the coin is that you bought so much time for politicians that they no 
longer needed to implement reforms so rapidly. Do you also see this other side? 
“Yes and no. We have a mandate to safeguard price stability. We are not responsible for how 
politicians make use of the time they have. I do not want to mix the responsibilities of the 
central bank with those of governments. But look at the extent of the reforms undertaken by 
governments since 2012. You will then need to admit that considerable progress has been 
made. Take Spain, for example, which has restructured its banking sector and reformed the 
labour  market.  Portugal  is  another  example  and  Ireland  yet  another.  And  even  in  Greece 
progress has been remarkable.” 
You have said repeatedly that the euro is an irreversible project. It is understandable 
that you say that, but is this not something for politicians to decide? 
“Our  mandate  is  to  ensure  price  stability.  There  was  more  than  enough  evidence  that  a 
collapse  of the  euro  would  endanger  price  stability,  and  therefore  our  action  was  squarely 
within our mandate.” 
You saved the euro. In doing so, did you not take a political decision? 
“No, certainly not. The issue is by no means political. My statement in July 2012 was aimed 
at price stability. There was unjustified uncertainty about the future of the euro, not political 
uncertainty but a financial one. Unjustified speculative expectations about a break-up of the 
euro had been self-fulfilling in a vicious spiral for several months. They had produced a very 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  high  level  of  interest  rates.  These  rates  were  harming  the  real  economy  and  the  banking 
sector.  The  consequence  might  have  been  a  new  credit  crisis  and  the  impairment  of  our 
monetary policy, and therefore of our ability to maintain price stability. There has far too often 
been criticism that it was a political decision, but that is simply not true.” 
Much  has  been  undertaken  to  close  the  gaps  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union, 
stricter budget rules and a banking union. Is everything now in place? 
“The  banking  union  is  a  major  step  forward  in  the  direction  of  a  more  complete  monetary 
union. The crisis has shown that the economic policies of one country have a clear impact on 
other countries. Economic policy cannot be a purely national matter. Where fiscal policy is 
concerned,  a  certain  degree  of  Union-wide  discipline  is  already  given.  But  the  marked 
imbalances  between  euro  area  countries  are  due  to  a  lack  of  structural  reforms  in  some 
countries.  The  next  step  to  be  taken  is  to  subject  structural  reforms,  too,  to  Union-wide 
discipline.” 
Current economic policy coordination in the euro area is merely a first step? 
“Yes, indeed, it is merely a first step.” 
What will the second step look like? 
“That is a matter for the political domain to decide. In the case of the budget agreements, 
sovereignty has been shared among Member States. That should also be done with respect 
to  the  labour  market,  competitiveness,  bureaucracy,  agreements  on  the  internal  market. 
Sovereignty  needs  to  be  shared  at  a  level  other  than the  national  sphere. That  is  where I 
stop. Because now there are several options for politicians to choose from. You could grant 
greater powers to the European Commission, or to the Member States within the European 
Council, or you could create new European institutions. That is not for me to decide.” 
The contention of some politicians that EMU is complete is thus not correct? 
“No, far more is necessary for a perfect monetary union.” 
Is a budgetary authority necessary at the euro area level, a fund for the compensation 
of weak countries? 
“That  is  a  highly  political  issue.  Compliance  with  existing  rules  would  be  enough.  But  it  is 
clear that my predecessor in office, Trichet, made a strong case for a budgetary authority.” 
Returning  to  your  example  of  the  State  of  Oklahoma,  would  that  not  be  a  form  of 
financial solidarity that is needed in the euro area? 
“There is at least one difference. The United States is a single country, the euro area is not. 
Given the more complex structure, we must seek a design that best ensures that economic 
policy is regarded as being of common interest.” 
Do you understand the concerns about such a transfer of powers? The outcome of the 
European  elections  can  also  be  viewed  against  that  background.  Do  you  have  a 
solution to this issue? 
“Are  we  really  so  sure that  it  would  have  been  better  if  we  all  still  had  our  own  currency? 
Would  we  have  been  better  off  over  the  past  ten,  fifteen  years?  In  the  1970s,  1980s  and 
1990s, we experienced a whole number of currency devaluations with often high inflation as 
a result. We currently have a formidable degree of price stability, a low rate of inflation. That 
offers enormous opportunities for growth and job creation. It is not the fault of the euro that 
economic policy went wrong in some countries. But let us please conduct that debate. It is 
important as such. Some people feel that we should turn time back thirty or forty years, but I 
prefer to move forward.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Do  you  understand  that  people  see  the  euro  as  the  cause  of  the  crisis,  and  of 
unemployment? 
“The crisis and the unemployment are the result of a very severe financial crisis and partly 
also of wrong economic policies. The euro may have masked it but it has not caused it. We 
must end the crisis in Monetary Union and enable it to create prosperity and jobs again.” 
That sounds terrific, but the many EU Summits on growth and job creation have all led 
to nothing. What needs to be done? 
“That is a complicated issue. We cannot accept the present because we currently have low 
growth and insufficient job creation. On the other hand, we should not dream of a past that 
cannot  be  brought  back  and  that  cannot  by  any  means  be  clearly  taken  to  be  better. We 
must  work  for  the  future  in  order  to  achieve  not  only  stability,  but  also  growth  and 
employment.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
