  Mark Carney: Putting the right ideas into practice 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  Institute  and  Faculty  of  Actuaries  General  Insurance  Conference, 
Wales, 25 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is an honour to be invited to address you today. Insurance is at the core of the new Bank of 
England. 
As regulator, we are tasked with ensuring the safety and soundness of the UK’s insurance 
companies and the protection of their policyholders. To discharge these responsibilities, we 
draw on the entire resources of the Bank. 
Fully one third of our regulatory staff – over 200 supervisors and 50 actuaries – are engaged 
in supervising insurance companies. But that is just the start. 
Our supervisors are supported by hundreds of credit risk analysts, scores of monetary policy 
experts and macro-financial analysts. 
As  a  central  bank  with  responsibilities  for  both monetary  and financial  stability,  we  have  a 
view of both the asset and liability sides of your balance sheets. 
And as a highly active participant in global financial reform, we influence the measures that 
are reshaping the global system. 
In  all  of  our  actions,  we  recognise  the  importance  of  insurance  to  the  economy.  The  UK 
insurance  industry  makes  a  major,  direct  contribution:  £25bn  to  annual  GDP  and 
300,000 high-paying jobs including many of the 14,000 members of the Institute & Faculty of 
Actuaries.  It  is  a  major  exporter  with  about  30%  of  premiums  earned  overseas.  And  the 
Lloyd’s  market  underlines  London’s  status  as  a  world  centre  for  insurance  excellence  and 
innovation. 
But the economic contribution of insurance goes much deeper. By spreading and managing 
risks, it increases the resilience of corporations, investors and financial institutions. It makes 
entrepreneurship and trade more viable. And it safeguards companies and individuals from 
perils they could not otherwise shoulder. 
From  a  financial  system  perspective,  insurance  companies  play  a  vital  role  in  the  efficient 
allocation  of  capital.  By  matching  long-term  savings  and  investment,  it  finances  the 
infrastructure  essential  to  build  our  economy.  The  long-term  perspective  of  insurance 
companies diversifies the financial system and reinforces its resilience.  
The  contribution  of  the  UK  insurance  industry  can’t  be  taken  for  granted  –  especially  in  a 
macro-financial environment that challenges traditional business models. 
Challenges from the macro-financial environment 
Of course, relative to the recent past, the economic outlook is much improved. The UK has 
experienced the strongest growth in the G7 over the past year. Job creation has been the 
quickest on record. Inflation has fallen below target having been above for most of the past 
five years. 
With  many  of  the  conditions  for  the  economy  to  normalise  now  met,  the  point  at  which 
interest rates also begin to normalise is getting closer. In recent months the judgement about 
precisely when to raise Bank Rate has become more balanced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  While there is always uncertainty about the future, you can expect interest rates to begin to 
increase.  
We have no pre-set course, however; the timing will depend on the data. 
Moreover, the precise timing of the first rate rise is less important than our expectation that, 
when rates do begin to rise, those increases are likely to be gradual and limited. 
Why does the Bank expect this to be the case? In part, because the headwinds facing the 
economy  are  likely  to  take  some  time  to  die  down.  Demand  in  our  major  export  markets 
remains muted. Public balance sheet repair is ongoing. And a highly indebted private sector 
is likely to be particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates. 
Over the medium term, several dynamics are likely to keep rates lower than in the past. UK 
rates could be restrained by continued imbalances between global saving and investment, 
together with potentially lower rates of global productivity growth. Central banks can also be 
expected  to  accommodate  with  lower  risk-free  rates  the  higher  spreads  that  are  likely  to 
result from new regulatory requirements. 
All of these factors likely mean that, even when spare capacity is used up, Bank Rate will 
need to be materially lower than in the past in order to keep the economy operating at its 
potential and inflation at its target. 
The  Bank  is  well  aware  that  a  prolonged  period  of  historically  low  interest  rates  could 
encourage  other  risks  to  develop.  In  the  UK,  the  biggest  risks  are  associated  with  the 
housing market, which is why last spring the Bank took graduated and proportionate actions. 
We are also alert to the possibility that financial markets may be mispricing risk. As the FSB 
concluded last week, “there are increased signs of complacency in financial markets, in part 
reflecting  search for  yield  amidst  exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policies.  Volatility 
has  become  compressed  and  asset  valuations  stretched  across  a  growing  number  of 
markets, increasing the risk of a sharp reversal.” 
In  such  circumstances,  insurers’  proven  ability  to  look  through  such  short  term  volatility  is 
invaluable. 
Nevertheless, an abrupt correction in term and risk premia could have a sharp impact on the 
valuation  of  securities  that  are  marked  to  market  and  reduce  the  effectiveness  and 
availability of proximate hedging strategies. 
More  fundamentally,  by  squeezing  margins,  persistently  low  interest  rates  challenge 
business  models.  Insurers  feel  this  pressure  on  both  sides  of  the  balance  sheet:  through 
muted investment returns; and as long-term obligations to policyholders – most common for 
life firms but increasingly relevant to general insurers that have Periodic Payment Orders on 
their books – become more expensive in today’s terms. 
An understandable response would be to move towards less traditional types of investments 
–  such  as  infrastructure;  into  new  or  more  complex  types  of  business  –  like  telematics 
pricing; or into new geographies like emerging markets. 
All these strategies bring new risks that must be well understood and prudently managed.  
Low rates are encouraging inflows of external capital into sectors like reinsurance. In effect, a 
“soft  cycle”  in  financial  markets  is  reinforcing  a  “soft  cycle”  in  insurance  –  a  particularly 
problematic combination. 
More capital boosts market capacity, but can also test underwriting discipline. 
Putting the right ideas to work 
As  supervisor,  the  Bank  of  England  is  monitoring  closely  how  these  new  risks  are  being 
managed and how your business models are evolving. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At the same time we’ll be implementing reforms. 
Reforms  to  promote  a  more  resilient  insurance  sector  without  standing  in  the  way  of  an 
effective insurance sector, and without imposing unnecessary impediments on your ability to 
evolve your business models in response to the challenges I described. 
To borrow the theme of this conference we will be “putting the right ideas to work”. 
Today I want to highlight three of them: 
• 
• 
• 
With  those  right  ideas,  we  are  promoting  a  resilient,  innovative  insurance  industry  that 
supports the real economy. 
Tailored, consistent and robust capital standards; 
Holding the right people to account; and 
Global standards for globally systemic insurers. 
appropriate market-based valuation methodologies; 
a comprehensive measure of risk and solvency covering all group activities; and 
capital resources of an appropriate quality to absorb loss. 
Right idea 1: tailored, consistent and robust capital standards 
The  first  right  idea  is  to  implement  tailored  and  consistent  capital  standards  to  ensure  the 
safety and soundness of insurers.  
Resilience  against  unexpected  losses  requires  risk-based  capital  standards  and  robust 
valuation practices.  
The UK’s Individual Capital Adequacy Standards deliver this and were one reason why the 
UK’s insurance sector weathered the crisis so well.  
The Bank of England wants the principles behind ICAS to be applied as widely as possible; 
to establish as level a playing field as possible.  
That is why we support Solvency II. It embeds across Europe the core principles necessary 
for sound regulation, namely:  
• 
• 
• 
Solvency II is the biggest change to insurance regulation in a generation, and it will be live in 
just  over  a  year.  While  our  shared  history  with  ICAS  means  the  UK  insurance  industry  is 
relatively well placed, we must not underestimate the scale of the challenge. 
Even  the  standard  formula,  which  nine  out  of  ten  UK  insurers  will  use  to  determine  their 
solvency  requirements,  is  significantly  more  advanced  than  the  Solvency  I  approach  it 
replaces. 
Although more demanding, we have worked to ensure the standard formula does not impede 
your  provision  of  long-term  finance  to  the  real  economy.  Steps  have  been  taken  to  make 
Solvency II more accommodative of securitisation. And in parallel, the Bank of England has 
been  working  with  the  European  Central  Bank  to  remove  other  impediments  to  the 
revitalisation  of  securitisation  markets,  including  pushing  for  revisions  to  regulatory 
requirements  for  banks  and  for  the  development  of  simple,  transparent  and  consistent 
products. 
Where the standard formula is not a good fit for a firm’s risk profile, firms will be asked to 
consider  developing  a  partial  internal  model;  making  an  application  for  an  undertaking-
specific parameter; or adjusting their underlying business model. 
Many  of  you  in  this  room  are  acutely  aware  of  the  demands  of  the  Solvency  II  model 
approval process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This rigour has a purpose. The dangers of using poorly designed models were made all too 
clear in the banking sector. So the Bank won’t hesitate to withhold approval of inadequate or 
opaque models. 
Models  must  be  based  on  appropriate  data  and  account  for  all  quantifiable  risks.  Boards 
have the responsibility to ensure models remain appropriate and to show they are used in 
practice. 
Of course, risk-based capital standards are about more than models. Models can never be 
relied  upon  in  all  circumstances  or  in  isolation,  nor  can  they  be  substitutes  for  sound 
judgment. 
Solvency II recognises this in its three-pillar approach – supplementing a modernisation of 
the  quantitative  regime  with  new  supervisory  review,  governance,  risk  management  and 
transparency  requirements.  These  requirements,  under  pillars  2  and  3,  build  a  coherent 
framework for the future. 
Tools  like  scenario  testing  and  the  Own  Risk  Solvency  Assessment  are  therefore 
fundamentally important. By thinking about the risks that could harm future solvency – and 
the possible responses to a stress – ORSAs promote the protection of safety and soundness 
of insurance firms, while providing insights into overall financial stability. 
Right idea 2: a regime that holds the right people to account 
The step-change in regulatory standards under Solvency II has several implications for the 
industry. 
Risk  professionals  like  yourselves  have  a  central  role  to  play  in  building  models;  in  using 
expert  judgment  to  marry  quantitative  and  qualitative  assessments  of  risk;  and  in  making 
technical subject matter accessible to Boards. 
Your work will be vital to making these new standards a reality and thereby to establishing a 
stronger, more consistent standard of resilience across the EU. 
But  amidst  our  work to embed  new  regulatory  standards,  it must  not  be forgotten that the 
responsibility for running insurers rests with their Boards and senior managers. 
This leads to the second right idea we are putting into practice: the people running insurance 
companies should be more clearly held accountable for their actions. 
It  is  now  clear  that  in  some  parts  of  the  financial  sector,  the  link  between  seniority  and 
accountability  had  become  blurred  or  even  severed.  The  Parliamentary  Commission  on 
Banking Standards recognised this when they recommended a new regime for the senior-
most managers in banks, ensuring their accountability. 
The  principles  underlying  that  regime  are  more  widely  relevant.  Those  individuals  that  run 
financial  institutions  should  act  with  integrity,  honesty  and  skill  regardless  of  whether  they 
work  for  global  investment  banks,  regional  building  societies  or  in  the  general  insurance 
sector. 
Solvency  II  recognises  this  imperative.  It  requires  both firms  and regulators  to monitor  the 
fitness and propriety of staff with key responsibilities in the insurance sector. 
As a consequence, the Bank of England is now working with other regulators to develop a 
regime for the key people in your industry. 
That  doesn’t  mean  we  are  about  to  extend  the  banking  regime  indiscriminately.  For  one 
thing, unlike in banking, there will be no statutory provision for applying a “reverse burden of 
proof” in the insurance sector. 
In developing a regime tailored to insurance we will also have to consider the particular skills 
and roles that matter. This includes the central role of actuaries, which is one of the important 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  functions  specifically  recognised  by  Solvency  II.  In  18th  century  London,  the  title  “actuary” 
was often interchangeable with that of Chief Executive. 
It’s your role in backing entrepreneurship with science; in ensuring premiums, reserves and 
capital are prudent; and in scanning the horizon for new risks and opportunities, that means 
we are minded to include both life and general insurance actuaries within the scope of our 
updated fit and proper regime for individuals in insurance. 
By including your profession in the new regime, we recognise the importance of your skills, 
the range of your contributions, and your personal propriety. 
Later  this  year  we  will  consult  on  a  regime  that  includes  the  most  senior  actuaries  – 
alongside CEOs, Chairmen and Chief Financial and Risk Officers – in our senior managers 
regime, making them directly accountable for how a firm is run, for their decisions, and for 
their actions. 
These senior persons will be expected to prove their fitness to regulators before they take up 
a role, and the onus will be on them to ensure risks are understood, measured and properly 
considered. 
Right idea 3: global standards for globally systemic insurers 
While  much  progress  has  been  made  on  the  home  front,  the  focus  of  the  global  reform 
agenda  since  the  crisis  has  been  on  putting  a  third  idea  into  practice:  common  global 
standards for systemically important insurers. 
The goal of this work is to increase systemic resilience; preventing spillovers from the failure 
of an insurer to the wider financial sector and the real economy. 
Policymakers agree that traditional insurance activities need not of themselves be a source 
of systemic risk. Indeed, recent events demonstrated three reasons why insurers are better 
able to withstand crises than other financial institutions. 
First, the underwriting cycle is generally not correlated with the business cycle;  
Second, the inherent resilience of business models that take a long-term view, and 
Third, an insurer’s production cycle is inverted as they collect premiums today with a view to 
paying claims tomorrow. This model reduces liquidity risks and immunises insurers against 
risks of a run. 
Insolvency  takes  time  to  manifest,  and  wind-down  when  it  happens  has  historically  been 
more orderly.  
Given all that, you might ask: why the concern about systemic risk in insurance? 
The  answer  is  simple:  The  financial  crisis  laid  bare  that  the  actions  of  some  individual 
insurers  –  like  AIG  –  can  have  broad  spillovers;  that  some  insurance  markets  –  like  the 
monolines – are systemic, and that the insurance sector plays a systemic role in diversifying 
the financial sector thereby reinforcing its resilience. 
AIG was the extreme case of a systemic insurer. 
That  sorry  experience  highlights the  need  to  understand  all  the  activities  in  which  insurers 
are engaged, including on occasion substantial business beyond the boundaries of traditional 
insurance. 
Regulators have grouped those activities as “non-traditional” and “non-insurance” – including 
business involving extensive use of market instruments, like derivatives, and instruments that 
engage in substantial maturity transformation. Where this type of business is carried out in 
scale or across borders, risks to the system can be substantial. 
The crisis also showed how particular insurance markets can affect systemic stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  Monolines  demonstrated  how  sub-sectors  that  are  excessively  concentrated  or 
undercapitalised can amplify shocks. 
The failure of multiple insurance companies in response to economic stress can disrupt the 
provision of critical economic functions. It can also suddenly transfer risks to other parts of 
the financial  system  that  may  be  ill-equipped  to manage  them;  or  shift  assets  around  in  a 
way that can amplify and spread distress. 
As I said previously, the insurance sector is systemic in a positive way. Insurance companies 
have  different  risk  bearing  capacities  than  many  other  financial  institutions.  They  play  a 
stabilising role by deploying funds over a longer time horizons, in a manner less vulnerable to 
sudden outflows. 
The resilience of large insurers is therefore important to safeguard that positive contribution 
to the global economy. 
The  starting  point  for  the  application  of  global  standards  has  been  the  identification  of 
systemically-important insurers. 
More than four-fifths of that assessment rests on the extent of non-traditional non-insurance 
activities  in  a  firm’s  business  model  and  on  its  interconnectedness  to  the  wider  financial 
system. Nine firms have been designated. 
It is vital that these systemic insurers, like systemic banks or financial market infrastructure, 
can  be  resolved  in  the  event  of  failure  without  the  need  for  taxpayer  support  and  without 
disruption of the wider financial system. That’s why the development of resolution plans is a 
top priority. 
Nonetheless,  given  the  externalities  from  the  failure  of  a  systemic  insurer,  it  is  of  course 
preferable that their probability of failure is lower. 
That’s why systemic insurers will be subject to higher global standards. 
The  Higher  Loss  Absorbency  requirements,  being  developed  now  by  the  IAIS,  will  ensure 
that all of the activities of a systemic insurance group – but especially non-traditional, non-
insurance activities – are backed with an appropriate minimum level of capital resources. 
Given  the  patchwork  of  capital  standards  across  major  jurisdictions,  the  first  step  towards 
applying these heightened resilience requirements is the development of the Basic Capital 
Requirement – an internationally comparable capital measure that will act as the baseline for 
additional resilience. 
Last week in Cairns, the FSB approved the final BCR proposal  which  will be presented to 
G20 Leaders at the Brisbane summit in November. It is simple and factor-based, contains a 
common valuation approach, and captures all activities of insurance groups. 
This is an important milestone – one that takes us further towards embedding the right idea 
of  increased  resilience  for  those  few  insurers  that  have  the  capacity  to  impact  the  global 
financial system. 
I  look  forward  to  your  continued  support  as  the  IAIS  builds  on  this  progress  to  put  into 
practice the overall package of requirements for systemic insurers by 2019. 
And  we  will  need  your  support  as  we  further  develop,  over  time,  an  International  Capital 
Standard to apply to all internationally active insurance groups. Our aim is nothing less than 
a standard which embodies the principles which underpin ICAS and Solvency II. 
Conclusion 
The  ideas  I’ve  described  today  are  vital  to  preserving  the  positive  role  of  insurance  in  the 
financial system and the real economy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These ideas – tailored capital standards that promote a level playing field; a framework to 
hold the right people to account; and global standards for globally systemic insurers – are 
needed now in practice. 
The Bank knows that as our reforms are implemented and as your business models evolve 
we  need  a  regulatory  approach  that  is  regularly  reviewed,  adjusted  if  necessary;  and  that 
takes account of evolving financial conditions, product innovation and changing markets. 
Robust interaction with the industry is essential to ensuring the right ideas can be put into 
action now, and for the future. 
The Institute & Faculty of Actuaries has been at the heart of the insurance industry for over 
150 years, and the changes to regulation, the industry and the world around us mean your 
contribution is more essential than ever. 
Having the right people putting the right ideas to work has never been more important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
