  DeLisle Worrell: Barbados – principles underlying its economic strategy 
and aims 
Remarks  by  Dr  DeLisle  Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  the 
XXXIX Meeting of Network of Central Banks and Finance Ministries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean,  sponsored  by  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank,  Washington  DC,  9  April 
2014. 
 The key to successful economic policy in small very open economies (SVOEs) like Barbados 
is  to  secure  the  exchange  rate  anchor  by  ensuring  the  country’s  reserves  of  foreign 
exchange remain at an adequate level. 
A  second  reality  for  SVOEs  is  that  they  do  not  produce  the  consumption  or  intermediate 
goods they use; these are all imported, as are most items of machinery. The reason is that 
SVOEs  have  limited  human  and  physical  resources,  and  they  can  achieve  internationally 
competitive scale in only a handful of activities. 
A  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  therefore  serves  no  good  purpose,  and  it  has  the 
adverse  consequences  of  high  inflation  and  undermining  investor  confidence.  Fear  of 
devaluation therefore provokes capital flight, because no-one wants to be caught out by the 
devaluation. 
How should the SVOE stabilise the external accounts to sustain adequate foreign reserves 
and  to  restore  adequacy  when  reserves  have  been  depleted?  The  answer:  by  containing 
aggregate demand, and thereby limiting the demand for imports, to fall within the supply of 
foreign exchange. The tools for aggregate demand management are government revenue, 
expenditure and the strategy for financing government’s deficit. 
These are the principles underlying the Barbados economic strategy. 
The  global  recession  has  been  a  challenge  for  Barbados.  Both  our  principal  foreign 
exchange  sectors  (tourism  and  international  business)  were  hit.  And  growth  stalled  in  all 
three of our main markets: the UK, the US and Canada. 
What has been our response? To persist with a strategy for adjustment and growth that has 
served us very well in the past. In the short run aggregate demand has to be cut, in line with 
the  reduced  availability  of  foreign  exchange  to  buy  imports.  However,  our  economy  has 
become more resilient in the face of shocks than we used to be. The cumulative real income 
contraction since 2008 is no more than 3 percent, compared to a 14 percent drop in the early 
1990s. 
Economic  growth  will  not  resume  until  the  foreign  exchange  sectors  get  moving  again. 
Barbados  remains  very  competitive  in  tourism,  international  business  and  alcoholic 
beverages. In the 2013–14 Global Competitiveness Report Barbados outranks its Caribbean 
and Central American neighbours in 10 of the 12 dimensions included in the Report. 
But we know we must do even better. We therefore aim to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
accelerate the growth of worker productivity; 
upgrade the quality of services offered; 
enrich our product offerings and exploit market niches; 
selectively  penetrate  promising  new  markets,  and  sharpen  our  focus  within  well 
established markets. 
The main thing we need from the international community is a better understanding of our 
reality,  and  support  for  these  policies.  Instead,  the  IMF,  the  rating  agencies,  the  Basel 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Committee and the OECD have all taken well-meaning initiatives which have in some way 
threatened the success of our adjustment and growth strategy. We are engaging with these 
bodies with a view to gaining greater voice to express the realities of economic policy making 
in SVOEs. We welcome the establishment of small states fora at the IMF and World Bank, 
the regional consultative groups of the Financial Stability Board, and the peer reviews of the 
Global  Forum.  These  are  all  fora  we  may  use  to  get  our  message  across.  This  regional 
network of central banks and finance ministries is a further opportunity to get the message 
across,  and  we  express  our  sincere  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  share  these  thoughts  with 
you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
