Karolina Ekholm: Role model or warning example? Swedish experiences 
of taking indebtedness into account in monetary policy decisions 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to a meeting at 
the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise, Stockholm, 14 March 2014. 
 The views expressed in this speech are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the 
Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank.  I  would  like  to thank  Carl-Johan  Belfrage  for his help  in  writing  this speech, 
along with Mikael Apel, Marianne Sterner, Ulf Söderström and David Vestin for their views on earlier versions. 
Today I shall talk about what has been the actual source of dissension among the Executive 
Board  of  the  Riksbank  for  several  years,  namely  to  what  extent  household  indebtedness 
should be taken into account in the monetary policy decisions. It may appear unnecessarily 
retrospective to focus on the earlier dissension when the Executive Board has actually been 
unanimous  on  the  monetary  policy  assessments  made  since  December  last  year.  But  I 
believe that there are important lessons to be learnt both by us in Sweden and those abroad, 
with regard to how the policy conducted may have brought us to where we are now.  
Swedish monetary policy has recently been one of the clearest examples of a policy that has 
tried to counteract the build-up of debt with reference to high indebtedness being a threat to 
financial stability. This type of monetary policy is known as leaning against the wind, and in 
this case the wind would be growth in household debt. Household indebtedness has affected 
the  monetary  policy  assessment  in  Sweden  in  earlier  periods,  too,  but  it  is  primarily  since 
autumn 2012 that it has explicitly been cited as a reason for a higher repo rate than is strictly 
justified by the prospects for inflation and resource utilisation.1 Although other central banks 
have also referred to high indebtedness and mentioned financial stability risks in connection 
with  monetary  policy  decisions,  few  central  banks  have  faced  such  a  clear  conflict  of 
objectives as the Riksbank. What this entails is either to keep the repo rate higher to slow 
down the build-up of debt, or to keep it lower to bring up an inflation that has long been below 
target at the same time as resource utilisation has been low. 
Personally,  I  have  been  sceptical  of  the  policy  conducted,  which  has  meant  that I  entered 
reservations against the decisions over a long period of time. Now that inflation has recently 
moved even further away from the target, the Executive Board has been able to agree on the 
monetary policy decisions. The repo rate was cut most recently in December last year and 
the repo-rate path was lowered. 
Why  inflation  has  been  so  low  is  something  of  an  open  question.  I  believe  that  the  policy 
conducted  has  been  an  important  contributory  factor.  At  the  same  time,  I  believe  that  its 
effects  on  household  indebtedness  have  been  minor.  In  my  view,  the  experiences  of 
including  indebtedness  in  the  balance  when  making  monetary  policy  decisions  in  Sweden 
are therefore not particularly positive. 
Swedish monetary policy leaning against the wind 
The Riksbank has recently been much clearer about how the risks linked to housing prices 
and household indebtedness have affected the monetary policy decisions.2 The risks have 
                                                
1  The  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  in  2005  and  2006  show  that  the  Executive  Board  took  into 
account  the  then  very  rapid increase  in  household  indebtedness  and housing  prices  (see,  in  particular,  the 
minutes of the monetary policy meetings in April 2005 and February 2006). At the monetary policy meeting in 
December 2009 I myself mentioned developments in household debt and housing prices as a reason for not 
cutting the repo rate. 
In the summary of the Monetary Policy Report published in October 2012, it is explained that the repo-rate 
path “is expected to go hand in hand with households’ debt ratios not rising”. The introduction to the Monetary 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
been  allowed  to  justify  a  higher  repo  rate  than  the  prospects  for  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation would have indicated. Thus, one can say that the Riksbank has practised what is 
known  in  central  bank  contexts  as  leaning  against  the  wind,  to  counteract  a  potentially 
harmful growth in debt. 
The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  this  type  of  monetary  policy  stance  have  been 
discussed  at  length,  both  in  academic  circles  and  among  central  bank  representatives, 
particularly after the global financial crisis. Some say that the experiences from the financial 
crisis provide support for a monetary policy that is adjusted so that it counteracts financial 
imbalances  such  as  price  bubbles  and  excessive  indebtedness,  while  others  say  that 
monetary policy is normally unsuitable for these purposes and should instead focus entirely 
on inflation and resource utilisation.3 My own opinion is closer to the latter perception than 
the former. I believe that while of course there may be situations in which it is justified to try 
to  dampen  a  general  credit  boom,  it  is  better  to  use  other  tools  than  monetary  policy  to 
influence indebtedness among households and developments on a specific market, such as 
the housing market. 
In  the  case  of  Sweden,  one  can  claim  that  the  repo  rate  has  for  several  years  been  set 
higher  than  is  strictly  justified  by  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.4  But  household 
indebtedness was not explicitly mentioned as a reason until the repo-rate decision in October 
2012.  The  repo  rate  had  then  been  gradually  cut  from  2  per  cent  at  the  end  of  2011  to 
1.25 per cent in September 2012. In October 2012, the repo rate was then held unchanged 
and  household  debt  was  for  the  first  time  treated  as  a  factor  in  the  monetary  policy 
deliberations,  both  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  the  press  release  on  the  repo-rate 
decision.  However,  the  repo  rate  was  cut further, to  1  per cent  in  December  2012.  It then 
remained at this level for one year, until December 2013, despite low inflation and an inflation 
forecast  that  had  been  revised  down  substantially,  as  well  as  unemployment  that  seemed 
stuck at around 8 per cent. In December 2013, the repo rate was cut further to 0.75 per cent. 
During the period between December 2012 and December 2013, I felt that the consideration 
given to household indebtedness was preventing the further repo-rate cut that I considered 
justified. 
Others also lean, but under different circumstances 
We in Sweden are far from alone in feeling that rising indebtedness driven by rising house 
prices  poses  a  threat  to  financial  stability.  Other  central  banks  have  also  given  explicit 
consideration to such threats when formulating their monetary policy. Of those countries that 
are comparable with Sweden in the sense that they are developed economies with inflation 
targets, Norway, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are the ones that can be said to have 
conducted  a  monetary  policy  that  to  some  extent  leans  against  the  wind.  Sweden  does 
however stand out in that inflation has been clearly below the target in recent years, at the 
same time as unemployment has been relatively high.5 
                                                                                                                                                   
Policy  Update  published  in  April  2013  states  that  the  monetary  policy  conducted  “is  expected  to  stimulate 
economic developments and inflation at the same time as taking into account the risks linked to households’ 
high indebtedness”.  An  article  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  published in  July  2013  presents  a conceptual 
framework for taking into account financial imbalances in the monetary policy assessment. 
3  For a review and categorisation of various points of view on the question of how monetary policy should give 
consideration to financial stability, see Smets, Frank (2013). 
4  See Svensson (2011). 
5 
In  Canada,  inflation  has  also  been  below  the  target  for  a  period  of  time,  but  before  this  situation  arose, 
unemployment had fallen back to its pre-crisis average. New Zealand had an inflation rate in the lower end of 
its target interval of 1–3 per cent during a few quarters before they began to say in early 2013 that they did not 
want to see increased financial stability risks as a result of developments in the housing market. They have 
not, however, expressly spoken of a trade-off between bringing up inflation and subduing developments in the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The situation in Norway has been similar to ours, in that inflation has also been clearly below 
the target for a relatively long time, from the beginning of 2011 until the middle of 2013. Since 
spring  2010,  Norges  Bank  has  often  discussed  the  build-up  of  imbalances  linked  to  a  low 
interest  rate  as  a  factor  that  is  included  in  its  monetary  policy  deliberations.  But  there  are 
clear differences here, too. Throughout this period they have had a resource utilisation that 
was  close  to  or  even  above  the  normal  level.  Unemployment  has  been  close  to  a  low 
historical average. 
Although it is of course difficult to compare and assess different central banks’ deliberations, 
the  repo-rate  decisions  in  Sweden  during  most  of  2013  would  appear  to  be  one  of  the 
clearest examples of a monetary policy that leaned against the wind. When the prospects for 
inflation  fell,  the  repo  rate  was  held  unchanged  with  explicit  reference  to  household  debt. 
This makes it interesting both for us in Sweden and for central banks in other countries to 
assess  how  successful  the  policy  has  been.  It  is  far  too  early  to  make  a  complete 
assessment.  But  as  there  is  a  substantial  need  to  manage  financial  imbalances  in  some 
countries,  and  there  is  a  discussion  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  this  context,  it  may 
nevertheless be useful to make a preliminary assessment of the policy. 
Swedish inflation moving further from the target 
CPIF  inflation  was  around  2  per  cent  in  2010,  when  the  increases  in  the  repo  rate  began 
after the record-high cuts in connection with the global financial crisis. But since then inflation 
has fallen and CPIF inflation has been around 1 per cent for a couple of years. Last autumn, 
inflation fell further. It is now very low; in February CPI inflation was –0.2 per cent and CPIF 
inflation was +0.4 per cent. We have been able to observe that it is a broad-based decline in 
inflation, to the extent that all major components are affected.6 
Low  inflation  has come to  be  a  widespread  phenomenon  and  many  countries  and  regions 
have  recently  reported  inflation  rates  clearly  below  their  targets.  Inflation  has  fallen 
particularly sharply in the euro area. The fact that this happens in a situation where there is 
plenty  of  spare  capacity  –  which  is  the  case  in  large  parts  of  the  euro  area  –  is  not 
particularly  surprising.  However,  the  downturn  in  Swedish  inflation  is  larger  and  has  been 
going on for longer than in other countries. And the question is why... 
One  possible  reason,  which  was  also  discussed  in  an  article  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
Report  in  February,  is  that  Swedish  companies  have  not  been  passing  on  their  cost 
increases to consumers as much as is normal.7 They have thus not increased their prices to 
the extent that one might expect, given the historical relationships with unit labour costs and 
import  prices  faced  by  producers.  There  may  be  several  reasons  for  this,  but  one  is  that 
margins  may  decline  when  economic  activity  is  weak,  which  is  also  noted  in  the  article. 
Current research using US data implies that price mark-ups vary positively with the business 
cycle.8 
Another reason may be that the weak development in the euro area has hit Swedish exports 
hard and that this has contributed to resource utilisation being lower than normal over a long 
period of time. With low resource utilisation one can expect that inflation will be pushed down 
as the pressure on wage and price increases will be low. The weak international demand is 
of course one factor that is beyond the Riksbank’s control and in this sense monetary policy 
                                                                                                                                                   
housing market. In the case of Australia, there are no clear signs that they have faced this kind of trade-off 
during  the  period  following  the  financial  crisis.  This  is  clearer  for  the  period  2002–2004,  but  then  inflation 
stayed within the target interval of 2–3 per cent and was only close to the lower interval limit for one quarter. 
6  See Sveriges Riksbank (2014a). 
7  See Sveriges Riksbank (2014a). 
8  See Nekarda and Ramey (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
cannot  be  blamed  for  the  low  inflationary  pressure.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  the  role  of 
monetary policy to counteract this type of downward pressure to stabilise inflation around the 
target. 
Monetary policy may have contributed in different ways 
Personally, I believe that the monetary policy conducted is an important contributory factor to 
the  fall  in  inflation.  The  fact  that  household  indebtedness  is  taken  into  account  in  the 
monetary  policy  decisions  –  and  the  repo  rate  is  thus  held  somewhat  higher  than  the 
prospects for inflation and resource utilisation have justified – has probably made the krona 
stronger than it would otherwise have been and also held back domestic demand. When the 
krona  appreciates,  this  has  both  a  direct  effect  on  inflation,  which  is  pushed  down  when 
import prices fall, and an indirect effect in that the demand for Swedish-produced goods and 
services is affected negatively.  
Strong krona contributes to low inflation 
The  possibility  for  monetary  policy  to  steer  the  exchange  rate  is  limited,  but  there  is 
nevertheless reason to believe that the krona has become stronger than it would otherwise 
have been because of our leaning against the wind. If foreign exchange market participants 
see an increased difference between the yield on a Swedish treasury bill and the yield on 
foreign  equivalents,  the  Swedish  treasury  bills  and  thus  the  Swedish  krona  will  be  more 
attractive  and  therefore  more  expensive  –  that  is,  the  krona  will  appreciate.  Although  it  is 
difficult to see clear links between observed exchange rates and interest rate differentials, a 
positive  interest  rate  differential  usually  coincides  with  a  strong  krona  (see  Figure  1).  The 
difficulty  in  seeing  clear  links  is  due  to  expectations  having  considerable  significance  for 
trade on the financial markets. The market rates and the krona rate do not change when the 
Riksbank makes its repo-rate decisions, they change when market participants’ expectations 
of future repo-rate decisions change. 
 Figure 1. 
Interest rates and exchange rates 
Percentage points and index, 18 November 1992=100, quarterly average 
Interest rate differential (left scale)
KIX index (right scale)
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
95
97
99
01
03
05
07
09
11
13
Sources: National sources and the Riksbank 
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
Weaker krona
Stronger krona
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The effect on the krona has thus arisen when expectations of the repo rate have changed, 
rather  than  when  repo-rate  decisions  have  been  made.  The  expectations  have  probably 
been  affected  gradually,  as  the  significance  of  the  indebtedness  for  the  decisions  has 
become clearer. Moreover, exchange rates are at the same time affected by several factors 
that are connected with both expectations and market functioning. This makes it difficult to 
see with the naked eye how a particular monetary policy stance will affect the krona rate – 
unless  it  entails  a  large,  sudden  and  unexpected  deviation  from  earlier  patterns.  But 
nevertheless,  consideration  to  household  indebtedness  and  developments  on  the  housing 
market have entailed a larger interest rate differential in relation to other countries, and thus 
probably a stronger krona, than we would have had otherwise. 
Between  spring  2010  and  autumn  2013,  the  interest  rate  differential  in  relation  to  other 
countries measured in terms of the KIX9 index increased by around one percentage point. 
During  this  period  the  krona  strengthened  by  around  10  per  cent  and  we  were  forced  to 
revise  our  exchange  rate  forecasts  in  a  stronger  direction  on  several  occasions.  One 
possible explanation is that the forecast did not fully reflect the large interest rate differential 
that monetary policy entailed.  
One consequence of the strong development of the krona is that Swedish import prices have 
fallen in absolute terms and fallen more than other countries’ import prices (see Figure 2a). 
This  puts  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  Another  consequence  is  that  the  international 
competitiveness  of  domestically-produced  goods  and  services  deteriorates.  This  could  be 
reflected  in  lower  sales  volumes  and,  to  the  extent  the  firms  instead  prefer  to  guard  their 
market  shares,  lower  price  mark-ups.  A  strong  krona,  combined  with  weak  demand  from 
abroad,  has  meant  that  the  situation  for  the  export  industry  has  been  particularly  hard 
pressed, which has probably led to low wage increases in the manufacturing sector. As this 
sector  is  traditionally  a  wage  leader,  the  low  wages  may  have  spread  to  the  rest  of  the 
Swedish economy and in this way have contributed to the low inflationary pressures. 
 
Figure 2a. 
Import prices 
Figure 2b. 
Services prices 
Annual percentage change 
Annual percentage change 
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
Australia
USA
United Kingdom
Norway
Canada
Sweden
10
11
12
13
14
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
  5
4
3
2
1
0
 Australia
USA
United Kingdom
Norway
Canada
Sweden
10
11
12
13
14
5
4
3
2
1
0
 Note. In Figure 2b, the data for Australia is quarterly, while the data for other countries is monthly. For Sweden, 
Norway, the euro area and the United Kingdom, the data refers to services prices in the HICP and for others in 
the CPI. 
Sources: National sources and Statistics Sweden 
                                                
9  The KIX index for policy rates only includes the euro area, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States. 
Its composition has been governed by the relevance of the respective country’s policy rate for pricing on the 
foreign exchange and financial markets. For a more detailed explanation, see Sveriges Riksbank (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Slower domestic demand and low inflation expectations also contribute 
The impact of monetary policy via the exchange rate can be primarily observed in prices of 
internationally-traded  goods.  However,  a  monetary  policy  that  leans  against  the  wind  also 
has effects on inflation in that it dampens domestic demand. Such effects probably leave a 
mark on the development of service prices, as services are not traded internationally to the 
same extent as goods. 
Increases  in  services  prices  have  been  small  in  Sweden  since  the  end  of  2012  –  both 
compared with normal developments and compared with other countries (see Figure 2b). 
A  further  explanation  for  the  abnormally  low  price  increases  could  be  expectations  of  an 
abnormally  low  future  inflation  rate.  In  monetary  policy  analysis  one  usually  assumes  that 
there is a forward-looking element in the pricing, as it may be perceived as costly to change 
prices. If one is expecting weak demand and thus low price increases in the future, one will 
not want to increase one’s prices very much today. Expectations of a low future inflation rate 
can thus become self-fulfilling and this is something we would prefer to avoid, as it makes it 
more difficult to attain the inflation target in the future. 
According to surveys of inflation expectations among money market participants, employers’ 
and  employees’  organisations  as  well  as  purchasing  managers,  expectations  for  1  and 
2 years  ahead  have  declined  recently,  which  may  have  significance  for  pricing  behaviour. 
Inflation  expectations  5  years  ahead  are  fairly  well  anchored  around  2  per  cent,  but  it  is 
important  that  the  development  of  the  past  couple  of  years  does  not  continue  so  that  the 
longer-term expectations also end up far from the target (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. 
Expected inflation 
Per cent 
5 years ahead
2 years ahead
1 year ahead
00
04
08
12
4
3
2
1
0
96
4
3
2
1
0
 Note. Average for all survey respondents. 
Source: TNS SIFO Prospera 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Resource utilisation remains lower than normal 
Resource utilisation has been lower than normal for in principle the entire period since the 
end  of  2008,  when  demand  for  Swedish  exports  fell  heavily  in  connection  with  the  global 
financial crisis. At the same time, developments on the labour market have been better than 
expected in some aspects. Although unemployment has remained around 8 per cent since 
the middle of 2012, employment has increased and the employment rate has risen around 
half a percentage point since then. 
One  question  that  sometimes  arises  is  whether  it  is  actually  possible  to  bring  down  the 
current  unemployment rate  of  8  per  cent  with  the  aid  of monetary  policy.  Matching  on  the 
labour  market  appears  to  have  deteriorated  and  a  larger  percentage  of  the  unemployed 
consist  of  groups  that  are  on  the  periphery  of  the  labour  market.  This  could  mean  that 
structural  unemployment  is  higher  than  before,  and  structural  unemployment  cannot  be 
affected by monetary policy. 
However,  my  impression  is  that  one  can  at  least  partly  determine  how  much  of 
unemployment  is  structural  by  looking  at  wage  increases.  Since  the  wage  increases  are 
small,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  there  is  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market.  This 
means there is also scope to use monetary policy to try to reduce unemployment. 
Household indebtedness nevertheless remains high 
The actual purpose of a monetary policy that leans against the wind is to counteract a build-
up of debt that is perceived as risky. When one assesses whether the policy conducted has 
been appropriate, one wants to know how far one has succeeded in this. 
In this context, it is important to note that the household debt ratio has remained relatively 
stable  since  autumn  2010.  In  2010  three  things  happened  that  may  have  affected 
developments; the mortgage cap was introduced, the Riksbank began to raise the repo rate, 
and after a period of silence there were suddenly lots of statements and initiatives from the 
political side referring to the housing market and household indebtedness.10 
It would have been interesting to be able to distinguish the separate effects of these events 
on  indebtedness,  but  this  is  of  course  very  difficult.  One  piece  of  the  puzzle  is 
Finansinspektionen’s conclusion that the mortgage cap has had an effect. They note in their 
Mortgage  Report  in  March  2013  that  the  mortgage  cap  is  continuing  to  work  and  that  the 
loan-to-value ratios for new mortgages are no longer rising.11 
For me as a monetary policy-maker, the decisive question is to what extent monetary policy 
has  contributed  to  limiting  household  debt  recently.  If  one  looks  at  the  estimates  of  the 
determinants of indebtedness used as a basis for our forecasts, one sees that the effect of 
the repo rate on households’ debt ratios (that is, their debts in relation to disposable income) 
is very small.12 A repo rate that is 0.25 percentage points higher during one year is expected 
to reduce the debt ratio by at most 0.3–0.4 percentage points (see Figure 4). 
                                                
10  For  example,  in  November  2010  Anders  Borg  warned  of  the  risk  that  a  housing  bubble  would  build  up, 
comparing  developments  in  Sweden  with  those  in  Ireland and  Iceland,  and  emphasising  the  importance  of 
putting  an  early  stop  to  it  (Borg,  2010).  The Liberal  Party  then  proposed  cutting  the  deductions  for interest 
payments in January 2011 (Hamilton, 2011). 
11  Finansinspektionen (2013). 
12  See Laséen and Strid (2013) and Sveriges Riksbank (2014b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Figure 4. 
Household debts 
Percentage of disposable income 
Lower repo rate 2013
Main scenario
13
14
15
16
17
182
180
178
176
174
172
170
12
182
180
178
176
174
172
170
 Note. The experiment with a lower repo rate in 2013 assumes a repo rate cut from 1 per cent to 0.75 per cent at 
the monetary policy meeting in February 2013 and a repo-rate path that from December 2013 follows the path 
published in December 2013 and again in February 2014. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
One would need to raise the repo rate substantially, perhaps by several percentage points, to 
have a tangible effect on the risks linked to indebtedness. But the effect would then also be 
much higher unemployment and a much lower inflation. Such a monetary policy stance does 
not appear appropriate, and would in any circumstance not be compatible with an inflation 
target. 
The  estimated  effect  of  the  repo  rate  on  the  debt  ratio  is  very  uncertain,  so  it  is  not 
impossible that the actual effect is much greater. At the same time, it is also possible that the 
actual effect is zero, or even that it would go in the opposite direction so that the debt ratio 
rises when the interest rate is raised.13 This could be possible, as the interest rate not only 
affects  indebtedness,  it  also  affects  disposable  incomes  through  its  impact  on  economic 
activity  and  inflation.  A  higher  interest  rate  is  expected  to  have  a  negative  effect  on  both 
indebtedness and disposable incomes. The ratio between them can therefore in principle rise 
or fall, even if it appears to be the latter in practice. 
Although I consider that indebtedness in the Swedish household sector comprises a risk to 
macroeconomic developments in Sweden, I am extremely doubtful about managing this risk 
by  means  of  a  monetary  policy  that  leans  against  the  wind.  The  cost  appears  to  be  high: 
inflation is pushed down in a situation where it is already low and unemployment becomes 
unnecessarily high. On the other hand, the benefit appears small, quite simply because the 
effect on indebtedness appears small. 
                                                
13  See Svensson (2013a). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  other  areas.  The  mortgage  cap  probably  already  has  some 
Risks linked to household indebtedness should instead be managed by means of measures 
taken 
impact. 
Finansinspektionen has also introduced a risk weight floor for mortgages and notified that it 
intends  to  raise  this,  which  in  practice  will  increase  the  banks’  costs  for  mortgages.  The 
Swedish Bankers’ Association’s recommendation to draw up amortisation plans in line with 
Finansinspektionen’s  notified  requirement  may  also  have  an  effect.14  Nor  is  there  any 
shortage  of  ideas for further  measures,  including  the  introduction  of  countercyclical  capital 
buffers, which they now use in Norway. 
Underneath all this is a problem of a more structural nature, namely a supply of housing that 
has grown slowly and a housing market that is not functioning efficiently. This has most likely 
contributed  to  pushing  up  the  price  of  housing  and  consequently  indebtedness.  Neither 
monetary policy nor measures in the field of macroprudential policy can resolve this type of 
structural problem; they must be managed with entirely different measures. 
Do marginal differences in the repo rate play a role? 
In  the  same  way  as  one  can  question  whether  a  repo  rate  that  is  a  few  tenths  of  a 
percentage  point  higher  or  lower  plays  any  role  with  regard  to  risks  linked  to  household 
indebtedness,  one  can  also  question  whether  it  has  any  significance  for  inflation  and 
unemployment. During the period between December 2012 and December 2013, when the 
repo  rate  was  unchanged  at  1  per  cent,  I  advocated  interest  rate  cuts  of  0.25  percentage 
points. Is  it reasonable  to  believe  that  such  a  small  cut  would  have  any  tangible  effect  on 
developments? 
Of course, we cannot know with any great degree of certainty what would have happened if 
monetary  policy  had  been  different  than  it  was,  but  we  can  use  economic  and  statistical 
models  to  assess  the  consequences.  An  analysis  using  the  Riksbank’s  macro  model 
Ramses15  indicates  that a  repo rate that  was  0.25  percentage  points  lower  during  most  of 
2013 would have meant that inflation would have been a couple of tenths of a percentage 
point higher today (see Figure 5). This may not seem much, but it corresponds approximately 
to the downturn in inflation we have observed since the start of 2013 and these are important 
tenths of a percentage point in a situation  where inflation has already been low for a long 
time.16 
The effect could be greater if one took into account the fact that a lower repo rate in 2013 
would  probably  have  affected  expectations  of  future  monetary  policy  during  2014  and 
onwards. Moreover, I was not merely advocating a lower repo rate, but also a lower repo-rate 
path during this period. A lower repo-rate path should have affected expectations of future 
monetary  policy  in  an  expansionary  direction  and  thereby  contributed  further  to  higher 
inflation. 
                                                
14  Swedish Bankers’ Association (2013). 
15  For a description of Ramses, see Adolfson et al. (2013). 
16  A corresponding analysis of the expected consequences of holding the repo rate unchanged at 0.25 per cent 
since July 2010 is presented in Svensson (2013b). According to this analysis, CPIF inflation would have been 
around one percentage point higher than it actually was at the beginning of 2013.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Alternative scenario for CPIF inflation and unemployment 
Annual percentage change and percentage of labour force, seasonally-adjusted data 
Figure 5. 
CPIF, lower repo rate 2013, (left scale)
CPIF, main scenario, (left scale)
Unemployment, lower repo rate 2013, (right scale)
Unemployment, main scenario, (right scale)
3
2
1
0
12
 13
14
15
16
17
9
8
7
6
 Note. The experiment with a lower repo rate in 2013 assumes a repo rate cut from 1 per cent to 0.75 per cent at 
the monetary policy meeting in February 2013 and a repo-rate path that from December 2013 follows the path 
published in December 2013 and again in February 2014. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
The  analysis  can  also  be  applied  to  unemployment.  We  see  then  that  a  repo  rate 
0.25 percentage points lower would have entailed somewhat lower unemployment now. The 
effect on unemployment is a clear economic cost of a monetary policy that leans against the 
wind.  This  must  be  traded  off  against  the  benefit  one  can  expect,  that  is,  potentially  less 
negative consequences of a crisis caused by households’ high indebtedness. 
Low inflation is also a risk 
In  my  view,  there  may  very  well  be  situations  where  it  is  justified  to  conduct  a  monetary 
policy that leans against the wind, that is, to make the policy tighter than is justified by the 
prospects for inflation and resource utilisation. This may be the case when there are signs of 
a strong general credit boom in the economy and credit assessments appear to be less and 
less prudent.17 However, one condition is that inflation is stabilised at least to some extent 
around the target. If, on the other hand, inflation is far below the target and has been so for a 
long period of time, such a policy may create new risks.  
One  such  risk  is  that  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  may  be  undermined.  If  long-term 
inflation expectations fall and begin to deviate too far from the target, it may be difficult to 
stabilise inflation not just in the short run, but also in the long run. If actual inflation becomes 
                                                
17  For an attempt to describe and define this type of general credit boom, see Dell’Ariccia et al. (2012). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
very  low,  there  is  a  greater  risk  of  new  negative  shocks  to  the  economy  leading  to  actual 
deflation,  which  could  entail  substantial  real  economic  costs.  It  is  important  to  show  with 
one’s  actions  that  it  is  the  inflation  target  that  is  the  central  focus  for  monetary  policy 
decisions.18 
I therefore think it was very welcome that a unanimous Executive Board was able to agree 
on  an  interest-rate  cut  in  December  after  the  weak  inflation  outcomes  in  the  autumn. 
Moreover, we lowered the repo-rate path, that is, our own forecast for the repo rate, quite 
substantially. However, there is some element of leaning against the wind even in the current 
repo-rate path. As described in the most recent Monetary Policy Report, an even lower repo 
rate is expected to bring inflation back on target sooner and steer unemployment towards a 
long-run sustainable level faster. 
Given  this,  I  felt  at  both  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  December  2013  and  the  one  in 
February 2014 that the alternative of an even lower repo rate needed careful consideration. 
My  one  reason  for  not  advocating  an  even  lower  repo  rate  was  that  I  felt  the  timing  was 
wrong. Increasingly strong international developments and rising resource utilisation here in 
Sweden  were  nevertheless  expected  to  lead  to  inflation  rising  gradually.  It  is  unusual  for 
central banks to cut their policy rates substantially or repeatedly during an economic upturn. 
However,  there  is  a  risk  that  inflationary  pressures  will  prove  to  be  even  weaker  than  we 
have  assumed.  Inflation  in  January  and  February  proved  to  be  somewhat  lower  than  we 
were  expecting  when  we  made  our  decision  in  February.  If  we  see  clear  signs  that 
inflationary  pressures  are  weaker  than  expected,  we  must  continue  to  show  through  our 
actions  that  we  take  the  inflation  target  seriously,  by  making  monetary  policy  even  more 
expansionary. Personally, I would be prepared to cut the repo rate even further, even if we 
were in the midst of an economic upturn. 
Is a monetary policy that takes indebtedness into account compatible with an inflation 
target? 
What conclusions can one draw from the Swedish case of monetary policy that takes into 
account indebtedness and housing prices? I would claim that the experiences so far argue 
against  this  type  of  monetary  policy  strategy.  Inflation  has  been  remarkably  low  and  has 
moved further away from the target in a situation where the economy nevertheless appears 
to be in an upturn. Although there have been positive developments on the labour market, 
unemployment has remained around 8 per cent for a long time. Household debts have grown 
at  around  the  same  rate  as  disposable  incomes,  which  mean  that  the  debt  ratio  and  the 
potential risks it entails are in principle unchanged. For me, it would appear as though the 
benefits have been small, while the costs have been high. 
However, it is of course difficult to draw any far-reaching conclusions on the basis of what we 
have been able to observe so far. We quite simply do not know how the Swedish economy 
would have developed if the Riksbank had conducted a more expansionary monetary policy. 
However,  the fact that  inflation  has  been  so  low  has  changed  the  conditions  for  monetary 
policy. The unexpectedly low inflation was the reason why the repo rate was cut in December 
last  year  by  a  unanimous  Executive  Board,  at  the  same  time  as  the  repo-rate  path  was 
revised  down  substantially.  At  the  most  recent  monetary  policy  meetings  there  has  been 
greater focus than before on inflation. 
                                                
18  The Canadian central bank governor recently described monetary policy as an exercise in risk management, 
where the risk of inflation falling and moving even further from the target has to be weighed against the risk of 
financial imbalances. He emphasises that the credibility of the inflation target cannot be taken for granted, but 
must be earned by clearly focusing monetary policy on attaining the target (Poloz, 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Perhaps the lesson here is that a monetary policy that leans against the wind is difficult to 
combine with an inflation target. Although there may be justification for slowing down credit 
growth in some situations, it may be difficult to use monetary policy for this purpose if there is 
an  explicit  inflation  target.  In  practice,  one  tries  to  attain  two  targets  with  one  single 
instrument  and  there  is  then  a  risk  that  one  will  not  be  particularly  successful  in  attaining 
either of them. 
the 
(2013),  Stärk  amorteringskulturen 
References 
Adolfson,  Malin,  Laséen,  Stefan,  Christiano,  Lawrence,  Trabandt,  Mathias,  and  Walentin, 
Karl, (2013), Ramses II: Model description, Occasional Paper no. 12. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Swedish  Bankers’  Association 
(Strengthen 
amortisation culture). Press release 14 October 2013. 
Borg, Anders (2010), interview response in radio programme P1-morgon 30 November 2010. 
Radio Sweden. 
Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni, 
Igan,  Deniz,  Laeven,  Luc,  Tong,  Hui,  Bakker,  Bas  and 
Vandenbussche, Jérôme (2012), Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit 
Booms, Staff Discussion Note 12/06. The International Monetary Fund 
Finansinspektionen (2013), The Swedish Mortgage Market 2013. 
Hamilton,  Carl  B.  (2011),  Dags  att minska  hushållens  ränteavdrag för  bostadslån  (Time  to 
reduce  households’  interest  deduction  for  mortgages),  article  on  debate  page  of  DN 
newspaper 5 January 2011. Dagens Nyheter. 
Laséen,  Stefan  and  Strid,  Ingvar  (2013),  Debt  Dynamics  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Note, 
Working Paper no. 283. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Nekarda, Christopher J. and Ramey, Valerie A, (2013), The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-
Cost Markup. Working Paper No. 19099. National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Poloz,  Stephen  S.  (2013),  Monetary  Policy  as  Risk  Management,  speech  12  December 
2013. Bank of Canada. 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  closely  interlinked? 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 3, 2013. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  (2011),  Practical  Monetary  Policy:  Examples  from  Sweden  and  the 
United States, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011, 289–332. 
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2013a), “Leaning Against the Wind” Leads to a Higher (Not Lower) 
Household Debt-to-GDP Ratio. larseosvensson.se. 
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2013b), Some Lessons from Six Years of Practical Inflation Targeting, 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 3, 2013. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2012),  KIX  index  better  reflects  Sweden’s  international  dependence. 
Article in Monetary Policy Report, October 2012. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2014a),  Perspectives  on  the  low  rate  of  inflation.  Article  in  Monetary 
Policy Report, February 2014. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2014b),  The  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  household  debt.  Article  in 
Monetary Policy Report, February 2014. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
