  Dimitar Bogov: What could SEPA bring for the banking and the real 
sector in the Republic of Macedonia 
Speech by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at the event “What could SEPA bring for the banking and the real sector in the Republic of 
Macedonia”, organized by The Banking Association at the Economic Chamber of Macedonia, 
in cooperation with the European Banking Federation (EBF), Skopje, 13 May 2014. 
 Honorable  Mr.  Stavreski,  Vice  President  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia 
and Minister of Finance, 
Honorable  Mr.  Janchevski,  Chairman  of  the  Banking  Association  of  the  Macedonian 
Economic Chamber 
Distinguished guests from the banking sector in the Czech Republic 
Dear representatives of the banking and the real sector in Macedonia 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
One of the primary functions of each central bank is to create conditions for stable, reliable 
and efficient operation of the payment systems. To achieve this function, and according to 
the  best  practices  of  central  banks  of the  EU  Member  States, the  National  Bank  performs 
four basic roles in the payment systems: operational, supervisory, development and catalyst 
role. 
The successful performing of these functions is closely related to the importance of payment 
systems for a national economy. The proper functioning of the systems for large payments, 
which  are  owned  and  managed  by  central  banks,  is  important  for  the  effective  monetary 
policy  conduct.  In  circumstances  of  permanent  changes  in  the  infrastructure  of  financial 
markets, the supervisory role of the central bank regarding the payment system contributes 
to  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability.  Additionally,  the  systems  for  large  payments 
contribute to the coordination of the direct participants in the national payment system, such 
as the Treasury of the Ministry of Finance, banks and clearing institutions, ensuring finality of 
all payments in the national economy. In this way, the National Bank maintains the vitality of 
the  payment  systems  as  one  of  the  most  important  components  of  the  financial  and 
economic infrastructure. 
In  terms  of  achieving  the  development  and  catalyst  role,  allow  me  to  affirm  the  strategic 
approach of the National Bank, the Ministry of Finance and the Banking Association in the 
development  of  the  national  payment  system  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  through  the 
adoption and implementation of the Strategy for the development of the payment system of 
the Republic of Macedonia for the period 2013–2017. Our shared vision for the development 
of the payment systems of the Republic of Macedonia until 2017 is the modernization and 
improvement  of  the  operations  of  payment  systems  through  the  application  of  high-tech 
achievements  and  gradual  harmonization  with  the  standards  and  rules  of  operation  of 
payment  systems  in  the  European  Union. In  this  way,  we  expect  to  increase  the  reliability 
and  efficiency  of  payments  and  the  acceptance  of  non-cash  payment  instruments, 
simultaneously  ensuring  gradual  compliance  with  the  requirements  for  integration  into  the 
Single European Payment Area – SEPA. 
Finally, let me once again welcome our guests, the experts from the Czech Republic, who 
will  pass  on  the  Czech  experience  in  the  realization  of  the  decade-long  EU  project  –  the 
establishment  of the  Single  European  Payment  Area  –  SEPA.  I  believe  that  today’s  panel 
discussions will encourage all stakeholders in the national payment system of Macedonia in 
creating realistically achievable integration initiatives in the area of cross-border payments in 
euros,  which  would  open  new  opportunities  for  Macedonian  companies  and  citizens  for 
effective and cheap payments in the economic exchanges with the European Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
