  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving forward together 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  Annual  General  Meeting 
“Independence,  Host  Country  and  Governance”,  Port-of-Spain,  Trinidad  and  Tobago, 
9 September 2014. 
 It is a great privilege for me to welcome all of you to the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of 
the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). I feel distinct pleasure in seeing familiar pioneers of 
financial inclusion, and new faces gathered in this hall. 
We have a weighty agenda that includes landmark issues for AFI and its membership. A key 
focus of today’s discussions is AFI’s progress toward becoming an international, independent 
organization and the important next steps that we will all be taking together. 
As is the usual practice, we are having the AGM before the Global Policy Forum (GPF), AFI’s 
centerpiece  event  where  financial  inclusion  stakeholders  gather.  A  members-only  AGM 
taking place before the GPF allows us to make collective decisions and have a unified voice 
before we set out to collaborate with our external stakeholders. 
Let  us  make  use  of  this  AGM  as  a  venue  that  has,  time  and  again,  provided  us  with  a 
collegial and enriching environment to discuss and find solutions to important matters facing 
us.  This  general  meeting  allows  us  to  bring  up  our  relevant  individual  and  institutional 
concerns,  to  hear  out  our  peers,  and  to  share  and  leverage  on  our  best  practices  and 
knowledge toward building a stronger network of nations championing financial inclusion. 
In  the  past  two  AGMs,  we  reached  agreement  and  started  the  initial  work  to  be  a  fully 
independent 
for 
independence  will  foster  a  stronger  policy-enabling  environment  for  the  members,  and  will 
strengthen  AFI’s  leadership  standing  in  financial  inclusion.  Key  considerations  surrounding 
our pursuit of independence, such as legitimacy and fiscal sustainability, were underscored. 
Also,  last  year  in  Kuala  Lumpur,  the  AFI  host  country  bidding  was  officially  launched.  The 
adoption of this bidding process offered transparency that further fortified AFI as a credible 
organization. 
Today,  we  continue  laying  the  foundation  of  our  work  toward  our  independence.  In  this 
meeting: 
 
In  Cape  Town,  members  reasoned 
the  aspiration 
institution. 
that 
the  membership 
Members will be provided with an overview of the AFI independence process, with a 
presentation  to  be  made  by  Superintendent  Daniel  Schydlowsky  of  Peru.  Our 
resolve to achieve independence will not only advance our sense of ownership, but 
also  assure  ourselves  that  we  are  building  together  a  member-governed  and 
member-driven organization that is sustainable. As such, crucial and practical issues 
such  as 
fee  structures  and  related  recommendations  on 
membership rights and participation will be discussed. 
Secondly, the rigorous work of the Sub-committee on Host Country Evaluation will 
be presented to us for our appreciation. The choice of the future home of AFI is a 
crucial milestone in our journey to become an independent institution. Thus, it is with 
a sense of excitement that I inform you that the newly selected AFI host country will 
be announced shortly. 
Thirdly,  the  Independence  Sub-committee  Chair,  Governor  Njuguna  Ndung’u  of 
Kenya  will  outline  the  governance  recommendations  that  will  determine  how  the 
independent  AFI  will  be  steered  toward  our  collective  mission  of  adopting  and 
expanding effective, inclusive financial policies in developing nations. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  With  these,  all  members  are  encouraged  to  be  proactive  in  the  discussions.  Your  insights 
and  contributions  to  the  many  important  issues  will  enrich  the  process  and  ultimately 
strengthen AFI. 
The  important  agenda  I  have  just  outlined  –  charting  our  way  toward  independence, 
governance  issues,  and  the  conferment  of  the  new  AFI  host  country  –  will  allow  us  to 
advance our strength as one body and our partnership for the ultimate betterment of the poor 
people we target to serve. 
On a final and a more personal note, let me take this opportunity to thank all of you for your 
personal commitment and individual contribution to AFI over the years. After this forum, I will 
be stepping down as the Steering Committee Chair – a role which has been a privilege and a 
joy to hold, in large measure due to all your support. 
Warm thanks to my colleagues at the Steering Committee who have shared their expertise in 
building and providing strategic guidance to AFI; to the Management Unit – the team that has 
made our AFI work seamless and efficient; to all the members – the bright minds behind our 
financial  inclusion  policies  and  various  programs  that  are  truly  making  a  difference;  to  all 
those who made AFI programs and initiatives a success through their effective organization 
of activities and events; our sincerest gratitude to all of you. I am pleased to announce that 
Superintendent  Daniel  Schydlowsky  of  Peru  is  the  incoming  chairman  of  the  Steering 
Committee. 
I will, of course, stay on as an active member of AFI and will remain committed in sharing our 
institutional knowledge, and, being a personal advocate of financial inclusion, in advancing 
AFI’s global mandate. 
My colleagues and friends, let us all remain committed in being responsible stewards of this 
global  policy  network  on  financial  inclusion.  Together,  let  us  note  that  stewardship  is  not 
merely an obligation but a proactive response and opportunity for us to develop further what 
has been entrusted to us. We are all called to foster this global connection and move forward 
together toward institutional independence. 
Thank you and more power to all of us. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
