  H R Khan: Banks in India – challenges and opportunities 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  the 
BFSI Conference 2014, organized by SBICap Securities, Mumbai, 12 June 2014. 
 The  speaker  gratefully  acknowledges  the  contributions  of Shri.  Prakash  Baliarsingh,  Smt.  Nilima  Ramteke and 
Shri Tulasi Gopinath of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1.  Smt.  Arundhati  Bhattacharya,  Chairman,  State  Bank  of  India,  Shri.  Deepak  Parekh, 
Chairman  HDFC,  Shri.  V.  G.  Kannan,  Chairman,  SBI  Cap  Securities  Ltd.,  Shri.  Mani 
Palivesan,  Managing  Director,  SBI  Cap  Securities  Ltd,  distinguished  panelists  and 
participants.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  address  the  BFSI  Conference  2014  which  features  panel 
discussions  on  topical  issues  in  banking.  The  first  panel  discussion,  interestingly,  is  on 
Disruptive  Themes  for  Next  Decade.  The  word  disruptive  is  usually  used  with  a  negative 
connotation  and  therefore  to  be  chosen  as  the  theme  for  the  panel  discussion  is  a  bold 
decision.  On  a  careful  rethinking,  it  seems  disruptions  can  be  used  as  synonym  for 
challenges posed by paradigm shifts in the environment, thereby questioning the way things 
are done today. These challenges are opening the opportunities which banks should harness 
if  they  want  to  remain  relevant  in  the  financial  service  space  in  India.  Therefore,  in  my 
address I intend to focus on some of these challenges & opportunities. 
2.  As  at  end-March  2013,  there  were  155  commercial  banks  including  151  scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) of which Regional Rural Banks were 64. The total number of bank 
offices  at  end-March  2014  is  estimated  to  have  reached  1,15,014  and  the  population  per 
office,  1,10,052.  In  terms  of  the  regional  spread  of  the  bank  offices,  while  North  Eastern 
region accounted for about 2 per cent (2,785 bank offices), Southern region accounted for 
about 28 per cent (30,925 bank offices). Despite such vast expansion of banking network, 
banking penetration still remains relatively low. According to the CRISIL’s financial inclusion 
index,  Inclusix,  which  covers  three  parameters  of  branch  penetration,  deposit  penetration 
and credit penetration, at all India level, the index is placed (on a scale of 100) at 40.1 in 
2011,  reflecting  under  penetration  of  formal  banking  facilities  in  most  part  of  the  country. 
While  the  Southern  region  witnessed  highest  financial  inclusion  with  index  at  62.2,  North-
Eastern region registered lowest with 28.5. Under-penetration is evident in terms of number 
of  ATMs  and  POS  per  million  population  also.  In  India,  it  stood  at  about  94  and 
695 respectively as compared to, say, 1200 and 4853 respectively in Russia. The credit to 
GDP ratio is at around 53 per cent, which is low compared to the credit-GDP ratio of many 
advanced  &  developing  economies.  Hence,  there  is  a  need for much greater  banking  and 
credit penetration going forward. This is so because despite efforts to develop the corporate 
bond  market,  the  Indian  financial  system  remains  bank-dominated  with  commercial  banks 
accounting for over 60 per cent of the financial sector assets. It is, therefore, essential for the 
Indian economy, striving for an accelerating, sustainable and inclusive growth in the medium 
to long-term, to have a healthy and growing banking system. 
3. Indian banking in future is, thus, expected to grow exponentially supported by technology 
intensive  processes  and  customer  friendly  models  with  focus  on  convenience  and  cost 
effectiveness.  A  report  titled  Indian  Banking  2020:  Making  Decade’s  Promise  come  True 
brought out by the Boston Consulting Group in 2010 had identified ten broad trends for the 
Indian  banking.  These  and  a  few  other  areas  which  should  receive  the  attention  of  banks 
seeking opportunities for sustainable growth are summarized below:- 
i. 
Retail banking will be immensely benefited from the Indian demographic dividend. It 
is important to note that the middle class population is expected to touch 200 million 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
 
 
by 2020 and 475 million by 20271. This would imply mortgages would grow fast and 
likely to cross `40 trillion by 2020;  
Another  segment  that  will  provide  huge  opportunities  will  be  the  financing  of 
affordable housing for growing “low” & “middle” class;  
Rapid  accumulation  of wealth  in  rich  households  will  drive  wealth  management  to 
10X size;  
“The Next Billion” consumer segment will emerge as the largest in terms of numbers 
and  will  accentuate  the  demand  for  low  cost  banking  solutions  and  innovative 
operating models, throwing up a big market of small customers;  
Branches  and  ATMs  will  need  to  grow  2X  and  5X  respectively  to  serve  the  huge 
addition  to  bankable  population.  Low  cost  branch  network  with  smaller  sized 
branches will be adopted;  
Mobile  banking  will  come  of  age  with  widespread  access  to  internet  on  mobile 
reaping the benefit of the high mobile density in the country;  
Banks  will  adopt  CRM  and  data  warehousing  in  a  major  way  to  reduce  customer 
acquisition costs and improve risk management. Banks will have to understand and 
adopt  new  technologies  like,  cloud  computing  and  invest  significantly  in  analytics 
based on big data;  
Margins will see downward pressure both in retail and corporate banking, spurring 
banks to generate more fees and improve operating efficiency;  
Banks will discover the importance of the SME segment for profitability and growth 
and new models to serve SME segment profitably will be found as more than three 
fourth of the segment is still waiting to be served;  
Investment banking will grow 10X, driven by demand from corporates for transaction 
support and capital market access; and  
Infrastructure debt will surpass 
 45 trillion — half of which will be on bank’s books. 
It will touch the ALM limits of banks and will require a significant upgrade of banks’ 
risk management systems.  
The  focus  of  agricultural  financing  will  be  on  areas  like  end-to-end  supply  chain 
management,  various  aggregation  models  of  financing,  organic  and  other  niche 
areas of agriculture. Rural banking predominantly will have to harness branchless  
Although banks will continue to focus on domestic business, given the rising trend of 
globalization,  cross-border  banking  business  will  need  more  attention.  As  per  a 
recent World Bank report, India retained its topmost position with US$ 70 billion in 
remittances 
the  Philippines 
(US$ 25 billion),  Mexico  (US$  22  billion),  Nigeria  (US$  21  billion),  Egypt 
(US$ 17 billion),  Pakistan  (US$  15  billion)  and  Bangladesh  (US$  14  billion).  Apart 
from remittances and deposit & investment related transactions originating from the 
growing  Indian  diaspora,  India  has  been  witnessing  a significant  increase  in  trade 
finance and outward direct investments. In other words, banks will need to gear up 
to reap the benefits of increasing business arising out of globalization of India and 
resident and non-resident Indians; 
It has now been realized that manufacturing will have to be one of the key drivers of 
growth though in the recent past, with moderation in the growth rate, the sector also 
followed  by  China  (US$  60  billion), 
in  2013 
                                                
1   Report of Ernst & Young: China and India: tomorrow’s middle classes. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
witnessed a slowdown. A recent report of the McKinsey Global Institute2 observes 
that  for  making  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  standards  of  living  of  the  Indian 
people and alleviating poverty, about 115 million new non-farm jobs will have to be 
created between 2012 and 2022 and of these, about 27 million new jobs need to be 
created in manufacturing. The required growth rate in manufacturing sector output 
needs to be at least 10 per cent a year, probably higher. The National Manufacturing 
Policy envisages share of manufacturing in GDP to 25 per cent by 2022. Achieving 
this rate of growth would require significant amount of financing by the banks. 
4. Against this evolving milieu of opportunistic trends, I feel it is appropriate to take stock of 
the challenges facing banks going forward in terms of strategies and business models that 
they  will  need  to  adopt  more  specifically  from  the  regulatory  and  payment  system 
perspectives. I intend to highlight some of the major challenges.  
Challenges from the regulatory perspective 
 288 trillion by 2020 from about 
Re-orientation of the Indian banking structure 
5. As the economy expands, a greater quantum of resources will be needed for supporting 
the growth process. The Indian banking sector also needs to catch up the likely acceleration 
in  the  credit  to  GDP  ratio  as  the  economy  expands.  To  support  the  economic  growth  as 
envisaged in the 12th Five Year Plan, the banking business needs to expand significantly to 
 115 trillion in 20123. Given this, there is a 
an estimated 
need  for  reorienting  the  banking  structure  to  make  it  more  dynamic  and  flexible,  while 
ensuring safety and systemic stability. There is enormous scope for increasing the size and 
capacity  of  the  banking  structure.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  came  out  with  a  set  of 
guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector in February 2013. The process of 
licensing culminated with the granting of “in-principle” approval to two applicants who would 
set up new banks in the private sector within a period of 18 months. 
6. While announcing the decision to grant “in-principle” approval to the two applicants, the 
Reserve  Bank  indicated  that going forward,  it  would  use  the  learning  experience from this 
licensing  exercise  to  revise  the  guidelines  appropriately  and  move  to  grant  licences  more 
regularly  on  “tap”  basis.  Further,  Reserve  Bank  would  work  on  a  policy  of  having  various 
categories  of  “differentiated”  bank  licences  which  will  allow  a  wider  pool  of  entrants  into 
banking leading to greater banking penetration and more competitive environment. Reserve 
Bank has, accordingly, been working on the relevant guidelines for licensing payment banks 
and small banks. 
7.  Eventually,  over  the  years,  as  visualized  in  the  Discussion  Paper,  the  reoriented  the 
banking  structure  may  comprise  four  tiers.  The  first  tier  may  consist  of  three  or  four  large 
universal  Indian  banks  with  domestic  and  international  presence  along  with  branches  of 
foreign  banks  in  India.  The  second  tier  is  likely  to  comprise  several  mid-sized  banking 
institutions  including  niche  banks  like  Payment  Banks  with  economy-wide  presence.  The 
third  tier  may  encompass  old  private  sector  banks,  Regional  Rural  Banks,  and  multi  state 
Urban  Cooperative  Banks.  The  fourth  tier  may  embrace  many  small  privately  owned  local 
banks and cooperative banks. 
                                                
2   From  poverty  to  empowerment:  India’s  imperative  for  jobs,  growth,  and  effective  basic  services,  February 
2014. 
3   Banking Structure in India-The Way Forward, Discussion Paper, Reserve Bank of India, August 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Competition 
8.  W.  Chan  Kim  &  A.  Renee  Mauborgne  in  their  “Blue  Ocean  Strategy”  have  shown  that 
companies can succeed not by battling competitors, but rather by creating Blue Oceans of 
uncontested market space. These strategic moves create value for the company, its buyers 
and  its  employees,  while  unlocking  new  demand  and  making  the  competition  irrelevant. 
Unlike  the  Red  Ocean  Strategy,  the  conventional  approach  to  business  of  beating 
competition,  the  “Blue  Ocean  Strategy”  tries  to  align  innovation  with  utility,  price  and  cost 
propositions.  Similarly,  financial  sector  reforms  have  brought  about  significant  structural 
changes and created several blue oceans. A manifestation of this development is reflected in 
the  increase  in  bank  competitiveness.  The  share  of  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  in  total 
banking assets, which was 90 per cent on the eve of reforms in 1991 has since declined to 
around  72  per  cent,  a  decline  of  roughly  1  percentage  a  year.  In  a  move  that  is  further 
expected  to  increase  competition  in  the  domestic  banking  industry,  the  Reserve  Bank 
released the framework for setting up of Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (WOS) by foreign banks 
to India in November 2013, besides the framework for new universal banks and differentiated 
banks,  such  as,  small  banks  and  payment  banks,  which  is  in  the  offing.  As  I  mentioned 
above,  new  banks  are  set  to  enter  baking  sector.  Further,  banks  are  facing  increasing 
competition from non-banks including NBFCs, MFIs and tech companies. Going ahead, there 
may be increase in the non-bank related financing activities through innovations like Peer-to-
Peer  (P2P)  lending4,  direct  consumer  lendings  and  social  investing.  With  increasing 
competition,  banks,  will  need  to  tap  into  untapped  business  opportunities. This  would  also 
call for harnessing resources at the bottom of the pyramid. Small customers are as important 
to their business growth as big business opportunities. The challenge before banks would be 
to make the best use of technology and innovation to bring down intermediation costs while 
protecting their bottom lines 
Basel III implementation 
9.  The  implementation  of  Basel  III  framework  will  throw  various  challenges  for  banks.  In 
particular, the adoption of Basel III capital requirements by Indian banks would push down 
their return on equity (RoE) to an extent. Investors have a wider choice and the stocks of the 
manufacturing  sector  may  be  preferred  to  banking  sector  stocks  and,  as  such,  it  may 
perhaps be difficult to convince the investor community to invest in Indian banks in the short-
term. It is, however, expected that by looking at the benefits of implementation of Basel III 
capital requirements by way of increasing resilience of the banking system, investors will get 
adjusted to the new reality. This issue also needs to be seen in a historical perspective to 
understand the fact that Indian banks have successfully transited in the past from the regime 
of  no  regulatory  requirement  for  capital  to  progressively  tighter  capital  requirements  and  it 
would be logical to expect that Indian banks would be able to navigate the current phase as 
well.  Nevertheless,  it  needs  to  be  recognized  that  while  moderation  of  growth  in  RoE  is 
inevitable, the key to cushion this impact is to optimise capital and augment efficiency. 
10.  On  June  9,  2014,  the  Reserve  Bank  issued  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Liquidity  Converge  Ratio  (LCR),  which  is  a  part  of  the  Basel  III  framework  on  Liquidity 
Standards. In India, the LCR will be introduced in a phased manner starting with a minimum 
requirement  of  60  per  cent  from  January  1,  2015  and  reaching  minimum  100  per  cent  on 
January  1,  2019.  Further, Government  securities  in  excess  of minimum  SLR  requirements 
                                                
4   P2P lending also referred to as “social investing”, “marketplace lending” or “direct consumer lending” is the 
practice of borrowing and lending of money among unrelated individuals and business entities, on the online 
platforms,  without  any  role  of  a  traditional  financial  intermediary  like  a  bank  or  a  non-banking  financial 
institution.  Crowd  funding  is  a  common  term  where  small  amounts  of  money  from  large  number  of 
individuals/organizations  is  raised  to  fund  an  art  work,  social  cause  or  start-up  venture  through  web-based 
platform. The P2P lending is carried out through the websites of the P2P lending companies, using different 
lending “platforms”, which charge a relatively small commission for their services. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and the Government securities within the mandated SLR requirement to the extent allowed 
by the Reserve Bank under Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) are permitted to be treated as 
Level  1  assets  for  the  computation  of  LCR.  Adoption  of  liquidity  standards  under  Basel  III 
may  induce  changes  in  funding  preferences  of  the  Indian  banks  reflecting  the  fact  that 
availability of and access to quality liquid assets may be a challenge going forward when the 
LCR requirement increases incrementally. 
Capital mobilisation 
11.  In  the  process  of  phased  adoption  of  Basel  III  capital  norms,  Indian  banks  in  general 
have a relatively comfortable capital adequacy position to begin with. Rising required amount 
of capital going forward would be, however, a challenge, to which I turn now. The Reserve 
Bank  issued  final  guidelines  on  implementation  of  Basel  III  capital  regulations  on  May  2, 
2012.  The  guidelines  became  effective  from  April  1,  2013  in  phases  and  will  be  fully 
implemented as on March 31, 2019. Though there are various estimates about the additional 
capital mobilization by the PSBs arising out of the phased implementation of Basel III capital 
requirements, one thing is clear that the required magnitude of capital in the run up to the full 
implementation will be substantial. During the last four years, the Government has infused 
 586  billion  in  the  PSBs.  The  Government  has  made  a  provision  of 
 112  billion  in  the 
interim  budget  for  2014–15.  PSBs  hold  more  than  70  per  cent  of  the  banking  assets. 
Therefore, capital infusion from the Government of this order may not be sufficient. It is also 
important  to  note  that  there  has  been  over  reliance  on  the  Government  to  infuse  equity 
despite headroom available for the management of the banks to raise equity from markets. 
There have not been concerted efforts made by PSBs to shore up their equity capital base 
from the markets, keeping in view the Basel III capital adequacy requirements. Their internal 
generation  of  capital  has  suffered  mainly  due  to  sharp  deterioration  in  the  asset  quality 
possibly due to /adverse selection of assets. The growing pressure on asset quality of PSBs 
and the threat of rating downgrades will further add pressure on the equity of banks. Further, 
there  would  be  further  requirement  of  capital  based  on  supervisory  review  and  evaluation 
process under Basel Pillar II framework. 
12. With higher additional capital requirements, as discussed above, recapitalisation of PSBs 
could exert significant stress on the government’s fiscal position. There are, however, several 
potential options available to meet the challenges of mobilization of additional capital. These 
would include:  
i. 
Divestment of Government’s shares in PSBs. Given the present level of government 
shareholding in these banks which ranges from 58 per cent to 89 per cent, there is 
substantial  ground  for  raising  equity  from  the  market  without  diluting  the  public 
sector character; 
The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  Boards  of  PSBs  could  be  reviewed.  The 
effectiveness of the Board and senior management has a moderating effect on the 
risk  profiles,  and  consequently,  overall  capital  requirements  in  a  bank.  The 
Government, being the owner of the PSBs, could address the governance aspects 
concerning PSBs;  
In addition to the public and rights issues, banks have other routes available to raise 
equity  in  the  form  of  qualified  institutions’  placement  (QIP)  and  ESOP.  Boards  of 
PSBs need to explore all the feasible options to raise equity capital.  
Providing tax incentive to investors’ on investments in banks’ Tier 1 bonds like tax 
exemption  of  interest  income(in  part  or  in  full)  with  a  view  to  promoting  and 
deepening the market for these bonds may be useful at this stage;  
PSBs  may  issue  non-voting  equity  shares  to  the  public  thereby  while  the 
Government  can  hold  less  than  51  per  cent  of  the  total  equity  shares,  it  can  still 
maintain at least 51 per cent voting rights of the total voting equity;  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
 Similarly,  the  option  of  issuance  of  differential  voting  equity  could  also  be 
considered.  These  issuances  will  allow  the  Government  to  maintain  their  voting 
rights  at  the  desired  level  even  though  there  may  be  a  dilution  in  the  economic 
interest, i.e., in terms dividend income to the Government; 
The Government’s stake in PSBs can be diluted below 51 per cent in conjunction 
with certain protective rights given to the Government by amending the respective 
statutes governing PSBs; 
In this connection, the proposals of the Committee to Review Governance of Boards 
of Banks in India (Nayak Committee) to transfer the Government’s shares in PSBs 
to  an 
Investment  Company  (BIC),  reduce 
Government  stakes  in  PSBs  to  less  than  50  percent  and  provide  more  autonomy 
and professionalism to PSBs which are expected to improve the returns on equity 
and attract more capital from the market apart from reducing provision requirements, 
etc. are worth serious consideration; and 
As  regards  distressed  banks  in  private  sector,  Nayak  Committee  has  also 
recommended  that  private  equity  funds,  including  sovereign  wealth  funds  be 
permitted to take a controlling stake of 40 percent. 
investment  company  viz.,  Bank 
Asset quality 
13.  During  the  quarter  ended  December  2013,  banks  collectively  held  loan  provisions  of 
about Rupees one lakh crores, an increase of 13 percent over the year, indicating that loan 
asset quality of banks in India deteriorated considerably The trend of y-o-y growth in gross 
non-performing  advances  (GNPA)  outstripping  the  y-o-y  growth  of  advances,  that  started 
from the quarter ended September 2011, continues although the gap in the growth rates is 
narrowed5. The PSBs continued to register the highest level of stressed advances at 11.3 
per cent of the total advances as at end March 2014, followed by the old private bank at 5.8 
per  cent.  Though  agriculture  sector  showed  the  highest  GNPA  ratio  the  industry  sector 
showed  distinctly  high  level  of  restructured  standard  advances,  resulting  in  the  stressed 
advances of the industry sector reaching 15.6 per cent followed by the services at 7.9 per 
cent as at December 2013. There are five sub-sectors, namely, infrastructure {which includes 
power  generation,  telecommunications,  roads,  ports,  airports,  railways  (other  than  Indian 
Railways)  and  others  infrastructure},  iron  and  steel,  textiles,  mining  (including  coal)  and 
aviation services had significantly higher level of stress and thus these sub-sectors/segments 
were identified as “stressed” sectors in the banks’ lending portfolios. The share of these five 
stressed sub-sectors to the total advances of the SCBs is around 24 per cent. Infrastructure 
has the highest share at 14.7 per cent in the total advances. Among the bank-groups, these 
five sub-sectors have the highest share at 27.3 per cent in the case of PSBs. 
14. It is widely accepted that the economic slowdown has affected the asset quality of banks 
adversely though the impact is not similar across bank groups. Sector-wise and their size-
wise  analysis  of  asset  quality  shows  that  the  GNPA  ratio  of  PSBs  across  the  sectors  and 
their  size  are  significantly  higher  than  the  other  bank-groups.  How  do  we  face  up  to  the 
challenge  of  deteriorating  asset  quality  of  banks?  Though  analysts  have  often  pointed  out 
that the poor asset quality of the banks, to a great extent, could be attributed to the not so 
                                                
5   The system level gross non-performing advances (GNPA) of SCBs as percentage of total advances, declined 
to 3.9 per cent in March 2014 from 4.2 per cent in September 2013.The net non-performing advances (NNPA) 
as percentage of total advances, also declined to 2.0 per cent in March 2014 from 2.3 per cent in September 
2013.  This  improvement  in  asset  quality  was  due  to  the  lower  slippage  of  standard  advances  to  non-
performing and a seasonal pattern of higher recovery and write-offs that generally take place during the last 
quarter of financial year. The stressed advances of SCBs also declined to 9.6 per cent of total advances as at 
end March 2014 from 10.2 per cent of September 2013. This improvement in the asset quality was observed 
across all the bank-groups. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  encouraging  macro-economic  situation,  it  is  expected  that  the  implementation  of  the  new 
initiatives  by  the  Central  Government  would  address  these  issues  effectively.  Skeptics, 
though may still point out at factors, such as, the threat of “El Nino” which could result in poor 
monsoon,  global  developments,  such  as,  quantitative  easing,  etc.  and  geopolitical  risks, 
could  threaten  the  performance  of  banks  in  India.  It  is  also  true  that  even  when  general 
economic outlook is healthy, the asset quality of banks could still suffer due to inadequacies 
in credit management. There are no short cuts for proper credit appraisals and monitoring. 
Recognising  early  warning  signals  and  taking  timely  measures  to  take  care  of  the 
weaknesses observed are very important. 
15.  The  Reserve  Bank,  on  January  30,  2014,  has  issued  a  “Framework  to  Revitalise  the 
Distressed  Assets  in  the  Economy”,  wherein  banks  would  recognise  at  an  early  stage  the 
stress in their assets and take prompt steps towards resolution/ recovery of distressed assets 
and detailed guidelines in this regard were issued on February 26, 2014. The Framework has 
identified certain structural impediments in the way of smooth resolution/recovery of stressed 
assets  of  banks  and  suggested  steps,  such  as,  revamping  the  SARFAESI  Act,  revitalizing 
DRTs, etc. and rejuvenating Asset Reconstruction Companies, are also being mooted. 
16. The  Reserve  Bank of  India  has  set  up the Central  Repository  of  Information  on  Large 
Credits  (CRILC)  to  collect,  store  and  disseminate  data  on  all  borrowers’  credit  exposures 
including Special Mention Accounts (SMA 0, 1 & 2) with aggregate fund-based and non-fund 
based exposure of `50 million and above. The CRILC has started disseminating information 
on large credit which will reduce credit information asymmetry and improve informed credit 
decision making by banks. Banks will be able to know large common exposures and build-up 
of leverage in the system. Banks will have access to asset classification of individual large 
exposures  by  different  banks.  Banks  are  required  to  activate  the  Joint  Lenders  Forum  for 
initiating corrective actions when a lender reports a borrower as SMA2 to CRILC. We have 
engaged with banks to avoid delay in submission of data and ensure quality and integrity of 
data.  It  is  expected  that  once  it  stabilizes,  the  CRILC  framework  would  exert  moral 
pressure/discipline  on  large  borrowers  to  repay  dues  in  time  lest  their  names  appear  in 
SMA2 report and bank managements would be better equipped to assess the health of their 
high value credit portfolio for initiating timely action. 
Governance 
17. As mentioned earlier, Nayak Committee has made some major observations regarding 
governance aspects of banks in India, especially that of PSBs. According to the Committee, 
there  is  a  need  to  upgrade  the  quality  of  board  deliberation  in  PSBs  to  provide  greater 
strategic focus. Further, there are seven themes which appear critical to their medium-term 
strengths  comprising  Business  Strategy,  Financial  Reports  and  their  Integrity,  Risk, 
Compliance, Customer Protection, Financial Inclusion and Human Resources. All other items 
for  discussion  should  be  brought  to  the  Boards  by  exception  and  should  typically  be 
discussed in committees of boards. It is added that, among these seven themes identified for 
detailed board scrutiny, predominant emphasis needs to be provided to Business Strategy 
and  Risk  dimensions.  Further,  the  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  as  the  quality  of  board 
deliberations is sensitive to the skills and independence of board members, it is imperative to 
upgrade  these  skills  in  boards  of  PSBs  by  reconfiguring  the  entire  appointments  process. 
Otherwise  it  is  unlikely  that  these  boards  will  be  empowered  and  effective.  For  this,  the 
Government  has  to  move  towards  establishing  fully  empowered  boards  in  PSBs,  solely 
entrusted with the governance and oversight of the management of the banks. The proposed 
BIC, which is expected to hold the shares of the Government in PSBs, should commence the 
process of professionalising and empowering bank boards by reconstituting them and this in 
turn  would  help  to  improve  the  corporate  governance  in  a  big  way.  As  per  the 
recommendations of the Committee, eventually in phase III, all ownership functions would be 
transferred by BIC to the bank boards. The appointments of independent bank directors and 
whole-time  directors  (including  the  CEO)  would  become  the  responsibility  of  bank  boards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  from 
Equally  important  from  PSBs  point  of  view  would  be  the  quality  of  the  top  management 
particularly 
the  points  of  view  of  experience,  expertise  &  continuity.  While 
professionalization and effectiveness of boards of PSBs emerged as a major challenge, it is 
no less as issue with many private sector banks, say for example, when there is domination 
of prominent shareholders/CEOs. Private sector banks also need to focus on the skill-set and 
profile of their top management and the board of directors. 
Risk management system in banks 
18.  The  design  of  risk  management  functions  should  be  based  on  size,  complexity  of 
business and the quality of MIS. The banks should have the necessary skill set available or 
develop it through proper in-house capacity building. Banks, therefore, will need to refine and 
re-orient  their  risk  management  skills  for  enterprise-wide  risk  management.  In  addition, 
banks  need  to  have  in  place  a  fair  and  differentiated  risk  pricing  of  products  and  services 
since capital comes at a cost. This involves costing, a quantitative assessment of revenue 
streams  from  each  product  and  service  and  an  efficient  transfer-pricing  mechanism  that 
would  determine  capital  allocation.  Generally  it  is  observed  that  some  banks  put  the  risk 
management architecture in place to meet the regulatory requirements without using the risk 
inputs for taking business decisions. The risk is not properly priced for various products. The 
most challenging part is the integrity and reliability of data. It must be appreciated that Risk 
Based  Supervision  (RBS)  under  which  all  the  banks  will  be  covered  by  the  Reserve  Bank 
over a period of time (28 banks were under RBS last year) is highly data intensive. The risk 
profile  of  a  bank,  its  rating,  and  most  importantly,  the  computation  of  supervisory  capital 
which  are  the  outputs  of  RBS  are  determined  on  the  basis  of  data  and  other  qualitative 
information furnished by the banks. It may be remembered that supervisory findings also go 
towards  formulation  of  regulatory  guidelines  and  other  macroeconomic  policies.  It  is, 
therefore, the responsibility of the top managements/Boards of the banks to ensure that this 
area is given utmost attention. 
HR management 
19. This is an area where most of our banks, especially the PSBs, are found lacking. In their 
eagerness  to  expand  their  core  business  they  tend  to  forget  the  relevance  of  human 
expertise which drives their business in a sustainable manner. The complexities of modern 
banking and the dependence on IT makes it all  the more important why the banks should 
have  requisite  manpower  with  right  amount  of  knowledge  and  experience  at  appropriate 
places.  Many  of  the  present  day  ills  in  Indian  banks,  e.g.,  weak  appraisal  standards,  not 
being able to pick up the early warning signals in problem accounts which leads to fraudulent 
transactions  or  accounts  becoming  NPA,  recurring  customer  grievances,  etc.  can  be 
ascribed to skill gaps in the manpower of the banks. Near vacuum in the senior management 
over  the  next few  years,  lack  of  expertise  in  critical  areas  like  IT, risk management,  credit 
appraisal  and  treasury  operations,  absence  of  succession  planning  for  middle  and  senior 
management positions, attracting, retaining and nurturing fresh talent, ad hoc responses to 
capacity  building  and  poor  performance  management  system  are  some  of  the  major  HR 
challenges  staring  the  PSBs.  The  proposal  of  universal  and  differentiated  bank  licenses 
being available on tap will make it tougher for PSBs to retain whatever skilled manpower is 
available with them. In respect of private sector banks, the problem in many cases relates to 
the work culture focussing unduly on achieving unrealistic targets by all means. This implies 
certain aversion towards employment in such banks and could have serious reputation risk 
implications for them. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Challenges from the payment systems perspective 
Financial inclusion through the payments route 
20.  Leveraging  technology  enabled  payment  system  for  electronic  transactions  provides 
challenges  and  opportunities  to  the  banks  by  expanding  outreach  in  terms  of  expanding 
customer  base,  offering  multiple  product  choices,  achieving  cost  efficiency,  providing 
assurance in terms of standardization, safety and safety. Despite the impressive growth in 
the volume and value of electronic transactions the same is concentrated in metros and big 
cities, thus widening the digital divide. This imbalance is reflected along various parameters, 
be  it  the  deployment  of  ATMs,  or  the  POS  infrastructure,  mobile  banking  services,  etc. 
Needless to state, the vision of financial inclusion, aided through the payments path, cannot 
be achieved unless the rural and semi-urban areas find an equal footing in the policy horizon 
for banks. 
21. While the ultimate goal is to migrate most of the payments to electronic mode, we cannot 
lose sight of the reality that large segment of population is still dependent on cash for day-to-
day  requirements.  The  lop-sided  development  of  infrastructure  mentioned  above  also 
contributes  to  this  challenge.  Hence,  from  a  perspective  of  achieving  inclusive  payment 
system, it is also necessary to facilitate remittance and cash-handling requirements of a large 
segment of society, particularly the migrant population, The Reserve Bank has already put in 
place  the  policy  framework  under  the Guidelines for  Domestic  Money  Transfer  (DMT)  and 
now it is up to the banks to take this forward. Towards this end, experiments like “Cardless 
cash  withdrawal”  for  the  unbanked  is  gaining  ground.  We  have  recently  given  in-principle 
approval for two entities to take this service forward. Of course, for this to gain traction, active 
participation  of  and  promotion  by  banks  would  be  imperative  as  the  delivery  channels 
envisaged in these models are the ATMs and Business Correspondents (BCs). 
Standardisation and capacity build-up 
22. While any development in offering electronic services is welcome, stand-alone systems 
not only work in silos but also fragment the market to some extent. Hence, as the payments 
eco-system  matures,  inter-operability  becomes  essential,  for  which  standardization  in 
processes and procedures is a pre-requisite. This not only facilitates uniformity in transaction 
handling but also enables uniform customer experiences. A related point is that of ensuring 
that  systems  are  not  just  adequate  to  meet  present  needs  but  also  the  growing  volumes. 
Hence,  even  as  the  Reserve  Bank  is  building  capacity  in  the  systems  operated  by  it  (for 
instance, the RTGS or NEFT), it is equally important for banks to review and upgrade their 
own infrastructure as well in tune with their policy and expected growth in business. 
Partnerships with non-banks 
23. Even as we have adopted a bank led model for achieving the goal of financial inclusion, 
opportunities have been given to the non-banks to involve themselves in payments area – 
whether it is through the BC, White Label ATMS (WLAs) or pre-paid card routes. In many of 
these areas, non-banks need to work in close coordination with banks. It is imperative that 
banks also see the potential for synergetic growth by partnering with these non-banks and 
leveraging  on their  strengths  so  as  to  reap  efficiency  gains for  both  the entities;  a  case  in 
point  is  bank-MNO  partnership  for  expanding  mobile  banking  space.  We  have  seen 
instances of such partnership, particularly with MNOs acting as BCs. Similar developments 
should  occur  in  other  areas  too.  A  word  of  caution  is,  however,  essential  –  banks  cannot 
abdicate  their  responsibilities  towards  customers,  in  ensuring  safe  and  secure  services, 
particularly  in  scenarios  where  a  large  part  of  the  activities  involved  in  payments  are 
outsourced. In some context, we have also observed concentration in a few service providers 
and banks should take cognizance of this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Safety and security of payment transactions 
24.  Last  but  not  the  least  is  the  consideration  towards  safety  and  security  of  payment 
transactions. This goes a long way in influencing customer behavior in the choice of payment 
methods. While the Reserve Bank has mandated many requirements to strengthen security 
and enhance risk mitigation standards for the electronic transactions, it is essential that these 
are  implemented  not  only  in  letter  but  also  in  spirit.  Further,  with  the  increased  volume  of 
transactions,  the  need  for  Straight  Through  Processing  (STP)  becomes  essential.  Hence, 
while  catering  to  large  volumes,  certain  procedural  changes  would  need  to  be  made.  For 
example, there is the requirement under NEFT and RTGS where the credit is afforded to the 
beneficiary  customer’s  account  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  account  number  given  in  the 
remittance request by the sender. While the intention behind this policy is to facilitate easier 
handling  of  growing  volumes  at  banks  through  STP,  the  risk-based  approach  to  handle 
customer  grievance  should  not  be  lost  sight  of  and  banks  should  also  seek  to  proactively 
address  of  the  payee  and  redress  customer  issues  emanating  from  such  electronic 
transactions.  Customer  as  well  as  frontline  staff  awareness  and  education  is  crucial  in 
ensuring not only acceptability of the payment products but also their assurance in terms of 
safety and security. 
Concluding thoughts 
25. Finally, let me conclude by highlighting that the challenges facing banks as they gear up 
to the task of funding an economy, aspiring to become a middle-income country in the years 
to come, are known knowns. But the known unknown is how the banks will be able to adapt 
to the evolving situation and come on top of it. What compounds the matter further is the fact 
that  Indian  banks  have  to  operate  in  an  increasingly  globalised  environment,  because  of 
which  there  will  be  many  factors  –  regulatory,  technological,  cross-border  financial  flows 
impacting them over which they may not have any control. In particular, 
i. 
Will  the  banks  be  able  to  mobilise  required  amount  of  capital from  the market for 
meeting their current and future business growth and prudential requirements? 
Will banks be able to understand the varied and dynamic requirements of its diverse 
set of clientele and devise customised products? 
Will banks be able to do so in a cost effective manner? 
Will banking be able to attract and retain skilled manpower and leverage them for 
both  for  business  growth  and  risk  mitigation  without  sullying  their  image  as 
responsible and responsive employers? 
Will banks be able to enlarge their outreach in terms of customer base and product 
choices  by 
in  affordable, 
accessible, acceptable and assured manner? 
technology  enabled  payment  systems 
leveraging 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
I am sanguine that in trying to respond to these and the related questions Indian banks will 
be  able  to  find  ways  to  convert  the  challenges  into  potential  opportunities  to  redeem  their 
mandate of serving the real economy in an efficient manner. The Reserve Bank, for its part, 
will  continue  to  endeavour  to  ensure  an  enabling  regulatory  framework  that  can  act  as 
catalyst in the process. I wish the conference all success.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
