  
 
Fahad Bin Abdullah Almubarak: Achievements and developments during 
the past nine years in Saudi Arabia 
Speech by H E Dr Fahad Bin Abdullah Almubarak, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary 
Agency, on the occasion of the 9th Anniversary of Allegiance to the Custodian of the Two 
Holy Mosques King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz, Riyadh, 27 April 2014. 
 On  the  26th  of  Jumada II,  1435  H,  the  Saudi  people  celebrate  the  occasion  of  Allegiance 
anniversary to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz Al Saud 
– may Allah preserve him- in its ninth year, expressing their deepest affection and sincere 
loyalty  to  the  leader  and  the  country.  These  sentiments  are  based  on  deep-rooted 
foundations,  at  the  top  of  which  are  his  characteristics  –  may  Allah  preserve  him-  of  wise 
leadership  of  the  affairs  of  the  state,  the  national  economy  and  great  attention  paid  to 
citizens’ different interests. This has resulted in comprehensive developmental achievements 
that have raced time and exceeded the set goals, since his assumption of the reins of power 
on 26/6/1426 H, corresponding to 1/8/2005 to the present time. It is difficult to count down 
the  achievements  of  these  past  nine  blessed  years  in  brief,  but  I  will  touch  upon  some  of 
them with some statistics that are the best evidence of achievement and development. 
The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques -may Allah preserve him- has taken a wide range of 
important  decisions  and  measures  aimed  at  restructuring  and  regulating  the  economy, 
updating the laws to enhance the level of efficiency and competitiveness in the economy and 
support  optimal  operation  of  the  factors  of  production,  apart  from  providing  an  advanced 
regulatory and administrative framework and attractive environment for domestic and foreign 
investment  to  achieve  diversity  in  the  economic  and  production  environment  in  order  to 
continue to create appropriate job opportunities for the sons and daughters of this country. 
The most prominent indicators of the economic development achieved are: the increase in 
the real GDP of the non-oil sector by 81.4 percent over the period from 2005 to the end of 
2013, the balance of payments recorded a surplus of SAR 3.6 trillion, the actual government 
expenditures amounted to SAR 5.7 trillion, and the public debt to GDP ratio declined from 
37.3  percent  at  the  end  of  2005  to  2.7  percent  at  the  end  of  2013.  Many  development 
projects have been approved for strengthening and streamlining the infrastructure, including 
roads, airports, telecommunications, water and electricity, health and education services, in 
addition to the Scholarship Program of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques for pursuing 
higher education abroad which is a long-term investment in human resources. The Kingdom 
has  maintained  high  sovereign  ratings  of  solvency  as  indicated  by  international  rating 
agencies. Most recently, Fitch international credit rating raised the rating of the Kingdom from 
AA- to AA with a stable outlook, which highlights the strength of its economy and financial 
position, and makes it more attractive for domestic and foreign investments. There is a great 
and deep-rooted confidence in the continued strong growth and overall development of the 
Saudi economy under the wise leadership of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques. 
At  the  level  of  the  financial  and  banking  sectors,  domestic  liquidity  increased  from 
SAR 553.7 billion in 2005 to SAR 1,545.1 billion at the end of 2013, recording a growth rate 
of 179.1 percent, or an average annual increase of SAR 123.9 billion.  The banking sector 
also  registered  strong  and  sustainable  growth  during 
that  period,  overcoming  the 
repercussions  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and,  thereby,  serving  the  national  economy  in 
accordance with the latest secure technology in the field of banking and financial services. 
The  total  assets  of  banks  more  than  doubled  from  about  SAR  759  billion  in  2005  to 
SAR 1,893 billion at the end of 2013. The number of bank branches during the same period 
increased  by  44.4  percent  to  1,768.  Automated  teller  machines  rose  by  202.6  percent,  to 
13.9  thousand  distributed  to  various  towns  and  villages  in  the  Kingdom,  providing  modern 
and secure banking services. As for SAMA, its total assets went up from SAR 619.4 billion at 
the end of 2005 to SAR 2,738.7 billion at the end of 2013, increasing by 342.2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques – may Allah protect him- has paid great attention to 
economic affairs. He has presided the Supreme Economic Council since its inception. Under 
his  instructions  and  guidance  –  may  Allah  protect  him-  a  number  of  resolutions,  aimed  at 
raising the level of economic performance and paving the way for sustainable growth, were 
taken.  A  rapid  review  of  the  Royal  Orders  and  Resolutions  of  The  Council  of  Minsters 
pertaining to economic and financial affairs, issued during the last nine years, will reveal a 
huge  quantum.  Some  of  which  are  the  following:  the  resolution  to  inaugurate  the  largest 
integrated economic city in the Middle East (King Abdullah Economic City), establishment of 
other  economic  cities  in  different  parts  of  the  Kingdom,  establishment  of  a  developed 
financial  center  in  Riyadh  city,  that  includes  all  financial  institutions,  setting  up  a  National 
Anti-Corruption  Commission,  and  establishment  of  an  independent  government  authority 
concerned  with  the  development  of  Saudi  non-oil  exports,  called  the  Saudi  Export 
Development  Authority.  The  formation  of  two  committees,  one  in  Jeddah  governorate  and 
another  in  Dammam  city,  to  settle  disputes  and  violations  set  forth  in  Article  XX  of  the 
Cooperative Insurance Companies Control Law, was approved. 
Other approved decisions are as follows: a decision to allow GCC citizens to exercise the 
activities  of  insurance  services,  transport  services,  in  its  different  forms,  and  real  estate 
services, the application of the Same National Treatment on GCC citizens in the field of joint-
stock companies’ shares ownership and trading and GCC Citizens Real Estate Ownership 
Regulation in the Member States for residential and investment purposes. Women Right to 
Obtain a Housing Loan from the Real Estate Development Fund, when she is responsible for 
her family, has also been approved. The Ministry of Housing has been established and it has 
received allocations of SAR 250 billion. The Real Estate Development Fund’s maximum real 
estate  loan  has  been  increased  to  SAR  500  thousand  from  SAR  300  thousand.  The  draft 
Arab Agreement on Combating Cyber Crimes and the draft Arab Agreement on Combating 
Money  Laundering  and  Terrorist  Financing  have  been  approved.  Financial  Leasing  Law, 
which  aims  to  provide  a  funding  formula  for  joint-stock  companies  specialized  in  financial 
leasing,  has  been  approved.  SAMA  has  been  entrusted  with  the  supervision  and  control 
function over financial leasing. Real Estate Mortgage Law has been approved to provide the 
necessary  guarantees,  when  practicing  real  estate  finance  activities,  and  define  the 
mortgage contract parties’ rights and obligations and provide more flexibility in utilizing real 
estate assets. 
The  Real  Estate  Finance  Law,  which  aims  at  creating  a  market  for  real  estate  financing, 
under  which  specialized  joint-stock  companies will  be  established,  in  cooperation  with  real 
estate  developers,  has  been  approved  to  enable  beneficiaries  from  owning  real  estate  in 
easy ways that protect the concerned parties’ rights under SAMA’s supervision and control. 
The  Finance  Companies  Control  Law  has  been  approved.  A  committee  named:  (Finance 
Violations and  Disputes  Settlement Committee) has been formed. Its powers include, inter 
alia, settlement of violations, disputes and private and public rights lawsuits, arising from the 
application  of  the  provisions  of  the  Finance  Companies  Control  Law  and  the  Financial 
Leasing Law. The amendment of the official working days from Sunday to Thursday, so that 
the  weekend  would  be  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  has  been  approved.  Terrorist  Crimes  and 
their Financing Law, stipulated under the Anti-Money Laundering Law, has been approved. 
The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques – may Allah protect him – is very well known for his 
devoted concern with citizens and their needs and his keenness for enhancing the level of 
their well-being and providing a decent livelihood for them. He issued his kind directives to 
take necessary measures for addressing and alleviating the poverty level, supporting social 
security,  approving  salary  and  cost  of  living  allowance  increases,  turning  employees  on 
wages item into state employees, addressing housing problems and supporting specialized 
development funds. We pray to the almighty Allah that the Kingdom’s citizens will have many 
returns of this dear and national occasion and that the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
HRH the Crown Prince and the Second Deputy Prime Minister will be in good health. May 
the  Kingdom  continue  to  enjoy  security  and  stability,  so  that  the  development  march  will 
continue under our wise leadership. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
