Raghuram Rajan: Fighting inflation 
Speech by Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FIMMDA-
PDAI Annual Conference 2014, Mumbai, 26 February 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thank you for inviting me. The Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of 
India  (FIMMDA)  has  been  playing  an  important  role  in  the  Indian  bond,  money  and 
derivatives  markets.  It  has  been  working  with  the  Reserve  Bank  in  various  capacities  and 
has helped us address emerging challenges. I thank all of you for that. The sessions in the 
conference  are  all  of  current  interest,  and  therefore  I  have  chosen  to  speak  on  an  issue, 
inflation, which is of paramount relevance to fixed income markets. 
As  you  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  for  India  was  constituted  “to  regulate  the  issue  of  Bank 
notes  and  the  keeping  of  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and 
generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage”. Implicit 
in these words are the core purposes of the RBI: to foster monetary and financial stability 
conducive  to  sustainable  economic  growth,  and  to  ensure  the  development  of  an  efficient 
and inclusive financial system. 
Note that the RBI is committed to getting the strongest growth possible for India – there is no 
difference  between  us  and  North  Block  on  this.  We  believe  the  best  way  we  can  foster 
sustainable growth in the current situation, other than through developing the financial sector, 
is through monetary stability – by bringing down inflation over a reasonable period of time. 
More specifically, we intend to bring CPI inflation down to 8 percent by January 2015 and 6 
percent by January 2016. 
There  are  a  number  of  points  here that  need  elaborating.  First,  are  we choosing  to  tackle 
inflation at the expense of growth? Most people believe there is a short run trade-off between 
growth and inflation. By raising interest rates, the RBI causes banks to raise rates and thus 
lowers demand; firms do not borrow as much to invest when rates are higher and individuals 
stop buying durable goods against credit and, instead, turn to save. Lower demand growth 
leads to a better match between demand and supply, and thus lower inflation for the goods 
being produced, but also lower growth. 
Relatedly, if lower rates generate higher demand and higher inflation, people may produce 
more believing that they are getting more revenues, not realizing that high inflation reduces 
what they can buy out of the revenues. Following the saying, “You can fool all the people 
some of the time”, bursts of inflation can generate growth for some time. Thus in the short 
run, the argument goes, higher inflation leads to higher growth. 
But  as  the  public  gets  used  to  the  higher  level  of  inflation,  the  only  way  to  fool  the  public 
again  is  to  generate  yet  higher  inflation.  The  result  is  an  inflationary  spiral  which  creates 
tremendous  costs  for  the  public.  Therefore,  economists  have  argued  –  and  a  number  of 
Nobel prizes have been given for the ideas contained in the previous paragraphs – that the 
best  way  for  the  central  bank  to  generate  growth  in  the  long  run  is  for  it  to  bring  down 
inflation.  Sooner  or  later,  the  public  always  understands  what  the  central  bank  is  doing, 
whether for the good or for the bad. And if the public starts expecting that inflation will stay 
low,  the  central  bank  can  cut  interest  rates  significantly,  thus  encouraging  demand  and 
growth. Indeed, the reason the Malaysian Central Bank can keep rates low today to foster 
growth is because it has fought the battle against inflation and convinced its citizens that, if 
need be, it will smote the inflationary beast again if it rears its head. 
Put differently, in order to generate sustainable growth, we have to fight inflation first. Let me 
also add that greater public faith that inflation will be low will add stability to our currency, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
prevent  the  kind  of  gyrations  we  saw  last  summer.  Exchange  rate  stability  is  centrally  in 
business interests. 
If  we  have  to  bring  down  inflation,  we  have  to  start  today.  We  cannot  wait  till  the  public’s 
expectations of inflation get more entrenched, and the inflationary spiral gains momentum. 
This is why we have raised interest rates 3 times since September. 
But what about industrialists who tell us to cut rates? I have yet to meet an industrialist who 
does not want lower rates, whatever the level of rates. But will a lower policy interest rate 
today give him more incentive to invest? We at the RBI think not. First, we don’t believe the 
primary factor holding back investment today is high interest rates. Second, even if we cut 
rates,  we  don’t  believe  banks,  which  are  paying  higher  deposit  rates,  will  cut  their  lending 
rates. The reason is that the depositor, given her high inflationary expectations, will not settle 
for less than the rates banks are paying her. Inflation is placing a floor on deposit rates, and 
thus on lending rates. 
Currently,  therefore,  we  do  not  believe  the  policy  rate  is  at  a  level  where  it  can  affect 
demand,  one  way  or  the  other.  We  do  believe,  however,  that  as  inflation  comes  down 
because  of  the  weak  economy  and  strong  food  production,  the  policy  rate  will  become  a 
stronger influence on bank interest rate setting, and will start influencing demand. 
A more important source of our influence today, therefore, is expectations. If people believe 
we are serious about inflation, and their expectations of inflation start coming down, inflation 
will also come down. Of course, many people form expectations simply by extrapolating the 
most recent or most salient experience they have. So we also need to take advantage of the 
current episode of food price disinflation to bring down expectations – yet another reason for 
acting now. 
Let us turn from answering those who want us to go slow to those who want us to do more. If 
we think inflation is so important, why don’t we “do a Volcker” and try and bring down inflation 
quickly by raising rates sky high? Of course, if we do raise policy rates substantially, banks 
will also have to raise rates to match us. While this may lead to a collapse in demand and 
bring inflation down quickly, it will cause significant damage to the economy – remember the 
severe  recession  Volcker’s  Fed  brought  about  and  the  Savings  and  Loan  Crisis  that 
followed?  A  developing  country  is  not  in  the  same  resilient  position  as  the  United  States. 
Rather than administer shock therapy to a weak economy, the RBI prefers to dis-inflate over 
time  rather  than  abruptly,  while  being  prepared  to  do  what  is  necessary  if  the  economy 
deviates from the projected inflation path. As of now, we believe the rate is appropriately set. 
Then there are those who believe we are moving too independently. All we have done thus 
far  is  to  adopt  the  reasonable  suggestion  of  the  Patel  Committee  that  we  focus  on  CPI 
inflation  rather  than  WPI  inflation  as  our  primary  objective.  The  Patel  Committee  has  also 
suggested  a  time  horizon  to  glide  down  to  6  percent  inflation  that  seems  doable  without 
extreme  hardship.  If  the  eventual  decision  of  the  government,  in  consultation  with  the 
Reserve Bank, is to adopt the recommendations of the Mistry, CFSR, FSLRC and the Patel 
Committees,  and  focus  on  some  form  of  an  inflation  objective,  it  would  be  good  for  the 
medium term inflation target to be set by the executive or the legislature, presumably based 
on advice from the Reserve Bank and other experts the Reserve Bank. The Patel Committee 
report  is  out  there  for  public  comment  and  debate,  and  once  we  collect  and  analyse 
comments, we will take an internal view and then start deliberations with the government. All 
this said, international experience suggests that, ideally, once the central bank’s objective is 
given, and the operational target fixed, the government should leave the technocrats in the 
central bank to do their job. 
Finally, does the Patel Committee intend to turn the RBI into inflation “nutters” focussed on 
bringing down inflation to the exclusion of all else, including financial stability? Of course not! 
Medium term flexible inflation targetting means that the monetary policy committee focusses 
on  inflation  over  the  medium  term,  being  concerned  about  too  high,  as  well  as  too  low, 
inflation. That means it may be willing to overlook temporary inflation spikes (such as, this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
November’s inflation numbers) but also raise rates when sustained low interest rates and low 
inflation  increase  threats  to  financial  stability  –  because  a  financial  crisis  could  lead  to 
deflation. In other words, the monetary policy committee will not put on blinkers and see just 
the inflation number. A number of emerging markets have adopted some form of targetting, 
while  “non-targetters”  like  the  Fed  target  inflation  in  all  but  name,  including  putting  a 
numerical target to its goal of price stability. 
In  the  remaining  time,  I  want  to  present  one  more  issue  that  has  many  commentators 
exercised – they say the real problem is food inflation, how do you expect to bring it down 
through the policy rate? The simple answer to such critics is that core CPI inflation, which 
excludes food and energy, has also been very high, reflecting the high inflation in services. 
Bringing  that  down  is  centrally  within  the  RBI’s  ambit.  But  I  will  argue  that  policy  is  not 
irrelevant  even  in  controlling  food  inflation,  though  clearly,  the  government  also  has  an 
important role to play. 
Role of food prices in the high inflation experience of recent years 
1.  
Headline inflation measured by the new CPI has remained in double digits during April 2012 
to January 2014, averaging 10 per cent over this period. Food inflation, which has a weight of 
47.6 per cent in the index, has contributed the largest share of headline inflation (Chart 1). 
Food inflation itself has stayed in double digits throughout this period, edging down to 9.9 per 
cent only in January 2014. 
Why are food prices high? 
2.  
Although  domestic  production  has  increased  steadily,  barring  reversals  in  2009–10  and 
2012–13, this has not been reflected in a softening of food prices. Let us try and understand 
why. 
Growing prosperity and dietary shifts 
Data  on  household  consumption  expenditure  show  that  the  share  of  food  in  overall 
consumption has been declining during the last decade (Chart 2), but at a milder pace than 
the significant relative increase in food prices. This suggests that demand is relatively less 
elastic to price changes. 
Despite the decline in overall consumption share, per capita food consumption in real terms 
has increased, particularly in rural areas (Chart 3). 
There has also been a distinct shift in dietary patterns towards protein-rich items and other 
high  value  foods  (Chart  4  and  Chart  5).  These  items,  in  turn,  have  been  contributing 
significantly to overall food price increases in the recent period. 
Minimum support price 
Other possible causes of high food price inflation 
a.  
One  obvious  cause  for  higher  food  price  inflation  that  analysts  have  pointed  to  is  higher 
minimum support prices (MSP). The minimum support price is set by the government on the 
recommendations of the CACP, based on a variety of factors including primarily the cost of 
production and price trends in the market (domestic and international). The crops covered 
under MSP constitute more than a third of the category ‘primary articles’ in the WPI. Since 
minimum  support  prices  are  intended  to  be  a  floor  for  arket  prices,  and  have  sometimes 
directly set the market price when increases have been substantial, for key crops the rate of 
price inflation seems to relate to the increase in MSP in recent years (Chart 6). 
Another way of saying this is that there has been a shift in the relative price of agricultural 
commodities, engineered by the rise in MSPs. If the idea is to get more food production to 
meet the rising demand we documented, this is just what is needed. In Chart 7 (a), we plot 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the ratio of WPI of food to WPI of non-food items. This suggests an appreciable improvement 
in terms of trade for agriculture. 
But when we look at the ratio of changes in input cost over the changes in the output price of 
agricultural commodities received on the basis of CACP data, it has remained flat, indicating 
that the gains from MSP increases have not accrued to the farm sector in full measure on 
account  of  rising  costs  of  inputs.  This  may  indicate  why  production  growth  has  not  been 
stronger. What could explain this? 
One explanation could be that MSPs also drive input costs, so increasing MSPs is like a dog 
chasing its tail – it can never catch it. Another could be that since rice and wheat are the 
primary  food  commodities  procured  at  the  MSP,  production  is  distorted  towards  rice  and 
wheat, leading to a suboptimal production mix by farmers – too much rice and wheat, and too 
little of other needed commodities. Both these explanations would suggest the need for more 
moderation as the government sets the MSPs in coming months. 
It is useful though, to look at the details of the cost increases. Prices of agricultural inputs, 
including  wages,  have  recorded  a  sharp  increase  during  2008–09  through  2012–13  in 
comparison with the preceding five years (2004–05 to 2007–08) as shown below (Table 1). 
Perhaps the most significant increase has been in rural wages. 
For  example,  wage  increases  have  accounted  for  the  largest  share  of  increase  in  paddy 
input costs (Chart 8). 
Nominal  rural  wages  have  grown  at  a  sharp  pace  during  the  last  five  years.  Because  so 
many  Indian  workers  are  at  subsistence  wages,  higher  food  prices  do  drive  rural  wages 
higher,  and  there  is  some  evidence  for  this  before  2007.  From  2007  onwards,  however, 
econometric tests suggest causality has flowed from wages to prices, underscoring the role 
of rural wages as a major determinant in food price increases. So why has rural wage growth 
been so strong? 
b.  
A  sharp  pickup  in  rural  wages  was  seen  after  the  rural  employment  guarantee  program 
(assuring 100 days of employment to every household whose adult members volunteer to do 
unskilled  manual  work)  was  enacted.  MGNREGA  may  have  contributed  to  the  bargaining 
power of rural workers, but careful econometric studies suggest that it accounts for only a 
small  fraction  of  the  rural  wage  increase,  and  indeed,  any  effect  is  waning  (Chart  9).That 
said, the indexation of MGNREGA wages suggests its effects in pushing rural wage inflation 
will not disappear entirely. 
c.  
There  has  been  an  increase  in  liquidity  flowing  to  the  agricultural  sector,  both  from  land 
sales, as well as from a rise in agricultural credit (Chart 10). More loans to agriculture have 
fostered  substantial  private  investment  in  agriculture,  but  may  also  have  pushed  up  rural 
wages. 
d.  
The  labour  force  has  been  moving  from  agriculture  to  non-agriculture  sectors,  particularly 
construction. This would have the effect of pulling up rural labourers’ wages (due to scarcity), 
especially in the labour supplying states. Total agricultural labour declined from 259 million in 
2004–05  to  231  million  in  2012–12.  Agriculture,  which  accounted  for  60  per  cent  of  total 
employment in 1999–2000, now accounts for less than 50 per cent (Chart 11 and Table 2). 
e.  
One of the more interesting possible explanations for the rise in rural wages is the changing 
female  participation  in  rural  markets.  The  female  participation  rate  is  down  in  all  the  age 
categories. Improved living standards could lead rural families to withdraw women from the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 
Labour shifting to construction 
Rural liquidity and credit 
Female participation 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
labour force (Chart 12). Also, higher prosperity could lead to greater investment in educating 
girls (for the age group 10 to 24) again leading to lower participation in the workforce. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To summarise 
3.  
In sum then, when we examine food inflation, a substantial portion stems from an increase in 
food  production  costs,  primarily  rural  wage  inflation.  Some  of  that  is  an  increase  in  real 
wages, needed to attract labour to agriculture, away from construction, education, household 
work, or MGNREGA. If, however, wages elsewhere also go up, the necessary shift in relative 
wages to keep agricultural work attractive will not take place, and we will continue to have a 
wage  spiral.  Also, some  of  the agricultural  wage  growth  may  be  because  of  more  liquidity 
flowing into rural areas. Somewhat paradoxically, to contain food inflation and get a strong 
increase in food production, we need to 
(i) 
Contain the rise in wages elsewhere so that relative wages in agriculture can rise 
without too much overall increase in wages. 
Contain any unwarranted rise in rural wages as well as the rise in other agricultural 
input costs (though not through subsidies) so that the farmer gets a higher return. 
Allow food prices to be determined by the market and use minimum support prices 
to  provide  only  a  lower  level  of  support  so  that  production  decisions  do  not  get 
distorted or the price wage spiral accentuated. This means limiting the pace of MSP 
increases going forward. 
Reduce the wedge between what the farmer gets and what is paid by the household 
by  reducing  the  role,  number,  and  monopoly  power  of  middlemen  (amend  APMC 
Acts), as well as by improving logistics. 
Improve farm productivity through technology extension, irrigation, etc. 
(v) 
Note  that  of  these  steps,  monetary  policy  has  a  direct  role  in  (i)  and  (ii)  by  slowing  the 
demand  for  labour  and  by  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  thereby  moderating  wage 
bargaining. Indeed, with the slowdown in the in the urban economy, there is some evidence 
now that rural wage growth is slowing (Chart 13), though a recent pick up is of concern. 
Finally, our food prices have largely caught up with global prices(we were the world’s largest 
rice  exporter  last  year).  Given  that  global  food  prices  have  been  moderating,  such 
moderation should feed through to domestic food prices – provided we do not intervene to 
prevent the feed-through of global prices, and do not intervene in limiting exports or imports. 
Let me emphasise that the RBI welcomes rural prosperity and wants to help increase rural 
productivity  through  appropriate  credit  and  investment.  But  recent  inflation  has  not  helped 
strengthen the hand of the farmer, so the fight against inflation is also in the farmer’s interest. 
To sum up, 
 
As  prosperity  has  increased  the  demand  for  food,  we  have  needed  more  food 
production (or imports). 
Higher  agricultural  commodity  prices  should  have  incentivized  farmers  to  produce 
significantly more. 
They  have,  but  not  enough.  Part  of  the  reason  may  be  that  farmer  earnings  are 
being eaten away by higher costs, most important of which is wages. 
To limit the rise in rural wages, given that it has to rise relative to other wages to 
attract labour into agriculture, wages elsewhere should not rise as much. 
Monetary  policy  is  an  appropriate  tool  with  which  to  limit  the  rise  in  wages, 
especially urban ones. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The slowdown in rural wage growth may be partly the consequence of tighter policy 
limiting wage rise elsewhere. 
Of  course,  monetary  policy’s  effectiveness  in  containing  other  price  and  wage 
increases (such as, services prices, which are an important part of the CPI index)) is 
far less controversial. 
To conclude, the RBI believes its fight against inflation will have traction, despite food being 
an important component of the CPI. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 