  Vítor Constâncio: The ECB and macro-prudential policy – from research 
to implementation 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Third 
Conference of the Macro-prudential Research Network, Frankfurt am Main, 23 June 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  open  the  Third  Conference  of  the  Macro-prudential  Research 
Network (MaRs). MaRs was established by the General Council of the European Central 
Bank  (ECB)  in  the  spring  of  2010  with  the  objective  of  developing  core  conceptual 
frameworks,  models  and/or  tools  that  would  provide  research  support  in  order  to  improve 
macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  European  Union  (EU).  This  was  a  very  significant 
collective  undertaking  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),  i.e.  all  EU 
central banks, in order to broaden our analytical foundations in this area. Nobody would have 
expected when we launched MaRs that the ECB would soon become a banking supervisor 
with distinct macro-prudential policy competencies.  
Now, that the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) starts in only a few months, we are 
glad that we started this investment so much in advance. Moreover, macro-prudential policy 
is  again  very  much  on  the  agenda.  Take  the  historically  low  interest  rates  and  range  of 
unconventional  monetary  policies  around  the  world  in  order  to  support  modest  recoveries 
and too low rates of inflation. This is an environment where investors search for yield and 
financial  imbalances  can  build  up.  And,  in  fact,  the  ECB’s  and  the  IMF’s  financial  stability 
analyses  confirm  that  specific  asset  segments,  among  which  real  estate,  point  to  some 
overheating in several countries. The issue then arises as to whether macro-prudential policy 
needs to react. In fact, in the last quarter, and considering only the euro area, four countries 
– Belgium, The Netherlands, Slovenia and Estonia – have activated macro-prudential policy 
tools (all capital-related measures), in line with the EU regulatory framework. This new policy 
area  is  getting  traction  and  robust  analysis  is  needed  to  allow  for  timely  and  adequate 
interventions. 
In my remarks today, I want to first start from the concept of systemic risk and discuss the 
way  our  understanding  of  systemic  risk  shapes  the  objectives  of  macro-prudential  policy. 
Most importantly, I will argue that the build-up of systemic risk over the financial cycle is 
an endogenous outcome – a man-made construct – and the job of macro-prudential policy 
is to try to smoothen this cycle as much as possible. Beyond increasing the resilience of the 
system,  I  will  argue  that  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  ambitious  in  leaning  against 
imbalances and if so, it has to be prepared to be bold and intrusive. Decisions on the timing, 
design  and  calibration  of  interventions  need  to  be  underpinned  by  robust  analysis.  While 
monetary policy should not be employed to smoothen the credit cycle, under the principle of 
“one  objective,  one  tool”,  the  macro-prudential  policy  function  should  rest  under  the 
responsibility of central banks given synergies and the interactions between the two policy 
functions. This reflects the macro-prudential policy framework adopted for the ECB/SSM. 
The nature of systemic risk and the objectives of macro-prudential policy 
Macro-prudential  policies  aim  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
through  containing  systemic  risks.  Systemic  risks  can  be  defined  as  risks  that,  if 
materialised, have the potential to make financial instability become so widespread that the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  is  impaired  to  an  extent  that  growth  and  welfare  suffer 
materially (ECB 2009). ECB staff, combining available  literature and practical experiences, 
has  developed  a  conceptual  framework  that  relies  on  three  mechanisms  that  can  lead  to 
systemic financial  instability:  risk  coming from  large  aggregate  shocks,  contagion  risk,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  risk  from  the  unravelling  of  widespread  financial  imbalances  that  have  built  up 
endogenously over time.1 
Contagion occurs when the failure of one institution “infects” other hitherto “healthy” 
institutions. Prominent recent examples of the materialisation of contagion risk include the 
drying up of interbank funding following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Large aggregate 
shocks  have  always  been  an  important  source  of  widespread  financial  instability 
through  history.  Gorton  (1988)  documented  how  negative  economic  news  were  the  best 
leading indicators of the likelihood of banking panics in 19th century USA. 
The third, and, in my view, most important source of systemic risk is the risk of the 
unravelling  of  financial  imbalances.  These  imbalances  may  build  up  gradually,  mostly 
endogenously, and can then unravel abruptly. They form part of the inherent pro-cyclicality of 
the financial system.2 
It  is  crucial  to  recognise  that  the  financial  cycle  has  an  important  endogenous 
component which arises because banks take too much solvency and liquidity risk. The aim 
of  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  to  temper  the  financial  cycle  rather  than  to  merely 
enhance the resilience of the financial sector ahead of crises. 
It  seems  unacceptable  that  macro-prudential  authorities  would  passively  watch  the 
development  of  a  bubble  in  housing  prices  and  other  asset  prices,  comforted  by  the 
idea that the banking sector is prepared to weather the storm and that the central bank would 
deal  with  the  painful  aftermath.  The  crisis  showed  that  the  amount  of  risk  endogenously 
generated  by  a  financial  cycle  spinning  “out-of-control”  dwarfs  the  “mopping  up”  ability  of 
fiscal and monetary policy due to fiscal capacity limits and the zero lower bound on nominal 
interest rates. In matters of financial instability, prevention is always better than cure. 
Taming the financial cycle 
The  challenge  of  taming  the  financial  cycle  is,  no  doubt,  formidable.  The  nature  of 
systemic  instability  is  not fully  understood,  and by  the  same token,  analytical  tools  for risk 
detection, risk assessment and to support policy responses are being developed. This is why 
the progress of researchers in MaRs and elsewhere has been very welcome. Despite all the 
difficulties,  the  new  field  of  macro  finance  has  already  identified  a  number  of  important 
financial amplification channels. 
“Collateral amplification” has been an important way to think about procyclicality ever 
since  the seminal  work of  Kiyotaki  and  Moore  (1997).3  This  mechanism operates  because 
easier credit would by itself increase the value of collateral, thereby further encouraging the 
supply  of  credit.  During  the  boom,  firms  and  households  borrow  too  much  because  they 
ignore the fact that their collective leverage decisions make the economy more vulnerable to 
                                                
1  See de Bandt, O., P. Hartmann and J.L. Peydró (2009), Systemic risk: An update, in A. Berger et al. (eds.), 
Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press, and the special features on “The concept of systemic 
risk” and “Analytical models and tools for the identification and assessment of systemic risks” in the December 
2009 and June 2010 ECB Financial Stability Review, respectively. 
2  Borio,  C.,  2009.  “Implementing  the  Macroprudential  Approach  to  Financial  Regulation  and  Supervision”, 
Banque  de  France  Financial  Stability  Review,  Vol.  13;  Shin,  H.S.  2011,  “Macroprudential  policies  beyond 
Basel III”, in Macroprudential regulation and policy, BIS papers 60. 
3  Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
negative  shocks  (Lorenzoni  (2008),4  Bianchi  and  Mendoza  (2010),5  Korinek  and  Jeanne 
(2010).6 
In  Brunnermeier  and  Sannikov  (2014)7  the  same  “collateral  amplification”  mechanism  is 
taken a step further and shown to generate endogenous leverage and volatility cycles. Long 
booms  boost  bank  capital  ratios  to  such  an  extent  that  credit  availability  stops  being  a 
constraint  on  economic  activity.  This  endogenously  leads  to  a  Great  Moderation  in  output 
and  asset  price  volatility  which  encourages  banks  to  lever  up  further.  Then  the  system 
becomes highly vulnerable to shocks in what is now widely known as the “stability paradox”. 
MaRs  has  made  significant  contributions  to  the  modelling  of  boom-bust  cycles.  Boissay, 
Collard and Smets (2012),8 for example, tackle the idea that long booms endogenously sow 
the  seeds  of  crises.  In  their  framework,  a  long  boom  leads  to  excessive  liquidity  in  the 
banking  system,  a  reduction  in  interest  rates  and  the  entry  of  bad  banks.  Eventually,  the 
boom unravels because banks lose trust in one another and the interbank market freezes up. 
This  model  captures  two  important  aspects  highlighted  by  the  empirical  evidence  of 
Schularick and Taylor (2012):9 crises tend to follow long booms and periods of low interest 
rates. The results are also consistent with the findings of Hahm, Shin and Shin (2013)10 and 
the MaRs paper by Bonfim and Kim (2013).11 Both show that financial crises are associated 
with a build-up of liquidity risk. 
The  three  papers  we  will  see  in  the  first  session  of  the  conference  (Clerc  et.  al.  (2013),12 
Nguyen  (2013)13  and  Benes,  Kumhof  and  Laxton  (2013)14  contribute  to  a  literature  that 
motivates  financial  imbalances  and  excessive  risk-taking  from  over-optimism  or  from  the 
implicit  safety  net  guarantees  for  banks.  In  these  models,  too,  the  build-up  of  imbalances 
activates the kinds of adverse feedbacks between the financial sector and the real economy 
that we know can cause deep and prolonged downturns in activity. 
These studies are welcome first steps on the road towards a new framework for the 
analysis  of macro-prudential  policy.  They  integrate  boom-bust  cycles  in  state  of  the  art 
macro-models and thus may support the introduction of macro-prudential tools or regulatory 
measures as a pre-emptive policy in the context of credit and asset price booms. 
                                                
4  Lorenzoni, G. (2008), “Inefficient Credit Booms”, Review of Economic Studies.  
5  Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. (2010), “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ‘Macro-prudential’ Taxes”, NBER 
WP 16091.  
6  Korinek,  A.  and  Jeanne,  O.  (2010),  “Managing  Credit  Booms  and  Busts:  A  Pigouvian  Taxation  Approach”, 
NBER WP 16377.  
7  Brunnermeier,  M.  and  Sannikov,  Y.  (2014),  “A  Macroeconomic  Model  with  a  Financial  Sector”,  American 
Economic Review. 
8  Boissay, F., Collard, F. and Smets, F. (2013), “Booms and Banking Crises”, mimeo.  
9  Schularick,  M.  and  Taylor,  A.  (2012),  “Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy,  Leverage  Cycles  and 
Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, American Economic Review.  
10  Hahm, J.H., Shin, H.S., and K. Shin, 2013, “Non-Core Bank Liabilities and Financial Vulnerability”, Journal of 
Money,  Credit  and  Banking.  Shin,  H.S.,  2010  “Risk  and  Liquidity”,  Clarendon  Lecture  in  Finance,  Oxford 
University Press.  
11  Bonfim, D. and M. Kim, “Liquidity Risk in Banking: is there herding?”, mimeo, Banco de Portugal, 2013. 
12  Clerc, L., Derviz, A., Mendicino, C., Moyen, S., Nikolov, K., Suarez, J., Stracca, L. and Vardoulakis, A. (2013), 
“Assessing Capital Regulation in Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Defaults”, mimeo.  
13  Nguyen, T. (2013), “Bank Capital Requirements: A Quantitative Analysis”, mimeo.  
14  Benes,  J.,  Kumhof,  M.  and  Laxton,  D.  (2013),  “Examples  of  Macro-prudential  Policy  Experiments  in 
MAPMOD” IMF Working Paper.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Earlier  and  decisive  action  seems  to  be  paramount  in  this  respect,  necessitating 
reliable early warning tools. The beneficial impact of higher credit depends on the extent to 
which  credit  booms  contribute  to  a  permanent  financial  deepening.15  It  is  therefore 
encouraging that we have new “early warning” models and considerable work on the topic 
(Alessi  and  Detken  (2013),16  Alessi  et.  al.  (2014)17  and  Gregory  et.  al.  (2014)18  presented 
here at the MaRs conference. These analytical tools exploit multiple and novel data sources, 
variables and models in order to generate accurate crisis predictions. Many of these tools are 
already in use in regular macro-prudential surveillance work at the ECB. 
Let me summarise. Systemic risk is a largely endogenous phenomenon due to the inherent 
procyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  Preventing  instability  from  occurring  is  better  than 
dealing with its consequences and therefore leaning against the financial cycle should be the 
key  objective  of  macro-prudential  policies.  Of  course, this  implicitly  assumes  that  we  have 
effective and efficient tools at our disposal. I will now turn to the issue of effectiveness.  
What instruments should we use to lean against imbalances? 
Understanding transmission channels of macro-prudential policies 
In advanced economies, actual experience on the use of macro-prudential policies is 
relatively limited, with the exception of the administrative interventions that were usual in 
many  European  countries  in  the  60s  to  the  80s,  like  limits  to  credit  or  minimum  down 
payments  for  consumer  credit.  These  instruments  played  a  containment  role  on  the  credit 
cycle  but  these  were  times  of  less  sophisticated  financial  systems.  Nowadays,  the 
transmission channels of stylised macro-prudential instruments are far more complex which 
makes their calibration especially hard. Policy makers will inevitably have to start with some 
trial-and-error  approaches,  that  will  help  identifying  and  addressing  the  main  operational 
issues.  Having  said  that,  I  would  also  underline  that  MaRs  and  relevant  research  in  the 
macro-prudential  policy  area  have  shed  light  on  the  transmission  channels  of  financial 
instability as well as of selected policy and regulatory instruments. 
But enhancing our understanding with more analytical work is very much needed to 
support the choice and implementation of policy instruments. Macro-prudential policies 
may  address  financial  imbalances  building  up  in  specific  sectors,  by  using  targeted 
instruments. This could facilitate the analysis of transmission mechanisms. At the same time, 
though, the variety of possible combinations of macro-prudential instruments also makes the 
implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy  a  complex  endeavour,  which  has  to  take  into 
account  interactions,  leakages  and waterbed  effects.  Going forward,  analytical  frameworks 
also need to take these elements into account. 
Macro-prudential policy: Implementation issues and effectiveness 
It is  worthwhile to  group  macro-prudential  policies into  two  categories  according  to 
the way they operate. A simple distinction can be made between measures that act through 
cost-price incentives, like capital requirements, and those that depend on quantitative limits, 
like large exposures or LTV/DTIs limits. Capital based instruments act to restrain the boom 
as long as banks’ overall cost of funds is sensitive to the structure of its liabilities. We know 
                                                
15  Since  countries  with  more  credit  booms  also  experienced  more  crises  (on  average),  there  seems  to  be  a 
trade-off between macroeconomic performance and stability (Rancière, Tornell, and Westermann, 2008).  
16  Alessi, L. and Detken, C. (2014), “Identifying Excessive Credit Growth and Leverage”, mimeo.  
17  Alessi et. al. (2014), “Comparing Different Early Warning Systems: Results from a Horse Race Competition 
Among Members of the MaRs Network”, mimeo.  
18  Gregory,  D.,  Kapadia,  K.,  Nyman,  R.,  Smith,  R.  and  Tuckett,  D.  (2014)  “News  and  Narratives  in  Financial 
Systems: Exploiting Big Data for Systemic Risk Assessment”, mimeo.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that as long as cost of equity is not too high and not too insensitive to the riskiness of equity 
itself, this condition will not hold. Higher capital requirements will increase banks’ resilience 
but may add little to the cost of loans. In an environment of exuberant expectations of house 
price  appreciation,  such  measures  may  therefore  do  little  to  restrain  excessive  credit 
demand. Quantitative limits such as the LTV/DTI ratio are cruder and therefore more likely to 
work as long as there are many borrowers who will be affected by them. I will discuss these 
two types of measures in turn. 
Capital-based instruments 
In the Basel III framework, the CCB is the main counter-cyclical tool. It is designed to 
increase banks’ resilience by making them set aside capital in good times and draw it down 
in bad times. If a release of the buffer in the downturn fosters bank lending in recessions, the 
CCB  will  also  have  a  countercyclical  effect.  Of  course  the  CCB  can  also  lean  against  the 
financial cycle in the upswing phase. However, I see two limitations of the CCB. 
First, given the relatively long lags in its implementation and impact, the CCB might 
not have a timely influence on the financial cycle. The CCB should be activated relatively 
early in the cycle to give it time to display its effects. This increases the possibility of false 
alarms, which in turn will most likely lead to setting it at relatively low levels to mitigate the 
effect of a potential false alarm. In such a scenario though, the CCB runs the risk of being 
ineffective. 
Second,  such  a  tool  could  also  be  subject  to  so-called  “waterbed  effects”  or 
“leakages”.  Macro-prudential  policies  are  no  exception  to  the  usual  search  for  regulatory 
arbitrage. Affected financial intermediaries may have incentives to circumvent regulation by 
moving  activities  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter.  By  pushing  financial  intermediation 
towards  the  “shadow  banking”  sector,  this  could  make  the  policy  less  effective  (if  no  less 
desirable) as Bengui and Bianchi (2014)19 will show at the conference tomorrow. 
Another  possibility  concerns  the  leakages  towards  branches  of  foreign  institutions 
from  countries  which  do  not  use  reciprocation.  There  is  convincing  evidence  of  such 
leakages in the work of Aiyar, Calomiris and Wieladek (2013)20 which draws on recent UK 
experience. For example, for certain risks, e.g. by buoyant credit markets, the CCB can be 
set  above  2.5%.  In  this  case  the  recognition  of  the  higher  buffer  rate  by  other  designated 
authorities  is  voluntary.  This  lack  of reciprocity  might  generate  substitution  effects  towards 
branches of foreign banks thus mitigating the intent of the buffer itself. Therefore, in order to 
make  an  effective  use  of  the  CCB,  international  cooperation  will  be  very  important.  In  the 
Euro Area, the SSM framework helps internalizing some issues. For example, the ECB can 
take action in the case of reciprocation if needed. 
Such leakages may explain why, in practice, macro-prudential policies, at times, seem 
to have had mixed results, that vary widely across countries. Most of the evidence on 
the effectiveness of those policies comes from experiences in emerging market economies. 
Borio  and  Shim  (2007),21  for  example,  argue  that  these  measures  have,  in  some  cases, 
slowed  down  credit  expansion  temporarily  and  restrained  imprudent  practices.  It  seems 
therefore  possible,  under  certain  conditions,  to  control  financial  developments  in  order  to 
avoid the boom-and-bust cycle. 
                                                
19  Bengui, J. and Bianchi, J. (2014), “Macro-prudential Capital Controls and the Shadow Economy”, mimeo.  
20  Aiyar,  S.,  Calomiris,  C.  and  Wieladek,  T.  (2013),  “Does  Macro-Pru  Leak?  Evidence  from  a  UK  Policy 
Experiment”, NBER Working Papers 17822.  
21  Borio,  C.  and  I.  Shim:  “What  can  (macro-)prudential  policy  do  to  support  monetary  policy?”,  BIS  Working 
Papers No 242, 2007.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  LTV/DTI instruments 
The  main  weakness  of  capital  instruments,  such  as  the  CCB  or  sectoral  capital 
requirements  is  that  they  have  their  impact  on  the  evolution  of  the  cycle  mainly 
through their effect on the cost/price of credit. In an exuberant financial market, this may 
not be enough to offset the prospects of gain that seem readily available when every asset 
price is going up. Instruments with quantitative limits like the LTV/DTIs can be more effective 
in  dealing  with  housing  booms  because  they  restrict  borrowing  in  a  more  direct  way.  Of 
course these instruments are not perfect. Ono et. al. (2013)22 (which will be presented here 
later  today)  presents  a  cautionary  tale  in  this  respect  based  on  the  Japanese  experience. 
The paper shows that LTV ratios in small business lending voluntarily declined during booms 
even in the absence of regulation, casting doubt on whether an LTV ratio cap will really bind 
and  help  to  restrain  the  boom.  Kuttner  and  Shim  (2013)23  also  argue  that  LTV  ratios  are 
relatively less effective at dampening housing price volatility compared to DTI limits. 
An interesting MaRs paper (Gelain, Lansing and Mendicino (2013)24 which was presented at 
last  year’s  MaRs  conference)  may  provide  a  convincing  explanation  for  these  empirical 
findings. The  paper finds  that  a generalised  borrowing  limit  that  includes  elements  of  both 
LTV and DTI is the best way to restrain housing booms. LTV limits may be ineffective during 
periods  of  rapid  house  price  appreciation  because  leveraged  borrowers  experience  large 
increases  in  wealth  and  the  down-payment  constraint  becomes  less  important.  Tightening 
LTV limits further may then have a rather limited impact on house prices and leverage. DTI 
limits,  in  contrast,  tighten  by  definition  whenever  housing  values  expand  faster  than 
incomes.25  They  begin  to  bind  for  an  increasing  number  of  borrowers  helping  to  exert  a 
counter-cyclical influence. The simulation results in Gelain et. al. (2013) show that the strong 
counter-cyclical properties of the DTI cap helps to moderate the financial cycle. 
My take on this evidence is that LTVs/DTIs need to be used aggressively and it may be 
necessary to use several instruments at the same time. Two telling practical examples 
are  Singapore  and  China.  Singapore  has  been  a  pioneer  in  the  use  of  macro-prudential 
policies to moderate financial stability risks arising from the housing market. Since 2009, a 
series  of measures  targeting  housing  has  been implemented,  with  a  tightening  of  the  LTV 
ratio for individual borrowers from 90% in 2009 to 40% in 2013. The cumulative impact of 
these  measures  has  been  slow,  and  residential  property  prices  stabilised  only  recently.  In 
China, the introduction of an 80% LTV ceiling in 2001 did not have much of a bite until it was 
complemented with 50% DTI limits in 2005–06. But even then, the combination of the two 
measures was credited with reducing mortgage credit growth by only 2 percentage points of 
GDP over 2004–08. This is a sobering fact when one notes that LTV/DTIs seem so far the 
most effective type of macro-prudential instruments. 
To summarise, macro-prudential policy has to be pre-emptive, deployed timely and in 
a bold fashion. We may doubt that capital instruments, such as the CCB with a maximum of 
2.5 percentage points, can be sufficiently effective to achieve more than merely building up 
the  resilience  of  banks.  Quantitative  instruments  such  as  the  LTV/DTI  ratio  limit  can  work 
better but even these instruments may need to be used boldly in order to have a significant 
dampening impact on housing booms. 
                                                
22  Ono,  T,  Uchida,  H,  Udell,  G.  and  Uesugi,  I.  (2013),  “Lending  Pro-cyclicality  and  Macro-prudential  Policy: 
Evidence from Japanese LTV Ratios”, mimeo.  
23  Kuttner, K. and Shim, I., 2013. “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a 
Panel of 57 Economies”, NBER WP 19723.  
24  Gelain,  P.  Lansing,  K.  and  Mendicino,  C.  (2013),  “House  prices,  credit  growth  and  excess  volatility: 
implications for monetary and macro-prudential policy”, International Journal of Central Banking.  
25  Equally, the limit endogenously loosens whenever housing prices decline relative to incomes. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Macro-prudential tools in the EU are governed by two legal texts: the CRR and CRD IV. 
The appropriate analytical underpinning needs to be gathered for the adequate design 
and calibration of tools at the disposal of macro-prudential authorities. At the same 
time, the range of tools might need to be expanded. The Countercyclical Capital Buffer 
(Art.  130,  135–140),  Systemic  Risk  Buffer  (Art.  133–134)  and  Capital  surcharge  on 
systemically important institutions (Art. 131) fall under the CRD IV. The CRR includes (under 
Art. 458): minimum Capital Requirements, Large Exposure limits, the Capital Conservation 
Buffer, Sectoral Risk Weights (in the residential and commercial property sectors) and Intra-
financial Sector Exposures whereby higher risk weights can be set vis-à-vis financial sector 
exposures.  Furthermore,  it  includes  the  Liquidity  Requirements  (LCR  and  NSFR)  and 
requirements  on  Public  Disclosure  aimed  at  enhancing  market  discipline  and  mitigating 
informational  asymmetries.  While  the  range  of  tools  might  appear  quite  broad,  it  would 
gain in being enlarged with some instruments less dependent on cost/incentives and 
more on quantitative limits, like for instance large exposures limits by sector and not just 
by clients. Other possible toolkit extensions to consider are the LTVs or DTIs ratios or the 
loans to deposit ratio. 
A final consideration relates to the fact that the cyclical behaviour of the parts of the 
financial sector which fall outside of the scope of regulation and supervision, need to 
be influenced by other policies, possibly by monetary policy. To a large extent, this is 
because  the  macro-prudential  tools  assigned  to  EU  authorities  (and  the  ECB)  concern 
primarily,  of  not  exclusively,  the  banking  sector.  For  a  central  bank  with  macro-prudential 
responsibilities,  the  link  between  macro-prudential  and  monetary  policies  is  therefore  of 
particular relevance. It is this point that I will turn to next. 
Interactions with monetary policy 
The fact that the financial crisis led to large disruptions in the economy is a strong 
reason to make the financial cycle a subject of stabilisation policies.26 Monetary policy 
has traditionally been defined in terms of the business cycle. The financial cycle, while not 
disconnected from the business cycle, has larger amplitude and is at least twice as long as 
the  business  cycle.  Its  dynamics  are  driven  more  directly  by  credit  and  property  price 
developments. 
As part of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB already assigns a prominent role to 
financial developments, by taking into account the medium-term effects of booming credit 
and  asset  markets  for  the  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability.  Nonetheless,  standard 
monetary  policy  may  not  be the  most  appropriate  tool  to  address  all  the  underlying forces 
driving  the  financial  cycle.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  findings  of  a  number  of  MaRs 
studies  (see  for  example  Angelini,  Neri  and  Panetta  (2012),27  Beau,  Clerc  and  Mojon 
(2012)28 and Lambertini, Mendicino and Punzi (2013).29  
First, it is not clear what would be the appropriate magnitude of changes in the policy 
rate to curb excessive developments in asset prices and credit. While monetary policy 
                                                
26  See, for example, Borio, C., “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”, Working Paper 
Series, No 395, Bank for International Settlements, 2012; Aikman, D., Haldane, A. and Nelson, B., “Curbing 
the  credit  cycle”,  Economic  Journal,  forthcoming;  and  Claessens,  S.,  Kose,  M.A.  and  Terrones,  M.E., 
“Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working Papers, No 11/76, International Monetary Fund, 2011.  
27  Angelini, P., Neri, S. and Panetta, F. (2012), “Monetary and Macro-prudential Policies” ECB Working Paper 
1449.  
28  Cahn,  C.,  Beau,  D.,  Clerc,  L.  and  Mojon,  B.  (2012),  “Macro-prudential  policy  and  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy”, Proceedings of the Central Bank of Chile 2012 Annual Conference.  
29  Mendicino,  C.,  Lambertini,  L.  and  Punzi,  M.  (2012),  “Leaning  against  boom  and  bust  cycles  in  credit  and 
housing prices: monetary and macro-prudential policies”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
could be a powerful instrument in a boom that is driven by increasing leverage30 the financial 
cycle  differs  from  the  business  cycle  in  its  amplitude,  which  could  at  times  require  much 
larger shifts in the policy rate than would be warranted by the outlook for inflation.31  
Second,  financial  cycles  across  euro  area  countries  are  still  heterogeneous,  while 
monetary policy is the same across the board. The ECB’s monetary policy is responsible 
for ensuring medium-term price stability in the euro area as whole. Tailoring monetary policy 
decisions  to  specific  sectoral  or  regional  differences  in  credit  or  asset  price  developments 
might have inappropriate side effects in other areas. 
These  considerations  suggest  that  two  different  objectives  warrant  the  use  of  two 
different sets of instruments, in the spirit of Tinbergen. The objective of monetary policy 
remains  the  safeguarding  of  medium-term  price  stability.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  the 
main task of macro-prudential policy is to address risks to financial stability and to ultimately 
curb  the  financial  cycle,  so  that  the  risk  of  financial  crises  occurring  is  reduced  and  real 
economic effects of financial crises are dampened. This separation is also consistent with the 
“principle of effective market classification”, according to which policies should be linked to 
those objectives on which they have the strongest impact.32  
Whether the two different policy functions give rise to friction depends on the degree 
of complementarity of the respective policy objectives. Most of the time, there is no 
trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Price  stability  contributes  to 
financial stability by eliminating inflation-related distortions in financial markets. At the same 
time,  financial  stability  facilitates  the  central  bank’s  task  of  maintaining  price  stability  by 
contributing to a stable monetary transmission mechanism – a precondition for a central bank 
to be able to discharge its task – and by avoiding that risks to price stability emanate from 
financial instability. Therefore, in those cases, the respective objectives of macro-prudential 
policy and monetary policy are mutually reinforcing. 
However  in  certain  situations,  the  two  policies  may  have  different  directions,  one 
restricting while the other is expanding, without this implying that they are in conflict 
but rather that they are being complementary. That is precisely what happened during the 
time  of  the  so-called  “great  moderation”  and  in  the  present  moment.  Right  now,  the  low 
nominal  growth  requires  low  interest  rates  and  this  creates  the  possibility  of  activating  the 
“the  risk-taking  channel”33  and  search  for  yield  and  restrictive  macro-prudential  measures 
become necessary. In general, the two policy areas interact, and their effects on each 
other  have  to  be  considered.  Macro-prudential  policy  influences  credit  conditions,  and 
thereby also feeds back into the overall economy and, hence, the outlook for price stability. 
Monetary  policy  can,  in  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  affect  systemic  risk  via  a  number  of 
transmission channels. 
The  interaction  effects  of  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  suggest  that 
coordination between the two policy functions is beneficial. The need for coordination and the 
fact  that  both  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  take  a  macroeconomic 
perspective  provide  a  strong  motivation  for  integrating  the  two  policy  functions  within  one 
                                                
30  See,  for  example,  Adrian,  T.  and  Shin,  H.-S.,  “The  Changing  Nature  of  Financial  Intermediation  and  the 
Financial Crisis of 2007–09”, Staff Reports, No 439, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 2010.  
31  See,  for  example,  Bean,  C.,  Paustian,  M.,  Penalver,  A.  and  Taylor,  T.,  “Monetary  Policy  after  the  Fall”, 
Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2011.  
32  See also Mundell (1962) who discussed this question in the context of monetary and fiscal policy.  
33  The risk-taking channel suggests that monetary policy affects risk premia via lenders’ or investors’ willingness 
to take risk, e.g. via sticky return targets or an inherent counter-cyclicality of investor risk aversion. See Borio, 
C.  and  Zhu,  H.,  “Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the  transmission 
mechanism?”, BIS Working Papers, No. 268, December 2008; and the references therein.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  institution, the central bank, an entity with broad knowledge of markets, financial stability and 
the independence to take bold decisions when needed. 
It has therefore been decided that the Governing Council will have a prominent role to 
play  in  matters  related  to  macro-prudential  policy.  Regular  joint  meetings  will  be  held 
with the Supervisory Board of the SSM to assess the relevant financial stability situation in 
the euro area and in each of its member countries. Following the assessment of risks and 
vulnerabilities  to  financial  system  stability  and  possible  remedial  action,  discussions  may 
conclude on the need for the activation of a specific macro-prudential tool. Robust analysis is 
needed  to  contradict  possible  inaction  bias  on  the  timing  of  intervention  as  well  as  on  the 
design and implementation features of such tools. The Governing Council also needs to be 
alert to leakages and issues of coordination of macro-prudential actions where measures are 
addressed to a specific country. Detailed procedures for the activation of macro-prudential 
policy  tools  have  also  been  spelled  out,  along  challenging  timelines,  in  line  with  the  SSM 
regulation, whereby the ultimate responsibility lies with the Governing Council. 
Conclusion 
Impressive progress has been made in understanding transmission mechanisms of macro-
prudential policy instruments but this is the beginning of a long journey, as we prepare the 
analytical toolkit for this new policy area. I am encouraged by the wide range of empirical and 
theoretical modelling approaches of financial instability which are being presented here at the 
MaRs conference. 
For the decisions we have to take in the near term, we will have to rely more on incompletely 
tested theories and sometimes precarious econometric evidence. This means that we have 
to  accept  uncertainty  and  cautious  experimentation  when  we  decide  what  is  necessary  to 
stabilise the financial system. As I mentioned recently: “Macro-prudential policy faces a major 
test  going  forward:  will  there  be  determination  and  boldness  to  try  to  smooth  the  financial 
cycle,  or  will  the  authorities  just take  refuge  in  building  buffers  and  strengthening financial 
institutions?”34 
This  would  imply  that  significant  reliance  on  monetary  policy  would  remain  to  address  a 
posteriori the regrettable results of the boom/bust feature of the financial system. Only time 
will tell, but the answer to that question will depend, in my view, whether the central banks 
will be given or not a predominant role in macro-prudential policy decision-making. 
Let me conclude. 
Many policies in history have been developed through trial and error. It is rare that a perfect 
theory or academic paradigm is established before at the time when a new policy needs to 
be used for the first time. But it is important that once the policy community has realised that 
a  new  policy  is  indispensable  and  starts  “field  experiments”,  the  analytical  foundations  are 
developed in parallel. And, I would argue that we, in the ECB and the European System of 
Central  Banks,  have  made  a  major  and  timely  step  through  MaRs.  I  hope  that  the 
presentation  of  the  final  MaRs  report  after  my  speech  and  the  papers  in  the  conference 
programme today and tomorrow will testify this. Other authorities, like the BIS or the IMF as 
well  as  a  part  of  the  academic  community  have  taken  similar  steps.  Many  of  the  people 
involved are represented here at the concluding MaRs conference. 
But this is only a start. As I tried to illustrate, policy-makers need well-established foundations 
for their actions. They also know that in order to be effective, these actions will have to be 
bold.  Many  years  of  experience  across  countries  and  a  variety  of  instruments  need  to  be 
                                                
34  “Making macro-prudential policy work”, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB,  at the high-
level seminar organised by De Nederlandsche Bank, 10 June 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  acquired. The macro-prudential policy area needs to become part of the regular economics 
curriculum. Seminal papers which can be referred to when such policies are addressed need 
to be written. Furthermore, a large body of research, from which university teachers distil the 
main  principles,  institutional  features,  policy  instruments  and  transmission  mechanisms 
needs  to  be  built.  This  would  enable  equipping  students  with  the  basic,  policy-relevant 
knowledge. 
In the macro-prudential field we are still very far from this ideal situation. More experience in 
the  application  of  macro-prudential  tools  and  in  the  use  of  new  frameworks  for  the 
assessment of macro-prudential regulatory instruments needs to be acquired. More research 
work  along  the  lines  of  MaRs  and  related  initiatives  needs  to  be  pursued.  We  invite  all 
researchers from outside the ESCB, whether at other policy authorities or academia, to join 
forces with us and pursue this goal. 
I am now at your disposal for questions, if you wish. Thank you for attention.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
