  François Groepe: Impact of the global financial crisis on South Africa 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  François  Groepe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, at a luncheon hosted by the Western Cape region of the Institute of Internal Auditors, 
Cape Town, 6 June 2014. 
 Members of the Institute of Internal Auditors and other guests, 
Thank you for the invitation to join you at this lunch networking event, hosted by the Western 
Cape  region  of  the  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors  of  South Africa,  and for  the  opportunity  to 
address you at this event. 
Today, I wish to focus my remarks on the impact of the global financial crisis on South Africa, 
in  particular  with  reference  to  the  challenges  it  poses  to  financial  regulation  and  the 
increased  focus  on  macro-prudential  financial  regulation.  In  this  regard,  I  will  take  you 
through the kinds of reforms the Bank is implementing, particularly in regard to its regulatory 
role and which forms part of the package of responses to the global financial crisis. Lastly, I 
would like to touch on the role that the auditing profession can play in support of achieving 
this objective. 
The global financial crisis 
There is no doubt that the global financial crisis has permanently changed the course of the 
global economy and has established a new normal. The severity of the 2008 financial crisis 
brought about significant damaging effects to both developed and developing countries. 
Although the emerging market economies performed better than the advanced economies, 
and became the engines of global growth through the crisis, they were nonetheless affected 
through the trade and finance channels and as a consequence their growth rates, too had 
been negatively impacted. 
In addition, the crises that started out as a banking crisis, then morphed into a sovereign debt 
crisis,  and  brought  with  it  particular  challenges  for  central  banks  and  their  previously  well-
defined mandates, for example:  
 
Many central banks now look much more closely at the build-up of imbalances in the 
financial system; and 
As  part  of  its  focus,  regulatory  reform  is  dealing  with  the  central  banks’  role  with 
regard  to  financial  stability  –  or  macro-prudential  regulation  (which  concerns  itself 
with more than just idiosyncratic risk and the soundness of individual institutions but 
is  concerned  with  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system  i.e. 
systemic soundness). 
 Rationale for a financial stability focus 
The ultimate objective of economic policy is to create a sustainable level of economic growth 
through investment, employment  and production. This is best achieved when contributions 
are made by all sectors in the economy, including the financial sector, which historically has 
made substantial contributions to the levels of economic growth achieved in many advanced 
and  developing  economies.  This  sector  is  therefore  important  and  hence  there  rests  a 
responsibility on policymakers to ensure its continued health. 
In  this  regard,  government  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  creating  a  stable  environment 
underpinned  by  a  legal  framework  that  brings  about  certainty  and  supported  by  regulatory 
and supervisory arrangements that help to ensure constructive incentives for financial market 
participants. The central bank too has a role to play as it is tasked with the responsibility of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  contributing towards the achievement and maintenance of both price and financial stability. 
Instability in either of these carries significant costs, as we have witnessed. According to the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  direct  costs  of  banking  crises  in  the  past  15  years 
exceeded 10% of the GDP in more than a dozen cases. 
The  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  is  important  and  central 
banks  must  ensure  that  monetary  policy  actions  themselves  do  not  contribute  towards 
financial instability. Hence, central banks have an important role to ensure that the possible 
formation of asset price bubbles that may threaten financial stability are kept in check. 
The  increasing  interdependence  of  economies  and  the  interconnectedness  of  the  global 
financial  system  have  led  to  significant  initiatives  aimed  at  safeguarding  financial  stability, 
including the development of standards that are material in strengthening the global financial 
system.  A  concerted  effort  through  various  international  bodies  has  seen  agreement  on 
common standards and principles for financial regulators and has, furthermore, resulted in 
central banks focusing more closely on financial stability and macro-prudential analysis. 
What is financial stability? 
Matters relating to monetary policy and monetary stability come naturally to central bankers. 
Monetary  stability  relates  directly  to  the  stability  of  the  price  level  and  the  value  of  the 
currency  and  speaks  directly  to  the  mission  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB). 
Traditionally,  the  main  objective  of  central  banks  –  often  enshrined  in  the  constitutions  of 
countries – has been to ensure price stability. For the Bank this responsibility is defined as 
“to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic 
growth…”.  It  was  commonly  believed  that  if  central  banks  could  achieve  price  stability 
(defined  as a  target  rate  or  target  range  of  inflation),  financial  stability  would  automatically 
follow. This assertion was found to be incorrect! 
Therefore,  the  concept  of  financial  stability  is,  in  general,  newer,  more  controversial,  less 
quantifiable and more difficult to define. Several attempts have been made to come up with a 
generally  acceptable  definition.  I  will  use  the  definition  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  “…when 
households,  businesses  and  financial-service  firms  can  reliably  hold  and  transfer  financial 
assets, without a meaningful risk of disturbances that would undermine financial exchange 
fundamentally and lead to macroeconomic costs”. 
The SARB’s mandate of price stability has been expanded with an explicit responsibility to 
oversee  and  maintain  the  stability  of  the  South  African  financial  system.  While  the  price 
stability mandate of the Bank is narrowly defined and measureable, its mandate for financial 
stability is much broader and is a shared responsibility with other stakeholders in the financial 
and public sectors. 
During the East Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, however, countries with low inflation 
rates experienced severe instability in their financial systems as banks failed, exchange rates 
depreciated  and  financial  markets  experienced  severe  volatility.  As  a  result  many  central 
banks  focused  increasingly  on  financial  stability  and  it  became  an  implicit  secondary 
objective.  In  South  Africa,  this  objective  was  mainly  pursued  through  the  regulation  and 
supervision of banks, which has been the responsibility of the Bank Supervision Department 
within the Bank. It soon became clear, however, that sound and profitable individual banks 
did not guarantee a sound banking and financial system. Banks often have inter-linkages and 
might have significant common exposures to risks that will not be visible from the supervision 
of individual banks.  
Hence the need for macro-prudential surveillance, or the monitoring of the “prudence” of the 
“broader” financial system was identified and which culminated in the SARB creating such 
capacity for this purpose as far back as 2001. The SARB further was given the objective of 
contributing  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  South  Africa,  following  the  global 
financial crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Following the publication of a policy document by National Treasury in February 2011 called 
“A safer financial sector to serve South Africa better” the SARB’s responsibility for financial 
stability became more explicit. This policy document eventually culminated in the Financial 
Sector  Regulation  Bill,  which  states  that  “…the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  primary 
responsibility for promoting financial stability…”. The Bill sets out further details to give effect 
to the Bank’s financial stability mandate and is expected to be promulgated during 2014. It is 
important to note that financial stability is a shared responsibility with other stakeholders such 
as the prudential and market conduct regulators and the National Treasury. 
Careful  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  co-ordinating  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability objectives, which at times may result in diversion of policy choices. In South Africa, 
cross  membership  between  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  committee 
structures  facilitates  such  coordination.  The  Bill  also  recommends  a  single  committee 
structure for financial stability, namely the Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC), 
chaired by the Governor of the Bank. The FSOC’s mandate will be to continuously monitor 
the financial system for risks and initiate any action necessary to mitigate or remedy a risk. 
The FSOC thus will have a financial stability responsibility, in the same way as the Monetary 
Policy Committee (MPC) does for price stability, and will be able to hold to account various 
authorities or  economic  agents  on  actions  to  be  taken  to  mitigate  against/reduce  systemic 
risk. 
The  Bank’s  expanded  mandate  for  financial  stability  will  not  impact  on  its  price  stability 
mandate,  which,  eluded  to  above,  is  a  narrowly  defined,  formal  and  explicit  mandate.  The 
Bank  will  therefore  still  be  independent  and  free  from  influence  in  pursuing  its  primary 
objective of achieving and maintaining price stability. 
Given  this  expanded  role,  it  will  require  of  central  banks  to  evolve  and  to  face  up  to  the 
increased  demands  for  greater  accountability.  Central  banks  will  need  to  communicate  on 
matters relating to financial stability, manage situations where conflicts arise in the goals of 
monetary policy and financial stability, and moderate unrealistic expectations of what can be 
achieved by financial stability policies. 
South Africa, as a member of the Group of Twenty (G20), is committed to promoting financial 
stability and contributing towards strengthening the resilience of the global financial system. 
The role of the auditing profession in supporting financial stability 
There are a number of important and close linkages between the financial stability objective 
of the central bank and the auditing profession. As mentioned earlier, one of the four main 
aspects of the Bank’s financial stability mandate is to promote the robustness of the financial 
system  architecture.  This  is  performed  through  a  process  of  benchmarking  the  financial 
architecture of South Africa against the Financial Stability Board’s twelve standards for sound 
financial  systems.  Amongst  these  standards  are  International  Standards  on  Auditing  (ISA) 
issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB). As part of the 
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) initiative, the World Bank has 
established  a  programme  to  assist  its  member  countries  in  implementing  international 
accounting  and  auditing  standards  for  strengthening  the  financial  reporting  regime.  This 
enables  authorities  to  analyse  comparability  of  national  accounting  and  auditing  standards 
with  international  standards  and  to  develop  and  implement  a  country  action  plan  to 
strengthen the country’s corporate financial reporting regime. 
In addition to that, well-functioning financial markets require accurate information to ensure 
the  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and  other  productive  resources  in  the  economy.  Market 
participants  need  to  have  confidence  that  the  system  of  financial  exchange  is  transparent 
and fair. The market system depends on trust, and in this regard, good corporate governance 
is  critical  to  ensure  economic  and  financial  stability  as  a  breakdown  in  governance  could 
significantly erode business efficiency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  In a testimony to the US Congress by the then Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in 
2002, Alan Greenspan stated that lawyers, internal and external auditors, corporate boards 
and rating agencies often fail to detect and blow the whistle on those who breach the level of 
trust  essential  to  well-functioning  financial  markets.  This  could  lead  to  widespread 
misinformation  to  shareholders  and  potential  investors.  The  question  is  why  corporate 
governance checks and balances that served the world well in the past broke down during 
recent years.  
Both  external  and  internal  auditors  have  a  key  role  to  play  in  strengthening  corporate 
governance as they are the third line of defence within the combined assurance frameworks. 
The Committee on Internal Audit Guidance for Financial Services in the United Kingdom has 
issued  its  recommendations  for  effective  internal  audit  in  the  Financial  Services  Sector  in 
July 2013. If implemented, these recommendations will improve the relevance of the internal 
audit  function  by  repositioning  the  focus  from  testing  and  reporting  on  the  internal  control 
environment  to  supporting  both  executive  and  non-executive  management  in  the  effective 
management of key risks. The guidance for example suggests that the scope of internal audit 
include, inter alia: 
The risk and control culture of the organisation 
(i)  
This  should  include  assessing  whether  the  processes  (e.g.  appraisal  and  remuneration), 
actions (e.g. decision making) and “tone at the top” are in line with the values, ethics, risk 
appetite  and  policies  of  the  organisation.  Internal  Audit  should  consider  the  attitude  and 
assess  the  approach  taken  by  all  levels  of  management  to  risk  management  and  internal 
control. This should include Management’s actions in addressing known control deficiencies, 
as well as Management’s regular assessment of controls. 
Risk of poor customer treatment giving rise to conduct of reputation risk 
(ii)  
Internal Audit should evaluate whether the organisation is acting with integrity in its dealings 
with  customers  and  in  its  interaction  with  relevant  markets.  Internal  Audit  should  evaluate 
whether Business and Risk Management are adequately designing and controlling products, 
services and supporting processes in line with customer interests and conduct regulation. 
Capital and liquidity risk 
(iii)  
Internal Audit should include within its scope the management of the organisation’s capital 
and liquidity risks.  
Conclusion 
After  much  discussion  and  debate,  we  have  to  accept  that,  after  nearly  seven  very 
challenging years, new challenges are being faced, which poses specific risks for emerging 
economies in particular. Some of these challenges include the unwinding of the extraordinary 
monetary  policy  actions  in  the  US  which  is  largely  untested  territory  as  there  is  no  prior 
history to guide us. Nonetheless, I will not delve into this topic at present as we could spend 
many hours discussing the various issues surrounding it. 
Let me stop here and thank you for the opportunity to talk to you today and to share a few 
ideas on the fascinating topics of financial stability and corporate governance. There is no 
question that good corporate governance and sound accounting and auditing standards and 
effective audit functions contribute significantly to sound, stable and well-functioning financial 
systems. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
