  Richard W Fisher: The Texas Jagannatha (with reference to Indian Prime 
Minister Modi, a Hindu Goddess and Wodehouse’s Big Money) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  US-India  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Dallas,  Texas, 
4 September 2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank  you,  Ashok (Mago). I  am  so  honored to have  been  invited  to  join  Ambassador (S.) 
Jaishankar  this  evening  to  celebrate  the  U.S.-India  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  its  many 
distinguished awardees. 
Mr. Ambassador, I am delighted you are here in Texas tonight. I am going to give you a few 
statistics  in  a  moment  that  I  think  will  make  readily  apparent  the  reason  for  this  large 
audience and why so many Indian entrepreneurs and professionals come to Texas. Then I 
am going to give you a snapshot of where the U.S. economy is at present and what we are 
grappling  with  at  the  Fed.  But  first,  with  your  indulgence,  I  want  to  briefly  speak  of  the 
relationship between our two great countries, India and the United States. 
Time to enhance the U.S.-India working relationship 
The  logic  of  an  enhanced  strategic  relationship  between  my  country  and  yours  is  crystal 
clear, beginning with a harsh geopolitical reality: You live in a tough neighborhood and need 
us; we, in turn, need all the friends we can muster in your geographic sphere. It seems very 
timely that we overcome the history that has separated us and begin working more closely 
together. 
During the Cold War, it was the view of many in the United States that India was too closely 
allied with the Soviet Union. American businesses that looked at India found it afflicted with 
the  legacy  of  the  worst  of  British  bureaucratic  administration.  (The  old  joke  was  that  you 
could never get morning tee times at any Indian golf course because the bureaucrats had 
locked them up at least until noon). 
From an Indian perspective, America seemed too hegemonic. Attempts by U.S. companies 
to invest and do business in your homeland revived memories of the East India Company. 
We  viewed  each  other  through  the  lens  of  the time  and  against  a  background  of  our  own 
histories, with suspicion. 
But the (Berlin) Wall came down, the economy has been globalized and cyberized, and new 
threats  to  security  have  arisen,  many  of  them from  nonstate  actors  or forces  who  operate 
from within failed states to inflict damage elsewhere. This is a time for like-minded people to 
unite and work together. 
We are  like-minded  in  that  we  are  democracies.  But tonight  we  celebrate  something  even 
more fundamental. My reading of India is that, like in the U.S., your country men and women 
are  more  pragmatic  and  business-oriented  than  they  are  ideological  or  inherently 
bureaucratic. 
The  recent  election  of  Prime  Minister  (Narendra)  Modi  offers  the  promise  of  making  this 
abundantly clear. He was, after all, the chief minister for over a decade of the Gujarat, the 
most probusiness state in India. And almost every U.S. business leader I know has heard of 
Ratan Tata’s experience when he looked to Gujarat for an alternative to the frustration of his 
attempt to build a new car factory in West Bengal. As I understand it, Mr. Tata went to see 
Minister Modi, had a handshake deal in 30 minutes, and in 14 months the new factory was 
up and running. That almost makes Texas look like California by comparison! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  So Mr. Ambassador, we are all watching for this first prime minister born since Independence 
to  work  his  probusiness,  nonbureaucratic,  can-do  spirit  upon  the  whole  of  India.  It  is  in 
America’s  interest  for  India  to  thrive.  We  wish  Prime  Minister  Modi,  the  government  you 
represent with such distinction, and the Indian nation the very best of luck. 
The Texas Jagannatha 
Tonight, you and I are surrounded by the smart, probusiness people of Indian heritage who 
have chosen to invest and operate within the most probusiness state in the United States. 
I  am  going  to  throw  up  a  few  slides  to  quickly  summarize  the  environment  in  which  they 
operate. Texas is a job-creating juggernaut. I pick that word deliberately, knowing it derives 
from  the  Hindi  Jagannatha  and  is,  according  to  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary,  a  title  of 
Krishna. Specifically, it is: “the uncouth idol of this deity at Puri in Orissa, annually dragged in 
procession  on  an  enormous  car”,  crushing  everything  in  its  path.  But  Hindu  or  Muslim  or 
whatever your faith, while one might consider Texans to on occasion be uncouth, there is no 
denying  that  our  economy  is  an  enormous  job-creating  car  that  enables  and  advances  its 
devotees rather than crushing them. A job is the road to dignity and to the prosperity of any 
people, and Texas has become the most prosperous of states. 
Here is a graph depicting job growth in Texas versus the other large states that typically have 
drawn Indian and other investment and immigration:  
 For over two decades, we have outperformed the rest of the United States in job creation by 
a factor of more than 2 to 1. Over 23 years, only nine net new jobs have been created for 
every 100 that existed in New York in 1990, whereas in Texas, 66 jobs have been created. 
We  have  been  especially  prolific  in  creating  jobs  since  the  Great  Recession  waylaid  the 
world at the end of 2007. Today, employment in Texas is 8.6 percent above its prerecession 
peak. The  nation  as  a whole  is  0.5  percent  – zero  point  five  percent –  above  its  previous 
peak. However, if you take Texas out of the U.S. economy, statistically speaking, you see 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that the U.S. ex-Texas still has not caught up to its prerecession employment levels. Here is 
a graph that shows the margin of difference in employment performance:  
 According  to  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics’  payroll  employment  data,  Texas  has  created 
1,100,600 jobs since November 2007; the rest of America is still 349,600 jobs shy of the prior 
employment peak. 
Texas has been the crucible of job creation in America. 
More than oil and gas; jobs well-distributed 
It  is  a  common  perception  that  the  jobs  that  have  been  created  here  are  primarily  in  the 
burgeoning energy sector. It is true that Texas is an energy powerhouse: We produce more 
than  3  million  barrels  of  oil  and  21  billion  cubic  feet  of  natural  gas  per  day.  To  put  this  in 
perspective,  Texas  produces  more  oil  than  Kuwait  or  Venezuela  or,  if  you’d  like,  more  oil 
than the amount the U.S. imports from the Middle East. With regard to natural gas, Texas 
produces more than all 28 countries of the European Union combined. 
Of  course,  the  energy  sector  is  a  significant  driver  for  the  Texas  economy.  Last  year,  the 
state saw an increase of 16,100 jobs related to oil and gas extraction and associated support 
services. We  are  grateful  for  every  one  of  them.  Yet  there  are  seven  other  sectors  of  the 
Texas economy that produced more jobs than the energy sector last year. Here is a graphic 
summary of where jobs were created in the Lone Star State in 2013:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   In  terms  of  number  of  jobs  created,  the  leading  sectors  in  Texas  last  year  were  trade, 
transportation  and  utilities  (accounting  for  73,700),  professional  and  business  services 
(44,600),  leisure  and  hospitality  (42,300),  educational  and  health  services  (33,500), 
construction (26,800), government (19,700) and financial activities (18,100). 
This  year  through  July,  Texas  employment  has  already  increased  by  238,200  jobs,  a 
3.6 percent annualized growth pace. Over the 12 months ending this July, Texas added just 
shy of 400,000 jobs – more jobs than any other state. Clearly, Texas employment is growing 
at an impressive clip. 
Another misperception is that all of these jobs created in Texas are low-paying jobs. Wrong. 
We  have  been  creating  jobs  in  every  income  quartile,  unlike  the  rest  of  the  country.  This 
graph, recently updated, covers the 13-year period from 2000 to 2013. It charts job creation 
by wage quartile in Texas and in the nation ex-Texas.  
As  you  can  see,  Texas  has  had  healthy  growth  in  every  income  quartile,  while,  without 
Texas, the United States has actually seen job destruction, on net, in the two middle-income 
quartiles. (This fact deeply concerns me because middle-income groups are the backbone of 
America.) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  U.S. economy is on the mend 
The  reality,  Mr.  Ambassador,  is  that  Texas  is  part  of  the  United  States  and,  all  told,  our 
economy is on the mend from the frightful shock of the financial and economic implosion of 
2007–09. 
This is the dashboard that we at the Dallas Fed use to track our national economy:  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
  The  Federal  Reserve  is  mandated  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States  to  manage  monetary 
policy  to  achieve  full  employment  while  maintaining  price  stability  and  “moderate  interest 
rates” over time.1  
A “Hindu goddess” 
As  you  can  see  from  this  graphic,  unemployment  has  declined  to  6.2  percent,  and  the 
dynamics of the labor market are improving. At the Federal Open Market Committee, where 
we  set  monetary  policy  for  the  nation,  we  have  been  working  to  better  understand  these 
employment  dynamics.  This  is  no  easy  task.  Bill  Gross,  one  of  our  country’s  preeminent 
bond managers, made a rather pungent comment about our efforts. He noted that President 
Harry  Truman  “wanted  a  one-armed  economist,  not  the  usual  sort  that  analyzes  every 
problem with ‘on the one hand, this, and on the other, that.’” Gross claimed that Fed Chair 
(Janet) Yellen, in her speech given recently at the Fed’s Jackson Hole, Wyo., conference, 
introduced  so  many qualifications  about the  status  of the  labor market that  “instead  of  the 
proverbial two-handed economist, she more resembled a Hindu goddess with a half-dozen or 
more appendages.”2  
Whether you analyze the labor markets with one arm or two, or six or 19, the issue is how 
quickly we are approaching capacity utilization, so as to gauge price pressures. After all, a 
central  bank  is  first  and  foremost  charged  with  maintaining  the  purchasing  power  of  its 
country’s currency. Like most central banks around the world, we view a 2 percent inflation 
rate  as  a  decent  intermediate-term target.  Of  late, the  various  inflation  indexes  have  been 
beating around this mark. Just this last Friday, the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) 
index for July was released, and it clocked in at a 1 percent annualized rate, a pace less than 
the run rate of April through June. 
Does this mean we are experiencing an inflation rate that is less than acceptable? I wonder. 
At  the  Dallas  Fed,  we  calculate  a  trimmed  mean  inflation  rate  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures  to get  what  we  think  is the  best  sense  of  the  underlying  inflation  rate for  the 
normal  consumer.  This  means  we  trim  out  the  most  volatile  price  movements  in  the 
consumer basket to achieve the best sense we can of underlying price stability. In the July 
statistics,  we  saw  some  of  the  fastest  rates  of  increases  in  a  while  for  the  largest,  least-
volatile components of core services, such as rent and purchased meals.3 So the jury is out 
as  to  whether  we  have  seen  a  reversal  in  the  recent  upward  ascent  of  prices  toward  our 
2 percent target. 
As to achieving “moderate interest rates”, the dashboard shows that we have overshot the 
mark. Interest rates on the lowest-quality credits – on “junk” – are historically low, as are the 
spreads they  are  priced  at  above the  current  historically  low  nominal  rates for  investment-
grade credits. I have been involved  with the credit markets since 1975. I have  never seen 
such ebullient credit markets. The 30-year Treasury yield is trading at a hair over 3 percent. If 
Ambassador  Jaishankar  and  I  were  to  abandon  our  service  to  our  respective  nations  and 
form a company, we would use our good names to borrow as much money as we could at 
current rates. 
                                                
1  The  Fed’s  policy  objectives,  as  stated  in  Section  2A  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  are  that  “the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long run 
growth  of  the  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to 
increase  production,  so  as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and 
moderate long-term interest rates.” See www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm. 
2  See “The Fed’s Evenhanded Policy”, by Randall W. Forsyth, Barron’s, Aug. 23, 2014.  
3  For  the  latest  reading  of  the  Dallas  Fed’s  alternative  measure  of  trimmed  mean  PCE  inflation,  see 
www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/index.cfm.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And this, indeed, is happening. U.S. companies have used this bond market and borrowing 
rate  hiatus  from  normalcy  to  pile  up  cheap,  nearly  cost-free  balances.  This  cheap  and 
abundant monetary fuel, with the proper incentives from the fiscal and regulatory authorities, 
can be deployed to the benefit of company stakeholders (shareholders and employees) to 
enrich and grow the economy. In this sense, we are unique in the world. 
Mr. Ambassador, American businesses are rich and muscular. And those muscles are being 
flexed. For example, just two days ago, the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) released 
its  Purchasing  Managers  Index.  The  data  surprised  most  all  forecasters  to  the  upside. 
Activity was broad based: 17 of 18 industries surveyed reported growth in August, and new 
orders reached a 10-year high. Today, the ISM released its nonmanufacturing index, which 
registered the highest level in nine years. These reports echo a string of others – including 
the Beige Book survey  of regional economic conditions released yesterday by the Federal 
Reserve – that underscore the healing that is taking place in the U.S. economy despite our 
having  what  is,  in  truth,  a  dysfunctional  and  counterproductive  fiscal  and  regulatory 
environment. All we need now is for the fiscal and regulatory authorities – Congress and the 
executive  branch  –  to  unleash  the  animal spirit of  business that  is  well  nourished  with  the 
feed of cash and ready to roll. 
Wodehouse’s perspective 
I  happen  to  share  a  common  bond  with  Indians:  I  have  long  been  a  reader  of  P.G. 
Wodehouse.4  In  his  book,  Big  Money,  published  in  1931,  he  has  a  wonderful  passage  in 
which  a  young  lad  nicknamed  Biscuit  describes  the  woman  he  has  fallen  in  love  with:  “… 
when I think that a girl can be such a ripper and at the same time so dashed rich, it restores 
my  faith  in  the  Providence  which  looks  after  good  men.”  Be  it  Providence  or  the  Fed,  the 
American  business  community  is  at  present  a  “ripper”  –  it  looks  darned  good  –  and  is 
“dashed rich”. We are poised for a healthy, sustainable expansion. The men and women in 
this room see it in Texas. I trust they will see it in the whole of the United States. And I trust 
they and others like them will use it to lead the world, including India, to expanded economic 
prosperity.  
Thank you for having me here this evening.  
                                                
4  P.G. Wodehouse is widely read and wildly popular in India.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
