  Mario Draghi: Unemployment in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 22 August 2014. 
 Summary 
Everyone in society is affected by high unemployment. For central banks it is at the heart of 
the  macro  dynamics  that  determine  inflation,  and  even  when  there  are  no  risks  to  price 
stability  it  increases  pressure  on  us  to  act.  The  key  issue,  however,  is  how  much  we  can 
really  sustainably  affect  unemployment,  which  depends  on  whether  the  drivers  are 
predominantly cyclical or structural.  
In  the  euro  area,  unemployment  has  been  caused  by  a  large  and  particularly  sustained 
negative  shock  to  GDP:  first  through  the  Great  Recession,  which  affected  all  advanced 
economies, and second, through sovereign debt crisis, where job losses were concentrated 
in  countries  affected  by  financial  stress.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  operated  in  part  by 
disabling  the  tools  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  as  fiscal  policy  had  to  switch  towards 
convincing  investors  of  debt  sustainability,  and  monetary  policy  transmission  became 
disrupted. 
Cyclical factors have therefore played an important role in the rise in unemployment, and the 
weak economic situation in the euro area suggests they continue to do so. At the same time, 
there  is  evidence  that  a  significant  share  of  unemployment  is  also  structural.  This  is 
suggested by patterns of long-term unemployment and skill mismatches.  
Making  firm  conclusions  about  the  degree  of  structural  unemployment  in  the  euro  area, 
however, is complicated by uncertainty over estimation methods. There is also considerable 
heterogeneity  across  countries  in  terms  of  initial  conditions,  and  in  the  way  that  demand 
shocks interact with labour market institutions.  
In  these  circumstances,  the  only  conclusion  that  policymakers  can  safely  draw  is  that  we 
need  action  on  both  sides  of  the  economy:  aggregate  demand  policies  have  to  be 
accompanied by national structural policies. 
Demand  side  policies  are  not  only  justified  by  the  significant  cyclical  component  in 
unemployment.  They  are  also  relevant  because,  given  prevailing  uncertainty,  the  risks  of 
“doing  too  little”  –  i.e.  that  cyclical  unemployment  becomes  structural  –  outweigh  those  of 
“doing too much” – that is, excessive upward wage and price pressures. 
At the same time, aggregate demand policies will ultimately not be effective without action on 
the supply side. Advanced economies are operating in a set of initial conditions which include 
low inflation, low interest rates and a large debt overhang. In this context, structural policies 
are  needed  to  engineer  higher  potential  growth  and  allow  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
regain traction over the economic cycle. 
On the demand side, monetary policy can and should play a central role. The package of 
measures announced by the ECB in June should provide the intended boost to demand, and 
we  stand  ready  to  adjust  our  policy  stance  further.  Acknowledging  the  downward  path  of 
inflation, the Governing Council would use also unconventional instruments to safeguard the 
firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the medium- to long-term. 
On the demand side, monetary policy can and should play a central role. The package of 
measures announced by the ECB in June should provide the intended boost to demand, and 
we  stand  ready  to  adjust  our  policy  stance  further.  Acknowledging  the  downward  path  of 
inflation, the Governing Council would use also unconventional instruments to safeguard the 
firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the medium- to long-term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It  would  nonetheless  be  helpful  for  the  overall  stance  of  policy  if  fiscal  policy  could  play  a 
greater role alongside monetary policy. The euro area has suffered from fiscal policy being 
less effective and available, especially compared with other advanced economies, reflecting 
the fact that the central bank in those countries could act and has acted as a backstop for 
government  funding.  While  respecting  our  specific  initial  conditions  and  legal  constraints, 
there are four key elements. 
First,  the  existing  flexibility  within  the  rules  could  be  used  to  better  address  the  weak 
recovery  and  to  make  room  for  the  cost  of  needed  structural  reforms.  Second,  there  is 
leeway  to  achieve  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal  policies,  for  instance  by 
lowering  the  tax  burden  in  a  budget-neutral  way.  Third,  stronger  coordination  among  the 
different national fiscal stances should in principle facilitate a more growth-friendly aggregate 
fiscal  stance  for  the  euro  area.  Fourth,  complementary  action  at  the  EU  level  would  also 
seem to be necessary to ensure both an appropriate aggregate position and a large public 
investment programme. 
No amount of fiscal or monetary accommodation, however, can replace necessary structural 
reforms. Structural unemployment was already very high in the euro area before the crisis 
and the national structural reforms to tackle this problem can no longer be delayed. 
Two  types  of  labour  market  measures  are  a  priority:  first,  measures  that  help  workers 
redeploy  quickly  to  new  job  opportunities  and  thus  lower  unemployment  duration;  and 
second, those that raise the skill intensity of the work force, which is also very important for 
potential growth due to demographic prospects. 
In short, the way back to higher employment is a policy mix that combines monetary, fiscal 
and structural measures, which requires a coherent strategy at the union and national levels. 
This will allow each member of our union to achieve a sustainably high level of employment.  
The stakes for our monetary union are high. Without permanent cross-country transfers, a 
high level of employment in each country is essential for the long-term cohesion of the euro 
area. Given the very high costs if the cohesion of the union is threatened, all countries should 
have an interest in achieving this. 
 No  one  in  society  remains  untouched  by  a  situation  of  high  unemployment.  For  the 
unemployed  themselves,  it  is  often  a  tragedy  which  has  lasting  effects  on  their  lifetime 
income.  Fo  r  those  in  work,  it  raises  job  insecurity  and  undermines  social  cohesion.  For 
governments, it weighs on public finances and harms election prospects. And unemployment 
is at the heart of the macro dynamics that shape short- and medium-term inflation, meaning it 
also  affects  central  banks.  Indeed,  even  when  there  are  no  risks  to  price  stability,  but 
unemployment is high and social cohesion at threat, pressure on the central bank to respond 
invariably increases. 
1.   The causes of unemployment in the euro area 
The key issue, however, is how much we can really sustainably affect unemployment, which 
in  turn  is  a  question  –  as  has  been  much  discussed  at  this  conference  –  of  whether  the 
drivers are predominantly cyclical or structural. As we are an 18 country monetary union this 
is  necessarily  a  complex  question  in  the  euro  area,  but  let  me  nonetheless  give  a  brief 
overview of how the ECB currently assesses the situation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Change in the unemployment rate since 2008 – the euro area and the US 
Figure 1 
  The long recession in the euro area 
The first point to make is that the euro area has suffered a large and particularly sustained 
negative  shock  to  GDP,  with  serious  consequences  for  employment.  This  is  visible  in 
Figure 1,  which  shows  the  evolution  of  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  and  the  US  since 
2008.  Whereas  the  US  experienced  a  sharp  and  immediate  rise  in  unemployment  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  Great  Recession,  the  euro  area  has  endured  two  rises  in  unemployment 
associated with two sequential recessions. 
From  the  start  of  2008  to  early  2011  the  picture  in  both  regions  is  similar:  unemployment 
rates  increase  steeply,  level  off  and  then  begin  to  gradually  fall.  This  reflects  the common 
sources of the shock: the synchronisation of the financial cycle across advanced economies, 
the contraction in global trade following the Lehman failure, coupled with a strong correction 
of asset prices – notably houses – in certain jurisdictions. 
From 2011 onwards, however, developments in the two regions diverge. Unemployment in 
the US continues to fall at more or less the same rate.1 In the euro area, on the other hand, it 
begins a second rise that does not peak until April 2013. This divergence reflects a second, 
euro  area-specific shock  emanating  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  resulted  in  a  six 
                                                 
1  
It is important to note, however, that the difference in euro area unemployment developments relative to the 
US  also  reflects  very  different  developments  in  labour  market  participation.  Over  the  period  2010–12,  the 
decline in the participation rate contributed significantly to the fall in the unemployment rate in the US. At the 
same time, the rising participation rate in the euro area explains part of the rise in the unemployment rate. 
Assuming  that,  in  both  the  US  and  the  euro  area,  the  labour  force  participation  ratios  had  remained 
unchanged  compared  with  2007  and  that  the  difference  to  the  actual  ratios  had  been  fully  reflected  in  the 
number  of  unemployed,  the  US  unemployment  rate  in  2012  would  have  been  higher  than  that  of  the  euro 
area. For more information see Box 7 in the ECB Monthly Bulletin, August 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  quarter recession for the euro area economy. Unlike the post-Lehman shock, however, which 
affected all euro area economies, virtually all of the job losses observed in this second period 
were  concentrated  in  countries  that  were  adversely  affected  by  government  bond  market 
tensions (Figure 2). 
Relationship between financial stress and unemployment 
Figure 2 
 The sovereign debt crisis operated through various channels, but one of its most important 
effects was to disable in part the tools of macroeconomic stabilisation. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  non-market  services  –  including  public  administration,  education  and 
healthcare – had contributed positively to employment in virtually all countries during the first 
phase  of  the  crisis,  thus  somewhat  cushioning  the  shock.  In  the  second  phase,  however, 
fiscal policy was constrained by concerns over debt sustainability and the lack of a common 
backstop,  especially  as  discussions  related  to  sovereign  debt  restructuring  began.  The 
necessary fiscal consolidation had to be frontloaded to restore investor confidence, creating 
a  fiscal  drag  and  a  downturn  in  public  sector  employment  which  added  to  the  ongoing 
contraction in employment in other sectors. 
Sovereign  pressures  also  interrupted  the  homogenous  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
across  the  euro  area.  Despite  very  low  policy  rates,  the  cost  of  capital  actually  rose  in 
stressed countries in this period, meaning monetary and fiscal policy effectively tightened in 
tandem. Hence, an important focus of our monetary policy in this period was – and still is – to 
repair  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  Establishing  a  precise  link  between  these 
impairments  and  unemployment  performance  is  not  straightforward.  However,  ECB  staff 
estimates of the “credit gap” for stressed countries – the difference between the actual and 
normal  volumes  of  credit  in  the  absence  of  crisis  effects  –  suggest  that  that  credit  supply 
conditions are exerting a significant drag on economic activity.2 
                                                 
2   The  “credit  gap”  is  computed  as  the  difference  between  the  actual  and  the  counterfactual  path  of  the  total 
credit to non-financial corporations simulated by using the multi-country BVAR of Altavilla et al. (2014). More 
precisely, the counterfactual path has been obtained by measuring the stock of loans consistent with pre-crisis 
past business cycle regularities in absence of financial friction for the banking system. For further details see 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Cyclical and structural factors 
Cyclical  factors  have  therefore  certainly  contributed  to  the  rise  in  unemployment.  And  the 
economic situation in the euro area suggests they are still playing a role. The most recent 
GDP data confirm that the recovery in the euro area remains uniformly weak, with subdued 
wage  growth  even  in  non-stressed  countries  suggesting  lacklustre  demand.  In  these 
circumstances, it seems likely that uncertainty over the strength of the recovery is weighing 
on business investment and slowing the rate at which workers are being rehired. 
That  being  said,  there  are  signs  that,  in  some  countries  at  least,  a  significant  share  of 
unemployment is also structural. 
For  example,  the  euro  area  Beveridge  curve  –  which  summarises  unemployment 
developments at a given level of labour demand (or vacancies) – suggests the emergence of 
a structural mismatch across euro area labour markets (Figure 3). In the first phase of the 
crisis strong declines in labour demand resulted in a steep rise in euro area unemployment, 
with  a  movement  down  along  the  Beveridge  curve.  The  second  recessionary  episode, 
however, led to a further strong increase in the unemployment rate even though aggregate 
vacancy  rates  showed  marked  signs  of  improvement.  This  may  imply  a  more  permanent 
outward shift. 
Evolution of the euro area Beveridge curve over the crisis 
Figure 3 
 Part  of  the  explanation  for  the  movement  of  the  Beveridge  curve  seems  to  be  the  sheer 
magnitude  of  the  job  destruction  in  some  countries,  which  has  led  to  reduced  job-finding 
rates,  extended  durations  of  unemployment  spells  and  a  higher  share  of  long-term 
unemployment. This reflects, in particular, the strong sectoral downsizing of the previously 
                                                                                                                                                      
Altavilla, Carlo, Domenico Giannone and Michele Lenza (2014). “The Financial and Macroeconomic Effects of 
the OMT Announcements,” ECB Working Paper No.1707. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  overblown construction sector (Figure 4), which, consistent with experience in the US, tends 
to  lower  match  efficiency.3  By  the  end  of  2013,  the  stock  of  long-term  unemployed  (those 
unemployed for a year or more) accounted for over 6% of the total euro area labour force – 
more than double the pre-crisis level. 
Evolution of euro area employment by sector and educational level 
Figure 4 
Another  important  explanation  seems  to  be  a  lack  of  redeployment  opportunities  for 
displaced low-skilled workers, as evidenced by the growing disparity between the skills of the 
labour force and the skills required by employers. Analysis of the evolution of skill mismatch4 
suggests a notable increase in mismatch at regional, country and euro area level (Figure 5). 
As the previous figure shows, employment losses in the euro area are strongly concentrated 
among low skilled workers. 
                                                  
3   U.S. industry-level studies find that a large part of the decline in match efficiency is driven by the low level of 
job  openings  and  hires  per  vacancy  in  the  construction  sector  –  see  e.g.  Barnichon,  Regis,  Michael  W.  L. 
Elsby, Bart Hobijn and Ayșegül Șahin (2012) “Which Industries are Shifting the Beveridge Curve?” Monthly 
Labor  Review,  June  2012,  25–37;  Davis,  Steven  J.,  R.  Jason  Faberman,  and  John  C.  Haltiwanger  (2012) 
“Recruiting  Intensity  during  and  after  the  Great  Recession:  National  and  Industry  Evidence,”  American 
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings. 
4   Based on skill mismatch indexes computed as the difference between skill demand (proxied by educational 
attainments of the employed) and skill supply (proxied by the educational attainments of the labour force or 
unemployed, respectively). See (forthcoming) ECB Occasional Paper entitled “Comparisons and contrasts of 
the impact of the crisis on euro area labour markets’’. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 5 
Skill mismatch indices for the euro area 
  All  in  all,  estimates  provided  by  international  organisations  –  in  particular,  the  European 
Commission, the OECD and the IMF – suggest that the crisis has resulted in an increase in 
structural  unemployment  across  the  euro  area,  rising  from  an  average  (across  the  three 
institutions) of 8.8% in 2008 to 10.3% by 2013.5 
Nuancing the picture 
There are nevertheless two important qualifications to make here. 
The  first  is  that  estimates  of  structural  unemployment  are  surrounded  by  considerable 
uncertainty, in particular in real time. For example, research by the European Commission 
suggests that estimates of the Non-Accelerating Wage Rate of Unemployment (NAWRU) in 
the  current  situation  are  likely  to  overstate  the  magnitude  of  unemployment  linked  to 
structural factors, notably in the countries most severely hit by the crisis.6 
The second qualification is that behind the aggregate data lies a very heterogeneous picture. 
The  current  unemployment  rate  in  the  euro  area  of  11.5%  is  the  (weighted)  average  of 
unemployment  rates  close  to  5%  in  Germany  and  25%  in  Spain.  Structural  developments 
also  differ:  analysis  of  the  Beveridge  curve  at  the  country  level  reveals,  for  example,  a 
pronounced  inward  shift  in  Germany,  whereas  in  France,  Italy  and  in  particular  Spain,  the 
curves move outward. 
 
                                                  
5  
In terms of calculating structural unemployment, the European Commission estimates a NAWRU while OECD 
estimates the NAIRU using a filter technique that seeks to disentangle movements in the unemployment rates 
into a structural and a cyclical component, on the basis of a Phillips-curve relationship. The estimates by the 
IMF  are  not  based  on  any  “official”  method  –  meaning  that  they  do  not  publish  a  model  or  a  given 
methodology, since their internal estimates are subject to judgement. 
6   European Commission, “Labour Market Developments in Europe 2013”, European Economy 6/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  This heterogeneity reflects different initial conditions, such as varying sectoral compositions 
of  employment  (in  particular  the  share  employed  in  construction),  as  well  as  the  fact  that 
unemployment rates have historically been persistently higher in some euro area countries 
than others.7 But it also reflects the relationship between labour market institutions and the 
impact  of  shocks  on  employment.8  The  economies  that  have  weathered  the  crisis  best  in 
terms of employment tend also to be those with more flexibility in the labour market to adjust 
to economic conditions. 
In Germany, for example, the inward shift in the Beveridge curve seen over the course of the 
crisis follows a trend that began in the mid-2000s after the introduction of the Hartz labour 
market reforms. Its relatively stronger employment performance was also linked to the fact 
that  German  firms  had  instruments  available  to  reduce  employees’  working  time  at 
reasonable  costs  –  i.e.  the  intensive  margin  –  including  reducing  overtime  hours,  greater 
working time flexibility at the firm level, and extensive use of short-time work schemes.9 
Even within the group of countries that experienced the sovereign debt crisis most acutely, 
we  can  see  a  differential  impact  of  labour  market  institutions  on  employment.  Ireland  and 
Spain, for example, both experienced a large destruction of employment in the construction 
sector  after  the  Lehman  shock,  but  fared  quite  differently  during  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
Unemployment in Ireland stabilised and then fell, whereas in Spain it increased until January 
2013 (Figure 6). From 2011 to 2013 structural unemployment is estimated to have risen by 
around 0.5 percentages points in Ireland, whereas it increased by more than 2.5 percentages 
points in Spain.10 
This diverging performance can in part be accounted for by differences in net migration. But 
it also reflects the fact that Ireland entered the crisis with a relatively flexible labour market 
and  adopted  further  labour  market  reforms  under  its  EU-IMF  programme  beginning  in 
November  2010.  Spain,  on  the  other  hand,  entered  the  crisis  with  strong  labour  market 
rigidities and reform only started meaningfully in 2012. 
Importantly,  until then,  the  capacity  of  firms  to adjust  to  the  new  economic  conditions  was 
hampered  in  Spain  by  sectoral  and  regional  collective  bargaining  agreements  and  wage 
indexation. Survey evidence indicates that Spain was among the countries where indexation 
was more frequent – covering about 70% of firms.11 As a result, as Figure 6 shows, nominal 
compensation per employee continued to rise in Spain until the third quarter of 2011, despite 
a  more  than  12  percentage  point  increase  in  unemployment  in  that  time.  In  Ireland,  by 
contrast,  downward  wage  adjustment  began  already  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  and 
proceeded more quickly. 
 
                                                  
7  
In  the  short  pre-crisis  period  between  1995  and  2007,  for  which  we  have  homogeneous  euro  area  data, 
average unemployment rates were around 9% in France and Italy, but above 14% in Spain. In Germany, the 
unemployment rate was also 9%, but only as a result of a large, previous increase following reunification. 
8   Blanchard, Olivier, and Justin Wolfers (1999), “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of European 
Unemployment: the Aggregate Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 7282. 
9   See Burda, Michael C., and Jennifer Hunt (2011), “What Explains the German Labour Market Miracle in the 
Great Recession”, NBER Working Paper No. 17187; and Brenke, Karl, Ulf Rinne and Klaus F. Zimmermann 
(2013), “Short-time work: The German answer to the Great Recession”, International Labour Review Vol. 152, 
Issue 2. 
10   Average of European Commission, OECD and IMF estimates. 
11   European  Central  Bank  (2010),  Wage  Dynamics  in  Europe:  Final  Report  of  the  Wage  Dynamics  Network 
(WDN), European Central Bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The upshot was that, whereas the Irish labour market facilitated some  adjustment through 
prices, the Spanish labour market adjusted primarily through quantities: firms were forced to 
reduce  labour  costs  by  reducing  employment.  And  due  to  a  high  degree  of  duality  in  the 
Spanish labour market, this burden of adjustment was concentrated in particular on a less 
protected group – those on temporary contracts. These had been particularly prevalent in 
Spain  in  advance  of  the  crisis,  accounting  for  around  one  third  of  all  employment 
contracts.12 
In  Spain,  as  in  other  stressed  countries,  a  number  of  these  labour  market  rigidities  have 
since  been  addressed  through  structural  reforms  with  positive  effects.  For  example,  the 
OECD estimates that the 2012 labour market reform in Spain has improved transitions out of 
unemployment and into employment at all unemployment durations.13 
Unemployment and nominal compensation developments in Ireland and Spain 
Figure 6 
 To  sum  up,  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  is  characterised  by  relatively  complex 
interactions. There have been differentiated demand shocks across countries. These shocks 
have interacted with initial conditions and national labour market institutions in different ways 
–  and  the  interactions  have  changed  as  new  reforms  have  been  adopted.  Consequently, 
estimates of the degree of cyclical and structural unemployment have to be made with quite 
some caution. But it is clear that such heterogeneity in labour market institutions is a source 
of fragility for the monetary union. 
2.   Responding to high unemployment 
So what conclusions can we draw from this as policymakers? The only conclusion we can 
safely  draw,  in  my  view,  is  that  we  need  action  on  both  sides  of  the  economy:  aggregate 
demand policies have to be accompanied by national structural policies. 
                                                 
12   See OECD Employment Outlook (2012), “How Does Spain Compare?”. 
13   OECD, “The 2012 Labour Market Reform in Spain: a Preliminary Assessment”, December 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Demand  side  policies  are  not  only  justified  by  the  significant  cyclical  component  in 
unemployment.  They  are  also  relevant  because,  given  prevailing  uncertainty,  they  help 
insure  against  the  risk  that  a  weak  economy  is  contributing  to  hysteresis  effects.  Indeed, 
while in normal conditions uncertainty would imply a higher degree of caution for fear of over-
shooting, at present the situation is different. The risks of “doing too little” – i.e. that cyclical 
unemployment becomes structural – outweigh those of “doing too much” – that is, excessive 
upward wage and price pressures. 
At  the  same  time,  such  aggregate  demand  policies  will  ultimately  not  be  effective  without 
action in parallel on the supply side. Like all advanced economies, we are operating in a set 
of  initial  conditions  determined  by  the  last  financial  cycle,  which  include  low  inflation,  low 
interest  rates  and  a  large  debt  overhang  in  the  private  and  public  sectors.  In  such 
circumstances,  due  to  the  zero  lower  bound  constraint,  there  is  a  real  risk  that  monetary 
policy loses some effectiveness in generating aggregate demand. The debt overhang also 
inevitably reduces fiscal space. 
In this context, engineering a higher level and trend of potential growth – and thereby also 
government  income  –  can  help  recover  a  margin  for  manoeuvre  and  allow  both  policies 
regain  traction  over  the  economic  cycle.  Reducing  structural  unemployment  and  raising 
labour participation is a key part of that. This is also particularly relevant for the euro area 
as,  to  list  just  one  channel,  higher  unemployment  in  certain  countries  could  lead  to 
elevated loan losses, less resilient banks and hence a more fragmented transmission of 
monetary policy. 
Boosting aggregate demand 
On  the  demand  side,  monetary  policy  can  and  should  play  a  central  role,  which  currently 
means  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  I  am  confident 
that the package of measures we announced in June will indeed provide the intended boost 
to demand, and we stand ready to adjust our policy stance further. 
We  have  already  seen  exchange  rate  movements  that  should  support  both  aggregate 
demand and inflation, which we expect to be sustained by the diverging expected paths of 
policy in the US and the euro area (Figure 7). We will launch our first Targeted Long-Term 
Refinancing  Operation  in  September,  which  has  so  far  garnered  significant  interest  from 
banks. And our preparation for outright purchases in asset-backed security (ABS) markets is 
fast moving forward and we expect that it should contribute to further credit easing. Indeed, 
such outright purchases would meaningfully contribute to diversifying the channels for us to 
generate liquidity. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Expected real interest rate path in the euro area and the US 
Figure 7 
  Inflation has been on a downward path from around 2.5% in the summer of 2012 to 0.4% 
most recently. I comment on these movements about once a month in the press conference 
and I have given several reasons for this downward path in inflation, saying it is because of 
food  and  energy  price  declines;  because  after  mid-2012  it  is  mostly  exchange  rate 
appreciation that has impacted on price movements; more recently we have had the Russia-
Ukraine geopolitical risks which will also exert a negative impact on the euro area economy; 
and  of  course  we  had  the  relative  price  adjustment  that  had  to  happen  in  the  stressed 
countries as well as high unemployment. 
I have said in principle most of these effects should in the end wash out because most of 
them are temporary in nature – though not all of them. But I also said if this period of low 
inflation were to last for a prolonged period of time the risk to price stability would increase. 
Over  the  month  of  August  financial  markets  have  indicated  that  inflation  expectations 
exhibited significant declines at all horizons. The 5year/5year swap rate declined by 15 basis 
points  to  just  below  2%  –  this  is  the  metric  that  we  usually  use  for  defining  medium  term 
inflation. 
But  if  we  go  to  shorter  and  medium-term  horizons  the  revisions  have  been  even  more 
significant. The real rates on the short and medium term have gone up, on the long term they 
haven’t gone up because we are witnessing a decline in long term nominal rates, not only in 
the  euro  area  but  everywhere  really.  The  Governing  Council  will  acknowledge  these 
developments and within its mandate will use all the available instruments needed to ensure 
price stability over the medium term. 
Turning to fiscal policy, since 2010 the euro area has suffered from fiscal policy being less 
available and effective, especially compared with other large advanced economies. This is 
not so much a consequence of high initial debt ratios – public debt is in aggregate not higher 
in the euro area than in the US or Japan. It reflects the fact that the central bank in those 
countries could act and has acted as a backstop for government funding. This is an important 
reason  why  markets  spared  their  fiscal  authorities  the  loss  of  confidence  that  constrained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  many euro area governments’ market access. This has in turn allowed fiscal consolidation in 
the US and Japan to be more backloaded. 
Thus, it would be helpful for the overall stance of policy if fiscal policy could play a greater 
role alongside monetary policy, and I believe there is scope for this, while taking into account 
our specific initial conditions and legal constraints. These initial conditions include levels of 
government expenditure and taxation in the euro area that are, in relation to GDP, already 
among  the  highest  in  the  world.  And  we  are  operating  within  a  set  of  fiscal  rules  –  the 
Stability and Growth Pact – which acts as an anchor for confidence and that would be self-
defeating to break. 
Let me in this context emphasise four elements. 
First,  the  existing  flexibility  within  the  rules  could  be  used  to  better  address  the  weak 
recovery and to make room for the cost of needed structural reforms. 
Second, there is leeway to achieve a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. As a 
start, it should be possible to lower the tax burden in a budget-neutral way.14 This strategy 
could have positive effects even in the short-term if taxes are lowered in those areas where 
the short-term fiscal multiplier is higher, and expenditures cut in unproductive areas where 
the  multiplier  is  lower.  Research  suggests  positive  second-round  effects  on  business 
confidence and private investment could also be achieved in the short-term.15 
Third, in parallel it may be useful to have a discussion on the overall fiscal stance of the euro 
area. Unlike in other major advanced economies, our fiscal stance is not based on a single 
budget voted for by a single parliament, but on the aggregation of eighteen national budgets 
and the EU budget. Stronger coordination among the different national fiscal stances should 
in principle allow us to achieve a more growth-friendly overall fiscal stance for the euro area. 
Fourth, complementary action at the EU level would also seem to be necessary to ensure 
both an appropriate aggregate position and a large public investment programme – which is 
consistent with proposals by the incoming President of the European Commission.16 
Reforming structural policies 
No  amount  of  fiscal  or  monetary  accommodation,  however,  can  compensate  for  the 
necessary  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area.  As  I  said,  structural  unemployment  was 
already estimated to be very high coming into the crisis (around 9%). Indeed, some research 
suggests it has been high since the 1970s.17 And given the interactions I described, there are 
important reasons why national structural reforms that tackle this problem can no longer be 
delayed. 
This  reform  agenda  spans  labour  markets,  product  markets  and  actions  to  improve  the 
business  environment.  I  will  however  focus  here  on  labour  markets,  where  there  are  two 
cross-cutting themes that I see as a priority. 
The first is policies that allow workers to redeploy quickly to new job opportunities and hence 
lower  unemployment  duration.  Such  policies  include  enabling  firm-level  agreements  that 
allow wages to better reflect local labour market conditions and productivity developments; 
allowing for greater wage differentiation across workers and between sectors; reductions in 
                                                 
14   The recommendations for the euro area adopted in the context of the 2014 European Semester explicitly call 
on the Eurogroup to explore ways to reduce the high tax wedge on labour. 
15   Alesina,  Alberto,  Carlo  Favero  and  Francesco  Giavazzi  (2014),  “The  output  effect  of  fiscal  consolidation 
plans”, mimeo, May 2014. 
16   The  incoming  European  Commission  President,  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  has  proposed  a  €300  billion  public-
private investment programme to help incentivise private investment in the EU economy. 
17   Blanchard, Olivier, (2006), “European unemployment”, Economic Policy, pp. 5–59. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  employment adjustment rigidities and especially labour market dualities; and product market 
reforms  which  help  to  speed  up  the  reallocation  of  resources  and  employment  to  more 
productive sectors. 
The second theme is raising the skill intensity of the workforce. We have already seen the 
disproportionate  effect  of  the  crisis  on  low  skilled  workers,  which  implies  a  period  of  re-
skilling will be necessary to get people back into work. The longer-term effects of high youth 
unemployment  also  point  to  this  conclusion.  The  number  of  unemployed  aged  between 
15 and 24, relative to the labour force of the same age group, increased from an already high 
level of around 15% in 2007 to 24% in 2013. This has most likely left significant “scarring” as 
the young have lost access to a crucial step of on-the-job training. 
The  issue  of  skill  intensity  is  also  very  relevant  for  potential  growth.  While  raising  labour 
participation  is  crucial,  demographic  prospects  imply  that  it  will  provide  a  diminishing 
contribution to future potential. Lifting trend growth will have to come mainly through raising 
labour  productivity.  Thus,  we  need  to  ensure  that,  to  the  extent  possible,  employment  is 
concentrated  in  high-value  added,  high-productivity  sectors,  which  in  turn  is  a  function  of 
skills. 
What  is  more,  in  the  global  economy  the  euro  area  cannot  compete  on  costs  alone  with 
emerging  countries,  if  only  because  of  our  social  model.  Our  comparative  advantage 
therefore has to come from combining cost competitiveness with specialisation in high-value 
added  activities  –  a  business  model  that  countries  such  as  Germany  have  successfully 
demonstrated.  Seen  from  this  perspective,  insufficient  skill  levels  will  effectively  raise  the 
non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) by causing more workers to drop 
out of the ‘competitiveness zone’ and become unemployable. 
Raising skills is clearly first and foremost about education, where there is much that could 
still  be  done.  The  percentage  of  the  working  age  population  that  has  completed  upper 
secondary  or  tertiary  education  in  the  euro  area  ranges  from  a  high  of  more  than  90%  in 
some  countries  to  a  low  of  around  40%  in  others.  But  there  is  also  an  important  role  for 
active labour market policies, such as lifelong learning, and for eradicating distortions such 
labour market duality. The latter would, among  other things, help reduce inefficient worker 
turnover and increase incentives for employers and employees to invest in developing job-
specific skills. 
Conclusion 
3.  
Let me conclude. 
Unemployment  in  the  euro  area  is  a  complex  phenomenon,  but  the  solution  is  not  overly 
complicated to understand. A coherent strategy to reduce unemployment has to involve both 
demand and supply side policies, at both the euro area and the national levels. And only if 
the strategy is truly coherent can it be successful. 
Without  higher  aggregate  demand,  we  risk  higher  structural  unemployment,  and 
governments  that  introduce  structural  reforms  could  end  up  running  just  to  stand  still.  But 
without  determined  structural  reforms,  aggregate  demand  measures  will  quickly  run  out  of 
steam  and  may  ultimately  become  less  effective.  The  way  back  to  higher  employment,  in 
other words, is a policy mix that combines monetary, fiscal and structural measures at the 
union level and at the national level. This will allow each member of our union to achieve a 
sustainably high level of employment. 
We  should not  forget  that  the  stakes  for  our  monetary  union  are  high.  It  is  not unusual  to 
have regional disparities in unemployment within countries, but the euro area is not a formal 
political  union  and  hence  does  not  have  permanent  mechanisms  to  share  risk,  namely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  
 
through fiscal transfers.18 Cross-country migration flows are relatively small and are unlikely 
to ever become a key driver of labour market adjustment after large shocks.19 
Thus,  the  long-term  cohesion  of  the  euro  area  depends  on  each  country  in  the  union 
achieving  a  sustainably  high  level  of  employment.  And  given  the  very  high  costs  if  the 
cohesion of the union is threatened, all countries should have an interest in achieving this. 
*** 
The text has been updated to reflect new comments on inflation made during delivery. 
*** 
Accompanying  slides  from  the  presentation  can  be  found  on  the  ECB’s  website:  Charts  & 
Graphs. 
 
                                                 
18   Cross-country transfers between euro area countries exist as part of the EU cohesion policy. These funds are 
however  in  principle  temporary,  as  they  designed  to  support  the  “catching-up”  process  in  lower  income 
countries. 
19   Beyer, Robert C. M., and Frank Smets (2013), “Has mobility decreased? Reassessing regional labour market 
adjustments in Europe and the US”, mimeo, European Central Bank. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
