  Jens Weidmann: Towards a more stable European monetary union 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Madrid Stock 
Exchange, Madrid, 18 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
1 
Mr Feito 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for your invitation and for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. 
A few months ago, a Spanish newspaper wrote about my institution: “El Bundesbank, banco 
central alemán, baluarte del pensamiente neoliberal más dogmatico de la Unión Europea…”. 
While  my  understanding  of  the  Spanish  language  is  poor  –  as  is  my  pronunciation  –  I 
assume this was not meant as a compliment, and, moreover, it is not even truthful. 
That’s why I am all the more delighted about the warm welcome you gave me here today. 
I would particularly like to thank Juergen Bernardo Donges for his kind introduction. Juergen 
and  I  worked  closely  together  between  1999  and  2002  when  the  two  of  us  were  with  the 
German Council of Economic Advisors – he was one of what are called the five wise men 
and I was their secretary-general. 
At  that  time,  I  remember,  Germany  was  considered  to  be  “the  sick  man  of  Europe”.  The 
Economist magazine  wrote in 1999: “... the biggest economic problem for Europe today is 
how to revive the German economy”. 
Nowadays,  Germany  is  called  the  economic  powerhouse  of  Europe.  This  is  not  least  the 
result of economic reforms that were implemented between 2003 and 2007. Moderate wage 
policies, greater flexibility in pay policy conditions and shrewd entrepreneurial decisions also 
helped to restore Germany’s competitiveness. 
Germany’s economic success means that it is often seen as a role model for other euro-area 
countries  that  have  run  in  trouble.  However,  reforms  in  one  country  cannot  be  used  as  a 
blueprint elsewhere. Each country has to tackle its own structural problems, and it is up to 
governments,  parliaments  and  their  advisors  to  assess  what  can  be  learned  from  other 
countries’ experiences. 
As far as Germany is concerned, there is no room for complacency; Germany has economic 
challenges  of  its  own  to  face.  Four  of  the  most  important  are  a  rapidly  diminishing  labour 
force  caused  by  demographic  trends;  increasing  competition  on  account  of  globalisation, 
which is particularly relevant for an economy that succeeds in high technology rather than in 
the most advanced technology; changes in the energy markets and the politically favoured 
energy mix; and high levels of public debt. 
Looking  at  the  German  government’s  recent  economic  policy  decisions,  not  all  of  them 
adequately  address  the  needs  resulting from these  challenges  nor  do  they  set  the  kind of 
example  which  a  large  euro-area  country  like  Germany  should  be  setting  for  the  other 
member states. 
However, I do not want to talk about Germany in too much detail today. Rather, I would like 
to share my views on the future of European monetary union. 
From  an  economist’s  point  of  view,  the  question  whether  a  country  should  abandon  its 
currency and join a monetary union is typically analysed in the framework of what is known 
as the theory of optimum currency areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Without a doubt, the euro area lacks some of the characteristics of an optimal currency area. 
Labour mobility, for instance, is much lower than in the US; plus the business cycles are not 
synchronised, nor is there any central fiscal stabiliser. 
At the end of the day, the decision to create European monetary union was a political one, 
not  an  economic  one.  Nonetheless,  in  the  first  15½  years  since  the  euro  was  launched, 
people have enjoyed a stable currency. The average euro-area inflation rate has been 2.0 %, 
which is very close to the ECB Governing Council’s definition of price stability (“below, but 
close to, 2 %”). 
However,  the  crisis  exposed  shortcomings  on  a  national  level  and  the  fragilities  of  the 
institutional  framework  of  the  monetary  union.  But  I  am  positive  that  if  we  learn  from  the 
sovereign debt crisis, the European economy will be stronger than before the crisis and we 
will be able to maintain our monetary union as a stability union – and it is indeed worth being 
maintained. 
In the next 30 or 40 minutes, I would like to discuss how we can achieve this end. I will start 
by looking into what still needs to be done at the national level. From there, I will go on to 
address  the  weaknesses  in  EMU’s  institutional  foundation.  Moreover,  I  will  touch  upon 
current monetary policy issues. 
But before I talk about what needs to be done, let us take a step back and consider what 
went wrong in the first place. 
The origins of the crisis 
2 
For  many  euro-area  member  states,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  ushered  in  a  new  era  of 
abundant  capital  owing  to  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks.  However,  the  favourable 
financing  conditions  in  the  euro-area  countries  which  had  previously  higher  interest  rates 
mainly stimulated investment in real estate and public and private consumption. 
Over  time,  unit  labour  costs  soared,  while  competitiveness  declined.  Between  1999  and 
2007,  on  average  unit  labour  costs  rose  in  Spain  by  3.0  %  per  year  compared  to  a  slight 
decline in Germany of –0.1 %. This led to a decline in Spain’s competitiveness of more than 
15 % over that period. 
When  the  financial  crisis  broke  out  in  2007,  the  vulnerabilities  were  laid  bare:  investor 
sentiment  began  to  shift,  and  interest  rates  for  the  countries  in  question  started  to  rise 
sharply, triggering a crisis that is still far from being fully resolved. 
In  order  to  understand  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  it  is  useful  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  euro 
area’s unique institutional set-up. 
The euro area teams up one common monetary policy with 18 national fiscal and economic 
policies.  This  approach reflects  a  currency  area  composed  of  sovereign  member  states. It 
grants member states sufficient leeway to preserve their diversity, that is, to establish their 
own business models or to tailor institutions and policies to their own national preferences. 
Such preferences can differ, for example, with respect to income redistribution or the role of 
the state in the economy. At the same time, it leaves the consequences of such decisions 
with the respective member state and consistently rules out the option of mutualising public 
debt with other euro-area states. But this set-up also creates vulnerabilities. 
First,  a  combination  of  this  kind  gives  rise  to  a  deficit  bias,  as  it  allows  the  costs  of  fiscal 
imprudence  to  be  shifted  partially  on  to  others.  An  unsustainable  fiscal  situation  in  one 
country has repercussions for monetary union as a whole. 
You  can  compare  this  to  what  economists  call  the  “tragedy  of  the  commons”.  Just  as 
overfishing creates negative externalities for other countries, excessive public debt harms the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Excessive  debt  in  one  member  state  drives  up  longer-term  interest 
rates for all euro-area countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And  second,  each  member  state  issues  debt  in  a  currency  it  cannot  create.  Thus,  a  high 
level  of  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  ensure  that  solvency  concerns  do  not  spiral  out  of 
control. 
Even  if  there  are  no  explicit  fiscal  transfers,  and  irrespective  of  the  approval  of  national 
legislatures,  central  banks’  balance sheets  can nonetheless  serve  as  a conduit for  shifting 
risks among national taxpayers if those central banks agree to finance national debt. 
This shift is undermining both countries’ individual national responsibility and central banks’ 
independence. If central bank independence is used for purposes other than price stability, it 
is only a question of time before central bank independence itself is challenged. 
The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw the risk of unsustainable public finances for 
a stability-oriented monetary policy. That was why precautions were put in place to safeguard 
sound public finances and to protect monetary policy. They took the form of a prohibition of 
monetary  financing  of  government  deficits,  the  no  bail-out  clause  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. 
Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz wrote in an article in 1998: “The most compelling 
rationale  for  the  Stability  Pact  rests  on  the  need  to  buttress  the  no-bailout  rule  of  the 
Maastricht  Treaty”.  And,  sensing  what  might  happen,  the two  economists  continued:  “That 
need will be most pressing where debt problems place banking systems at risk and where 
bond market contagion is pervasive.” 
At  the  time,  it  was  assumed  that  by  constraining  governments’  ability  to  fiscally  stimulate 
demand – and by shifting monetary policy to the European level – governments would have 
no choice but to implement structural reforms, improve their supply side, and strengthen their 
potential for sustainable growth. 
It was also thought that the financial markets would enforce fiscal discipline. As it turned out, 
things did not exactly work out as expected. 
The  fiscal  rules  were  breached  numerous  times,  not  least  by  Germany  and  France.  In 
addition,  investors  made  hardly  any  distinction  between  the  bonds  of  individual  member 
states. 
From  1999  to  2007  the  average  difference  between  EMU  government  bonds,  excluding 
Germany, and German government bonds, for instance, was a mere 14 basis points which 
compares to an average spread of 190 basis points over the last five years. 
I will leave it for you to decide whether this was because investors turned a blind eye to the 
growing differences in economic fundamentals or because they never really bought the idea 
that the no bail-out clause would hold when the going got tough. 
Reforms at the national level 
3 
The title of the “sick man of Europe” often changes hands. Countries other than Germany are 
currently the reigning champions in this discipline. 
But  many  countries  have  made  substantial  efforts  to  cut  their  public  deficits.  Additionally, 
structural  reforms  aimed  at  removing  rigidities  in  product  and  labour  markets  are  now 
underway. 
A number of labour market reforms have been introduced to foster employment and reduce 
adjustment costs during economic downswings. According to the OECD indicators for labour 
market  rigidity,  the  stressed  countries  have  made  noticeable  progress  in  this  area.  In 
addition, the retirement age has been raised as well. 
Product  market  rigidities  that  weaken  competition,  produce  regulatory  red  tape  and  inhibit 
growth are also being addressed. And according to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report, 
progress has been made in this regard as well: Portugal, Italy, and Spain have climbed up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the ranking ladder by 17, 13, and 10 positions respectively over the last four years. Greece 
has even moved up 37 positions. 
Current  accounts  in  the  deficit  countries  have  improved  –  not  only  because  of  shrinking 
imports,  but  also  because  of  expanding  exports.  The  latter  has  been  supported  by 
decreasing unit labour costs. 
Spain  has  markedly  improved  its  price  competitiveness  through  lower  unit  labour  costs. 
Currently, unit labour costs are 6½ % below their pre-crisis level,  while they have risen by 
10 % in the euro area as a whole. 
In the stressed countries, factors of production are being reallocated to sectors with a strong 
focus on exports. The construction sector in Ireland accounted for over half of the decrease 
in aggregate employment; in Spain, Italy and Portugal, it accounted for around two-fifths. In 
industry, by contrast, either far fewer jobs have been cut or – as in Ireland – new jobs have 
recently been created. 
Thanks  to  improved  competitiveness,  Spanish  exports  have  risen  by  8 %  over  the  past 
12 months. Since the cyclical trough in 2009, exports have even risen by more than 50 %, 
with intermediate goods showing particularly strong growth. 
Overall,  thanks  to  the  reform  efforts  made  so far,  the  underlying  conditions  in  most  of the 
periphery countries are already significantly better than they were before the crisis. Progress 
has been uneven, though, and further reforms are needed. 
To  address  the  problem  of  very  high  unemployment,  the  IMF  recommends  more 
decentralised wage setting and the introduction of greater flexibility at the firm level to adapt 
wages, working hours and employment to the economic situation, which might also be a way 
forward for Spain. 
Overcoming the crisis is still an uphill struggle; if you don’t go forwards, you go backwards. 
With regard to reforms, governments therefore have to keep the pedal to the metal. 
However,  is  it  a  German  central  banker’s  task  to  call  for  structural  reforms  and  budget 
consolidation in other euro-area countries? 
Given  the  important  role  that  sustainable  public  finances  and  highly  productive  member 
states play in buttressing a stability-oriented monetary policy, and given that the Eurosystem 
has bought time for national action, I don’t think that bringing to mind the pledges that were 
made  to  embrace  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  constitutes  meddling  in  national 
affairs. 
In the euro area, we share a common currency, which means that a lack of reform in one 
country has implications for the euro area as a whole and for the stability of our monetary 
union. 
While adjustment has to happen primarily in the deficit countries, countries running a current 
account surplus, such as Germany, face challenges as well, as I have outlined before. Last 
Sunday’s victory in the football World Cup should not blind us to reality, either. As Gideon 
Rachman  wrote  in  a  Financial  Times  comment:  “Germany  is  undoubtedly  going  through  a 
golden moment – on and off the football-field – but there are reasons for fearing that it will 
prove all too momentary.” 
In any case, deliberately weakening the competitiveness of Germany’s export sector would 
harm, rather than benefit, the stressed countries’ economies. We should bear in mind that 
German  exports  contain  imported  intermediate  inputs  from  other  euro-area  countries 
amounting to 9 % of the overall added value. 
If Germany were to accept the economic advice to excessively boost its wages in order to 
stimulate domestic demand, it would harm employment in Germany and, as a consequence, 
the economic situation in the entire euro area as simulation results show. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Despite this, it is clear that against the background of Germany’s strong cyclical position and 
the tight labour market, wages will rise faster than in the rest of the euro area. We expect 
effective wages to rise more than 3 % this year and next year. 
Strengthening EMU’s institutional architecture 
4 
However,  when  it  comes  to  taking  action  at  the  European  level,  the  challenges  facing 
monetary union are also considerable. 
The  safeguards  originally  put  in  place  for  the  stability  of  monetary  union,  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact and the no bail-out clause, failed to prevent the crisis. As I have already pointed 
out,  there  are  additional  macroeconomic  imbalances  which  likewise  pose  a  threat  to  the 
stability of the euro area: a steady loss of competitiveness, persistent current account deficits 
and high levels of private debt. 
Measures to address these deficiencies, such as the strengthened Stability and Growth Pact, 
the Fiscal Compact and macroeconomic surveillance, have been implemented. I will come 
back to this in a minute. 
Ultimately, the risk of contagion between countries was also underestimated when monetary 
union was established. In response to the crisis, rescue mechanisms such as the EFSF and 
ESM were put in place, and they did manage to contain the fallout somewhat. 
But  at  the  same  time,  the  rescue  mechanisms  have  weakened  the  principle  of  individual 
responsibility, as fiscal responsibility has essentially remained national, while liabilities have 
been  partially  mutualised.  In  other  words:  the  balance  between  liability  and  control  has 
become lopsided. Yet I believe that this balance is fundamental to the stability of Europe’s 
monetary union. 
But  how  do  we  restore  that  balance,  and  put  monetary  union  on  a  more  solid  footing?  In 
principle, there are two ways: first, by creating a genuine fiscal union, or second, by making 
the principle of individual responsibility work. 
The first option, a genuine fiscal union, would require the member states to relinquish their 
fiscal sovereignty and cede it to the European level. In such a setting, the mutualisation of 
future liabilities would be consistent. This step would necessitate changes to the European 
treaties and amendments to national constitutions. 
In  Germany,  such  a  leap  towards  more  political  integration  used  to  be seen  as  inevitable. 
Addressing  the  Bundestag  in  1991,  Helmut  Kohl,  for  example,  remarked  that  “the  idea  of 
sustaining economic and monetary union over time without political union is a fallacy”. But 
judging by the reluctance of governments and electorates to let Brussels have a say in fiscal 
matters, this avenue seems to be blocked, at least for the foreseeable future. 
This leaves us with the second option, making the principle of individual responsibility work 
better. 
Since  public  debt  in  one  country  has  negative  spillover  effects  on  other  countries  in  a 
monetary  union,  a  set  of  fiscal  rules  is  required,  even  if  the  principle  of  individual 
responsibility  works.  Thus,  the  stiffening  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Fiscal 
Compact  were  steps  in  the  right  direction.  But  the  mere  existence  of  these  rules  will  not 
suffice. 
The question of how effective these changes will be can best be summed up by the proverb 
“the  proof  of the  pudding  is  in the  eating”  which  is  often  attributed to the  Spanish  novelist 
Cervantes because it is cited in a widespread English translation of Don Quixote. However, 
in the Spanish original you read “y si no, al freír de los huevos lo verá”, meaning something 
like “you will see it when you fry the eggs”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In other words, it is not yet clear whether the new rules do really bite. Strict and consistent 
application of the stiffened rules is therefore important. Here, the Commission has a special 
responsibility. 
Metaphorically speaking, we need to make sure that the Commission does not go beyond its 
role as a referee and move the goalposts mid-game. 
In this regard, some doubts are warranted, as is evident from the recent debate surrounding 
a flexible interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact, which was reformed less 
than three years ago, grants a great deal of discretionary scope. 
Moreover,  there  is  a  risk  that  recent  decisions  by  the  European  Council  will  provide  even 
more of a pretext for lax interpretation. However, an excessively generous interpretation of 
this leeway would certainly undermine the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
It was only last week when Mario Draghi warned: “To unwind the consolidation that has been 
achieved,  and  in  doing  so  to  divest  the  rules  of  credibility,  would  be  self-defeating  for  all 
countries.” 
And let us not forget: in the medium term, the Pact stipulates balanced or close to balance 
budgets. The 3 % mark that is frequently used as a yardstick is therefore a ceiling and not 
intended to be a regular TARGET. This is, incidentally, also true of the 60 % debt ratio that 
almost all euro countries breach. 
A look in the rear-view mirror shows how poorly the fiscal rules have worked as a speed limit. 
Since the introduction of the euro, the economically important member states of France and 
Italy  have  exceeded  the  upper  public  deficit  limit  of  3 %  of  GDP  in  nine  out  of  15  years. 
Germany,  meanwhile,  has  had  seven  “entries  in  the  class  register”.  And  as  for  2014,  we 
expect six out of 18 countries to exceed the limit. 
In  the  long  run,  consolidation  does  not  inhibit  growth;  rather,  it  is  a  precondition  for 
sustainable growth. More debt is not a prerequisite for successful structural reform. Quite the 
opposite is true: sound public finances are a crucial element of a successful reform strategy. 
Any  attempt  to  trade  off  reforms  against  higher  structural  deficits  would  pave  the  way  for 
budgetary arbitrariness, undermining the credibility of the rules. Judging by past experience, 
it is clear to me that it will take more than simply stiffening the rules to enforce the principle of 
individual responsibility. 
Essentially, this principle requires sovereigns, banks and investors to bear the consequences 
of their decisions. Juergen Donges wrote in a recent comment: “The principal of individual 
responsibility includes the possibility of bank and sovereign insolvencies.” 
The BRRD and the Single Resolution Mechanism will allow banks to be resolved in a more 
orderly manner. However, in terms of restructuring sovereign debt, little progress has been 
made so far. 
The  principal  of  individual  responsibility  requires  that  it  is  primarily  up  to  the  respective 
government and its citizens to come up with the revenue required to repay public debt. This 
holds, in particular, since high levels of public debt often go hand in hand with substantial 
private assets. 
But it also implies that the risk of non-repayment ultimately lies with investors, since they are 
the ones who reap the return when things go well. And if the fiscal limit has been reached for 
real,  public  debt  will  need  to  be  restructured  without  posing  a  systemic  threat  to  financial 
stability. 
The  introduction  of  collective  action  clauses  in  sovereign  bonds  was  a  first  step  in  that 
direction.  But  more  steps  are  needed.  The  Bundesbank  has  put  forward  a  proposal  for 
sovereign  bonds  to  include  an  automatic  maturity  extension  of  three  years  in  case  a 
sovereign needs to make use of the European rescue mechanisms. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This automatic maturity extension  would allow the sovereign in question to tackle its fiscal 
challenges  while  preventing  investors  from  bolting.  Liability  and  control  would  be  brought 
better into balance. That would reduce the amount of official financial support, and buy time 
to figure out whether the problem is one of temporary illiquidity or insolvency. 
But  ultimately,  all  these  questions  boil  down  to  the  quip  by  American  economist  Allan 
Meltzer: “Capitalism without failure is like religion without sin. It doesn’t work.” 
For the above proposals to work, we need to make sure that the restructuring of both banks 
and sovereign debt is possible without bringing down the financial system as a whole. At the 
moment, this is perceived as an unpredictable risk. 
What do we need to do to make this risk manageable? 
At the core of the problem lies what is now known as the sovereign-bank nexus. In the crisis, 
this  sovereign-bank  nexus  developed  into  a  vicious  circle:  Tottering  banks  and  teetering 
sovereigns lean towards each other for support, but are in fact pushing each other over. 
If a large bank or one which is strongly interconnected with other banks runs into difficulties, 
this can pose a threat to the stability of the entire financial system. The state then often has 
no other option but to step in if it wants to prevent a meltdown of the real economy. To quote 
the  ESRB’s  Advisory  Scientific  Committee:  “Banks’  liabilities  are  taxpayers’  contingent 
liabilities.” 
As a result, necessary rescues can become a huge burden for government finances. This is 
what happened in Ireland, where the need to prop up the financial system pushed the public 
debt  ratio  up  by  nearly  30  percentage  points.  Conversely,  weak government positions  can 
destabilise banks – directly through their exposure to sovereign bonds, and indirectly through 
worsening macroeconomic conditions. This was the case in Greece. 
How can we break this “doom loop”? 
The  strengthened  Basel  III  capital  rules  are  a  first  step  in  that  direction,  as  they  increase 
capital buffers and thus the capacity of banks to absorb losses. The banking union, with its 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), is another such step. Strict and stringent supervision 
ensures that tough rules are applied equally to all. 
The SSM is important for severing the link between banks and sovereigns. But to make sure 
that banks cannot pass on the consequences of their actions to the public, more is needed. 
An  effective  recovery  and  resolution  mechanism  including  a  bail-in  regime  that  clearly 
assigns how losses are distributed augments the SSM. 
Shareholders  and  creditors  should  be  first  in  line  to  absorb  losses.  It  is  therefore  to  be 
welcomed  that  the  Directive  establishing  a  framework  for  the  recovery  and  resolution  of 
failing  banks  (BRRD)  and  the  regulation  creating  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  have 
been agreed upon. 
The  sovereign-bank  nexus  works  both  ways,  however.  We  also  have  to  make  sure  that 
worsening public finances do not infect the financial system. 
The banking union still has a sovereign virus, as Daniel Gros from the Centre for European 
Policy Studies once quipped. To strengthen the banking union’s immune system, we need to 
put an end to the preferential treatment afforded to sovereign debt. 
At  present,  sovereign  bonds  are  treated  by  European  regulators  as  being  risk-free,  even 
though recent history has taught us that the opposite is true: sovereign bonds are not risk-
free assets. Hence, sovereign bonds should be adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to 
individual sovereign debt should be capped, as is already the case for private debt. 
These  changes  might  trigger  substantial  repercussions,  but  they  would  be  manageable  if 
they  were  phased  in  over  a  transitional  period  –  which  would  undoubtedly  need  to  be 
granted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Despite these repercussions the changes would be worth because they would make banks 
more  resilient  if  the  fiscal  position  of  the  respective  sovereign  were  to  deteriorate.  And  it 
would bring spreads more into line with the underlying risk, thus sending a disciplining signal 
to the sovereign. 
At  the  current  juncture  when  it  comes  to  sovereign  bonds,  banks  all  too  often  seem  to 
neglect this principle of risk diversification. In many cases, European banks hold bonds from 
one  sovereign  only  –  their  home  country.  During the  crisis, many  banks,  particularly  weak 
ones, used the low refinancing costs to buy even more sovereign debt; they made a sort of 
“carry trade”. 
Between end-November 2011 and end-May 2014, Spanish banks expanded their holdings of 
Spanish government debt securities by 74 %, from Euro165 billion to Euro288 billion. 92 % of 
Spanish banks’ euro-area sovereign portfolios are domestic. 
Only Italian, Greek and Slovakian banks are even more home-biased. However, it is the high 
level  of  undiversified  sovereign  exposures  which  makes  sovereign  default  a  potentially 
systemic event. 
The role of monetary policy 
5 
Consistently  applying  the  stiffened  rules  and  putting  an  end  to  the  preferential  treatment 
afforded to sovereign debt will be instrumental in strengthening the stability of our monetary 
union. So will the banking union. 
Currently,  much  of  the support  provided  to  the whole  structure  hinges on  one  pillar  alone: 
monetary policy. But this can only work for so long; monetary policy has already done a lot to 
absorb the economic consequences of the crisis, but it cannot resolve the crisis. 
There is still truth in what Wim Duisenberg, the first President of the ECB, once said: “Don’t 
ask for monetary policy to perform tricks it cannot deliver.” Therefore, the best contribution 
the Eurosystem can make to a lasting resolution of the crisis is to fulfil its mandate: that of 
maintaining price stability. 
The Eurosystem’s crisis measures have helped prevent the crisis from escalating. However, 
some of these measures have, as I have repeatedly pointed out, taken the Eurosystem to the 
outer  edge  of  its  mandate.  Meanwhile,  the  comprehensive  measures  agreed  by  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  in  June  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  be  compared  with  the  crisis 
measures taken two or three years ago. 
The current measures do not provide for individual countries’ liability risks to be taken onto 
the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The task now is to prevent an excessively long period of 
low inflation. Because that could paralyse the euro area’s economy. 
Governor  Linde  will  certainly  confirm  that  the  June  decision  was  preceded  by  much  soul-
searching  as  to  how  best  to  proceed. These measures  are  also  associated  with  risks  and 
side-effects, which we would be wrong to play down. 
In the long term, the ultra-loose monetary policy poses risks to financial stability. There is a 
danger  of  exaggerations  on  the  asset  and  real  estate  markets  –  just  think  of  the  hunt  for 
yield. 
Low  interest  rates  also  ease  the  pressure  on  governments  to  vigorously  tackle  their 
countries’  problems.  There  is  a  danger  that  the  low  interest  rates  will  be  used  not  to 
consolidate budgets, but to finance additional spending. 
This  is  why  the  Governing  Council  so  insistently  calls  for  sound  public  finances  as  a 
prerequisite  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  Or  to  say  it  with  the  words  of  Mervyn 
King, the former governor of the Bank of England: “Central banks are often accused of being 
obsessed  with  inflation.  This  is  untrue.  If  they  are  obsessed  with  anything,  it  is  with  fiscal 
policy.” 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So it is particularly important to make it quite clear now that the Eurosystem will not put off a 
necessary  increase  in  central  bank  interest  rates  out  of  consideration  for  public  finances. 
Looking at the euro area, I would therefore say that monetary policy has done its bit towards 
maintaining price stability. 
Conclusion 
6 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
The  crisis  has  laid  bare  shortcomings  at  the  national  level  as  well  as  weaknesses  in  the 
monetary union’s institutional architecture. 
Repairs  at  the  national  level  have  seen  considerable  progress,  though  there  is  still  a  long 
way to go. Like in a marathon, the second half of the course always feels tougher than the 
first – and one major challenge is to not give in to the growing reform fatigue. 
But at this point, the weaknesses in EMU’s architecture probably pose a more fundamental 
challenge. The balance between liability and control has got out of kilter. We need to regain 
that balance if we are to put EMU on a more solid footing. 
Since a genuine fiscal union is not on the cards – and to me, it does not seem to be for the 
foreseeable future – we need to make the principle of individual responsibility work. But we 
also need to put an end to the preferential treatment afforded to sovereign debt in order to 
immunise the financial system against sovereign default. 
Finally, monetary policy must not allow itself to be misappropriated for fiscal policy purposes. 
Otherwise it cannot fulfil its mandate, which is price stability. 
And now I am looking forward to hearing your views on this matter. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
