Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Results of the National Risk 
Assessment on money laundering and terrorist financing 
Speech by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism  Financing 
(IFCTF) 2014, Kuala Lumpur, 8 October 2014. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here today to discuss with all of you the results of the National 
Risk Assessment on money laundering and terrorist financing (or the NRA). First, allow me to 
thank the Compliance Officers Networking Group (CONG) and the Asian Institute of Finance 
(AIF) for organising this conference and inviting me to this morning session. 
I also would like to extend my special appreciation to Mr. Roger Wilkins, the President of the 
Financial  Action  Task  Force  (or  FATF)  for  delivering  his  keynote  address  and  to  the 
delegates from FATF namely  Mr. Rick McDonell, the Executive Secretary of FATF, Mr Liu 
Zhengming  and  Mr  Young-Han  Byun,  members  of  the  Steering  Committee  of  FATF  for 
attending this morning session. It is an honour to have with us Mr Wilkins and delegates from 
FATF, and to get an update on the latest development on AML/CFT directly from the FATF 
President.  Mr  Wilkins  and  the  delegates  are  in  Malaysia  as  part  of  the  FATF  high  level 
mission  to  meet  the  senior  Ministers,  government  officials  and  key  agencies  such  as  the 
Royal  Malaysia  Police, 
the  Attorney  General’s  Chambers,  Malaysia  Anti-Corruption 
Commission, Royal Malaysia Custom and the Inland Revenue Board to assess the level of 
the country’s commitment in implementing the FATF standards to combat money laundering, 
financing of terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As the Competent 
Authority  under  the  AMLATFA,  we  appreciate  the  opportunity  given  by  the  FATF  to 
demonstrate our commitment in ensuring that our AML/CFT regime is effective. 
This International Financial Crime and Terrorism Financing (or IFCTF) Conference is the 6th 
public and private partnership initiatives conference conducted by CONG and the AIF. In the 
past  5  conferences,  important  building  blocks  have  been  put  in  place  to  raise  awareness, 
develop understanding and nurture the commitment from the financial industry on pertinent 
areas in contributing to an effective anti-money laundering and counter financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT)  in  Malaysia.  As  we  are  aware,  an  effective  AML/CFT  regime  requires  strong 
collaboration  and  mutual  trust  between  the  public  and  the  private  sectors.  Therefore,  this 
conference  provides  the  value  added  platform  for  the  regulators,  supervisors,  industry 
players,  government  agencies  and  the  public  to  build  trust  and  greater  understanding  on 
latest development and initiatives, key issues and regulatory expectations on AML/CFT. As I 
understand  from  the  organiser,  this  year’s  conference  has  a  fairly  diverse  audience 
comprising more than 400 participants from the financial sector, government agencies and 
the public including participants from other countries. This reflects the strong level of interest 
and commitment by all parties involved in AML/CFT. 
Money laundering is a serious global problem. At the global level, the International Monetary 
Fund  (or  the  IMF)  estimated  the  extent  of  money  laundering  to  be  at  2%  to  5%  of  global 
GDP. According to the United Nation Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), this translated to 
800 billion to 2 trillion US dollars in current GDP. Whilst the UNODC acknowledged that the 
margin  between  those  figures  is  huge,  even  at  the  lower  estimate  it  underlines  the 
seriousness of the problem and the devastating impact that it would bring to any country. 
In  Malaysia,  for  the  year  of  2011  and  2012,  the  law  enforcement  agencies  investigated 
serious  crimes  involving  a  total  amount  of  RM13.1  billion.  This  is  the  amount that  has the 
potential to be laundered through our system. We recognized that the actual extent of money 
laundering is difficult to measure. As it is widely acknowledged internationally, for every 10 
crimes committed, only one will get reported. Certain types of crime may not be reported, let 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
alone be investigated. For example, in the case of corruption, if both the giver and taker are 
willing parties, the case will not be reported unless there are reports from the third party. 
The  growth  in  international  trade,  inter-linkages  of  the  global  financial  system  and 
advancement  in  technology  have  presented  both  the  risks  and  opportunity  to  the  private 
sectors. From the business perspective, this development provides for greater access to the 
wider global market. From the money laundering perspective, this also means that criminals 
have greater means and tools to launder their illegal proceeds into a form which appears to 
be legal. Using the tools provided via the advancement in technology such as the internet 
banking  and  wire  transfers,  these  proceeds  could  subsequently  be  transferred  out  and 
layered into another transactions either in Malaysia or abroad. 
Changes in the business and economic landscape present a challenge to law enforcement 
agencies, financial regulators and supervisors. To ensure that we are effective in protecting 
the  financial  system  and  the  broader  economy  from  the  threats  of  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing, cooperation and collaboration is not an option but a vital requirement. In 
this  regard,  there  must  be  strong  working  partnerships  between  all  the  law  enforcement 
authorities, regulators, supervisors and the private sectors. Without that, our efforts will be 
futile. 
In  terms  of  the  legal  framework,  concerted  efforts  have  been  taken  to  ensure  that  our 
AML/CFT law and policies are comprehensive. On this note, I am happy to inform that the 
main law governing the AML/CFT has been passed by the Parliament and gazetted into a 
law  on  29  August  this  year.  The  amended  law  is  now  known  as  “Anti-Money  Money 
Laundering, Anti-Terrorist Financing and Proceeds of Unlawful Activities Act 2001” and has 
come into effect on 1 September this year. 
As for the private sector, particularly the financial institutions and key gatekeepers such as 
lawyers, changes brought about in the operating environment demands greater need for the 
private sectors to be more vigilance in fulfilling their AML/CFT obligations. Compliance with 
AML/CFT law and regulations require high commitment from all levels of the staff, particularly 
the  front-liners  or  staff  facing  the  customers.  Around  the  world,  non-compliances  with 
AML/CFT obligations are seriously dealt with. At the international level, we have witnessed 
banks been penalised to the tune of billion of dollars for their failure to comply with AML/CFT 
law and regulations. In Malaysia, we have taken and will continue to take strong actions on 
financial  institutions  and  other  reporting  institutions  that  failed  to  comply  and  implement 
AML/CFT law and regulations. 
Another  key  element  for  an  effective  AML/CFT  eco-system  is  the  effective  financial 
intelligence and enforcement. The important source of financial intelligence come from the 
suspicious  transactions  reports  (or  the  STRs)  submitted  by  reporting  institutions  to  the 
financial intelligence unit (FIU) in Bank Negara Malaysia. Overall, the STR submissions had 
increased on average of 20% over the past 5 years. In terms of disclosure made to domestic 
law enforcement authorities (LEAs) and foreign FIUs, the numbers of proactive disclosures 
made  had  increased  steadily  over  the  past  3  years  with  an  average  increase  of  33% 
annually. Notably, the number of STRs disclosed in 2013 has also increased by three times 
as compared to the previous years. This is mainly contributed by disclosures relating to large 
network of subjects suspected to be involved in tax/duty evasion, scam/fraud activities and 
corruption.  Proactive  disclosures  made  to the  LEAs  had  also  recorded positive  feedbacks. 
Based on the feedback that we received from the LEAs, the STRs submitted have provided 
leads to their investigation and have resulted in the number of joint initiatives. More than 70% 
of  the  STRs  disclosed  to  the  enforcement  agencies  have  resulted  in  the  opening-up  of 
Enquiry Papers or Investigation Papers. The remaining of the information disclosed will be is 
used as part of the database for future investigation. 
Understanding  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist financing  risks  is  the foundation  to  which 
our  legal  framework,  preventive  measures,  financial  intelligence  and  enforcement,  and 
cooperation will be based on. Since 2012, the National Coordination Committee to Counter 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Money  Laundering  (NCC)  has  given  the  mandate  to  its  16  members  to  carry  out  a 
comprehensive assessment of our money laundering and terrorist financing risks. 
Background on National Risk Assessment (NRA) 
The  National  Risk  Assessment,  which  is  conducted  under  the  ambit  of  the  NCC,  seeks  to 
enhance  the  country’s  collective  understanding  of  the  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing  risks  facing  the  country  and  draws  upon  principles  set  out  under  the  FATF’s 
International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism & 
Proliferation.  The  FATF  Standards  requires,  amongst  others,  that  countries  and  financial 
institutions identify and assess their money laundering and terrorist financing risks and apply 
AML/CFT measures that commensurate with the identified risks. 
Therefore, the two main purposes of the NRA are: 
• 
Firstly: to identify, assess, and understand key money laundering / terrorist financing 
threats and vulnerabilities facing the country; and 
Secondly: to apply appropriate control measures to mitigate the risks. 
• 
The  identification  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  would  enhance  our 
understanding of the specific money laundering and terrorist financing threats in Malaysia, in 
particular the scale, sources and methods of money laundering and terrorist financing, and 
identify  vulnerabilities  and  risks  across  the  various  sectors.  This,  in  turn,  will  provide 
guidance to the authorities and reporting institutions in allocating and prioritizing AML/CFT 
resources efficiently and towards areas that present the highest risks and impact. Results of 
the NRA will also serve as input in applying the appropriate national AML/CFT strategy and 
policy response proportionate to the identified risks, such as, the AML/CFT Strategic Plan, 
amendments  to  the  law,  revision  of  guidelines/policies,  guidance  to  reporting  institutions, 
manpower review and budget allocation. 
Understanding  of  risks  form  the  main  principles  in  the  FATF  revised  standards  and 
methodology. Riskin the context of money laundering and terrorist financingis a function of 
three factors: threat, vulnerability and consequence, and the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks assessment involves making judgments about these 3 factors. 
A threat is anything, be it people, object or activity with the potential to cause harm to the 
country, society, or the economy. In the money laundering and terrorist financing context this 
includes criminals, their criminal activities, terrorist groups and their facilitators, their funds, 
as  well  as  past,  present  and  future  money  laundering  or  terrorist  financing  activities. 
Identifying  the  threat  is  an  essential  starting  point  in  assessing  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing risks. It provides an understanding of the nature, size and volume of the 
predicate  offences  and  proceeds  of  crimes  and  an  understanding  of  the  environment  in 
which these offences are committed and the proceeds are generated. 
The concept of vulnerabilities used in risk assessment comprises those factors that can be 
exploited by threat or that may support or facilitate its activities. In the money laundering and 
terrorist  financing  risks  assessment  context,  vulnerability  is  distinct  from  threat  because 
vulnerabilities are the factors that represent weaknesses in certain features of a country, or in 
the AML/CFT systems or controls. They may also include the features of a particular sector, 
a  financial  product  or  type  of  service  that  make  them  attractive  for  money  laundering  and 
terrorist  financing  purposes.  By  assessing  the  country’s  threats  and  vulnerabilities,  we  are 
actually  putting  the  risks  assessment  in  the  context  of  our  country’s  situation  in  terms  of 
materiality of these threats and vulnerabilities in our country’s structural elements, and other 
factors that form important features of our country. 
Consequence refer to the impact or harm that money laundering or terrorist financing may 
cause  and  includes  the  effect  of  the  underlying  criminal  and  terrorist  activity  on  financial 
systems  and  institutions,  as  well  as  the  economy  and  society  in  general.  Contrary  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
impact of other type of risks such as credit or market risk, the impact of money laundering 
and  terrorist financing risks  are  difficult  to quantify.  For the  purpose  of this  NRA,  we  used 
perception surveys conducted among reporting institutions, supervisors, regulators and LEAs 
as our sole data-point of assessing the impact or consequences. 
In summary, the key point in conducting the NRA, is that whatever the approach is, it should 
be able to distinguish the extent of different risks to assist with prioritising mitigation efforts. 
Findings of risk and more importantly the effectiveness of risk mitigation measures is key to 
our mutual evaluation reports and the ratings. 
Scope of the NRA 
Based  on  the  understanding  of  what  the  NRA  entails,  the  scope  of  this  NRA  is  broadly 
categorised under 2 broad elements; i.e. threats and vulnerabilities. In assessing threats, the 
extent of money laundering and types of prevailing crimes in Malaysia were analysed based 
on statistical data provided by law enforcement agencies and intelligence data from the FIU. 
The purpose of this analysis is to understand the extent and types of prevailing crimes that 
pose money laundering threat in Malaysia, gauge the level of the country’s attractiveness to 
money laundering, and identify methods and origins of the proceeds of crime, in particular 
whether the proceeds are generated domestically or abroad. 
In assessing vulnerabilities, the country’s features or systems, in particular the characteristics 
of Malaysia’s economic, legal and geographical environment that make Malaysia attractive to 
money laundering activities were assessed. Vulnerabilities in the financial and non-financial 
sectors and their attractiveness to money laundering arising from the structural risks inherent 
in the sector/industry, such as, the size of the industry, volume turnover, the products and 
services offered and the types of clients served were also assessed. The sectors assessed 
under  this  NRA  are  the  financial  institutions,  the  designated  non-financial  businesses  and 
professions  (DNFBPs),  the  non-profit  organizations  (NPOs)  and  the  legal  persons  (body 
corporate or unincorporated). 
Terrorism  Financing  is  assessed  on  its  own  and  broadly  covers  its  specific  indicators  of 
threats and vulnerabilities. Given its unique characteristics, factors associated with terrorist 
financing  are  vastly  different  from  those  of  money  laundering.  For  example,  the  source  of 
funds  for  money  laundering  activities  has  to  come  from  criminal  proceeds,  whereas  funds 
used  for  financing  of  terrorist  activities  may  come  from  either  criminal  activity  or  legal 
sources.  Another  difference  is  that,  transactions  associated  with  TF  may  be  conducted  in 
very small amounts, which when not viewed in the TF context could be the very transactions 
that  are  considered  as  low  money  laundering  risk.  Therefore  we  have  chosen  to  assess 
money laundering and terrorist financing risks separately. 
Methodology of the NRA 
The methodology used in conducting this NRA is loosely based on factors used in the World 
Bank’s  NRA  tool  and  the  Asia  and  Pacific  Group  on  Money  Laundering  (APG)  Strategic 
Implementation Planning Framework. The NRA is largely a combination of quantitative and 
qualitative assessment. It draws together statistical information from across key government 
ministries, supervisory and regulatory authorities (SRAs) and LEAs. Statistics on the mutual 
legal assistance requests received from other countries and the types of matters to which the 
requests relate to, and the financial intelligence requested or disclosed by the foreign FIUs 
are  used  as  indicators  as  to  the  level  of  foreign  proceeds  of  crime  being  laundered  in 
Malaysia.  This  is  complemented  by  qualitative  information  sources  such  as  perception 
surveys  involving  respondents  from  officers  of  the  LEAs,  reporting  institutions  and  foreign 
FIUs,  intelligence  insights,  independent  and  external  studies  and  public  information  on 
current  and  emerging  threats  to  form  a  consolidated  picture  of  the  country’s  money 
laundering and terrorism financing environment. The findings were then validated through a 
focus group involving subject matter experts from amongst the NCC members. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Result – Relationship between threats and vulnerabilities 
Based on the analysis and methodologies employed, our assessment concluded that there 
are  5  types  of  crimes  that  pose  high  money  laundering  risk  threat  to  the  country.  Those 
crimes are: 
• 
Fraud (which comprises fraud-related offences, for example cheating offences under 
the Penal Code, illegal investments schemes offences under the Financial Services 
Act, Capital Market and Services Act, Direct Sales and Anti-Pyramid Scheme Act, 
and Companies Act), 
Drugs trafficking, 
Corruption and bribery, 
Smuggling offences (including evasion of customs and excise duties), and 
Tax crimes. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Based  on  data  from  LEAs,  except  for  corruption  and  bribery,  the  number  of  investigation 
conducted and the amount involved in the investigation on these types of crimes are high. 
This finding is in line with the results of perception survey and feedback from other LEAs. It 
also conforms to various credible independent international and external reports. 
In  terms  of  vulnerability  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks,  sectors  that  are 
most  vulnerable  and  attractive  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  are  the 
banking and money services business in the financial sector and casino in the non-financial 
sector.  Key  factors  contributing  to  the  vulnerabilities  of  these  sectors  are  size  of  their 
institutions,  high  volume  of  transactions,  high  exposures  to  cash-based  transactions,  high 
geographical coverage, multiple channels of deliveries, and high exposures to cross-border 
transactions. Based on statistics, there are high numbers of STRs reported by and on these 
sectors,  and  there  are  also  high  numbers  of  investigation  carried  out  by  the  LEAs  on 
customers or transactions originated from these sectors. 
Vulnerabilities could also come from the country’s economic and geographical elements, as 
well as our legal framework. As a highly open economy, there are certain economic factors 
that contribute to the attractiveness of money laundering risk in the country such as the high 
integration  with  international  markets,  cash-based  economy,  high  existence  of  non-bank 
remittance  transfer,  exposure  to  international  trade,  high  percentage  of  informal  economy 
and large volume of physical movement of currency. 
Vulnerabilities 
the 
attractiveness of money laundering risk is the country’s long and porous border. In the case 
of drugs trafficking for example, Malaysia position that is close to the “Golden Triangle” and 
within the route of “Afghanistan Opium” make our country vulnerable to trafficking of drugs 
from these areas. In the case of human trafficking, our country’s proximity to conflict areas 
such as Myanmar, makes us vulnerable to smuggling of migrants and trafficking of persons 
from Rohingya areas. Although in most cases Malaysia is not the final destination, we are the 
favourite transit points for these refugees. 
The  NRA  highlights  the  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  faced  by  Malaysia, 
and  areas  that  warrant  more  resources  and  attention.  Some  of  the  targeted  mitigation 
measures undertaken by the authorities include: 
• 
Intensified  joint  investigation  efforts  by  the  LEAs  to  effectively  combat  money 
laundering and terrorist financing. This is reflected in the increased number of raids, 
arrests  and  prosecutions  related  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  and 
predicate offences; 
the  country’s  geographical  elements 
that  may  contribute 
to 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Another  effort  is  the  enhancement  of  the  structure  of  the  individual  LEAs,  which 
includes the formation of dedicated AML/CFT unit within the LEAs and increase in 
manpower focusing on money laundering and terrorist financing investigations; 
Another  response  by  the  government  is  the  amendment  to  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Anti-Terrorism  Financing  Act  2001  (AMLATFA)  which  is  aimed  at 
strengthening  Malaysia’s  AML/CFT  framework  against  criminal  activities.  The 
amendments  would  provide  clarity  on  reporting  obligations  so  that  preventive 
measures  can  be  implemented  more  effectively,  such  as  requirements  to  submit 
STRs related to terrorism financing, tipping off provision and CDD requirement; 
The  intensity  of  enforcement  actions  against  financial  institutions  that  failed  to 
comply  and  implement  AML/CFT  programs  is  also  increased.  In  2013  and  2014, 
BNM has compounded banks for various failures to implement effective compliance 
programs.  With  the  coming  into  force  of  the  amendments  to  the  AMLATFA  on  1 
September  2014,  the  maximum  penalty  for  various  provisions  was  increased.  For 
instance,  maximum  penalties  under  general  offence  have  been  increased  from 
RM250,000 to RM1 million. While for more serious offences such as tipping-off and 
opening of account in false name would trigger maximum penalties of RM3 million or 
imprisonment of 5 years or both. 
Targeted mitigation efforts also mean higher expectations on the reporting institutions. The 
reporting  institutions  are  expected  to  have  proper  policies  and  procedures  in  providing 
investigation supports to the LEAs and play proactive roles in deterring and detecting money 
laundering threats. For example, Bank Negara Malaysia and the Royal Malaysia Police are 
currently exploring the possibility of sharing the names of suspected mule account holders 
that facilitate illegal activities. This initiative aims to help the financial institutions to prevent 
their  account  facilities  from  being  misused  for  criminal  activities,  especially  by  account 
renting  syndicates.  Another  initiative  is  to  assist  financial  institutions  in  developing  and 
detecting suspicious activities related to high risk crimes. For this purpose, we are proposing 
for the establishment of working groups comprising the financial institutions and the LEAs in 
developing  red  flags  related  to  high  risk  crimes  identified  in  the  NRA,  including  terrorism 
financing. 
Before we move into what is expected of financial institutions with the understanding of the 
risk,  let  me  share  with  you  the  heat  map  of  the  threat  of  the  other  serious  crimes  in  the 
country. This classification is based on similar methodologies that I explained earlier. Based 
on that, the following crimes are classified as medium threats to money laundering situation 
in Malaysia: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling, although currently assessed as medium threat is 
also  seen  as  an  emerging  threat  for  Malaysia  as  this  criminal  activities  is  believed  to 
generate  substantial  proceeds  and  may  be  further  pursued  if  not  enough  enforcement 
actions are taken by the law enforcement agencies. If left unchecked, this type of crime may 
have  the  potential  to  pose  high  risk  threats  to  the  country  from  money  laundering 
perspective. 
The following crimes are classified as low threats from money laundering activities: 
• 
Organised Crimes 
Human Trafficking & Migrant Smuggling 
Forgery 
Theft and Robbery; and 
Counterfeiting of Currency 
Sexual Exploitation 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Arms Trafficking 
Counterfeiting and piracy of products 
Insider Trading and Market Manipulation 
Murder 
Environmental Crimes 
Extortion 
Kidnapping 
Sea Piracy 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Terrorism Financing threat is classified as medium risk taking into consideration the following 
factors: 
• 
• 
Insignificant number of terrorism and terrorism financing incidents in Malaysia 
Primary  groups  (such  as  Jemaah  Islamiah  (JI)  and  Kumpulan  Mujahidin  Malaysia 
(KMM) have been dismantled) 
Evidences so far indicate self-financing by individual terrorist. 
Fund Management Companies 
Unit Trust Companies 
Offshore Banks, given that they are not allowed to accept cash; and 
Non-Bank Deposit Taking Companies 
• 
Let us now look at the heat-map for vulnerabilities of Financial Sectors to the risk of money 
laundering. The findings identify the following sectors as Medium risk. Again, let me stress 
that this is looking at the inherent risk of the sector and not taking into consideration of the 
control measures put in place by such sector. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The following institutions are classified as low of money laundering risk: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
For the non-financial sectors, the following sectors are considered as medium to the risk of 
money laundering: 
Lawyers 
• 
• 
Offshore trust 
Real estate agents; and 
• 
• 
Trust companies 
And the following sectors are considered low to the risk of money laundering: 
• 
Stockbroking 
Leasing and Factoring 
Life Insurance 
Money Lenders 
Non-bank cards issuer 
E-money providers; and 
Development Financial Institutions. 
Gaming companies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Jewellers 
Accountants 
Pawn Brokers; and 
Notaries 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Besides looking at the vulnerabilities of the sectors that may be exploited or used as conduit 
to  launder  proceeds  of  crimes,  we  also  conducted  separate  assessment  on  money 
laundering risk posed by legal person (i.e. companies or legal entities that are established 
either  in  Malaysia  or  in  Labuan).  Based  on  the  assessment,  legal  entities  are  rated  as 
“medium  risk”. Taking  into  consideration  experiences from  the  investigations  conducted by 
the  LEAs,  there  are  various  instances  where  legal  entities  have  in  the  past  being  used  to 
facilitate laundering activities by the criminals. 
Similar  assessment  was  also  conducted  for  the  Non-Profit  Organisation  (or  the  NPO), 
especially from the perspective whether these NPOs are being used to facilitate financing of 
terrorism. Although, based on the LEAs investigations there are no known NPO involve in the 
terrorist financing activities, minimum supervision on the NPOs makes the sector vulnerable 
to be used by criminals or terrorist. 
The  NRA  on  its  own  has  no  meaning  unless  the  results  are  used  to  facilitate  greater 
understanding  among  all  stakeholders  involved,  including  the financial  institutions  to  better 
understand the money laundering and terrorist financing risks in their own sectors, as well as 
other  sectors  that  they  have  dealings  with.  This  will  allow  financial  institutions  to  better 
assess the adequacy of their internal AML/CFT controls in mitigating the risks identified and 
to strengthen these controls where necessary. As the country gathers its understanding of 
money laundering and terrorist financing risks through the NRA, similar expectations are also 
incumbent upon the financial institutions. 
The  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  identify,  assess  and  understand  the  money 
laundering and terrorist financing risks at the institution level and the Financial Institutions’ 
leadership  and  senior  management  need  to  be  involved  and  be  engaged  in  the  risk 
assessment  process.  The  institution’s  risk  level  assessment  can  be  leveraged  through 
thematic  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  assessment  conducted  at  by  the 
institution  or  periodic  reporting  by  compliance  department  such  as  updates  on  STRs 
submissions, investigation orders received or findings from internal auditors. By getting the 
leadership and senior management involved in the risk assessment process, the institution 
would  be  better  informed  in  making  business  decisions,  such  as  when  venturing  into  new 
markets,  services  or  geographical  areas,  especially  when  the  new  area  is  vulnerable  or 
attractive  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks.  In  addition,  having  a  complete 
understanding on the risks will assist the institution in allocating resources for the compliance 
function,  including  recruitments  of  competent  personnel  and  investment  into  management 
information system. 
The  communication  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  identified  is  equally 
important. The risks identified should be shared throughout the organization especially with 
key business units and the front liners. The risks identified shall also act as a guide in coming 
up with policies procedures and training needs requirements and its robustness for different 
business  units.  In  return,  the  business  units  should  be  able  to  provide  feedback  to  the 
compliance or risk management departments on any new or emerging risks that they face or 
encounter in their daily business operations. The feedback loop that exists would enable the 
institutions  to  keep  the  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  assessment  current 
and relevant. Finally, this in turn would be a source of valuable information to the authorities 
in conducting the national level money laundering and terrorist financing risks assessment. 
Comprehensive  understanding  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  should  be 
translated into a comprehensive risk controls and mitigation. This is key in applying a risk-
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
based approach in the implementation of preventive measures, where more focus should be 
channelled to high risk areas identified. The controls and measures should be applied across 
the  overall  compliance  program,  including  oversight  by  management,  customer  due 
diligence,  staff  trainings  and  suspicious  transactions  reporting.  Equally  important,  the  risk 
controls  and  mitigation  developed  should  be  executable  and  applied  religiously.  To 
complement  this,  the  policies  and  procedures  should  be  tested  and  monitored,  by 
independent parties to ensure its effectiveness and relevancy. 
Let  me  conclude  my  presentation  today.  The  NRA  is  an  important  tool  to  facilitate  our 
understanding  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  facing  the  country. 
Understanding of risks is important as it set the foundation upon which our AML/CFT regime 
is implemented. For an AML/CFT regime to be effective, it has to target the resources and 
AML/CFT initiatives towards areas that pose the greatest risks. 
At the end of the day, the test is on how good we are in achieving the ultimate objective of an 
effective  AML/CFT  regime.  That  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  and  the  broader 
economy are protected from threats of money laundering and the financing of terrorism and 
proliferation,  thereby  strengthening  financial  sector  integrity  and  contributing  to  safety  and 
security of the country. 
In relation to the Mutual Evaluation that will be undertaken from 13 to 25 November this year, 
I  wish  to  inform  that  some  of  you  will  be  called  to  meet  the  assessors  during  the  on-site 
assessment in November. The purpose of the meeting is for the assessors to assess how 
effectively  have  AML/CFT  measures  been  implemented  by  the  reporting  institutions.  We 
have identified several potential institutions as per the criteria given by the assessors. If your 
institution  is  being  selected,  you  will  receive  formal  notification  from  us  in  due  course.  Of 
course,  there  are  possibilities  that  the  assessors  may  request  to  meet  other  institutions 
during the on-site assessment. 
Malaysian  leadership  and  authorities  are  fully  committed  and  unrelenting  in  the  efforts  to 
address  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks.  For  the  country,  an  effective 
AML/CFT regime is critical to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Reduce the overall crime in the country; 
Increase government revenue and reduce leakages in the economy; 
Preserve the integrity and reputation of our financial system; 
Create  conducive  environment  for  businesses  and  investors,  and  support  the 
Government’s economic transformation agenda; and 
Strengthen  Malaysia’s  reputation  as  a  country  committed  to  combat  money 
laundering and terrorist financing. 
 On  that  final  note,  I  would  like  to  once  again  thank  CONG  and  AIF  for  organising  this 
conference. I wish all of you a successful and productive conference ahead. 
Thank you and Assalamualaikum. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
