  William C Dudley: Improving financial institution supervision – 
examining and addressing regulatory capture 
Testimony  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Protection  Subcommittee,  Washington  DC, 
21 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you 
for this opportunity to testify on the effectiveness of financial institution supervision and the 
issue of regulatory capture. 
In 2008 and 2009 our country faced its worst financial crisis since the  Great Depression. I 
mention those years as a touchstone for my remarks today. Despite the passage of time and 
an economy that is steadily improving, the financial crisis is hardly something that happened 
in the remote past. For the too many people who are still unemployed or underemployed, or 
who otherwise continue to struggle financially, it is living history. 
While  the  causes  of  the  crisis  remain  subject  to  debate,  it  is  undeniable  that  banking 
supervisors could have done better in their prudential oversight of the financial system. This 
conclusion raises two fundamental questions: 
• 
First, how can we improve the stability of the financial system? In other words, how 
can we make the financial system more resilient and productive? 
Second, how can we improve our supervision of financial institutions? 
• 
The Federal Reserve is working diligently to improve both stability and supervision. The two 
concepts  are  linked.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  made  significant 
changes  to  the  substance  and  process  of  supervision.  As  a  result,  the  financial  system  is 
unquestionably much stronger and much more stable now than it was five years ago. 
Substantive changes 
II. 
Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  redoubled  its  attention  to  bank  capital. 
Capital  is  the  financial  cushion  that  banks  hold  to  absorb  loss.1  It  provides  an  economic 
firebreak that helps prevent systemic stress from turning into a full-blown crisis. 
Before  the  crisis,  capital  requirements  were  too  low  and  inconsistent  across  jurisdictions. 
Moreover, too much of the capital held by banks was of poor quality, and their internal capital 
assessments  were  not  forward-looking.2  Since  the  crisis,  new  regulation  and  heightened 
supervision have increased both the quantity and the quality of equity capital at the largest 
financial institutions that we regulate and supervise. The Federal Reserve and other federal 
banking  regulators  implemented  so-called  “Basel  III”  international  capital  standards  in  July 
2013,  which  raised  the  minimum  ratio  of  common  equity  Tier  1  capital  to  risk-weighted 
assets.  Federal  regulation  also  now  requires  stricter  criteria  for  instruments  to  qualify  as 
                                                
1  
I  use  the  terms  “bank”  and  “financial  institution”  interchangeably,  but  note  that  the  two  terms  are  not 
synonymous in federal regulation. 
2   See Joint Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, “Regulatory Capital Rules: Regulatory Capital, Implementation of 
Basel III, Minimum Regulatory Capital Ratios, Capital Adequacy, Transition Provisions, and Prompt Corrective 
Action,” June 12, 2012, at 32. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  regulatory  capital  and  higher  risk  weights  for  many  classes  of  assets.  And  the  Federal 
Reserve mandated a new minimum supplementary leverage ratio that includes off-balance 
sheet  exposures  for  the  largest,  most  internationally  active  banking  organizations  and  a 
leverage surcharge for large U.S. banking organizations. 
In support of these new regulations, capital assessment has become a focus of supervision 
since the financial crisis. Examiners monitor capital reserves and put banks through periodic 
stress  tests  that  are  evaluated  on  a  cross-firm  basis.  This  has  been  one  of  the  great 
advancements of bank oversight following the crisis. These evaluations enable supervisors 
to assemble a composite assessment of the nation’s banking sector, which materially assists 
the Federal Reserve in its statutory mandate to promote financial stability.3  
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  mandates  supervisory  stress  tests  that  assess  whether  large  bank 
holding  companies  have  a  sufficient  level  of  capital  to  absorb  losses  during  adverse 
economic conditions.4 The Federal Reserve also conducts a capital planning exercise, called 
the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review or “CCAR.” This evaluation combines the 
quantitative  results  from  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  stress  tests  with  a  qualitative  assessment  of 
whether the largest bank holding companies have vigorous, “forward-looking capital planning 
processes that account for their unique risks.”5 The criteria for both sets of stress tests are 
dynamic and change in response to evolving risks. For example, past tests have assumed a 
sharp, sudden, and widespread drop in markets triggered by, say, a large Eurozone shock. 
The tests also evaluate market interconnectedness, including the risk of major counterparty 
default. 
To increase public transparency, the Federal Reserve now publishes the overall results of its 
stress tests. This helps rebuild confidence in the strength of the financial system. The most 
recent round of stress tests concluded in the first quarter of this year. In my view, the results 
were encouraging, although not uniformly satisfying. In general, “firms participating in CCAR 
have more than doubled their Tier 1 common capital since 2009, an increase of $500 billion 
of  additional,  high-quality  capital  in  the  U.S.  financial  system.”6  This  impressive  statistic 
notwithstanding, 
the 
30 participating  firms.  Four  of  those  five  firms  submitted  plans  that  raised  firm-specific, 
qualitative concerns. The remaining firm failed to meet a minimum quantitative requirement.7  
The consequences of failing to pass a stress test can be severe. If its capital plan has been 
rejected,  the  Federal  Reserve  may,  among  other  things,  restrict  a  bank  holding  company 
from paying or increasing dividends on its common stock or increasing any repurchase of its 
common  stock,  or  both.8  For  example,  as  a  result  of  this  year’s  CCAR,  Citigroup  was  not 
permitted  to  begin  a  new  common  stock  repurchase  program  or  to  increase  its  quarterly 
common stock dividend.9  
As a companion to improved capital, the Federal Reserve also assesses liquidity – that is, 
how quickly a bank can convert its assets into cash. Prior to the crisis, liquidity practices did 
not  generally  anticipate  the  possibility  of  severe  drops  in  the  prices  of  saleable  assets. 
the  Federal  Reserve  objected 
to  capital  plans 
five  of 
from 
                                                
3   See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. § 5365(a)(1). 
4   See 12 U.S.C. § 5365(i). 
5   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Press Release, October 23, 2014. 
6   Daniel Tarullo, “Stress Testing after Five Years,” Remarks at the Federal Reserve Third Annual Stress Test 
Modeling Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts, June 25, 2014. 
7   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014: 
Assessment Framework and Results, March 2014, at 7–8. 
8   See 12 C.F.R. §§ 225.8(c)(2) and (e)(2)(iv). 
9   See Citigroup, Inc., “Citi Statement on 2014 CCAR Results,” March 26, 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Following  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  imposed  new  liquidity  regulations,  including  the 
Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio. The objective of these new regulations is to require large 
firms to hold levels of liquid assets sufficient to protect against constraints on their funding 
during times of financial turmoil. We have also implemented liquidity stress test assessments 
for systemically important financial institutions. These assessments provide important insight 
into  the  adequacy  of  liquidity  positions  and  bank  preparedness  for  upcoming  regulatory 
standards. 
Beyond  capital  and  liquidity,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  increased  its  focus  on  risk 
management  practices at  the  largest  and most systemically  important financial  institutions. 
We learned from the crisis that risk management in the financial services industry had not 
always kept pace with changing market practices. We have responded in several ways. 
For  example,  we  have  paid  greater  supervisory  attention  to  corporate  governance.  We 
significantly  increased  the  depth  and  frequency  of  interaction  between  senior  supervisors 
from  the  Federal  Reserve  and  directors  and  executives  at  banks.  This  supplements  our 
ongoing assessment of management’s oversight of risk. Our review entails a critical analysis 
not  only  of  firm  policies,  procedures  and  limits,  but  also  of  the  quality  of  the  risk  reports 
escalated to senior management, the capabilities of the firm’s risk monitoring program, and 
the adequacy of control functions. 
We have also increased our enforcement activity for violations of law or unsafe or unsound 
conduct. Since 2009 the Federal Reserve has taken 36 public enforcement actions against 
institutions supervised by the New York Fed, which included $1.2 billion in fines. On top of 
this, five firms supervised by the New York Fed paid $1.3 billion into a qualified settlement 
fund  for  mortgage  borrowers,  and  the  same  five  institutions  were  required  to  provide  over 
$2 billion  in  other  foreclosure  prevention  assistance.  These  statistics  do  not  include  non-
public enforcement actions, including restrictions on the further growth of banks that do not 
have satisfactory risk management regimes. And, earlier this year, we assisted in consigning 
the concept of “too big to jail” to history when Credit Suisse and BNP Paribas pleaded guilty 
to criminal charges. I am gratified that the Attorney General and the United States Attorney 
for the Southern District of New York have acknowledged the work of the Federal Reserve in 
supporting our law enforcement partners.10  
The New York Fed has also devoted significant resources and attention to the reform of bank 
culture and conduct. Increased capital and liquidity are important tools to promote financial 
stability, but in the end a bank is only as trustworthy as the people who work within it. I have 
personally delivered a strong message that the culture of Wall Street is unacceptable.11 Bad 
conduct by bankers damages the public trust placed in banks. In my view, this loss of trust is 
so severe that it has become a financial stability concern. If bad behavior persists, it would 
not be unreasonable – and may even be inevitable – for one to conclude that large firms are 
too big and complex to manage effectively. 
Our nation’s largest financial institutions need to repair the loss of public trust in banks. This 
means a back-to-basics assessment of the purpose of banking, including duties owed to the 
public  in  exchange  for  the  privileges  banks  receive  through  their  bank  charters  and  other 
functions of law. Among these privileges are deposit insurance and access to a lender of last 
resort. 
                                                
10   See  U.S.  Department  of  Justice,  “BNP  Paribas  Agrees  To  Plead  Guilty  To  Conspiring  To  Process 
Transactions Through The U.S. Financial System For Sudanese, Iranian, And Cuban Entities Subject To U.S. 
Economic Sanctions,” June 30, 2014. 
11   See William Dudley, “Ending Too Big to Fail,” Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, New York City, 
November  7,  2013;  William  Dudley,  “Enhancing  Financial  Stability  by  Improving  Culture  in  the  Financial 
Services Industry,” Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services 
Industry, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, October 20, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  As part of this effort, I have proposed four specific reforms to curb incentives for illegal and 
unduly  risky  conduct  at  banks.  First,  banks  should  extend  the  deferral  period  for 
compensation to match the timeframe for legal liabilities to materialize – perhaps as long as 
a  decade.  Second,  banks  should  create  de  facto  performance  bonds  wherein  deferred 
compensation  for  senior  managers  and  material  risk  takers  could  be  used  to  satisfy  fines 
against the firm for banker misbehavior. Third, I have urged Congress to enact new federal 
legislation  creating  a  database  that  tracks  employees  dismissed  for  illegal  or  unethical 
behavior. Fourth, I have requested that Congress amend the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
to  impose  a  mandatory  ban  from  the  financial  system  –  that  is,  both  the  regulated  and 
shadow banking sectors – for any person convicted of a crime of dishonesty while employed 
at a financial institution. 
Supervisory process 
III. 
In  tandem  with  our  attention  to  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk  management,  we  have  made 
important changes to the process of supervision. 
For starters, the Federal Reserve now makes its most consequential supervisory decisions 
on a system-wide level through the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee or 
“LISCC.”  The  committee  comprises  representatives  across  professional  disciplines  from 
several Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The New York Fed supplies only three 
of  its  16  members.  LISCC  sets  supervisory  policy  for  the  15  largest,  most  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  in  our  country  and  develops  innovative,  objective,  and 
quantitative  methods  for  assessing  these  firms  on  a  comparative  basis.  LISCC  also 
coordinates  the  supervision  of  the  largest  supervised  institutions  through  its  Operating 
Committee,  which  reviews  and  approves  supervisory  plans  for  exams,  receives  regular 
updates  on  major  supervisory  issues,  and  makes  material  supervisory  decisions  regarding 
matters that affect the firms’ safety and soundness. In this respect, the Operating Committee 
provides an important safeguard against regulatory capture by ensuring that no one person 
or Reserve Bank has the power to make a final decision on a matter of significance. 
Another procedural change is our increased application of cross-firm, horizontal review. This 
technique enables peer-to-peer comparison of banks, facilitates a better assessment of the 
overall health of the financial system, and safeguards against regulatory capture by providing 
insight from across the Federal Reserve System. The analysis is done not only at the level of 
the Board of Governors – for example, through CCAR and Dodd-Frank stress testing – but 
also within the New York Fed. We hold weekly discussions among senior supervisory and 
risk officers to identify developing concerns that may pose a systemic risk. A current subject 
of horizontal analysis is leveraged loans – specifically, whether lax underwriting practices for 
such loans could pose a significant risk to financial stability. 
In addition, we have reorganized the supervision group at the New York Fed in a number of 
ways  that  promote  unbiased  analysis  and  professional  objectivity.  Many  of  these  changes 
directly reflect the recommendations in a 2009 report that I commissioned from David Beim, 
which was featured in the recent This American Life program about supervision at the New 
York Fed. For example: 
• 
Over the last five years, we have reassigned some of our most senior personnel to 
front-line  positions  at  the  largest  supervised  institutions.  We  also  recruited 
experienced executives with financial backgrounds from outside the New York Fed. 
The  purpose  of  these  personnel  changes  was  to  position  leaders  with  the 
confidence  and  depth  of  professional  experience  necessary  to  challenge  the 
leadership of supervised financial institutions. 
We increased training, especially for more senior examiners. Since 2011, we have 
required enhanced training for senior supervisory officers on corporate governance, 
business  strategies,  and  risks.  Our  goal  is  to  deliver  stronger  and  clearer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
         supervisory  views  to  boards  of  directors  and  senior  management.  Also  since  that 
year,  we  have  offered  a  customized  management  development  program  for 
managers in the supervision group. 
We  hired  more  risk  specialists  and  created  the  role  of  business-line  specialist  to 
assess the risks and vulnerabilities in firms’ business models. 
We continue to require that examiners rotate to another institution after three to five 
years.  This  tenure  allows  enough  time  to  gain  an  understanding  of  a  firm  without 
sacrificing examiner independence. 
We have taken concrete steps to encourage examiners to speak up, which we view 
as  a  core  competency.  For  example,  we  evaluate  examiners  on  their  level  of 
engagement with colleagues and their willingness to share insights. 
We  created  programs  to  encourage  peer  recognition  of  good  ideas,  including 
funding for new supervision ideas proposed and voted on by supervisory staff. 
We increased the opportunities for feedback to senior managers, including the head 
of supervision, in addition to other channels already provided by the New York Fed. 
Among other improvements, we conduct regular town halls and provide a standing, 
on-line  forum  as  a  device  to  funnel  questions  to  group  leaders.  In  both  settings, 
questions and answers are offered in an open, transparent manner. 
And  we  require  examination  teams  to  spend  more  time  at  New  York  Fed 
headquarters and less time “in the field.” Additional time at headquarters promotes 
cross-firm  discussion  and  direct  communication  between  senior  managers  and 
examiners. For example, we offer a seminar series at which group leaders discuss 
key issues in supervision with our supervision staff. 
Each  and  together,  these  improvements  to  the  substance  and  process  of  supervision 
contribute to financial stability by providing greater insight into bank resiliency and risk. But 
these enhancements are not self-executing. They depend on the hundreds of examiners who 
are  dedicated  professionals  working  in  the  public  interest.  Our  examiners  fulfill  their 
obligations  with  considerable  care,  mindful  of  the  stakes  to  Main  Street  when  something 
goes wrong on Wall Street. I am grateful for their efforts. 
Reasonable expectations 
IV. 
Before  concluding,  let  me  offer  a  broader  view  of  what  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  expect 
from  prudential  supervision.  Very  briefly,  I  submit  that  supervision  should  be  fair, 
conscientious, and effective. 
Fair supervision means that the rules are applied consistently across the firms we supervise. 
We all need to know the rules and follow the same rule book. It also entails a commitment to 
independence from business or political influence, as envisioned by the Federal Reserve Act 
one hundred years ago. 
Conscientious  supervision  means  we  must  be  committed  to  sustained  and,  if  necessary, 
radical self-improvement. The Beim report is an example of our willingness to commission 
and accept self-critical analysis and our commitment to improve. But we cannot stop there. 
To  this  end,  we  will  be  working  with  the  Board  of  Governors  on  its  upcoming  review  of 
whether  the  LISCC  Operating  Committee  receives  information  that  is  sufficient  to  reach 
sound supervisory decisions. One subset of this system-wide inquiry will analyze regulatory 
capture – specifically, how divergent views are presented to decision makers at the Board. 
The review is expected to take several months. 
Effective  supervision  means  tough  supervision  and  demands  a  focus  on  large  banks  that 
pose systemic risk. Bank supervisors cannot prevent all fraud or illegal conduct or forestall all 
undesirable  behavior  in  large,  complex  financial  institutions.  But  we  can  help  create  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  resilient,  less  complex,  and  better  managed  organizations  that  promote,  rather  than 
undermine, financial stability. 
Conclusion 
V. 
The  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  improve  its  supervision  and  regulation  of  financial 
institutions. We understand the risks of doing our job poorly and of becoming too close to the 
firms we supervise. We work hard to avoid these risks and to be as fair, conscientious, and 
effective as possible. Of course, we are not perfect. We cannot catch or correct every error 
by a financial institution, and we sometimes make mistakes. But in my view, a good measure 
of the effectiveness of supervision is the improved strength and stability of banks since the 
financial  crisis.  Thanks  in  part  to  enhanced  supervision  and  regulation,  banks  “have  the 
ability  to  meet  their  financial  obligations  and  continue  to  make  a  broad  variety  of  financial 
products  and  services  available  to  households  and  businesses  even  in  times  of  economic 
difficulty.”12 I can promise you that we will always strive to improve and that we will work hard 
to earn and retain your trust. 
I look forward to taking questions. 
                                                
12   Scott  G.  Alvarez,  Regulatory  Rulemakings,  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  United 
States House of Representatives, April 8, 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
