  Jacqueline Loh: Gearing up for sustainable growth 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore, at the Singapore Trustees Association Conference 2014, Singapore, 2 October 
2014. 
 1. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. First off, let me thank you for 
inviting  me  to  join  you  at  the  third  Singapore  Trustees  Association  Conference.  This 
Conference  brings  together  industry  professionals  to  discuss  trends  and  challenges  facing 
the trust industry, and how Singapore can stay ahead in this competitive environment. 
2. It is believed that the origin of trusts dates back to the 13th century. As crusading English 
knights sought to protect and preserve their estates during their lengthy absence in battle, 
they transferred the legal ownership of their estate to a third party, usually a trusted friend, 
under  the  agreement  that  ownership  would  be  transferred  back  upon  their  return.  Today, 
some 700 years later, the key hallmark of trusts – the trust structure itself, the beneficiary 
and the trustee – remain unchanged. The trust structure continues to serve as an important 
fiduciary arrangement. It has remained relevant and reliable, through ongoing efforts by the 
industry  in  adapting  and  strengthening  its  capabilities  to  meet  evolving  needs  as  well  as 
industry standards. 
3. Your theme this year is therefore instructive. “Singapore: a Dynamic Trust Centre”. The 
Oxford  Dictionary  defines  “dynamic”  to  be  characterised  by  constant  change,  activity  or 
progress. This morning, I would like to share with you some observations of the changes that 
we must act on, in order to be a truly “Dynamic Trust Centre”. 
Growth drivers are strong 
4.  Let  me  say  a  few  words  on  the  outlook.  Prospects  are  bright,  with  strong  growth  in 
Asia-Pacific wealth and greater traction in the use of trusts. While trust services have had a 
long history in developed economies, such as US and Europe, the trust industry in most of 
Asia is still at a relatively nascent stage. 
5. On the demand side, we expect to see further interest, as Asia attracts more investment 
inflows, and the number of High Net Worth Individuals in Asia continues to grow. According 
to the Boston Consulting Group, Asia-Pacific wealth is expected to expand around 11% per 
annum until 2017. Wealthy families in Asia are increasingly attuned to use of trust structures 
to facilitate  estate  planning,  succession  planning,  and  to safeguard  assets.  Philanthropy  is 
also gaining traction in the region, and according to a study by UBS and INSEAD, there is a 
rising trend towards the use of charitable trusts for philanthropic initiatives. 
6. On the supply side, Singapore’s trust industry has expanded steadily, and the ecosystem 
is  evolving  alongside  the  wealth  management  sector.  Since  the  introduction  of  mandatory 
licensing  of  trust  companies  in  2006  by  MAS,  we  have  53  Licensed  Trust  Companies 
operating  here.  Many  private  banks  have  also  broadened  their  capabilities  to  the  area  of 
trusts.  Beyond  the  financial  sector,  law  and  accounting  firms  have  also  expanded  their 
expertise to provide trust-related services to support this growing industry. 
“Myths” versus reality 
7. Notwithstanding the important and legitimate roles of trusts, the trust services industry has 
come under increased scrutiny for the confidentiality it provides. There is a misconception at 
times that trusts are mostly being used to conceal one’s identity or beneficial ownership for 
tax  evasion  or  other  illicit  purposes.  Indeed,  if  left  unregulated,  trust  structures  can  be 
vulnerable to being abused by criminals. The Financial Action Taskforce (“FATF”), an inter-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  governmental body that sets the global standard for measures to combat money laundering, 
terrorist  financing,  and  the  financing  of  proliferation,  has  identified  specific  typologies  to 
illustrate  common  activities  related  to  money  laundering.  In  one  such  example,  criminals 
could set up trusts to receive stolen assets, and then separate themselves from the assets 
by  creating  multiple  layers.  Singapore’s  regulatory  framework  deters  and  prevents  such 
criminal abuse. 
8. With the growing use of trusts, it is critical that we have in place regulatory frameworks 
that  can  support  its  development  and  help  to  ensure  international  confidence  in  the  trust 
industry.  Singapore  maintains  one  of  the  most  modern  and  robust  frameworks  for  the 
regulation of trust companies – we are one of the first financial centres to have introduced 
mandatory  licensing  for  trust  companies,  under  the  Trust  Companies  Act  (“TCA”).  Trust 
companies regulated under the TCA have to comply with the MAS Notice on Prevention of 
Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism (“AML/CFT”). Amongst other 
obligations, the MAS Notice requires them to identify and verify the identity of trust relevant 
parties,  perform  ongoing  transactions  monitoring  and  file  suspicious  transaction  reports. 
MAS’  AML/CFT  requirements  for  licensed  trust  companies  are  consistent  with  FATF 
standards. Trust companies must collect and make available information to law enforcement 
authorities when required to do so. 
9.  The  benefits  of  having  a  comprehensive,  well-structured  trust  can  only  be  effectively 
achieved if it is properly administered by the trustee. Similarly, a strong regulatory framework 
needs to be complemented with an effective supervisory regime. Following the revisions to 
the  MAS  Notice  on  AML/CFT,  issued  on  2  December  2009,  MAS  conducted  a  thematic 
inspection of licensed trust companies to assess their compliance with the revised Notice on 
AML/CFT. In June last year, the MAS issued a circular on our inspection findings. I am glad 
that  most  trust  companies  have  in  place  appropriate  policies  and  procedures  to  combat 
money  laundering.  However,  MAS  highlighted  that  implementation  can  strengthen  further 
with a more consistent application of these policies and procedures across the industry. I will 
also  stress  that  adequate  and  timely  record  keeping  forms  an  important  part  of  the  entire 
process. 
Global standards: transparency of Beneficial Ownership (“BO”) and tax transparency 
10.  Singapore  supports  the  international  effort  in  combating  money  laundering,  terrorist 
financing  and  other  abuses  of  the  financial  system.  As  part  of  this  effort,  two  key  global 
standards  are  relevant  to  the  trust  industry  –  (i) transparency  of  beneficial  ownership,  and 
(ii) tax  transparency  through  Automatic  Exchange  of  Information  (“AEOI”)  between  tax 
jurisdictions.  These  rules,  when  applied  appropriately  and  consistently  across  all 
jurisdictions,  can  help  to  more  effectively  combat  money  laundering  and  other  serious 
financial  crimes  including  on  tax.  This  in  turn,  will  safeguard  the  integrity  of  the  global 
financial  system,  of  which  the  trust  industry  is  a  part,  and  create  the  conditions  for 
sustainable growth. 
Increased focus on transparency of Beneficial Ownership 
11. Let me first touch on the increased focus on beneficial ownership. 
12. Given  the  risks  of the  misuse  of  corporate vehicles  for  illicit  purposes, there  has  been 
increased international focus on transparency of beneficial ownership. Initiatives such as the 
FATF Anti-Corruption Work Group and the work of the Global Forum on Transparency and 
Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes (“Global Forum”) are good examples. 
13. There is also growing recognition that transparency of beneficial ownership will help to 
prevent  and  combat  financial  crimes.  We  can  thus  expect  international  standards  setters 
such  as  the  FATF  to  probe  deeper  in  their  assessment  of  how  countries  promote 
transparency  of  beneficial  ownership.  For  example,  the  revised  FATF  Recommendations 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  now include additional elaboration on the manner in which countries can go about enhancing 
the transparency of trusts. In the case of trust structures, this would include an assessment 
of whether: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
adequate information on beneficial ownership of the trust is being collected; 
such information is available to law enforcement authorities; and 
regulated  entities,  such  as  trust  companies  and  banks,  are  doing  their  part  in 
complying  with  the  relevant  AML/CFT  regulations  to  collect  beneficial  ownership 
information. 
Singapore’s approach to increased transparency on Beneficial Ownership 
14. Let me now share with you Singapore’s position on increased transparency on beneficial 
ownership. 
15.  We  believe  that  increased  transparency  on  beneficial  ownership  is  consistent  with 
continued  strong  growth  in  the  trust  industry.  Conversely,  Singapore’s  reputation  as  a 
dynamic  trust  centre  could  easily  be  tainted  by  just  one  or  two  incidents  where  proceeds 
derived from illicit activities are found to be linked to trust companies or trusts in Singapore 
because of inadequate due diligence. 
16.  There  are  several  ways  to  enhance  transparency  of  beneficial  ownership  for  trusts. 
Singapore’s approach has been to strike a balance between protecting the legitimate need 
for confidentiality, while ensuring that this protection is not abused for illegitimate purposes. 
This is consistent with our approach taken with regard to tax crimes. Let me elaborate. 
17. Besides the current framework we have put in place for the regulation of trust companies, 
MAS  also  regularly  reviews  our  AML/CFT  regime.  We  issued  in  July  2014  a  public 
consultation  on  proposed  amendments  to  the  MAS  Notice  on  AML/CFT  for  Financial 
Institutions.  The  proposed  amendments  drew 
revised  FATF 
Recommendations and international best practices, so as to take into account latest global 
developments and incorporate emerging best practices. Some of these amendments relate 
to  enhanced  transparency  on  beneficial  ownership  information.  MAS  is  currently  reviewing 
the feedback from the private sector and will also be looking at updating the MAS Notice on 
AML/CFT  for  licensed  trust  companies.  Continual  review  of  our  policies  and  guidelines,  in 
consultation  with  industry  stakeholders  such  as  yourselves,  remain  the  bedrock  of  our 
regulatory  approach.  It  makes  sure  that  Singapore’s  regulatory  regime  is  in  line  with 
international  standards,  while  at  the  same  time  taking  into  account  industry  feedback  to 
facilitate practical implementation. 
reference 
from 
the 
Increased momentum towards tax transparency 
18. Turning now to tax transparency. 
19. To combat cross border tax evasion, the G20 endorsed Article 26 of the OECD Model 
Tax Convention on Income and Capital to be the global standard for Exchange of Information 
(“EOI”)  for  tax  transparency,  in  2009.  This  provided  for  bilateral  EOI-on-request,  where  a 
jurisdiction  may  request  from  another  jurisdiction  information  on  its  tax  payer  that  is 
foreseeably relevant to its determination of whether the tax payer has evaded taxes. 
20.  Following  that,  there  has  been  strong  progress  towards  enhanced  tax  transparency  – 
most  recently,  the  G20  and  OECD  advocated  the  adoption  of  AEOI  as  the  new  global 
standard for tax transparency (the “AEOI Standard”), and urged all jurisdictions, including all 
financial centres, to implement the AEOI Standard swiftly. In fact, G20 members last month, 
endorsed  the  implementation  of  AEOI  and  promised  to  do  so  by  end-2018.  The  AEOI 
Standard  requires  financial  institutions  in  one  jurisdiction,  with  customers  who  are  tax 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  resident in another jurisdiction, to automatically provide the tax-relevant customer information 
on a regular basis, to the customers’ home tax authorities. 
Singapore’s approach to enhanced tax transparency 
21. The global trend on enhanced tax transparency is in line with Singapore’s commitment to 
combat  cross-border  tax  offences,  in  order  to  protect  our  integrity  and  reputation  as  an 
international financial centre. We have taken several significant steps to strengthen our EOI 
framework,  such  as  entering  into  international  agreements  and  making  the  relevant 
legislative amendments to facilitate international cooperation. 
22.  In  May,  Singapore  joined  the  G20,  EU,  OECD  member  jurisdictions  as  well  as  other 
financial  centres  in  endorsing  the  OECD’s  “Declaration  on  Automatic  Exchange  of 
Information 
this  Declaration  demonstrates  Singapore’s 
commitment towards enhancing international tax compliance. This Declaration is consistent 
with our principles for AEOI: 
(i) 
Firstly,  implementation  must  be  done  under  a  robust  framework  of  law  so  as  to 
maintain confidentiality and legitimate use of information exchanged; 
Secondly, there must be reciprocity in terms of the scope of information exchanged 
between jurisdictions; and 
Thirdly,  AEOI  must  be  endorsed  and  implemented  among  all  financial  centres  to 
provide a level playing field. 
In  Tax  Matters”.  Endorsing 
(ii) 
(iii) 
23. Enhanced tax transparency lifts the veil on structures created for illicit purposes, and will 
help to deter tax criminals from abusing trust structures. This bodes well for the longer term 
sustained growth of the trust industry. 
The critical role of industry 
24. An AML/CFT regime, no matter how robust, cannot in itself fight against ML/TF activities. 
We  need  the  commitment  and  active  participation  of  the  industry.  Promoting  a  strong 
AML/CFT  culture  within  the  industry,  and  deepening  manpower  capabilities  are  important 
elements to maintain a robust regime, and allow us to reap the benefits of business growth 
while managing risks effectively. 
25.  Industry  has  primary  responsibility  to  build  a  good  AML/CFT  culture  and  ensure 
compliance.  I  am  encouraged  that  the  industry  has  taken  active  steps  to  promote  robust 
controls  to  strengthen  its  resilience  and  prepare  for  increased  transparency  on  beneficial 
ownership  information  and  enhanced  tax  transparency.  The  private  banking  industry  in 
Singapore  introduced  a  set  of  industry  sound  practices  last  year  to  provide  guidance  to 
private banks on the development and implementation of robust controls to detect and deter 
the proceeds of tax crimes. As most of you would know, the Singapore Trustees Association 
has also issued similar guidelines for trust companies. We commend such industry initiatives 
and look forward to continue working in meaningful partnership with the industry. 
26. Competency building is also imperative in raising AML/CFT standards amongst industry 
professionals.  An  effective  AML/CFT  system  cannot  be  solely  the  responsibility  of 
compliance  professionals  or  experts,  but  must  be  an  integral  part  of  the  firm’s  culture. 
Besides  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (“IBF”),  certification  providers  like  the 
International  Compliance  Training  Academy  and  the  Association  of  Certified  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Specialists  (“ACAMS”)  offer  a  suite  of  AML/CFT  courses  and  training 
programmes. Such courses, where they are accredited by the IBF, are available for funding 
from the MAS’ Financial Sector Development Fund. So I would strongly encourage industry 
professionals  to  tap  on  the  many  resources  and  training  avenues  in  order  to  increase 
knowledge and awareness of risks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
27. Returning to the history of the origins of trusts. Such arrangements could well have been 
phased out at that time if the law did not recognise them. When the Crusaders returned, they 
often faced refusal for the return of their estate. Such disputes had to be brought before the 
Lord  Chancellor,  who  found  in  favour  of  the  returning  Crusaders,  and  recognised  such 
claims. 
28. Fortunately, trusts today are built on stronger foundations than the changeable favours of 
Lord Chancellors. The trust industry is based on and built on reliability and professionalism. 
MAS partners with the industry, and will continue to do so, to further strengthen its reliability 
and resilience, by building a robust regime that is well-regulated, stable and trusted. This will 
continue to instil confidence in clients, and in our financial system. And this will keep us on 
the path of sustainable growth. 
29. On this note, I wish all of you an engaging session and fruitful conference. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
