  Sabine Lautenschläger: National supervision in a European system – 
what is the new balance? 
Speech Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Fifth FMA (Austrian financial market authority) supervisory conference, Vienna, 
30 September 2014. 
 Mr Ettl, 
Mr Kumpfmüller, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Nine months ago to the day, the Finanzmarktaufsicht (Austrian financial market authority or 
FMA)  issued  two  press  releases  announcing  major  “restructuring  measures”.  According  to 
the FMA, banking supervision in the euro area would be built on “new foundations” in 2014 
and the year would bring new tasks and challenges. 
I really like the building site metaphor. It isn’t hard to imagine what the challenge of laying 
new  foundations  and  constructing  a  new  building  –  especially  during  regular  operations  – 
means. 
This  event  today  is  about  national  supervision  in  a  European  system  and  where  the  new 
balance lies. The focus is therefore on the stability of the European supervisory building. 
Now, there are clear rules or conditions to be complied  with  when constructing a building. 
Tasks and responsibilities must be clearly defined. Everybody needs to know what to do or to 
leave  alone  –  and  that  goes  for  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  too.  The 
European  supervisory  building,  consisting  of  the  ECB  and  19  national  supervisors,  isn’t  a 
single  family  home,  but  a  large  building  complex;  a  structure  that  should  be  sturdy  and 
stable, even in stormy conditions. 
Expectations of the developer 
European  legislators  and  the  public,  too,  expect  the  SSM  to  ensure  a  resistant,  robust 
banking system in the euro area. Supervision in Europe is rightly expected to be better than 
what  19  national  supervisors  could  achieve  with  national  means.  The  new  system  of 
supervision should be neutral and not wedded to national thinking and traditions. It should, 
where  appropriate,  produce  a  level  playing  field.  It  had  become  apparent  in  the  financial 
crisis that the difficulties of large, strongly interlinked banks were not just a national problem 
and that difficulties can spill over into the public sector and the real economy. 
The SSM is supposed to identify any risks that may endanger national financial markets or 
the European financial market as a whole at an early stage and take measures to counter 
them. It should be assertive and able to act. 
If  it  is  set  up  properly,  the  SSM  can  indeed  meet  the  majority  of  these  expectations.  A 
European supervisory body will be able to identify risks early on and act effectively. The SSM 
will be in a position to provide a considerable part of what a supervisor can do for a resistant 
banking system. Among other things, the division of tasks between national supervisors and 
the ECB will ensure this. But not all the developer’s wishes can be fulfilled or are feasible, as 
the  resistance  of  the  European  banking  system  or  the  performance  of  a  national  credit 
institution don’t just depend on the supervisor’s performance and ability to act. In order to be 
resistant  in  the  long  term,  a  bank  needs  a  sustainable  business  model;  it  needs  sufficient 
income in order to bear the risks associated with banking. After all, it shouldn’t be forgotten 
that the balance sheet of a bank – especially a bank with extensive corporate banking – is 
always a reflection of the economies in which it operates as a financial service provider. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Construction planning – dimensioning the building 
But let’s leave the expectations and go back to the building itself. At the beginning of every 
construction project is the planning. The architect has to bring the wishes and expectations of 
the developer into line with all kinds of existing restrictions. The final purpose of the building 
needs to be clearly defined. 
With  regard  to  the  SSM,  this  means  that,  for  practical  reasons,  direct  supervision  of  all 
institutions  in  the  euro  area  was  neither  feasible  nor  wanted  right  from  the  outset.  Fully 
centralised  supervision  would’ve  had  the  considerable  disadvantages  associated  with  an 
organisation  being  too  large,  the  resultant  burdens  for  all  concerned  –  which  would  be 
considerable  –  and  a  loss  of  national  and  regional  expertise  concerning  the  specific 
characteristics of banks in the Member States. What added value would have been brought 
by direct ECB supervision of the many smaller institutions, which often have regional roots? 
What  challenges  would’ve  arisen  in  terms  of  linguistics  alone?  After  all,  without  having  a 
detailed look at a large number of credit files, it isn’t possible to properly supervise most of 
the  banks  which  are  active  in  private  and  corporate  banking.  National  language  skills  are 
indispensable here for discussions with the Executive Board and employees, as well as for 
looking into the files. Furthermore, it wouldn’t have been feasible to set up direct supervision 
of all banks in the euro area within a year. 
As you can see, ladies and gentlemen, when it came to the dimensions of our building, it was 
once again a question of striking a balance between the advantages and disadvantages of a 
central  or  decentral  solution.  For  supervision  to  function  in  the  euro  area,  a  balanced 
relationship must be achieved between centralisation and regionality. Making the building as 
big  as  possible  must  not,  then,  be  an  end  in  itself,  because  the  foundations  for  this  are 
lacking. 
Significant institutions 
The  architects  of  the  SSM  thus  decided  that  only  the  largest  banking  groups  with  cross-
border  activities  in  the  euro  area  should  be  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB.  The  national 
supervisory authorities in the euro area countries will thus continue to be the main contact for 
the remaining banks. 
So the SSM will directly supervise what are known as significant institutions. This category 
consists  of  120  banking  groups  with  around  1,200  individual  institutions,  which  hold  more 
than 80% of the total banking assets in the euro area. If things were to get difficult, these 
banks could have a significant impact on the stability of the financial system in the euro area. 
Eight of these banking groups are Austrian. 
Less significant institutions 
All 3,500 other institutions will be indirectly supervised by the ECB. The decisive point is that 
the  national  supervisor  remains  the  direct  contact  for  the  credit  institutions  and  generally 
takes the associated supervisory decisions. But there will also be some changes in terms of 
the supervision of less significant institutions, because the SSM will influence the supervisory 
approach of the national supervisors. Through rules, guidelines and recommendations, the 
SSM will steer the national supervision of less significant institutions. The aim of this is not to 
make everything the same; it is rather to ensure that a uniformly high level of supervision is 
achieved in the euro area. The sole aim must be to ensure a level playing field for all and to 
prevent blind spots on the supervisory map. 
The  term  less  significant  institutions  is,  in  fact,  misleading.  There  are  certainly  countries 
where individual institutions are not in themselves systemically relevant, but where the same 
cannot  be  said  for  these  institutions  taken  together.  In  addition,  the  less  significant 
institutions do not all look alike. They have balance sheets ranging from a few million euro to 
almost  30  billion.  Some less  significant  institutions  operate  on  a  purely  regional  level,  with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  business models that are sometimes very simple, but sometimes very specific, while others 
are  cross-border  institutions  with  very  complex  business  models.  The  range  is  huge.  The 
same  is  true  of  their  characteristics  and  distribution  in  the  euro  area.  Owing  to  their 
numerous cooperative banks and savings banks, Germany (with 48.2% of such institutions) 
and  Austria  (with  564  banks,  accounting  for  16%  of  such  institutions  and  8%  of  banking 
assets in the euro area) are home to the majority of less significant institutions. This makes 
Austria our second largest “customer”, after Germany, in the area of indirect supervision. At 
the same time, there are countries that have very few such institutions: Cyprus, for example, 
will have seven such institutions in the SSM. 
What does indirect supervision mean? 
Let me say a few words on what indirect supervision actually means. Indirect supervision by 
the  ECB  consists  of  two  elements,  macro-prudential  supervision  and  supervision  of 
institutions and sectors. Macro-prudential supervision aims to identify and address deficits, in 
particular by comparing or benchmarking the various supervisory systems and approaches, 
and to spread and enforce best practice approaches. Institutional and sectoral supervision 
are about the institutions prioritising their levels of risk and the possible effects accordingly, 
thereby  defining  the  intensity  of  the  indirect  supervision.  Depending  on  which  “class”  of 
intensity the bank is in, the content of the reports will change in agreement with the various 
national supervisors. For example, we’re currently working on the draft of a reporting guide 
for national supervisors. This guide should provide an overview of the information the ECB 
requires. After all, indirect supervision isn’t possible  without information, unfortunately. The 
reporting guide will be an expression of the multi-stage supervisory approach. The reporting 
requirements  are  differentiated  according  to  the  prioritisation  of  the  institution,  the  type  of 
information to be provided and the reporting interval. 
For  example,  we  will  put  into  a  high  “intensity  class”  those  institutions  that  may  have 
considerable adverse effects on the financial system of their Member State in the event of a 
crisis.  For  these  banks,  we  will  supervise  the  activity  of  the  national  supervisory  authority 
more intensively. This way, the SSM can ensure high-quality supervision that follows uniform 
standards,  even  in  individual  cases,  without  subjecting  each  institution  to  an  equally  high 
intensity  of  supervision.  This  applies  first  to  those  institutions  that,  as  a  first  step,  were 
classified by national supervisory authorities as institutions that require particularly intensive 
supervision. In the not-too-distant future, however, there will be additional criteria, which will 
allow  granular  differentiation.  I’m  thinking  here,  for  example,  of  institutions  for  which  early 
warning  indicators  are  sounding  or  banks  that  are  growing  large  enough  naturally  to  be 
regarded  as  significant  banks 
increasing 
interconnectedness. 
The consequence of the risk-oriented approach of institutional supervision is that the majority 
of  the  banks  that,  owing  to  their  level  of  risk  and  their  size,  are  classified  as  “low”  or 
“medium”  priority  are  subject  to  only  very  light  supervision  by  the  ECB.  This  applies,  for 
example,  to  the  majority  of  cooperative  banks  and  smaller  savings  banks.  For  the  new 
European  system  of  supervision,  however,  a  sectoral  view  will  be  added,  which  we  will 
develop further in the next few years. We want to identify institutions that together represent 
a concentration risk for the financial system and could therefore be systemically relevant as a 
group in the event of a crisis. We describe these virtual groups as sectors. We will be paying 
particular attention to this group. 
through  balance  sheet  growth  or 
Resources of indirect supervision 
To conclude the topic of dimensioning, I’d now like to say a few more words on the resources 
for  indirect  supervision  in  the  SSM.  On  the  basis  of  uniform  requirements,  operational 
supervision for the 3,500 less significant banks has quite consciously been left to the national 
supervisory authorities. The distribution of staff in the new European supervisory body also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  takes  account  of  this  basic  idea:  while  around  400  supervisors  will  take  care  of  the 
120 significant banking groups at the ECB, operational national supervision of the 3,500 less 
significant institutions will be accompanied by approximately 80 members of staff at the ECB. 
We  are  therefore  quite  consciously  relying  on  the  thousands  of  employees  in  the  national 
supervisory  authorities  who,  with  their  knowledge  of  specific  regional  characteristics,  take 
care of this large group of banks on a daily basis. 
Structural soundness 
The construction plans are in place. What regulations now need to be observed to ensure 
that the building is stable? 
I believe that four fundamental technical requirements need to be fulfilled: 
(1)  First  of  all,  a  European  supervisor  needs  a  single  legal  basis  which  does  not  just 
determine  the  rules  to  be  followed  by  the  European  banking  sector,  but  also  allows  the 
supervisors scope for action. Only then will we be able to create a level playing field within 
the SSM area. 
The conditions for a single legal framework for banks and supervisors were put in place at 
the  European  level  when  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  (CRR)  and  the  Capital 
Requirements Directive IV (CRD IV) entered into force on 1 January 2014. In addition, the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  in  London  is  working  on  a  single  rulebook,  a  single 
interpretation of the legal basis for European banking supervision. This will take the form of 
binding technical standards on a variety of topics. 
The European Regulation and Directive contain a number of national options and individual 
solutions in order to cater for specific national features. If the European legislator has left it 
up  to  the  national  legislator  to  transpose  these  options  –  as  is  the  case  in  around 
20 instances – and the national legislator has done so in the form of a law, the SSM must 
respect this. We have to apply national law, even if this might impair the level playing field. 
The  situation  is  different  when  the  European  legislator  has  left  the  exercise  of  national 
options to the discretion of the supervisor, as has been done in around 80 cases. Over the 
past few months, we have made a list of all the national options and will come to a decision 
as  soon  as  possible  as  to  where  we  stand  on  every  single  one  them,  whether  we  will 
exercise  them  and  if  so,  how.  The  national  supervisors  will  play  an  important  role  in  this 
respect, as they are the ones that will have to explain the national features and the related 
risks to us. They are the ones who should complement our knowledge of national markets 
and  market  structures,  of  national  legal  systems  and  risk  trends.  And  we  know,  as 
supervisors, that some of these options are the result not of specific market structures, but of 
the continued existence of old traditions and popular habits. 
(2) Good supervision in Europe requires knowledge and experience of individual national as 
well as  European markets and market structures; it requires knowledge and experience of 
national  and  European  legal  systems.  Knowledge  should  be  consolidated  and  decisions 
taken centrally at the European level so that attention is focused on the European interest 
instead of on the solely national interest. The division of tasks within the SSM provides for 
just  that.  As  I  said,  the  ECB  will  take  complete  responsibility  for  the  direct  supervision  of 
significant institutions. But national supervisors will bring their knowledge and experience to 
the supervisory teams and support the ECB in its supervision, and they will do so in line with 
a single supervisory approach. It is our aim at the ECB to have detailed knowledge of the 
business model and risk profile of each of the 120 directly supervised institutions. We want to 
be able to assess, at any time, the risk-bearing capacity, the internal control systems and the 
governance of banks, and to intervene at an early stage when we see danger. In short, we 
intend to supervise intensively. I have already spoken in detail about the division of labour 
with regard to the less significant institutions. In both areas, then, knowledge of national and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  European  markets  will  be  brought  together  with  a  single  evaluation  system,  a  single 
supervisory approach and a central, European decision-maker. 
(3)  The  third  precondition  for  successful  supervision  in  Europe  is  that  macro-prudential 
oversight dovetails with micro-prudential supervision. 
This  is  a  case  of  complementing  the  supervision  of  credit  institutions,  which  is  very  much 
concerned with individual circumstances, with important, well-prepared information that can 
only  be  obtained  from the  perspective  of the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  or  the global financial 
system. It is not just in the supervision of internationally active banks that it is important for 
the  supervisor  to  know  what  risks  are  emerging  in  the  financial  markets.  And  looking  at  it 
from  the  other  side,  national  supervisors  can  carry  out  the  important  task  of  identifying 
national incentive systems and channels of contagion. Such information makes it possible to 
intervene preventively and at a much earlier stage. 
(4) The last and fourth condition for successful European supervision has to do with the SSM 
using the advantages of its size to the greatest advantage. With powers of direct supervision 
over around 120 banks, the SSM has a broad knowledge base with which to identify risks at 
an early stage through cross-sectional analyses and comparisons. For this reason the SSM 
will be able to rely on a strong horizontal function, which, together with the supervisors of the 
institutions, evaluates business and risk management practices at the banks and if need be 
formulates standards and establishes best practices. 
Preparation for further extensions 
A clever builder considers, even in the planning phase, whether it will be possible in future to 
meet requests to extend the building. In the construction of the SSM European lawmakers 
have  set  clear  rules  on  how  EU  Member  States  that  are  not  part  of  the  euro  area  can 
nonetheless  become  part  of  the  SSM.  The  rules  for  this  close  cooperation  are  there;  so 
extensions are not out of the question! And to this I am very open, well disposed, as long as 
they meet certain conditions. 
The  strict  rules  governing  the  construction  of  the  main  building  must  also  be  applied  to 
extensions. For this reason, close cooperation is not designed as an agreement between the 
ECB and the country in question, but as the result of an application that has been accepted. 
If an EU Member State that does not use the euro wishes to participate in the SSM, it must 
create the legal basis enabling the SSM to issue instructions and guidelines to its national 
supervisory authority. This is particularly important because, in non-euro area countries, the 
SSM cannot act directly vis-à-vis a credit institution but implements its decisions indirectly, 
via the national supervisory authority. The banking system of a country that enters into close 
cooperation  must  of  course  undergo  an  extensive  health  check  before  the  SSM  takes  on 
supervision – just as happens at present in the euro area. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  draw  your  attention  one  final  time  to  our  vast  construction 
project. It is almost finished. 
Countless experts from the euro area have worked together on this project. And here I am 
also talking in particular about my colleagues at the national supervisory authorities, from the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the Finanzmarktaufsicht. 
With  incomparable  effort,  they  have  helped  to  shape  the  project  at  all  levels  by  means  of 
expert knowledge, years of experience and manpower: from many, many working groups to 
the  numerous  staff  who  have  come  to  prepare  the  day-to-day  running  of  the  building  and 
make  sure  it  can  function  over  the  medium  term.  They  have  all  made  an  essential 
contribution  to  ensuring  that,  from  the  plans  to  the  operational  phase,  it  has  always  been 
possible to maintain the balance between the necessary ultimate responsibility at the central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  level  and  the  legitimate  interests  of  the  euro  area  countries  in  both  planning  and 
implementation.  This  will  continue  to  be  so  in  the  future,  as  the  18  (soon  19)  member 
countries  with  their  national  supervisory  authorities  will  also  be  prominently  represented  in 
the Supervisory Board. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  our  European  supervisory  project  will  be  ready  on  time.  There  are 
exactly 35 days to go till the start date, 4 November. In Frankfurt we are currently working 
very hard on the start of regular supervisory operations at the ECB, as the responsibility for 
the supervision of around 4,700 credit institutions in the euro area will from that day on lie 
with us. 
The staff of the SSM has largely been recruited. A few interviews are still being held. The 
way  supervision  will  be  carried  out  has  been  defined.  The  division  of  labour  between  the 
national supervisory authorities and the ECB has been laid down. Internal procedures have 
been set out in the Supervisory Manual. 
The  part  of  the  construction  project  covering  significant  credit  institutions  is  virtually 
complete.  The  Joint  Supervisory  Teams,  which  will  supervise  the  120  significant  banking 
groups, have already formed and are getting up to speed on their banks. 
In  the  part  covering  less  significant  institutions,  our  colleagues  are  currently  gathering 
detailed information on the banking supervision systems and the population of other banks 
and their features in the euro area. This part will also be ready to operate on 4 November. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am convinced that only by working closely together and ensuring a 
clear division of labour between national supervisors and the ECB will we be able to fulfil our 
mandate to make the banking system of the euro area more robust. 
The foundations of the SSM will in future surely be exposed sometimes to uneven stress in 
one place or another. This is completely normal for a building that stands for many years. 
As long as we do not forget the principles applied by the architects of the SSM, it will always 
be possible for the ECB and the national supervisory authorities to together regain the right 
balance. This is the prerequisite for ensuring that the primary aim of the SSM, high-quality 
banking supervision in the euro area, is met in the long term. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
