  Jon Nicolaisen: Challenges for the payment system 
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the Finance Norway’s payments conference, Oslo, 12 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
The modern history of payments in Norway began 200 years ago. A clause was included in 
the  Constitution  stipulating  that  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  should  “supervise  the 
monetary  affairs  of  the  realm”.  Two  years  later,  in  1816,  Norges  Bank  was  founded.  The 
Storting delegated “supervisory authority” over monetary affairs to the Bank. Today, private 
banks  perform  payment  services  for  the  general  public.  Norges  Bank  has  become  the 
bankers’ bank. 
According to the Norges Bank Act, Norges Bank shall promote an efficient payment system. 
The  Bank  issues  cash  and  ensures  efficient  settlement  between  banks’  accounts  with 
Norges Bank. In addition, the Bank has responsibility for overseeing and supervising those 
parts  of  the  payment  system  located  outside  of  Norges  Bank.  Finanstilsynet  (Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  has  responsibility  for  supervising  the  retail  payment 
systems.1  
Payment services play a unique role in the economy. The payment system can be compared 
to  the  plumbing  system  in  a  house.  As  long  as  it  functions,  we  do  not  give  it  a  second 
thought. But if it fails, the consequences are immediate and serious. 
The  Norwegian  payment  system  is  efficient  and  up-to-date.  Fast,  cheap  and  reliable 
payments save time and provide security to households and the business sector. It gives the 
nation  a  competitive  advantage  over  many  other  countries.  To  preserve  this  advantage, 
Norway needs to be a leader. Technological developments pave the way for new possibilities 
– new means of payment are introduced and existing means of payment become faster and 
cheaper.  While  most  changes  result  in  a  more  efficient  system,  they  also  pose  new 
challenges.  New  technology  and  outsourcing  require  stricter  standards  for  both  the  risk 
management  framework  and  contingency  preparedness.  Responsibility  rests  with  system 
owners. 
As supervisory and oversight authority, Norges Bank has a duty to point out any deficiencies 
and weaknesses. There are also challenges associated with the pricing of payment services. 
When  given  a  choice  of  payment  solution,  customers  are  not  charged  prices  that  reflect 
actual  costs.  Does  this  make  the  system  more  expensive  than  necessary?  Banks  operate 
most  of  their  payment  solutions  at  a  loss.  Does  this  have  to  be?  Are  banks’  incentives  to 
invest in secure and forward-looking solutions being weakened? 
Risk and costs are drivers of change 
The  main  structure  of  the  payment  system  has  remained fixed  for  a  number  of  years,  but 
there  have  been  changes,  both  to  the  part  of  the  system  customers  encounter  and  to 
interbank settlement. Behind many of the changes is a desire to reduce risk or costs, often 
both.2  
                                                
1  See the Payment Systems Act. 
2  The  discussion  of  trade-offs  between  costs  and  risk  is  inspired  by  Kahn  et  al.  (2014):  “Central  banks  and 
payment systems: The evolving trade-off between cost and risk” and Norman’s comments at Norges Bank’s 
conference “Of the uses of central banks: lessons from history”, 5–6 June 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Allow  me  to  give  two  examples.  Just  before  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  Norges  Bank 
introduced a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system that allowed  large payments to be 
settled far faster than earlier. This also resulted in less uncertainty and lower risk. Another 
example  is  the  introduction  of  the  foreign  exchange  settlement  system  CLS  just  over  ten 
years ago. Before CLS was established, one party could risk paying his leg of a trade without 
receiving anything from the counterparty. With CLS, this counterparty risk was eliminated. 
In both cases, the introduction of the new systems increased costs for private participants. 
This prompted criticism. But over time, the reduction in risk has more than offset the increase 
in costs. The financial crisis in autumn 2008 showed that the gains were real. Where there 
were adequate settlement systems without counterparty risk, markets functioned better. 
The  core  of  the  Norwegian  payment  system  is  the  Norwegian  Interbank  Clearing  System 
(NICS)  and  Norges  Bank’s  settlement  system  (NBO).  On  average,  over  NOK  200  billion 
passes through NBO each day. Without this system, payments in Norway would come to a 
halt. This would quickly have serious consequences. Norges Bank therefore has a target of 
100-percent availability for the settlement system during opening hours. In recent years, the 
Bank  has  been  successful  in  ensuring  this.  Almost  no  disruptions  have  occurred.  We  are 
steadily working on improvements to ensure a robust and efficient system also in the years 
ahead. 
Payments often start when an individual or firm makes a payment using an online banking 
service or using a payment card. Most payments are relayed from the data processing centre 
in the customer’s bank to NICS. On the basis of all payments we as customers have made, 
NICS calculates a position for each bank vis-à-vis the other banks. The result of this clearing 
is sent four times a day to NBO. There the balances of banks’ accounts with Norges Bank 
are adjusted. When the banks have been notified that the settlement in Norges Bank is in 
order,  the  banks  adjust  their  customers’  accounts.  All  the  large  banks  participate  in  these 
settlements. DNB and SpareBank 1 SMN also participate in the settlement in Norges Bank 
on behalf of smaller banks. 
Today, Norges Bank has published a new survey of payment costs using data from 2013. 
The  overall  social  costs  of  using  cash,  payment  cards  and  giro  payments  amount  to  just 
under NOK 15 billion,3 or 0.6 percent of mainland GDP. The estimate includes the costs for 
both providers and users of payment services. These costs have declined since they were 
last estimated in 2007. Compared with other countries, the costs of the Norwegian payment 
system are low. This is a benefit to customers and represents a comparative advantage for 
the Norwegian business sector. 
There are several reasons why payment costs are low in Norway. New technology resulted 
in  an  early  introduction  in  Norway  of  cost-efficient  electronic  systems.  Banks  led  with  new 
solutions,  and  the  public  adopted  them  quickly.  Banks  have  collaborated  on  both  the 
establishment and the operation of new services. The resulting economies of scale made it 
possible to keep costs low. Norwegian and Nordic banks are at the forefront of developments 
in this area. 
Norway  is  among  the  world  leaders  in  the  use  of  payment  cards.  Eight  out  of  ten  card 
transactions take place using BankAxept, one of the solutions that banks have developed. 
According  to  Norges  Bank’s  estimates,  the  social  cost  of  using  BankAxept  is  around 
NOK 3 per  payment.  By  comparison,  payments  using  international  payment  cards  cost 
society NOK 13, or four times as much. 
Credit card use is increasing. It is the point of sale, typically a shop, which pays the costs 
connected  with  use,  and  not  the  cardholder.  While  the  merchant  pays  around  NOK  0.10 
when  the  customer  uses  BankAxept,  the  merchant  must  usually  pay  between  1  and 
                                                
3  See Norges Bank Papers 5/2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 percent  of  the  purchase  amount  when  the  customer  chooses  Visa  or  MasterCard. 
Merchants are free to pass on this cost to card users, but this seldom happens in Norway. 
Customers are thus not charged correct prices when given a choice of payment solution. The 
result  can  be  that  an  inexpensive  solution  –  BankAxept  –  is  supplanted  in  favour  of  more 
expensive solutions. 
In Denmark, merchants charge a fee to customers who use a credit card. A similar practice 
in Norway could keep down payment costs. The profit banks earn on the use of international 
payment cards is higher than on BankAxept. It is therefore likely that, in isolation, it is in the 
interest of many banks for customers to choose international payment cards. New European 
regulations that will set a cap on the fees issuers of payment cards can charge are in the 
pipeline. This will likely weaken banks’ incentive to promote international payment cards. 
Banks  continue  to  lose  money  on  payment  services.  The  cost  survey  we  are  presenting 
today does show that banks’ cost coverage has increased somewhat over time. But income 
still amounts to only 76 percent of the costs associated with payment services. 
Banks lose money on all main types of payment instruments, except for international cards. 
The losses must be covered by income from other banking activities. Pricing that does not 
cover costs may be a conscious choice by banks. Some customers may believe that they 
should not have to pay for using their own money. At the same time, mispricing and losses 
weaken  banks’  ability  and  willingness  to  promote  efficient  solutions  and  invest  in  new 
infrastructure. That is not a forward-looking approach. 
We  must  invest  now  to  ensure  efficient  and  secure  payments  also  in  the  future.  The 
establishment of the company BankAxept AS is promising in this regard. Norges Bank will 
closely follow developments and continue to publish information on costs, prices and market 
conditions. 
Contactless  payments  are  making  their  way  into  the  Norwegian  payments  market. 
Contactless payment allows customers to make a payment by holding a mobile phone or a 
card  over  a  terminal  without  entering  a  PIN.4  While  this  is  a  new  means  of  payment,  the 
underlying payment solution is not new. The solutions are often based on the use of credit 
cards,  with  a  low  price  for  users.  If  contactless  payments  based  on  credit  cards  supplant 
payments with BankAxept, the social costs of payment services may rise. Norges Bank has 
noted  that  the  new  owner  company  of  BankAxept  is  considering  developing  a  solution  for 
contactless payments. This may bolster competition and help to lower costs of this type of 
payment too. 
Efficiency  is  more  than  low  costs.  Payment  services  have  become  faster  and  more  user-
friendly  in  recent  years.  For  example,  there  has  been  an  increase  from  two  to  four  daily 
clearings and settlements. Contactless payments make small payments faster. Soon, online 
bank transfers will also become faster. With the new service “instant payment”, funds will be 
available  in  the  payee’s  account  within  seconds,  while  interbank  settlement  does  not  take 
place until afterwards. But there is still a way to go – in this area, other countries have come 
further than Norway. Hopefully, payment services in Norway will be even faster in the coming 
years. 
Assessment of the Norwegian financial infrastructure 
The  financial  crisis  was  a  reminder  that  increasingly  complex  financial  instruments  and 
demanding technological solutions have increased risk in the financial infrastructure. In the 
                                                
4  Within certain amounts. Customers must still enter their PIN code in connection with large payments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  aftermath of the crisis, the international recommendations for the financial infrastructure have 
been tightened.5  
The new principles provide a comprehensive standard for the financial infrastructure across 
borders  and  across  various  systems.  The  purpose  is  to  promote  a  robust  and  efficient 
financial  infrastructure6  that  supports  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system.  The  new 
principles devote considerable attention to such areas as operational risk, derivate exposure 
and the use of central counterparties. 
Norges  Bank  oversees  financial  infrastructure  and  supervises  interbank  clearing  and 
settlement  systems.  There  are  two  systems  that  are  licensed  by  Norges  Bank  to  provide 
clearing  or  settlement:  NICS  and  DNB  as  a  private  settlement  bank.  For  these  systems, 
Norges  Bank,  as  supervisory  authority,  may  require  that  owners  take  corrective  action  for 
noncompliance with licence terms or the Payment Systems Act. 
In collaboration with Finanstilsynet, Norges Bank has recently conducted an assessment of 
important parts of the financial infrastructure in Norway in accordance with the international 
principles.7  
The  main  conclusion  is  that  the  financial  infrastructure  in  Norway  is  robust  and  efficient. 
Nevertheless  there  is  a  need  for  some  improvements.  In  particular,  two  areas  are 
emphasised: 
First,  some  of  the  systems  have  a  deficient  framework  for  monitoring  and  managing  risk. 
Such a framework is necessary for assessing risk and measures in aggregate. Otherwise, 
one cannot be certain whether the measures implemented are appropriate. 
The  framework  should  cover  all  aspects  of  operations,  also  the  parts  outsourced  to  other 
providers.  This  is  an  essential  tool  for  controlling  the  overall  risk  in  the  system.  It  is  not 
sufficient  to  indicate  that  an  operating  services  provider  has  a  separate  risk  management 
framework in place. The board of the owner company has ultimate responsibility. 
Second, it is not always clear how operational risk is managed and controlled. If operational 
risk is not managed appropriately, there is a risk that operations are disrupted – and in the 
worst  case  come  to  a  halt.  A  failure  in  the  delivery  of  electronic  communications  is  an 
example of an operational risk that may have serious consequences. System owners must 
ensure that the various operational risks are identified and analysed. The system owner must 
implement the necessary measures on that basis. 
The  assessment  is  now  being  followed  up.  System  owners  have  drawn  up  plans  for 
measures. The NICS Operations Office has responded to Norges Bank that work relating to 
the  principles  concerning  the  risk  management  framework  and  operational  risk  will  be 
completed by the turn of the year. Norges Bank will ensure that progress and measures are 
satisfactory.  As  the  operator  of  NBO,  Norges  Bank  is  also  working  on  measures  that  will 
strengthen the settlement system centrally. 
                                                
5  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  –  previously  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems (CPSS) – and International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 
6  The financial infrastructure comprises the payment system and securities settlement system, including central 
counterparty systems. 
7  The  following  systems  were  evaluated:  Clearing  and  settlement  systems  for  payments,  the  securities 
settlement  system,  the  VPS  registry  function  and  the  central  counterparty  Oslo  Clearing,  the  latter  two  in 
collaboration  with  Finanstilsynet.  The  evaluation  was presented in  the  Norges  Bank  Financial  Infrastructure 
Report 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outsourcing 
Today’s  financial  infrastructure  is  based  on  advanced  technical  solutions.  This  places 
considerable  demands  on  system  developers  and  operators.  This  expertise  is  costly  and 
may be difficult to retain. Owners have largely outsourced technical operations. This provides 
greater  flexibility.  At  the  same  time,  outsourcing  can  make  it  more  challenging  to  manage 
operational risk. 
The  fixed  costs  associated  with  operation  and  development  can  be  high.  This  allows 
operators  to  exploit  economies  of  scale.  A  possible  result  of  outsourcing  is  that  several 
systems use the same service provider. This may reduce costs. On the other hand, such a 
concentration may weaken competition, while risk is concentrated in a single provider. Any 
failure in the service provider may then impact large parts of the financial infrastructure. 
The systems are vulnerable to technical failure and to external attacks. With several layers of 
service providers, risk increases while at the same time becoming more difficult to uncover. 
In  2015,  Norges  Bank  will  evaluate  the  outsourced  operations  of  key  participants  in  the 
financial  infrastructure  in  Norway.  This  assessment,  too,  will  be  based  on  international 
principles.8  
A fundamental prerequisite is that the owners of systems have the ultimate responsibility for 
operation. This responsibility also covers backup solutions. The owners’ responsibility does 
not change because all or parts of system operation are managed by others. Owners must 
therefore retain sufficient expertise in-house. 
Both for the system owner and the authorities, the ability to set requirements and follow up 
activities  is  more  of  a  challenge  the  more  remote  they  are.  When  parts  of  the  financial 
infrastructure  are  operated  outside  of  Norway,  system  owners  should  implement  special 
measures  to  address  these  additional  challenges.  A  situation  must  be  avoided  where 
infrastructure critical to Norway is affected by incidents in other countries. Norges Bank will 
give weight to these considerations in its supervisory role. 
Contingency preparedness 
The consequences of disruptions in a payment system may be more serious for society than 
for  the  individual  operator.  For  that  reason,  the  authorities  set  strict  requirements  for 
contingency  preparedness.  Contingency  arrangements  shall  both  reduce  the  likelihood  of 
incidents and mitigate the consequences if an incident has occurred. The requirements for 
contingency preparedness may entail increased costs in the short term. In the longer term, 
adequate contingency preparedness is crucial for society. This is reflected in the trade-offs 
between long-term risk and short-term costs. 
IT systems and websites are vulnerable to attack by criminals. Attacks can put services out 
of order and reduce confidence in the systems. Attacks take ever newer forms. This requires 
that  system  owners  keep  updated  on  the  various  kinds  of  attack.  The  establishment  of 
FinansCERT by Finance Norway is a sound measure in this regard. In addition, participants 
must ensure robust defences against attack. This will not be any easier in the period ahead. 
Nevertheless: if we are to reap the benefits of IT and online services, a substantial use of 
resources on monitoring and security is a price we must pay. 
Banks and Norges Bank must in the worst case deal with situations where all or part of the 
payment system has been put out of action. New technology may in the longer term usher in 
new contingency arrangements. Even so, to date no sufficiently adequate alternatives have 
been  documented  to  allow  cash  to  be  written  off  as  a  part  of  the  overall  solution. 
                                                
8  Appendix F in the CPMI-IOSCO principles. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Finanstilsynet  and  Norges  Bank  are  now  examining  closely  contingency  preparedness  for 
both electronic payment and banks’ contingency arrangements for cash distribution. 
Norges Bank shall ensure that society has access to cash as a means of payment. Banks 
can  make  cash  withdrawals  based  on  deposits  in  Norges  Bank.  The  general  public  go  to 
their  banks  to  withdraw  cash.  The  Government  presented  a  bill  for  a  new  Financial 
Institutions Act before summer. The bill states that banks will have an  obligation to accept 
cash from customers and make deposits available to customers in the form of cash. This is a 
further specification of banks’ responsibility for cash handling. The bill also gives banks the 
freedom  to  choose  how  services  are  to  be  organised,  as  long  as  they  are  able  to  meet 
customer demand. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  sum  up:  The  Norwegian  payment  system  is  efficient  and  up-to-date.  It  gives  the 
nation a competitive advantage over many other countries. 
The  owners  must  have  management  systems  that  enable  them  to  have  sound  control  of 
operations.  The  owners’  responsibility  also  includes  backup  solutions.  This  responsibility 
does not change if all or parts of operations are managed by others. 
Payments  can  become  cheaper,  faster  and  more  user-friendly  than  they  are  at  present. 
Banks  should  price  payments  so  that  they  achieve  acceptable  earnings  and  promote 
profitable investments. This will also serve the interest of customers. It is of benefit to us, as 
a society, that banks and other operators are now  investing in secure and forward-looking 
solutions. The aim must be to remain at the forefront of international developments. There is 
growing  urgency  to  put  in  place  new  solutions.  In  this  respect,  the  system  owners  –  the 
banks – have collective interests that go beyond pure private financial considerations of the 
individual bank. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
