  Sarah Dahlgren: The new era of supervision – progress to date and the 
road ahead 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  York  Bankers 
Association’s Annual Meeting, New York City, 25 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  New  York  Bankers  Association  for  inviting  me  to  speak  today.  I 
appreciate the opportunity to address this group and to continue the dialogue that I’ve been 
having  with  many  of  you  in  various  forums  over  the  past  several  years.  As  always,  my 
remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York or the Federal Reserve System. 
The last time I spoke to you in this setting was three years ago, when I spoke about the new 
era  of  supervision,  modifications  in  our  approach  to  supervision  in  response  to  lessons 
learned from the crisis, and the need to be better prepared for future crises. I focused on the 
Framework for Supervision, which pushed for firms to be more resilient, less complex and 
better managed. I also spoke about the structural changes that we made in our supervision 
area and our plans for the future. 
Today, I will provide an update on the Framework and progress in addressing weaknesses 
identified through the crisis. I will share some of the challenges we see in the road ahead as 
the industry continues to adapt to and implement necessary changes. And then I’ll finish with 
a brief discussion of two of the issues that keep me awake at night. 
Progress to date 
Three years ago, I encouraged you to acknowledge that it is impossible to predict the nature 
or  timing  of  a  future  crisis  event.  I  posed  a  question  about  what  a  financial  system  better 
prepared  to  weather  all  storms  would  look  like.  As  financial  institution  supervisors  and  as 
leaders  of  financial  institutions,  we  all  knew  we  needed  to  be  better  prepared  for  crisis 
events, whatever their character, source or timing. Since I made those remarks, a number of 
stress events have reinforced not only the need for continued substantive changes in firms, 
but also the benefits of the changes we have made so far. 
1. Starting first with what has been accomplished to make financial firms – and the system – 
more resilient today to future shocks. 
First, in the area of capital resiliency, as a result of both new bank capital standards and our 
new  stress  testing  regime,  bank  capital  levels  and  the  quality  of  capital  have  increased 
significantly  –  and  on  some  measures,  nearly  doubled  from  pre-crisis  levels.  The  banking 
system has more capital and, thus, a better ability to withstand stressful events when they 
arise. At the same time, our supervisory focus on capital planning and management across 
firms  has  led  to  greater  focus  and  attention  on  the  internal  processes  that  firms  use  to 
manage  their  capital,  including  the  prudent  distribution  of  capital  to  shareholders,  whether 
through dividends or share buybacks. 
In the area of liquidity, again, new rules and regulations have raised both the absolute level 
of liquidity in firms and the quality of liquid assets (that is, assets that are readily accessible). 
This provides for a much stronger ability to manage through stress conditions. As many firms 
learned  in  the  depths  of  the  crisis,  what  was  once  thought  to  be  a  liquid  asset  quickly 
became  illiquid  as  markets  seized  up  and  normal  outlets  for  converting  assets  to  cash 
evaporated. Further, our enhanced focus today on liquidity management across the range of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  firms we supervise has led to heightened management – and board of directors – attention to 
liquidity levels, liquidity risk management and liquidity stress testing. 
In addition, global supervisors have finalized rules – or are in the process of finalizing rules – 
in the areas of both capital and liquidity, including additional and more stringent rules for the 
largest, most systemically important firms. For these firms, additional buffers will be required, 
as will stronger risk management practices. 
2. In addition to becoming more resilient, firms have made some progress in becoming less 
complex – although the progress is somewhat less measurable and less dramatic to date. 
Firms  have  begun  to  take  a  hard  look  at  their  legal  entity  structures,  including  having 
identified and mapped material legal entities. This was a necessary first step for a lot of firms, 
which have begun the difficult task of making sense of their legal entity structures. This will 
be a focus of our future supervisory work on firms’ preparedness for recovery and resolution 
planning. 
Another  positive  step  was  recently  made  in  the  area  of  financial  contracts  –  wherein  18 
global firms recently agreed to sign a new ISDA Resolution Stay Protocol. The Protocol will 
provide for a stay of certain early termination rights triggered by resolution proceedings. The 
stay is  intended to give  jurisdictions time to orchestrate an orderly resolution of a troubled 
institution.  It  will  be  important  that  firms  adhere  to  the  protocol  and  amend  ISDA  Master 
Agreements consistent with the terms of the protocol. Firms should carry out a similar effort 
with respect to other types of financial contracts not covered through the protocol. 
While these are positive steps, the feedback provided to the industry this summer after our 
review of the 2013 resolution plans for the largest firms suggested that quite a bit of work 
remains ahead on rationalizing legal entity structures, as well as in other areas, particularly: 
• 
• 
Developing a top-tier holding company structure that supports resolvability; 
Establishing  robust  service  level  agreements  and  contingency  arrangements  to 
ensure ongoing provision of critical services among material affiliates and between 
material entities and third parties; and 
Demonstrating the ability to produce, on a timely basis, reliable information about a 
material  entity 
financial  and  operational 
interconnectedness, and third-party commitments and contracts. 
financial  condition, 
related 
to 
 3. In the third area of our Framework – better managed  – we have seen progress on several 
fronts, although this area remains very much a work in progress. 
Considering  that  a  firm’s  leadership,  including  the  board  of  directors  and  the  senior 
management, is ultimately responsible for the culture of the firm, and culture is a dynamic 
element  that  firms  should  always  strive  to  improve,  I  see  the  work  in  the  area  of  better 
managed as requiring on-going, sustained attention. It is impossible to achieve “perfection” in 
an area of art like management. I think it’s also important to acknowledge that cultures within 
individual firms ultimately play a role in defining the culture of the industry. We have seen 
progress  in  this  area  over  the  past  few  years  with  some  firms  hiring  outside  experts, 
engaging  in  cultural  diagnostic  work  and  implementing  programs  that  focus  on  improving 
ethics, behaviors and internal culture. 
We’ve  also  seen  progress  in  our  direct  engagement  with  boards  of  directors  –  and  we’ve 
seen  this  across  institutions  of  all  sizes.  When  we,  as  supervisors,  first  began  requiring 
deeper  engagement  with  directors  and  senior  leaders,  the  reactions  varied,  with  an  initial 
wariness  of  the  purpose.  In  fact,  directors  were  often  accompanied  by  a  compliance  or 
regulatory  relations  liaison  during  our  early  interactions  with  them.  Over  time,  though,  as 
senior leaders and board members recognized the advantages of this level of engagement, 
the process has been smoother and our exchanges are becoming more engaging and direct 
(and  few  if  any  “escorts”  are  present  during  our  interactions  now).  While  the  level  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  engagement  varies  across  firms,  in  general,  we  are  seeing  boards  being  more  active  in 
asking questions, providing oversight of management and engaging with supervisors. We, in 
turn,  have  deeper  insight  into  decision  making  dynamics  at  the  board  and  c-suite  level, 
including  the  how  and  why  of  decision  making  on  key  strategic  issues.  Regular 
communications also encourage early and proactive surfacing of issues. 
In addition, we’ve seen good progress in recruiting additional directors to complement current 
skills  on  the  board  –  better  positioning  the  board  to  engage  with  the  senior  management 
team in a productive and appropriately challenging way. 
Before turning to the road ahead, I wanted to pause and recognize two things. First, it’s clear 
that  progress  has  been  made  across  the  industry  in  a  number  of  areas  –  particularly  in 
making firms and the system more resilient through improvements in capital and liquidity, as 
well  as  enhancements  in  risk  management,  including  capital  planning  and  stress  testing 
across the range of risks firms face. But, in the remaining two areas of the Framework– less 
complex  and  better  managed  –  I  think  it’s  safe  to  say  that  despite  the  fact  that  firms  are 
addressing a number of outstanding issues, these areas continue to present challenges in 
reaching the desired end state. 
As  I’m  sure  you  would  agree,  we  collectively  still  have  quite  a  bit  of  work  to  do  to  fully 
implement  the  changes  required  under  new  rules  and  regulations.  While  it  is  important  to 
take stock of the changes made over the past few years – first, to assess the impact of those 
changes, both intended an unintended; and, second, to understand the contours of the “new” 
financial system operating under a plethora of new rules and regulations, both national and 
global in nature – we must acknowledge that some of the changes necessary have yet to be 
fully implemented. We must continue to devote sufficient attention and resources to complete 
the  efforts.  And,  firms  and  supervisors  will  continue  to  face  challenges  and  competing 
demands as we press ahead on reform efforts in the coming months and years. 
The road ahead 
Looking ahead, we see a number of challenges that firms are facing, and I thought I’d take a 
couple of minutes to share with you some broad themes that we see emerging. The list is not 
exhaustive or overly detailed – as I’m sure you will recognize – but I think it captures some of 
the issues that are – and should be – more “top-of-mind” for many of you. 
1.  Engagement  of  Boards  and  Senior  Management:  While  management  is  clearly  on  the 
hook to develop and implement necessary changes, and despite the tremendous progress 
made in board engagement over the past few years, some firms are still struggling to set the 
appropriate level of engagement with their boards. The challenge for these firms is finding 
the  right  balance  and  having  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of 
boards of directors. 
Based on our experiences with increased engagement with boards, a number of lessons can 
be  applied  to  engagement  between  senior  management  and  boards,  including  the 
importance of: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Firms should not underestimate the importance of the chairman or lead director, or the roles 
of the committee chairs. The board has the responsibilities to provide the appropriate level of 
oversight and to be prepared to hold senior management accountable for their running of the 
firm. You don’t want board members so involved that they need to approve every policy and 
procedure. You do want them to be involved enough that they understand the organization, 
Trust and credibility; 
The qualifications and experience of board members; 
Board leadership and in setting the right tone; and 
The right composition of members. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  they  are  providing  the  right  level  of  oversight  and  guidance,  and  they  share  a  sense  of 
responsibility for the actions of the firm. 
2.  Resources:  In  terms  of  talent,  we  see  firms  struggling  to  recruit  and  retain  sufficient 
expertise  in  some  areas,  with  firms  competing  for  the  talent  needed  to  implement  new 
standards and to address identified resource gaps. We also understand the challenges firms 
are  having  with  filling  many  difficult  leadership  roles,  such  as  risk  management  and 
compliance positions, where demand is higher than the supply of talented candidates. 
With regard to general population of eligible candidates, hiring managers must be willing to 
look  closer  at  the  25  to  40-year-old  cohort  that  makes  up  much  of  the  workforce  in  the 
industry. There needs to be a better understanding of: 1) what incents and motivates them; 
and  2)  why  they  fail  to  make  long-term  commitments  to  firms.  The  high  turnover  rates  in 
financial  services  can  be  attributed  in  part  to  the  competitive  nature  of  the  industry,  the 
financial  incentives  to  move,  and  the  lack  of  repercussions  for  bad  behavior.  But,  more 
importantly,  the  demographics  of  the  workforce  may  also  playing  an  important  role. 
According to  a  report from  the  U.S.  Department  of  Labor’s  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  the 
median tenure of workers ages 25 to 34 is only three years – less than a third of the tenure 
among  people  aged  55  to  64  years  old.1  And,  according  a  Future  Workplace  “Multiple 
Generations@Work” survey, 91 percent of “millennials” (that is, a person born between 1977 
and 1997) expect to stay in a job for less than three years. 
Job-hopping can speed career advancement. Getting a promotion in the process of changing 
jobs allows employees to avoid the “dues paying” that can keep workers in a painfully slow 
rise  up  the  corporate  ladder.  Job  hopping  can  also  lead  to  greater  job  fulfillment.  A  2012 
survey  by  Net  Impact2  found  that  88  percent  of  all  workers  considered  “positive  culture” 
important or essential to their dream job, and 86 percent said the same for work they found 
“interesting.” The same survey found that millennials are the least satisfied in their careers. 
I also recognize that firms are no longer just competing with others in the financial sector for 
talent.  With  skills  that  can  be  adapted  across  multiple  industries,  the  talent  pool  that  was 
once specialized for financial firms is now spread thin. This puts pressure on the firms and 
gives  talented  workers the  advantage  of  being selective  in  their  roles. They  demand  more 
from hiring managers and sense other opportunities out there if they’re not satisfied. 
As I said to a group of foreign firms a few weeks ago, all firms, regardless of size, need to 
keep this information in mind and get better at planning in advance, ensuring their recruiting 
efforts are providing a steady stream of qualified candidates, and looking for opportunities to 
move people around within the organization, particularly between the front office and control 
functions,  to  develop  more  well-rounded  professionals.  This  is  likely  to  mean  more 
aggressive,  creative  and  targeted  searches  and  a  commitment  to  ongoing  training.  As  the 
competitive landscape and regulatory requirements change, firms will need to find the right 
balance between hiring new talent with specific expertise and training current staff to keep 
them up to speed and capitalize on institutional knowledge. 
3.  Continuing  to  Build  Resilience  –  Stress  Testing  and  Risk  Management:  No,  I  am  not 
suggesting that all firms, regardless of size, are going to be required to participate in CCAR. 
However, I believe that incorporating the motivating principles behind stress testing into your 
planning – namely thinking about the many ways that tomorrow could be different from today 
and what that could mean for your business – is at the heart of managing your risk and your 
business  with  foresight  and  prudence.  Sound  risk  management  demands  a  thorough 
understanding of the organization’s full risk profile today and how it could evolve tomorrow. 
                                                
1  Employee Tenure in 2014. 
2  Talent Report: What Workers Want in 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We expect banking organizations of all types and sizes to have the capacity to analyze the 
potential impact of adverse outcomes on their financial condition. 
Stress  testing  can  be  a  means  to  carry  out  such  analysis.  Certain  portions  of  existing 
supervisory  guidance  –  which  cover  capital  planning  and  management  of  funding  and 
liquidity  risks  –  discuss  using  stress  testing  or  addressing  potential  adverse  outcomes  in 
order to enhance risk management practices. This guidance is applied commensurate with 
an organization’s size, complexity and risk profile. For example: 
• 
Community  banks  –  those  with  below  $10  billion  in  assets  –  are  not  expected  to 
conduct  the  type  of  stress  testing  required  or  expected  of  larger  banking 
organizations,  as  indicated  in  recent  rulemakings,  proposals  and  guidance.  A 
community  bank  may  still  employ  certain  other  types  of  simpler  stress  testing  to 
augment their risk management – as many community banks have been doing for 
some time. 
In contrast, regional banks – which are typically those with assets between $10 and 
$50 billion – are indeed required to conduct a company-run stress test on an annual 
basis. Still, regional banks are not subject to many other stress testing requirements 
imposed  on  larger  firms,  such  as  going  through  a  supervisory  stress  test  or 
conducting  an  additional  stress  test  each  year.  Moreover,  our  reviews  of  those 
company-run stress tests are focused primarily on the quality of the processes those 
firms  employ  and  not  necessarily  the  results.  Our  goal  with  regional  banks  is  to 
ensure  that  managers  at  those  firms  recognize  their  vulnerabilities  and  develop 
appropriate mitigation strategies to enhance their resilience. 
 4. Structure and Culture: The final area, or challenge, I wanted to touch on is organizational 
structure and culture. Firms need to ensure that business strategy, organizational structure 
and desired culture are aligned to successfully operate in a fast-paced, ever-changing world. 
Whether you are a small community bank or a large global institution, you need to be agile 
enough to act quickly without risking the integrity of your structure and culture. 
I will touch on culture again a little later. 
In the short term, these are issues that we see as “top-of-mind” in terms of challenges and 
should continue to be areas of focus for firms. I thought I would close out today with thoughts 
on two areas. At times I have described these as being on my list of “things that keep me 
awake at night,” and I think it’s fair to say that these two issues continue to be near the top of 
that list. They are: information technology and culture. 
What keeps me awake at night 
Information technology 
1. 
My first issue is a topic that I had the opportunity to address with many of you earlier this 
year: the broad area of information technology, which has a few dimensions to it. 
The first dimension won’t surprise you or your boards: cybersecurity. I’m sure I don’t have to 
explain too much why this keeps me awake at night. Suffice it to say that as I think about the 
kinds of risks that might cause the next crisis, cybersecurity is the one that worries me the 
most.  
The worry is not focused solely on the financial sector. This is much bigger than just banks. It 
includes many other sectors, most notably, the retail sector. In particular, cyber threats pose 
a potentially systemic risk to financial stability through the disruption or corruption of critical 
payment, clearing and settlement systems and related data. A big question we need to think 
about is how firms, big and small, can protect themselves from these risks. 
As I have noted in the past, all of us face quite a bit of work ahead on the cybersecurity front. 
Importantly  for  us,  as  supervisors,  we  must  determine  the  best  areas  of  focus  given  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  perspective and the range of skills that we can bring to the topic. For example, in the near-
term  we  are  continuing  supervisory  plans  related  to  cyber  security  work  at  the  complex 
financial  institutions.  We  are  also  identifying  “core”  expectations  for  smaller  firms  so  that 
they, too, can take appropriate measures to harden their defenses. 
We  are  also  undertaking  concentrated  work  to:  develop  a  better  understanding  of 
vulnerabilities  and  emerging  practices:  develop  an  approach  to  enhanced  communications 
around  cyber  events,  and  revisit  supervisory  guidance  in  this  area.  The  initial  work  will 
require  a  deeper  assessment  of  the  interconnectedness  of  firms  and  the  prioritization  of 
critical operations. We will be working with all of you to do that. Once we all have a better 
understanding  of  the  areas  of  risk,  we  all  need  to  focus  on  timely  and  centralized 
communications  across  all  firms.  Finally,  while  there  is  a  lot  of  guidance  in  this  area,  we 
recognize that we need to review our supervisory approach and our tools to ensure we are in 
the best position to understand and assess vulnerabilities. This step is critical so that we can 
make  timely  and  informed  decisions  that  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  our  supervisory 
framework for cybersecurity. 
I think we’ve done a reasonable job in developing rules and regulations to ensure firms are 
prepared to withstand the other types of shocks we have experienced in the past. But, cyber 
adds an element to planning for the next crisis that goes beyond what additional capital and 
liquidity, for example, can provide to the system. 
The topic is a daunting one, but one that we have to address in the very near-term. It is an 
area  that  will  continue  to  warrant  attention  and  will  require  a  level  of  coordination  and 
collaboration between the public and private sectors. In many respects, I think we are all in 
this one together. 
The second dimension is legacy: There is still so much “clean-up” to do to fix longstanding 
technology and data issues that have built up over the years. The investments necessary are 
long-term and the fixes, in many cases, will take multiple years to execute. A number of firms 
have sound programs in place to address these longstanding issues, but continued strong 
project management and tenacity are crucial. I see commitment to this basic “blocking and 
tackling” as essential to financial institutions continuing to be competitive – and relevant – in 
the digital world. 
And  that’s  the  third  dimension  that  concerns  me:  the  competitive  landscape  for  financial 
institutions  in  the  digital  world.  As  more  and  more  non-financial  entities  are  entering  the 
financial arena, I worry that financial firms may lack the agility and ability to compete at the 
level that they need to – particularly with the added complexities (and likely constraints) of 
regulation. At the end of the day, will financial firms be able to compete in the same way – or 
will these largely unregulated players be the future of our financial system? 
Culture 
2. 
My  final  topic  today  is  culture  –  a  complex  topic  that  we  all  know  it  is  an  important  one. 
Before I get into this in detail, I want to stress that “culture” is very different from “risk culture.” 
You can have a strong risk culture within your firm, but still have cultural issues. The culture I 
am talking about today is broader and deeper. 
There  seems  to  be  a  general  acceptance  that  there  needs  to  be  changes  to  the  overall 
culture in the financial services industry, as well as improvements to cultures within individual 
firms. However there continues to be a lot of mixed views around how the changes can and 
should be initiated and implemented. The interconnectedness of the industry has resulted in 
the  public  viewing  the  industry  as  “one.”  Therefore,  I  believe  to  address  the  tarnished 
reputation of the industry as a whole in a credible and sustainable way, firms must be willing 
to address it with a unified front. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Culture is a bit of a nebulous concept that tends to go unattended. Accepting that cultural 
change is a necessity, not a “nice to do,” is the first step in a long road that will require the 
participation of management, boards and every employee on your payroll. 
The culture within the organization  will guide the behavior of employees, particularly when 
there are shades of gray. Therefore, if organizational values and norms conflict with the rules 
or guidance you are required to follow, the organization is headed for trouble. The failure to 
understand the purpose of a law or regulation may lead one to adopt an overly technical or 
game-like approach to compliance. Left uncorrected, this type of compliance arbitrage can 
fester and lead to micro-cultures lacking in respect for law. The recent enforcement actions 
addressing  sanctions  violations  offer  prime  examples  of  this  unfortunate  and  costly 
phenomenon. 
Last  week  we  hosted  a  workshop  on  “Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial 
Services Industry” at our offices downtown. Based on the discussions among panelists and 
attendees,  it  was  evident  that  industry  participants  have  taken  onboard  the  directive  that 
cultural and behavioral change is needed in the industry. A number of firms have begun to 
implement programs that are at various stages of depth, breadth and maturity. There were a 
few key themes that emerged that I want to share with you today: 
• 
The  role  of  regulation:  There  was  a  lot  of  discussion  on  the  potential  role  of 
regulators and the public sector in developing and maintaining appropriate cultures 
at financial firms. While some  voiced  the  opinion  that  regulators must  play  a  role, 
others clearly indicated that trying to regulate something as dynamic and amorphous 
as culture would be counterproductive and would overstep the purview of regulators. 
I tend to agree. Of course, regulation is one thing; supervision is another. Culture 
may  not  be  amenable  to  official  rulemaking,  but  it  falls  squarely  within  a  banking 
supervisor’s responsibility for financial stability. Financial institutions should expect 
greater supervisory attention to culture. 
Industry-led  effort  vs.  first  mover:  Using  the  United  Kingdom’s  Banking  Standards 
Review Council as an example, we believe that meaningful change will require an 
industry-wide  effort.  At  the  same  time,  the  “first  mover”  issue  fostered  a  general 
sense of skepticism around whether any firm would be willing to take on the risk of 
implementing a compensation structure, for example, that was dramatically different 
from others in the industry. Also, as an industry, there must be a willingness to listen 
to the critics when developing solutions. So the industry clearly has a way to go on 
this front. 
Employee base: There was much discussion around the population that makes up 
the majority of the workforce in the industry. As I said earlier when I spoke about 
resources,  there  needs  to  be  a  better  understanding  of  this  demographic.  The 
current  environment  of  high  turnover  can  lead  to  a  lack  of  loyalty  to  a  firm,  less 
concern  about  how  behaviors  will  be  perceived  and  a  disproportionate  focus  on 
financial compensation. 
Measuring success: Clear metrics are needed to measure behavior if culture is to be 
included  in  performance  assessments  and  discretionary  compensation.  All  firms 
measure risk, but culture is a very different type of risk. Even if measured to a higher 
confidence  interval  than  other  risks  (99+  %)  it  still  means  you  have  some  bad 
apples. This problem doesn’t go away with fewer people, so, regardless of your size, 
you can’t ignore the importance of culture. 
   So, as we move forward and the industry ramps up its efforts to address this issue, I see a 
number of considerations that must be incorporated into the solutions. They are in three main 
categories: management, operations and employees. 
Regarding management, we need leadership from top. Firms must have a clearly articulated 
statement  of  purpose  that  aligns  with  the  firm’s  business  strategy  and  risk  appetite.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  business  model  must  be  simple  enough  that  it  can  be  shared  with  employees  and 
understood at every level. Senior managers must lead by example, present a unified front 
and set the tone. The job of the leader is to encourage and foster the good and squash the 
bad. While many argue that it takes just “one bad apple,” firms must accept that it is rarely 
just one and that they always need to be focused on identifying the potential problems and 
addressing them early and quickly before they become outsized. 
Boards,  whether  as  a  whole  or  through  a  sub-committee,  need  to  set  direction  and 
expectations on culture and behavior, and measure and monitor progress over time. Boards 
also  need  to  hold  senior  management  accountable  for  building  and  sustaining  the 
appropriate culture and fostering the desired behaviors over time. Senior management must 
in turn hold employees accountable for their actions. 
Within  the  category  of  operations,  I  envision  the  development  of  industry  standards  on 
culture and behavior, enhanced communications, both within firms and across the industry, 
and clarification around success metrics. It’s important to realize that “one size does not fit 
all”  when  it  comes  to  solutions  and  metrics.  Employees  should  know  what  behaviors  are 
expected  from  them  and  how  their  actions  will  be  measured.  The  purpose,  strategy  and 
business plan need to be communicated to every level of the organization. It should be clear 
to employees how their work aligns with the purpose and strategy and how they contribute to 
the overall success of the firm. 
Finally,  within  the  employee  category,  the  remedies  need  to  cover  the  entire  employment 
cycle,  from  recruitment  and  onboarding  to  performance  management,  compensation  and 
promotion. I have already spoken about the importance of hiring practices, so I don’t need to 
repeat  myself  here.  It  goes  without  saying  that  to  be  successful  in  strengthening  hiring 
practices,  you  need  to  incorporate  a  process  where  you  assess  whether  candidates  are  a 
strong  fit  with  the  desired  culture  of  the  organization  and  develop  indoctrination  programs 
whereby new employees are educated on strategy and vision, as well as the behaviors that 
are not tolerated. The goal is to convince all employees of three points. First, good behavior 
protects them as well as the firm. Second, all employees share the consequences of poor 
conduct. Third, it is therefore the responsibility of each employee root out bad behavior. 
The industry also needs to consider a mechanism to stop movement of “bad apples” from 
firm to firm. The current situation not only facilitates movement, but in many cases rewards it. 
By allowing employees to jump from firm to firm, the impact of unethical behavior is systemic 
and cannot be contained within one firm or a small section of the industry. We must address 
this challenge. 
Once employees are on board, performance management should play a greater role, both in 
compensation  decision-making,  which  needs  to  be  simplified  and  diversified,  and  in  the 
promotion  process.  The  process  should  reflect  a  better  balance  between  production  and 
controls,  by  focusing  not  on  “what”  was  accomplished  but  “how”  it  was  accomplished. 
Repercussions  are  necessary  for  employees  that  do  not  behave  in  a  manner  that  is 
desirable. 
I said that leadership must come from the top. But that doesn’t mean that you can’t drive the 
culture from throughout the organization in the form of “culture carriers” – employees who are 
well connected, respected and can be effective in making your culture “go viral.” 
Cultural change is not just a “flavor of the month.” It is a long-term commitment to changing a 
firm and an industry. It will take time. And, once you feel you’ve achieved what you originally 
set  out  to  achieve,  you  will  likely  have  raised  the  bar  and  will  need  to  reset  your  goals. 
Building and maintaining a strong culture in a firm is an ongoing effort, not a “one and done” 
initiative. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
Will our list of “to dos” ever end? Probably not. Will our list of “worries” get shorter? Unlikely 
in the current environment. 
We  live  in  an  ever-changing  environment  where  speed  and  agility  are  of  the  essence. 
Demands  from  customers  change,  expectations  from  shareholders  change,  and  the 
regulatory landscape you work within will continue to evolve to keep pace. Constant change 
–  and  commitment  to  evolution  –  is  not  a  choice.  It  is  a  necessity  to  remain  relevant  and 
provide  a  safe,  sound  and  accessible  financial  sector  that  also  contributes  to  the  health, 
vitality and dynamic growth of our economy. 
Overall, we want smooth, efficient markets that support global growth. We want to continue 
to reduce the systemic risk posed by firms that are large, complex and interconnected. We 
want  to  ensure  fair  access  to  credit  for  all.  And  we  want  a  strong,  resilient,  safe  financial 
system.  Our  challenge  is  how  to  balance  all  of  these  “wants.”  As  we  strive  to  find  the 
balance,  it  is  important  that  we  continue  to  have  productive  engagements  with  you,  the 
industry. We need honest, frank and educated discussions. And we need to work together to 
gain a better understanding of our shared goals and how to get there. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
