  Geoff Bascand: Brighter money – enhancing innovation and embracing 
heritage 
Speech  by  Mr  Geoff  Bascand,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Operations  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, at the launch of Brighter Money, Wellington, 20 November 2014. 
 Seeing  people’s  initial  reactions  to  the  new  banknote  designs  is  a  heartening  reminder  of 
what an important role currency plays in our lives, and what a sense of pride and heritage 
our notes evoke. 
Three years ago, when we launched the project to upgrade New Zealand’s banknotes, we 
decided to retain representation of well-known New Zealanders and flora and fauna on our 
notes.  Our  research  showed  that  New  Zealanders  were  satisfied  with  the  themes  of  the 
existing notes and the denominations available. 
Looking  at  the  designs  in  print,  we’re  very  proud  of  the  way  New  Zealand’s  rich  cultural 
diversity, world-class achievements and unique heritage have been brought to life as part of 
the new designs. 
From our world famous mountaineer and explorer Sir Edmund Hillary, through to our Nobel 
Prize winning scientist Lord Rutherford, the stories that we’ve celebrated as New Zealanders 
will continue to live on through future generations. Some new ones may even emerge as the 
sharper and more colourful pictures on the notes bring flora, fauna, landscapes and history 
alive. 
But  our  Brighter  Money  doesn’t  just  celebrate  innovation  and  the  pioneering  New  Zealand 
spirit  through  the  images  depicted  on  the  banknotes  –  the  notes  themselves  are  at  the 
forefront of banknote technology. 
It’s been 15 years since the current New Zealand banknotes were last upgraded, and printing 
and design techniques have advanced significantly. In 1999, New Zealand was one of the 
few countries to be printing banknotes on polymer – now, it’s increasingly common as central 
banks around the world work to produce durable, secure currency. 
Security features have also advanced considerably in the last 15 years, and our new notes 
contain  more  sophisticated  security  elements  that  greatly  enhance  the  overall  design. The 
transparent windows are larger, and striking holographic features will help to make the notes 
very easy to verify, but hard to counterfeit. More details about these features will be made 
available closer to the time the notes are released. 
New  Zealand  is  very  fortunate,  in  that  we  have  low  rates  of  counterfeiting  by  international 
standards.  But  since  the  last  banknote  upgrade  in  1999,  there  have  been  significant 
advances in copying, scanning, and printing technologies and the cost of this technology has 
reduced. As a result, the economics of counterfeiting have changed substantially and the risk 
of  counterfeiting  has  increased.  So  we  need  to  stay  ahead  of  the  game,  as  a  counterfeit 
attack  could  potentially  be  very  costly,  and  erode  the  high  levels  of  trust  New  Zealanders 
have in the currency. 
Delivering New Zealand’s new banknotes is a key priority for the Reserve Bank, as we gear 
up for the pending release of the new banknotes and the subsequent growth in operational 
activity.  Over  the  last  year  we’ve  made  sure  that  our  Wellington  facilities  are  now  well 
equipped to handle the roll out of new banknotes, and we have the processing capability in 
place to handle the higher activity associated with the changeover of banknote series. 
After  a  multi-stage  international  tender,  we  chose  Canadian  Banknote  Company  (CBN)  to 
design and print our new banknotes. CBN has a very strong reputation for technologically-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  advanced printing and has produced New Zealand’s passports since 2009. It also prints the 
Bank of Canada’s banknotes. 
In recent months we’ve had a team up at CBN’s facility in Ottawa making sure the designs 
you  see  here  are  being  translated  accurately  and  smoothly  into  printed  banknotes.  It’s  a 
particularly  detailed  process,  requiring fastidious  checking  and  cross  referencing  of  source 
material. 
We  are  still  completing  detailed  work  on  the  security  features,  which  will  help  people  to 
authenticate the new notes. So, the actual banknotes will look slightly different to the ones 
you see here today. 
We’ve  still  got  a  lot  of  work  to  do  together  with  the  team  at  CBN  before  the  new  Brighter 
Money comes rolling off the presses, but it will result in a product we all can be proud of. 
Closer  to  home,  there’s  been  a  lot  of  work  going  on  behind  the  scenes  to  make  these 
banknotes much more user-friendly for people with visual impairments. Most importantly, the 
new notes will continue to be the same sizes as the current ones – meaning visually impaired 
people can continue to use size to differentiate the denominations. In addition, the note value 
is shown in larger print and there is greater colour contrast between notes. 
New Zealand’s Māori culture is also better represented on our new notes. In particular, they 
incorporate more te reo Māori – notably Aotearoa, the Māori name for New Zealand, and Te 
Pūtea Matua, the Māori name for the Reserve Bank. As with the current notes, the names of 
the  native  birds  on  the  reverse  of  the  notes  (hoiho,  whio,  kārearea,  kōkako  and  mohua) 
continue  to  be  written  in  Māori.  Tukutuku  panels  also  feature  more  prominently,  weaving 
important cultural and symbolic meaning into the banknote designs. 
Designing,  developing,  printing  and  rolling  out  new  banknotes  involves  many  partnerships 
and moving parts. We’ve been working with the New Zealand Police to ensure the designs 
are counterfeit resilient, and a panel of experts from the national museum, Museum of New 
Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, to ensure that the note designs are culturally and scientifically 
accurate. 
On  a  personal  note  –  I  have  learnt  first-hand  the  importance  of  design  accuracy.  Despite 
having  a  father  as  a  botanist  and  a  mother  as  an  artist  and  printmaker,  and  growing  up 
surrounded  by  drawings  of  ferns,  I’ve  been  amazed  at  just  how  scientifically  accurate  the 
drawing of the silver fern needs to be before the team will let it near our banknotes! 
As well as the contracts for design and print with CBN, we have signed seven other contracts 
or supply agreements with six other vendors or component suppliers. To give you an idea of 
the  scope  of  the  changeover  exercise  –  more  than  40,000  pieces  of  cash-handling 
equipment will need to be calibrated for the new notes. We’ve been consulting with industry 
on the calibration and testing programme, and at this stage we’re confident the industry will 
be  ready  to  handle  the  new  notes  later  next  year. We’ll  continue  to  work  closely  with  the 
industry to ensure the transition is as smooth as possible. 
Release approach 
We’re  targeting  October  2015  for  the  release  of  $5  and  $10  notes,  followed  by  the  $20, 
$50 and $100s in April 2016. 
Issuing the new notes and collecting up the old notes is a major logistical exercise for the 
Reserve  Bank.  Our  note  circulation  and  distribution  strategy  has  been  designed  in 
consultation  with  industry,  and  it  represents  a  “business-as-usual”  approach  which  should 
minimise  the  additional costs  of  introducing  new  notes.  Such an  approach  means that the 
Reserve Bank will issue new banknotes as banks demand them, and we will take back old, 
surplus or worn banknotes as required. Some of these old series notes will be held in reserve 
in case we ever need to call on them, but most will be shredded and recycled. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Reserve Bank will withdraw the old series notes from circulation naturally as the banks 
return them to us. It may take 12–18 months for the new notes to be widely in circulation, but 
both  sets  of  notes  will  remain  legal  tender  so  people  can  continue  to  use  them  with 
confidence. 
Of the approximately 148 million notes in circulation ($4.7 billion) we receive, process and re-
issue over 140 million banknotes each year. We expect it will cost an extra $7–8 million per 
annum for the next five years to issue and distribute the new notes, and replace our reserve 
stocks. 
In preparation for the changeover, we will be running a public awareness campaign to ensure 
that New Zealanders can easily  identify the new notes and use the new security features. 
Today we’ve launched a Brightermoney.co.nz website that contains basic information about 
the notes and the wider upgrade project. We will progressively update it over time, and it will 
eventually become a one-stop-shop for industry players, retailers and the public to up-skill 
themselves about the new notes. 
Upgrading  New  Zealand’s  banknotes  is  a  big  project,  and  it  is  one  we  have  to  get right  – 
especially  as  demand  for  cash  continues  to  increase.  New  Zealand  is  experiencing 
consistent  growth  of  notes  in  circulation  of  4.6  percent  per  year  (in  terms  of  note  value; 
2.5 percent per annum in terms of number of notes). This growth is being mirrored in many 
other countries too. 
The Reserve Bank’s project to upgrade New Zealand’s banknotes is about celebrating and 
honouring our country’s unique heritage and culture. It also involves embracing modern and 
innovative technologies. We expect Brighter Money to be something all New Zealanders can 
be proud of. 
While we’ve still got more work to do on the upgrade project, we’re confident we’ll continue to 
supply currency that New Zealanders can continue to identify with and trust. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
