  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Issues surrounding intellectual property 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Intellectual Property Financing Conference 2014, 
Kuala Lumpur, 23 September 2014. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  today  to  the  2014  Intellectual  Property  (IP) 
Financing Conference – themed “IP Potentials in Financial Landscape Evolution”. I would like 
to thank the Malaysian Intellectual Property Corporation and the Asian Institute of Chartered 
Bankers  for  co-organising  this  event  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  We  are  also  grateful  to 
Secretary General Dato’ Sri Alias bin Haji Ahmad for joining us today to deliver the keynote 
address and officiate the conference. 
In  the  age  of  the  information  economy,  the  importance  of  intellectual  property  as  a  key 
enabler of productivity and economic growth has become significantly more pronounced as 
intangibles make up an increasing proportion of business investments. This conference was 
carefully  designed  to  raise  issues  surrounding  IP.  Many  issues  and  questions  require 
resolutions and insights. 
How do we achieve strong and effective IP protection that will encourage companies to bring 
new  innovations  to  the  market?  How  do  we  unlock  the  value  of  IP  within  businesses  and 
encourage the financial system to make better use of this value in financing decisions? How 
do  we  start  to  develop  a  more  transparent  market  for  IP  assets?  These  are  some  of  the 
issues and questions that the Conference should explore to optimise the full potential of IP in 
Malaysia. 
The  world’s  economy  continues  to  transform  into  one  that  prioritises  knowledge-based 
production and services. 53% or more than half of global market capitalisation is now derived 
from intangible assets. For example the S&P 500 companies encompass over 80% of market 
value.  IP,  a  major  component  of  intangible  assets,  is  now  truly  becomes  the  primary 
contributor to business value and wealth creation. The significance of IP is also not confined 
to the developed economies alone. 
Since 2010, East Asia has overtaken North America and Western Europe in the number of 
international patent filings. With deeper economic integration within Asia, this shifts has an 
important  implications  on  the  economic  growth  potential  for  businesses  in  the  region.  In 
Malaysia, IP has been growing steadily. The number of patent applications in 2013 has more 
than doubled than that in 1993. For trademarks, it has more than tripled. 
Despite  these  clear  trends,  we  have  yet  to  fully  leverage  the  value  and  significance  of 
intangibles, including IP in particular, as an important asset to create growth opportunities for 
businesses.  This  is  especially  true  for  innovative  small  and  medium  scaled  enterprises 
whose value tends to be more closely linked to intangible assets. To a large extent, this is 
because  IP  issues  are  still  not  well  understood.  The  financial  industry  has  not  devoted 
enough  resources  to  this  increasingly  critical  sector  for  future  growth.  Frameworks  within 
financial institutions for lending against IP are consequently not well-developed. 
This is quite surprising when one considers that way back in the 1880s, IP was first used as 
collateral  to  secure  funding  by  Thomas  Edison  with  the  incandescent  electric  light  bulb.  It 
was ground-breaking. It was a feat ahead of its time. IP is an ownership over an innovation. 
Innovation reflects an investment in a knowledge assets with an opportunity to make profits. 
Thus,  understanding  IP  makes  good  business  sense  and  offer  fund  providers  a  good 
opportunity for business growth and opportunities. 
Greater  recognition  of  IP  as  a  relevant  factor  in  financing  decisions  is  therefore  a  proven 
concept. Different financial players harness the potential of IP in different ways. The varying 
business models and risk appetites within the financing ecosystem will determine how IP fits 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  into financing considerations. For example, banks have to prioritise depositors’ interests and 
would  not  be  expected  to  finance  ventures  with  high  risks.  However,  this  is  not  true  in  all 
cases.  SMEs  with  proven  track  records  should  be  within  banks’  sights,  in  such  cases  the 
value-add of IP should be more effectively leveraged. 
Indeed,  in  other  emerging  economies,  progress  has  been  evident.  The  Thai  SME  Bank, 
Chinese Bank of Communications and the Federal Development Bank of Brazil already take 
IP into consideration for financing. Malaysia’s financial services industry should also take this 
opportunity created by this new growth industry. 
Therefore, it is an opportune time that the boards and senior management of the financial 
service fraternity in Malaysia to begin to actively explore pragmatic approaches to assimilate 
IP  into  existing  financing  considerations.  An  important  starting  point  is  building  a  stronger 
knowledge base of IP issues within financial institutions. This includes identifying staff within 
your institutions to learn about these issues and providing them with local and international 
opportunities for training or exposure in IP. 
The  industry,  working  together  with  relevant  authorities,  agencies  and  trade  associations, 
should also come together to agree on specific initiatives to overcome barriers to the more 
effective  use  of  IP  assets  in  financing  considerations.  This  includes  developing  practical 
guidance for both businesses and financial institutions in identifying, managing and valuing 
IP assets, and a way to include such assets within an institution’s existing credit assessment 
procedures. 
Such  initiatives  should  also  address  the  need  for  a  clear  and  unambiguous  legal 
documentation  for  a  legal  charge  over  IP.  This  promotes  a  cost  effective  and  consistent 
approach in perfecting legal rights across the industry. In addition, processes to facilitate the 
continuous  assessment  and  reporting  of  IP  assets  of  borrower  firms  will  also  promote 
transparency on the performance of the assets and provide early signals of potential distress. 
Through such efforts, IP can be further developed as an individual asset class that supports 
lending decisions. 
For this to become a reality, it will require a change in mindset and vision, coordination and 
investments by the industry today, to position itself for the future for a much bigger role in 
financing intangibles. 
The  real  economy  is  undergoing  significant  transformation  and  the  financial  sector  has  to 
keep pace. To remain relevant, just as financing looked to physical assets in the industrial 
age, it must look to intellectual assets in the information age. A first step needs to be taken. It 
needs to be taken expeditiously. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
