Jwala Rambarran: Paanch Kahani – five Ramayana stories of central 
banking 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago Divali Celebration Programme, Port-of-
Spain, 5 October 2014. 
 from 
this  evening  possible,  especially  staff 
Sita Ram, good evening and a warm welcome to each and every one of you who graciously 
accepted  our  invitation  to  attend  Central  Bank’s  2014  Divali  celebrations.  Let  me  also  say 
Sita Ram and a good evening to those of you watching our Divali show on CNMG. 
This  is  the  third  year  Central  Bank  has  opened  its  Divali  celebrations  to  the  public  in  this 
remarkable manner...and this year’s public response was the best ever. We had close to one 
thousand requests for tickets to attend this evening’s Divali program. 
We are indeed overwhelmed and touched so many of you from all over Trinidad and Tobago 
expressed  such  eager  interest  in  our  show.  It  is  truly  Central  Bank’s  honour  to  give  this 
valuable gift of art and culture to our country during the festive Divali season. 
I  can’t  think  of  many  other  institutions  that  have  the  privilege  of  sharing  this  type  of 
experience with the public. I sincerely thank everyone in Central Bank who worked towards 
making 
the  Strategic  Communications 
Department. 
I say thank you because the Bank has certainly come a long way in celebrating Divali. Many 
years  ago  when  I  was  here  as  a  young  economist,  I  remember  our  humble  Divali 
celebrations,  some  of  which  were  held  outside  the  Bank’s  Plaza  entrance  during  the 
lunchtime hour. 
In 2012, when Central Bank started these more engaging Divali celebrations we began with 
a  very  simple  theme.  We  started  with  the  story  of  Lakshmi  who,  in  our  open  minded  and 
culturally  all-embracing  country,  is  easily  associated  with  Divali,  as  she  is  the  Goddess  of 
Light  and  Prosperity.  Last  year,  we  turned  to  the  Ramayana,  which  has  been  a  source  of 
courage, strength and inspiration for the Hindu community here in Trinidad and Tobago for 
almost 170 years. 
The Ramayana relates the story of Ram who was the eldest and favorite son of Dashrath, 
the king of Ayodhya. Dashrath reluctantly agrees to exile Ram to the forest for fourteen years 
with his beloved wife Sita and his devoted younger brother Lakshman. 
The Ramayana tells the tale of how Ram, with the help of Hanuman, his loyal, humble but 
powerful emissary, defeated the evil king Ravan of Lanka and rescued his wife Sita who had 
been abducted by Ravan. Upon Ram’s return from exile, the people of Ayodhya celebrated 
by lighting rows of deyas to welcome him back. This is perhaps the most common story of 
the origin of Divali. 
Last year, instead of going with the obvious, we chose the character Hanuman for our Divali 
program.  In  selecting  Hanuman,  we  realized  there  were  themes  and  lessons  in  the 
Ramayana that were very applicable to the Central Bank. 
We  highlighted  how  like  Hanuman,  Central  Bank  is  a  faithful  servant  to  the  people  of  our 
country. We highlighted how we diligently ensure their financial protection, no matter the size 
and ferocity of the Ravans (demons) we take on. 
This year, we decided to continue with our exploration of the Ramayana because it is my one 
intention  that  anyone  attending  our  cultural  programs  should  walk  away  with  a  greater 
appreciation and new found respect for whatever artform we are showcasing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
So tonight when you leave here, no matter where you come from, I hope you are inspired not 
to see the Ramayana as a deeply religious, complex Hindu holy book, but a story poetically 
written that has at its heart the universal triumph of good over evil. 
Tonight’s performance is entitled Paanch Kahani. It is Hindi for five stories. We selected five 
stories  from  the  Ramayana  because  Central  Bank  is  celebrating  its  50th  anniversary  this 
December, and each story represents a decade in the Bank’s life. 
The five stories to be performed by Nrityanjali Theatre are not the obvious Divali stories with 
which  many  of  us  are  familiar,  but  they  are  stories  from  the  Ramayana  with  powerful 
messages for central banking. 
The first story is about a lesser celebrated character in the Ramayana, but incidentally the 
entire reason the epic Ramayana was written. The first story is about Shravan Kumar. His life 
was one of devotion to his parents and this is what led to his death and triggered the chain of 
events that is the Ramayana. The second story is about King Dashrath whose karma and 
that of Shravan Kumar were inextricably linked. The third and fourth stories are about Ram’s 
brothers, Bharat and Lakshman. The final story is about Ram’s twin sons, Luv and Kush. 
Shravan Kumar’s story is applicable to Central Bank’s own story, as you will soon see. In the 
Ramayana,  the  story  goes  that  as  a  young  prince,  Dashrath  during  a  hunt,  mistaking  the 
sound  of  a  pot  being  immersed  in  water  for  the  sound  of  a  deer  quenching  its  thirst, 
accidentally  shot  dead  a  young  man  called  Shravan  Kumar.  Shravan  Kumar  was  fetching 
water for his old, blind parents. When they found out about the terrible death of their son, 
Shravan Kumar’s grief-stricken parents cursed Dashrath that just as they are dying due to 
separation from their beloved son, so too would Dashrath suffer and die due to loss of his 
son. This is the reason behind the exile of Ram to the forest. 
Shravan Kumar epitomizes the dutiful son. His service to his parents cost him his life, but 
that was his fate, and his karma. Shravan Kumar’s tragic death triggered the entire events of 
the Ramayana. 
Over the past fifty years, Central Bank has been at the centre of three financial crises that 
were tragic and disruptive to our people’s lives…from failure of several finance houses and 
trust companies in the mid-1980s to the collapse of the Hindu Credit Union in 2008 and to 
the CLICO meltdown in early 2009. This is our karma. 
Just like good eventually came out of Shravan Kumar’s death, so too we have been jolted 
into action to ensure good comes out from each financial crisis and to try and prevent similar 
tragedies from being repeated. 
Just  like  Shravan  Kumar  is  the  dutiful  son,  Central  Bank  is  the  dutiful,  national  institution. 
Before 2008, the typical person with a savings account, a mortgage, or an insurance policy 
never  quite  cared  about  who  was  keeping  on  an  eye  on  the  persons  and  institutions 
managing  their  money.  Now  Central  Bank  is  more  scrutinized  than  the  financial  players 
themselves. Like Shravan Kumar, we are honoured to accept the burden of our obligations, 
as we strive to protect our financial system beyond the next fifty years. 
Our second story is about King Dashrath. 
Dashrath  who  accidentally  kills  Shravan  Kumar  eventually  becomes  king.  He  had  granted 
one  of  his  three  wives,  Kaikeyi,  two  boons  when  she  saved  him  during  a  battle.  The  day 
before Dashrath was to crown Rama as king, Kaikeyi demands that Dashrath grant her the 
two boons. Her first demand is to send Rama into exile in the forest for fourteen years. The 
second is to crown her son, Bharat, king in Ram’s place. Bound by his rigid devotion to his 
word, a heartbroken Dashrath reluctantly orders Rama into exile. 
After Rama’s departure to the forest, Dashrath lies on his bed and suddenly remembers the 
curse of Shravan Kumar’s parents. The curse has taken effect. Dashrath’s karma has taken 
effect. Dashrath passes away in the night due to the pain and misery of his separation from 
Rama. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Just like Dashrath was duty bound to repay his wife Kaikeyi and keep his promise to her, 
Central  Bank  is  duty  bound  by  the  people  we  are  here  to  serve.  Even  if  it  means  taking 
difficult  but right  actions,  we  will  not  back  out  of  our  responsibility  to  ensure  your  savings, 
pensions, insurance policies and hard earned money are not put at undue risk. 
Like Dashrath’s angst over his decision to exile Ram, sometimes we too endure our own pain 
when taking actions we know are right. As the country’s primary financial regulator, the entity 
with the power to keep the mighty players in the financial system on their toes, we have no 
friends. In fact, we often make people unhappy with the hard decisions we must take. 
Earlier, I told you I hope you leave here tonight perhaps inspired and eager to learn more 
about the poetic writings of the Ramayana. I would like to share a bit of the poetic stanza of 
the Ramayana with you as it pertains to King Dashrath, and I hope you get a sense of how 
great is the writing and you are moved to learn more. 
I quote from the scene entitled “Dashrath’s Visit” 
“Then Dashrath, best of those 
Whose speech in graceful order flows, 
With gathered saints on every side, 
Thus to the lord of earth replied: 
“A truth is this I long have known, 
A favor is the giver’s own. 
What thou shalt bid, O good and true, 
We, as our power permits, will do.” 
We, as our power permits, will do. That is the essence of central banking. Central Bankers 
have a primordial responsibility to guarantee trust and confidence in the financial system. We 
carry out this responsibility with clear statutory objectives and with operational independence 
to pursue them. 
But  when  we  need  more  power  we  do  not  hesitate  to  go  to  the  authorities  to  widen  and 
strengthen our regulatory net to make sure we are equipped in every way to do our duty. We 
currently  regulate  the  banking,  insurance  and  private  pensions  sectors  of  the  financial 
system…we are also preparing to supervise five systemically important financial institutions 
(UTC, NIB, HMB, TTMF and ADB) as well as credit unions. 
That is a lot of power for a central bank. How do we wield such power? 
This brings me to our third story, which is about Bharat. 
As soon as the sad news of Dashrath’s death reaches Bharat, he rushes back to Ayodhya. 
He reproaches his mother Kaikeyi for her wicked scheming ways and leaves for the forest in 
search of his brother Rama to offer him his rightful position as ruler of Ayodhya. So great was 
his  devotion  to  Rama  and  so  strong  was  his  desire  to  be  fair  and  just,  that  when  Rama 
refused  to  return  to  Ayodhya  before  completing  his  fourteen  years  in  exile,  Bharat  placed 
Rama’s wooden sandals on the throne and ruled Ayodhya in the name of Rama – as Rama’s 
emissary until Rama returned to regain his rightful position. 
Bharat’s action, in my view, is one of the most powerful lessons in the Ramayana for those of 
us who serve in Government. Bharat was given the honour of ruling the mighty kingdom of 
Ayodhya.  He  could  have  just  accepted  the  throne  and  the  absolute  power  and  luxury  that 
came with it. But Bharat’s sense of right and wrong would not permit him to eagerly accept 
what most others would greedily take. Instead, he ruled Ayodhya in Ram’s name. 
As a central bank, we have the power to produce the public good called financial stability. 
Like Bharat, we recognize our power does not come from us, it comes from elsewhere. In the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
case  of  Bharat,  his  power  and  authority  to  rule  Ayodhya  came  from  Ram.  In  the  case  of 
Central  Bank,  our  power  and  authority  to  manage  the  financial  system  comes  from  the 
people of Trinidad and Tobago. We seek to exercise this power in a fair and just manner, 
without regard to race, class or creed but to what actions are best for the overall health of 
Trinidad and Tobago’s economy. 
In wielding this extensive power, what is our guide? What is our line in the sand? 
The This brings me to our fourth story… is the story of Lakshman. 
Soon after his birth, Lakshman kept crying until he was placed next to Ram. Since that day 
he  was  always  beside  Ram,  accompanying  him  into  exile  in  the  forest.  Such  was  his 
devotion to Ram that Lakshman even refused to sleep for fourteen years so that he could 
serve his brother, day and night. 
In the fourteenth year of exile, Sita sees a golden deer and pleads with Rama to capture it. 
Rama chases the deer into the forest, leaving Lakshman behind to watch over Sita. Hours 
pass. There is no sign of Rama. Afraid that a mishap might have befallen her husband, Sita 
forces Lakshman to go and look for Rama. Before setting out, Lakshman traces a line – the 
Lakshman Rekha – around the hermitage with an arrowhead. He warns Sita never to cross 
the line or let anyone in. 
No sooner does Lakshman leave than Ravan comes disguised as a beggar to the hermitage 
and  asks  Sita  for  food.  Unaware  of  the  devious  plan  of  the  beggar,  Sita  is  tricked  into 
crossing the Lakshman Rekha. To her horror, she discovers that the beggar is Ravan, king of 
the Rakshasas. Ravan grabs hold of Sita and forcibly carries her off to Lanka. 
The  Lakshman  Rekha  separates  civilization  from  the  jungle.  Within  the  Lakshman  Rekha, 
Sita is Rama’s wife. Outside, Sita is at Ravan’s mercy. 
Central  Bank’s  Lakshman  Rekha  is  financial  regulation.  Within  our  Lakshman  Rekha,  our 
citizens have financial protection. Outside it, financial rakhshas are free to take away your 
wealth without mercy. 
The  collapse  of  CLICO  and  the  HCU  some  five  years  ago  showed  there  were  financial 
rakhshas who through greed and avarice tempted our citizens to step outside the Lakshman 
Rekha and took what was not theirs to take, just like Ravan took Sita. That is why today we 
are  building  an  even  stronger  regulatory  and  supervisory  financial  perimeter…we  are 
strengthening our own Lakshman Rekha to prevent a reoccurrence of financial crises. 
This brings us to the final and fifth story about Luv and Kush, the twin sons of Rama…the 
future. 
According to legend, during Ram’s period of ruling Ayodhya, he yielded to negative public 
sentiment  about  Sita’s  purity  and  banished  Sita  into  exile  in  the  forest  for  a  second  time. 
Sage  Valmiki  provided  shelter  to  a  pregnant  Sita  in  his  ashram  (hermitage)  where  she 
delivered twin sons named Luv and Kush. Sage Valmiki trained Luv and Kush to be masters 
in  archery  so  that  no  one  on  earth  could  defeat  them  in  war.  He  also  taught  them  about 
divine and celestial warfare. 
Ram  decided  to  perform  Ashwamedha  Yagna  to  enlarge  his  empire.  The  Ashwamedha 
Yagna is a ritual where an emperor sends out a horse accompanied by his army to various 
neighboring  kingdoms.  The  local  king  has  two  options.  He  could  either  allow  the  horse  to 
wander, signaling that his kingdom is annexed. Or, he could tie up the horse, indicating that 
he was ready to battle the emperor’s army. 
The  horse  wandered  into  the  forest  where  Luv  and  Kush  lived  and  the  twins  tied  up  the 
horse,  not  knowing  its  significance.  Ram  sent  Hanuman  to  retrieve  the  horse.  Hanuman 
recognized  Luv  and  Kush  as  the  sons  of  Ram.  He  let  them  capture  him  and  tie  him  up. 
Worried, Ram sent his brothers and his army to look for the horse. As they saw Hanuman 
tied up and Luv and Kush guarding him, they thought the two boys had stolen the horse. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So Ram’s brothers started attacking Luv and Kush who defeated them all. Eventually, Ram 
himself came to confront them in battle and eventually learned that Luv and Kush were his 
children.  Once  Sita  witnessed  the  acceptance  of  her  children  by  Ram,  Sita  sought  final 
refuge in the arms of her mother Bhumi Devi (the goddess Earth), to receive her and as the 
ground opens, she vanishes into it. 
If  you  want  to  learn  how  it  is  Ram  did  not  know  he  had  these  two  powerful  sons,  then  I 
encourage you to read the Ramayana. For me, Luv and Kush represent the future of central 
banking…  a  strong  approach  of  specialized,  skills  that  can  take  on  any  force.  At  Central 
Bank, we are building capacity in specialized skills such as anti-money laundering, actuarial 
science,  cyber  security  and  operational  risk.  Demand  is  also  picking up  for  expert  skills  in 
strategic communications, international relations, and behavioral psychology. A decade ago, 
these skill sets were nowhere on the radar of Central Bank. 
Like Luv and Kush, our new breed of central bankers must not only come with specialized 
skills.  Just  like  Luv  and  Kush,  our  new  breed  of  central  bankers  must  also  come  with  the 
head and heart to ask the right questions, and the courage to look beyond the obvious to 
take on too-big-to fail entities like Ram’s army. 
Here at the Central Bank, more than 15 percent of our new hires in the past two years have 
been in financial supervision, many with experience from the private sector. Another 10 per 
cent of new hires are in economic research. Like Luv and Kush, most of these new Central 
Bankers are young, but experienced thinkers who are prepared to serve their country. 
These are the five stories we have chosen to tell you this evening and while they  are not 
traditional Divali stories, they come from the same source that gave birth to one commonly 
accepted story of Divali. Hopefully, you will leave here tonight with a greater appreciation as 
to why Hindus and non-Hindus remain so inspired by the epic story of the Ramayana. 
Let me take this opportunity to wish you and your family Shubh Divali. 
May your paths always be lit; may your minds always be illuminated. 
I hope you enjoy Paanch Kahani. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
