Ardo Hansson: Availability of banking services in Estonia 
Answer  by  Mr  Ardo  Hansson,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  before  the 
Riigikogu (the unicameral Parliament of Estonia), Tallinn, 22 September 2014. 
 Interpellations raised by members of the Riigikogu concerning the accessibility of 
banking services 
1. 
Why  has  Eesti  Pank  not  set  minimum  requirements  for  the  provision  of  cash  and 
payment services in a decree alongside the technical requirements, in the context of 
the Emergency Act? 
What solutions has Eesti Pank discussed for ensuring the equal accessibility of cash 
and payment services across Estonia? 
2. 
The principal position of Eesti Pank 
Banking services are important and they need to be accessible to people and 
companies across Estonia. It is reasonable for services to be provided efficiently and 
flexibly. 
I  understand  that  people  are  worried  about  the  accessibility  of  banking  services 
across Estonia. Eesti Pank does not prefer any one means of payment over any other. 
Cash  is  an  official  means  of  payment  and  so  Eesti  Pank  believes  that  it  should  be 
available through flexible solutions everywhere in Estonia. 
Eesti Pank works every day to supply Estonian companies and people with cash. We 
provide a flexible cash service to the commercial banks, giving cash out and taking it in every 
working day, and in exceptional circumstances we can be even more flexible. Our aim in this 
is  to  make  sure  that  cash  can  circulate  smoothly  and  without  interruption  and  we  also 
manage  the  state’s  cash  reserves  and  test  the  quality  of  the  cash  in  Estonia  every  day. 
Tomorrow Eesti Pank will release ten-euro notes of the second series into circulation, and 
these  are  more  secure  and  longer-lasting  than  the  notes  of  the  first  series,  with  better 
security  features.  As  Governor  of  Eesti  Pank  I  can  confirm  that  cash  is  not  going 
anywhere. I personally like to use cash and I am proud of the quality of the euro cash 
used in Estonia. 
Access to cash is important, and it is a complicated issue that doesn’t have a quick and easy 
solution. This is why it needs to be discussed, and Eesti Pank is very pleased that we could 
be part of the working group set up by Minister of Economic Affairs and Infrastructure Urve 
Palo to look for solutions. 
Eesti Pank believes that the issue of access to banking services across Estonia should not 
be handled under the Emergency Act, but this does not mean that it should be ignored. I will 
now answer questions about the Emergency Act first, and then questions about access to 
banking services. 
Coming  to  the  first  question  of  the  interpellation,  as  Governor  of  Eesti  Pank  I  have  set 
minimum requirements for the provision of cash and payment services in case of emergency. 
The  Decree  requires  that  the  four  largest  banks  in  Estonia  restore  their  normal 
services to  70%  of their  normal  operational  level within  12  hours in  the  event  of  an 
emergency. How the banks restore their services is up to them, but they must describe their 
recovery  plan  to  Eesti  Pank,  who  then  passes  the  information  on  to  the  Ministry  of  the 
Interior. 
As I understand it, the purpose of the Emergency Act is to see that vital services are 
restored in the event of an emergency. It is not intended to cover cases where some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
people do not have day to day access to some important services. Neither is it intended 
for  the  purpose  of  guiding  trends  in  urbanisation  and  marginalisation.  That  is  an  issue  for 
regional policy, not one that requires solving under emergency powers. 
Regional  policy  lies  within  the  domain  of  the  Riigikogu,  the  government  and  local 
authorities. That said, cash circulation is an issue of importance for Eesti Pank, and 
we wish to be fully engaged in setting policy for cash circulation. This brings me on to 
the second question in the interpellation, and the position of Eesti Pank on the accessibility of 
cash and payment services across Estonia. 
Eesti Pank’s goals for cash are to supply the commercial banks with sufficient cash 
resources and to ensure the quality of the cash. The commercial banks distribute the 
cash  among  the  people  and  companies  of  Estonia,  in  the  same  way  that  it  is  done 
around the world. Eesti Pank is not aware of any country anywhere where the central bank 
is responsible for operating the cash network serving people and companies directly. It would 
require massive investment and fixed costs for Eesti Pank and the outcome would most likely 
be  unwieldy  and  unclear  for  the  public  in  their  use  of  money.  The  commercial  banks  are 
much better able to do this and do it more efficiently. However, Eesti Pank is responsible for 
managing  cash  circulation,  and  we  consider  it  important  to  engage  in  looking  for  ways  of 
making sure services can be accessed across Estonia. 
Access  to  banking  services  is  a  problem  globally,  this  is  not  an  issue  that  is  unique  to 
Estonia. A parliamentary commission in Australia looked into the matter ten years ago, and 
similar questions have been discussed in Canada and Sweden and other countries. 
The trend is for the number of bank branch offices and cash machines to be cut, and 
this  is  happening  everywhere  in  the  world  in  response  to  advances  in  technology, 
trends in demography and changes in consumer preferences. To some degree this is a 
natural evolution against which it would be pointless to stand. Equally it creates problems 
of access to banking services, and such problems need to be resolved. Problems may 
arise particularly for the elderly or for people with impaired mobility, but they may also arise 
for small businesses or for those who live in the countryside or who do not use the internet. 
Services should not be provided exclusively to people who use the internet regularly, or only 
those who live in Tallinn or Tartu. 
The advances in technology have led electronic payments and internet banking to become 
very popular, and this has reduced the need for cash and the need for people to actually go 
into a bank branch. This has been driven by both supply and demand. Surveys in Estonia 
show that bank cards are ever more popular as a means of payment, while internet 
banking is increasingly used for banking transactions, and this trend shows no sign of 
abating.  This  means  that  preferences  of  consumers  themselves  are  changing,  and  bank 
customers need less and less to visit their local bank or to use cash. This is an inevitable 
consequence of technological progress, and it must be borne in mind throughout this debate. 
Demographic changes specifically means urbanisation, and urbanisation is happening here 
in Estonia too, amplifying the effect of developments in technology. It is inevitable that the 
decline in customer numbers will be reflected in falling demand, and that falling demand will 
lead to reduced supply. This applies equally to all forms of service provision, not just banking 
services.  Swedbank  has  released  detailed  data  to  explain  why  they  are  closing  branches, 
and  they  show  that  the  branches  being  closed  were  used  by  only  13%  of  the  clients 
registered there prior to closure, and that the number of cash transactions in those branches 
has halved in five years. 
The  larger  commercial  banks  in  Estonia  now  provide  services  more  efficiently,  and  one 
consequence  has  been  the  closure  of  branches  and  cash  machines  in  rural  areas.  A 
comparison with Sweden can be useful here, as that is where the parent banks of our largest 
banks are based. At the end of 2013 there were 1655 bank branches in Sweden, and a 
little  over  half  of  them  were  cash-free,  which  is  more  than  twice  the  proportion  in 
Estonia, where only 23% are cash-free. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At the start of June I wrote to the leaders of the local government in Läänemaa that Eesti 
Pank finds that having a single network of cash machines for all the banks would not 
improve  access  to  banking  services  in  rural  areas.  This  is  because  it  would  not  be 
possible for any commercial bank to differentiate its services from those of other banks by 
offering higher quality if there were a single network. Furthermore, a single network dilutes 
the responsibility of each individual bank, making it harder for clients or the public to affect 
the decisions taken by the banks. Cost efficiency will probably become even more important, 
meaning  there  are  no  grounds  to  expect  that  access  to  cash  services  in  rural  areas  will 
improve. 
I  do  not  conclude  that  the  commercial  banks  ought  to  maintain  an  unnecessarily  large 
network of branch offices and cash machines. There is no real difference here whether such 
a network is supported by the clients of the banks or by the Estonian taxpayer, in any case it 
is an unreasonably expensive solution. 
That  said,  the  commercial  banks  do  need  to  explain  their  vision  for  access  to  banking 
services  more  clearly  than  they  have  done  so  far,  and they  should  themselves  arrive  at  a 
solution that is acceptable to society. 
In short, the position of Eesti Pank is that the guiding principle for the provision of 
cash and banking services across Estonia is that it should make economic sense. At 
the same time, every person in Estonia must have access to banking services, and so 
we must find alternative flexible solutions in Estonia. 
The next question is how those flexible solutions should be supplied. Although this topic is 
under discussion in the Minister’s working group, I can suggest some options drawn from 
the experience of other countries, which the banks and the government may want to 
consider during their discussions on the accessibility of banking services: 
• 
A  cashback  system  in  shops  –  when  paying  for  their  food  in  shops  by  card, 
people can add some extra to the total amount paid and then get that in cash from 
the shop. For this to work, the commercial banks need to allow shopkeepers to offer 
this  service  without  charging  them  any  percentage  of  the  cash  that  is  withdrawn. 
The banks would gain by having a more efficient cash network, shopkeepers would 
gain additional clients in their shops, and those clients would benefit by being able to 
withdraw cash more conveniently and securely. 
State service points – offices providing a wide range of services from the state, the 
banks and other enterprises, all in one place. This would allow people in rural areas 
to  make  payments  at  regular  intervals,  and  get  cash,  medicines,  letters  and 
newspapers  and  other  services.  Cash  and  medicines  would  probably  need  to  be 
ordered in advance, but this would bring the services closer to people. This would 
make more sense for the state and for companies than maintaining separate offices, 
each dedicated to only one service. 
A state tender for services – the state can use a joint tender run by the central 
government, a state company or local government for provision of banking services 
in rural areas. The Swedish post and telecoms operator PTS used this approach by 
running a state tender in 2008 at the request of the government to supply 15 local 
authorities and 73 districts around the country with cash. 
Requirements,  or  best  practice  guidelines  that  are  generally  adhered  to,  for 
the  closure  of  bank  branches,  especially  in  rural  areas  –  Canada  has 
requirements  for  closing  local  bank  branches  and  the  banking  association  in 
Australia has set out the best practice for closing branches there. 
Joint  work  by  local  governments  and  banks  to  train  people  –  this  is  where 
banks  offer  regular  training  in  the  use  of  internet  banks  in  the  style  of  the  Vaata 
Maailma  project  that  ran  earlier.  Local  authorities  help  in  deciding  who  needs 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 training and bring together everyone interested, and the banks provide the people, 
computers and knowledge for the courses. 
Joint work by local governments and banks to provide cash – the commercial 
banks help local authorities provide cash and payment services to people who have 
impaired mobility or difficulty using a computer. This could be particularly useful in 
helping  elderly  people  or  people  with  impaired  mobility  or  vision.  Local  authorities 
can establish who in their area has such difficulties and then they can provide help 
by delivering cash to homes or help with paying electricity bills and so on. 
The experiences of other countries can’t simply be copied straight across here, but it is worth 
discussing  them  to  see  whether  we  could  use  them  in  some  way  to  provide  cash  and 
payment services to people all across Estonia. I am certain that the commercial banks in 
particular, though also the state, should be able to provide better solutions than has 
been the case so far, and I would invite the banks, state institutions and local authorities to 
take  an  active  role  in  the  discussions  about  access  to  banking  services.  Eesti  Pank  is  of 
course ready to join the discussion and I do not believe that any solution should be ruled out. 
Thank you for your attention and I am quite happy to answer any questions you may have. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
