Charles I Plosser: Communicating a systematic monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, to the Society of American Business Editors and Writers Fall 
Conference, City University of New York (CUNY) Graduate School of Journalism, New York, 
10 October 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President Plosser discusses how effective communications and a systematic, rule-
like monetary policy lead to better economic outcomes. 
President Plosser believes the appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-
like,  is  to  base  policy  decisions  on  economic  conditions.  He  thinks  policymakers 
should  describe  the  reaction  function  that  determines  how  the  current  and  future 
policy rates will be set depending on economic data. Monetary policy should be data 
dependent, not date dependent. 
President Plosser also believes the Fed should think of forward guidance as part of 
a systematic approach to decision-making and not an independent policy tool that 
attempts  to  bend  expectations.  As  monetary  policy  becomes  normalized,  the  Fed 
has  the  opportunity  to  ensure  the  public  understands  that  forward  guidance  is  an 
integrated part of a systematic approach to policy. 
Introduction 
Thank  you.  As  you  may  know,  this  is  the  centennial  year  for  the  Federal  Reserve.  On 
December  23,  1913,  President  Woodrow  Wilson  signed  into  law  the  act  that  created  the 
Federal  Reserve  System,  and  on  November  16,  1914,  the  12  Reserve  Banks  officially 
opened their doors as independently chartered banks. Oversight was assigned to a Board of 
Governors in Washington, D.C. That decentralized structure is one of our great strengths, but 
it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express this morning are my own 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
Since this is a professional society of business editors and writers, I thought I would discuss 
the  benefits  of  clear  communications  as  part  of  a  systematic,  rule-like  approach  to  setting 
monetary policy. 
During the past eight years, I have spoken and written frequently about ways to improve the 
framework  we  use  for  making  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  my  view,  the  monetary  policy 
framework is most effective when the central bank: 
• 
Commits to a set of clearly articulated objectives that can be feasibly achieved by 
monetary policy; 
Conducts monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner; 
Communicates its policies and actions to the public in a clear and transparent way; 
and 
Protects its independence by maintaining a clear separation of monetary policy from 
fiscal policy. 
  These four principles are interrelated, and, as you will see, communication is a key ingredient 
for a sound policy framework. To its credit, the Federal Reserve has sought to strengthen its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
communications  and  its  monetary  policy  framework  in  recent  years.  I  have  described  the 
process as like a journey, with each step contributing to a more informed public and a more 
transparent central bank. While we have made strides over the past several decades, I also 
recognize  that  the  journey  in  recent  years  has  taken  us  into  unchartered  territory. 
Extraordinary actions by the Fed in response to the Great Recession have presented unique 
communications challenges, which have made clarity more difficult. Yet, I believe we have 
nonetheless made progress. 
The journey thus far 
Just consider how far we have come. It was once taken for granted that the central bank was 
supposed to be secretive and mysterious. The guiding principle was simple: The less said 
about  monetary  policy,  the  better.  Indeed,  it  was  not  until  1994  that  the  FOMC  began  to 
announce policy changes made at its meetings. Before then, the markets were left to infer 
the policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market.1 Since then, the FOMC has issued 
statements at each meeting, which include a vote tally, along with the views of dissenters. 
The  FOMC  now  expedites  the  release  of  the  minutes,  publishing  them  three  weeks  after 
each meeting. It also reports the economic projections of Committee participants four times a 
year.  These  meetings  are  followed  by  press  conferences  with  the  chair  of  the  FOMC.  In 
2012, the FOMC issued a statement clarifying our longer-run goals and strategy, including an 
explicit 2 percent target for inflation. And the economic projections now include information 
about the policy path assumptions of participants. 
These  last  two  initiatives  were  based  on  the  recommendations  of  a  subcommittee  on 
communications led by then Vice Chair Yellen, which included President Evans of Chicago, 
former Governor Raskin, and myself. This summer, Chair Yellen asked Vice Chair Fischer to 
lead a new subcommittee on communications, with Governor Powell, President Williams of 
San  Francisco,  and  President  Mester  of  Cleveland,  to  continue  to  find  ways  to  improve 
communications. 
Clearly articulating objectives 
Let’s  consider  how  communications  support  each  of  the  four  principles  of  sound  central 
banking,  beginning  with  clearly  articulating  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy.  But  before 
doing  so,  it  is  useful  to  spell  out  exactly  what  the  FOMC  is  supposed  to  do.  The  Federal 
Reserve  Act  specifies  the  Fed  “shall  maintain  long  run  growth  of  the  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so 
as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate 
long-term  interest  rates.”  Since  moderate  long-term  interest  rates  generally  result  when 
prices  are  stable,  many  have  interpreted  these  goals  as  a  dual  mandate  to  manage 
fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 
However, most economists are dubious of the ability of monetary policy to predictably and 
precisely control employment in the short run, and there is a strong consensus that monetary 
policy cannot determine employment in the long run. As the FOMC noted in its statement on 
longer-run goals adopted in 2012, the maximum level of employment is largely determined 
by  nonmonetary  factors,  such  as  changing  demographics,  which  affect  the  structure  and 
dynamics of the labor market. 
In my view, excessive focus on short-run control of employment weakens the credibility and 
effectiveness of the Fed in achieving its price stability objective. We learned this lesson most 
dramatically during the 1970s when, despite the extensive efforts to reduce unemployment, 
                                                
1   See the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “Timeline to Transparency,” www.philadelphiafed.org/about-
the-fed/transparency/ (accessed October 9, 2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Fed  essentially  failed,  and  the  nation  experienced  a  prolonged  period  of  high 
unemployment  and  high  inflation.  The  economy  paid  the  price  in  the  form  of  a  deep 
recession, as the Fed sought to restore the credibility of its commitment to price stability. 
When establishing the longer-term goals and objectives for any organization, and particularly 
one  that  serves  the  public,  it  is  important  that  the  goals  be  achievable.  Assigning 
unachievable goals to organizations is a recipe for failure. For the Fed, it could mean a loss 
of public confidence. I fear that the public has come to expect too much from its central bank 
and too much from monetary policy, in particular. We need to heed the words of Nobel Prize 
winner,  Milton  Friedman.  In  his  1967  presidential  address  to  the  American  Economic 
Association, he said, “we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than it 
can  perform,  in  danger  of  asking  it  to  accomplish  tasks  that  it  cannot  achieve,  and  as  a 
result, in danger of preventing it from making the contribution that it is capable of making.”2  
In my view, the dual mandate has contributed to a view that monetary policy can accomplish 
far more than it is, perhaps, capable of achieving. Even though the FOMC’s 2012 statement 
of  objectives  acknowledged  that  it  is  inappropriate  to  set  a fixed  goal for  employment  and 
that  maximum  employment  is  influenced  by  many  factors,  the  FOMC’s  recent  policy 
statements have increasingly given the impression that it wants to achieve an employment 
goal as quickly as possible through aggressive monetary accommodation. 
I  believe  that  assigning  multiple  objectives  for  the  central  bank  opens  the  door  to  highly 
discretionary policies, which can be justified by shifting the focus or rationale for action from 
goal to goal. That is why I have argued that Congress ought to redefine the Fed’s monetary 
policy goals to focus solely, or at least primarily, on price stability. I base this on two facts: 
Monetary  policy  has  a  very  limited  ability  to  influence  real  variables,  such  as  employment. 
And, in a regime with fiat currency, only the central bank can ensure price stability. Indeed, it 
is the one goal that the central bank can achieve over the longer run. 
Setting clear, achievable objectives is part of the framework. Asking policymakers to pursue 
those objectives in a systematic, rule-like approach is the second key principle. 
The benefits of systematic monetary policy 
So,  what  do  I  mean  by  a  systematic  approach  to  policy?  Quite  simply,  I  mean conducting 
policy in a more rule-like manner. It is difficult for policymakers to choose a systematic rule-
like  approach  that  would  tie  their  hands  and  thus  limit  their  discretionary  ability.  Yet, 
economists have long been aware of the benefits of rule-like behavior. Dating as far back as 
1936, Henry Simons discussed how rule-like behavior is preferable to pure discretion.3 More 
recently,  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed  Prescott  in  their  Nobel  Prize-winning  work  showed  that  a 
credible  commitment  by  policymakers  to  behave  in  a  systematic  rule-like  manner  leads  to 
better  outcomes  than  discretion.4  Since  then,  numerous  papers  using  a  variety  of  models 
have investigated the benefits of rule-like behavior in monetary policy and found that there 
are indeed significant benefits. 
One  of  the  reasons  that  rules  work  better  than  discretion  is  that  they  are  transparent  and 
therefore allow for simpler and more effective communication of policy decisions. Moreover, 
a  large  body  of  research  over  the  last  40  years  has  emphasized  the  important  role 
expectations  play 
in  determining  economic  outcomes.  That  means  more  effective 
                                                
2   See  Milton  Friedman,  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy,”  American  Economic  Review,  58:1  (March  1968), 
pp. 1-17. 
3   Henry C. Simons, “Rules Versus Authorities in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 44:1 (February 
1936). 
4   Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473-491. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
communication of the decision-making process leads to more accurate expectations. When 
policy  is  set  systematically,  the  public  and  financial  market  participants  can  form  more 
accurate expectations about policy. Policy is then less of a source of instability or uncertainty. 
The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on 
observable economic conditions. That is, policymakers should describe the reaction function 
that  determines  how  the  current  and  future  policy  rate  will  be  set  depending  on  economic 
data. I want to emphasize that a reaction function does not mean a timetable or a threshold 
for action. Monetary policy should be data dependent, not date dependent. And the use of 
that  data  must  recognize  that  policymakers  are  no  more  certain  about  future  economic 
conditions than anyone else is. Thus, the future path of policy will always be highly uncertain. 
However,  a  reaction  function  should  explain  how  the  policy  rate  will  be  determined  in  the 
future as a function of economic conditions. 
I  also  want  to  clear  up  some  confusion  about  whether  a  reaction  function  is  somehow 
mechanical. The science of monetary policy has not reached the point where we can specify 
a  single  optimal  rule  for  setting  policy  and  turn  decision-making  over  to  a  computer. 
Judgment is still required. Because we do not know the true model of the economy, I would 
suggest  the  FOMC  begin  by  considering  and  reporting  on  a  set  of  robust  policy  rules 
designed  to  have  good  results  in  a  variety  of  models  and  across  various  stages  of  the 
business  cycle.  Such  robust  rules  recognize  that  data  are  measured  imprecisely  and  are 
subject to revision. 
By considering such robust rules, the FOMC might be able to move toward a consensus on a 
qualitative  description  of  its  reaction  function  as  an  important  first  step.  For  example,  we 
would not have to specify the precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of 
key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key 
variables.  If  policy  were  changed, then  we  would  explain  that  change  in  terms  of  how  the 
variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and 
systematically  use  them  to  describe  our  policy  choices,  then  the  public  will  form  more 
accurate judgments about the likely course of policy. That will reduce uncertainty, promote 
stability, and lead to greater transparency. 
Increasing transparency 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  communications  has  been  the  subject  of  considerable 
discussion in recent years. It took on heightened importance as the FOMC responded to the 
financial crisis and recession. Since December 2008, the federal funds rate target has been 
near  zero.  Since  the  nominal federal funds rate  cannot go  below  zero,  we  had  to  develop 
alternative policy tools in an effort to provide further accommodation to support the recovery, 
such as the large-scale asset purchase program. We also had to figure out how and what to 
communicate  about  these  new  tools.  The  asset  purchase  program  has  had  many 
dimensions,  such  as  the  overall  volume  of  purchases,  the  pace  of  purchases,  the  kind  of 
assets  targeted  for  purchase,  and  the  criteria  for  starting  and  stopping  the  purchases. 
Policymakers have tried to fine-tune the program along each dimension while assessing the 
tradeoffs among them and the tradeoffs with other policy tools, such as the traditional funds 
rate  decision. With  so many  moving  parts to  our  policy  framework,  it  is  not  surprising that 
communication is very complicated and challenging. 
The task was further complicated because one of the unconventional measures employed by 
the FOMC was so-called forward guidance. Forward guidance is the central banker’s term for 
communications about the future path of policy. One way to think of forward guidance is that 
it  is  just  another  step  toward  increased  transparency  and  effective  communication  of 
monetary  policy.  However,  another  rationale  for  forward  guidance  is  that  it  is  a  way  of 
increasing  accommodation  in  a  period  when  the  policy  rate  is  at  or  near  the  zero  lower 
bound. Some models suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, 
or  optimal,  to  indicate  that  future  policy  rates  will  be  kept  “lower  for  longer”  than  might 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
otherwise  be  the  case.  In  this  approach,  such  a  commitment  would  tend  to  raise  inflation 
expectations  and  lower  long-term  nominal  rates,  thereby  inducing  households  and 
businesses to spend more today. 
This  approach  asks  more  of  forward  guidance  than  just  articulating  a  reaction  function.  It 
takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence 
and manage the public’s beliefs about the future policy path in ways that are different from 
how  they  may  have  behaved  in  the  past.  As  I  have  indicated  in  previous  speeches,  this 
approach to forward guidance can backfire if the policy is misunderstood.5 5 For example, if 
the  public  hears  that  the  policy  rate  will  be  lower  for  longer,  it  may  interpret  this  news  as 
policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If the message is 
interpreted in that way, then the forward guidance will not succeed and may even weaken 
current spending. 
I  believe  we  should  think  of  forward  guidance  as  part  of  systematic  approach  to  decision-
making and not an independent policy tool that attempts to bend expectations. As monetary 
policy becomes normalized, we have the opportunity to ensure the public understands that 
forward guidance is an integrated part of a systematic approach to policy. 
So, what additional steps can we take to increase transparency? I think that the FOMC could 
improve  communication  and  transparency  by  preparing  a  more  comprehensive  monetary 
policy  report  on  a  regular  basis,  perhaps  quarterly.  Currently,  the  Chair  testifies  before 
Congress twice a  year and submits an accompanying  written report. In addition, the Chair 
holds press briefings four times a year when participants present their economic projections. 
I think there is an opportunity to combine these efforts into a more comprehensive report on 
monetary  policy  as  many  other  countries  do.  The  report  would  offer  an  opportunity  to 
reinforce  the  underlying  policy  framework  and  how  it  relates  to  current  and  expected 
economic conditions. Ideally, this report would incorporate a discussion of robust systematic 
rules I referred to a moment ago. Such a discussion would provide the opportunity to inform 
the public about the expected future path of policy conditioned on how the economy evolves. 
Publishing a monetary policy report with an assessment of the likely near-term path of policy 
rates,  in  conjunction  with  its  economic  forecast,  would  also  provide  added  discipline  for 
policymakers  to  stick  to  a  systematic,  rule-like  approach.  Providing  information  about  how 
that  path  is  likely  to  evolve  forces  policymakers  to  think  more  deeply  and  systematically 
about  policy.  Communication  about  that  path,  in  turn,  gives  the  public  a  much  deeper 
understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy. 
While I am discussing transparency, I also want to touch on another misconception. Some 
commentators express the view that dissent causes dissonance and therefore confuses the 
communications.  In  fact,  letting  the  public  know  about  our  debates  and  differing  views  is 
more transparent than hiding behind false consensus. 
Monetary  policymaking  is  conducted  by  committee,  and  divergent  views  can  and  often  do 
exist. While this can be clumsy at times, such governance mechanisms have great strength 
in  preventing  institutions  from  lapsing  into  groupthink  by  ensuring  that  various  views  are 
heard  in  an  environment  that  promotes  better  decisions  and  outcomes,  and  they  help  to 
preserve the central bank’s independence and accountability. 
Open  dialogue  and  diversity  of  views  leads  to  better  policy  decisions  and  is  the  primary 
means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated into our monetary policy framework. 
Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of thoughtful progress. I have often quoted the 
famous American journalist Walter Lippmann who said, “Where all men think alike, no one 
thinks very much.” I think it is healthy for the American public to know that we debate some 
                                                
5   See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s 
(SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of  the  same  issues  that  those  outside  the  Fed  debate.  Hiding  such  debate  behind  a 
unanimous vote does nothing to promote true transparency. 
Preserving independence 
Finally,  I  believe  that  the  fundamental  concept  of  a  decentralized  central  bank  has  great 
merit, in part, because it helps to preserve the independence and maintain the public trust in 
the institution. Independence is essential if a central bank is to play its fundamental role in 
preserving  the  purchasing  power  of  a  fiat  currency.  History  is  replete  with  examples  of 
governments using the power to print money as a substitute for making tough fiscal choices, 
and the results are almost always disastrous. 
Central  bank  independence  is  a  fundamental  tenet  of  sound  central  banking  and  leads  to 
better economic outcomes. But independence must be accompanied by accountability. And 
accountability is more easily achieved when there is transparency. The public can best hold 
a central bank accountable when its goals are clearly stated and achievable. 
Transparent  and  clear  communications  of  monetary  policy  goals  and  a  decision-making 
framework  help  ensure  accountability  and  preserve  central  bank 
independence. 
Transparency can also enhance a central bank’s credibility. A central bank that is transparent 
will be less willing to make promises it cannot keep. When policy pronouncements are more 
credible, policy is more effective. Transparency can also make it easier to explain changes in 
policy without damaging the central bank’s credibility. 
improves 
Conclusion 
To summarize, the FOMC is on a journey to improve communications and the transparency 
of  its  monetary  policy  decision-making  process.  The  benefits  of  transparency  are  now 
accepted  by  policymakers  across  the  globe.  Transparency  not  only 
the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  it  also  improves  the  central  bank’s  credibility  and 
accountability with the public. The FOMC’s recent moves to publish guidelines on its longer-
run goals and policy strategy and the policy assumptions that underlie FOMC projections are 
great strides toward this goal. However, more can be done. 
In  particular,  I  believe  the  FOMC  should  continue  to  work  toward  increasing  the  public 
understanding  of  how  policy  will  react  systematically  to  changes  in  economic  conditions.  I 
believe  the  FOMC  should  move  forward  to  describe  a  reaction  function  and  then 
communicate  our  actions  and  decisions  in  terms  of  this  reaction  function.  A  detailed 
monetary policy report could be a useful vehicle for such enhanced communication. 
Because  systematic  policy  is  easily  communicated  to  the  public,  it  will  improve  the 
transparency  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy,  which  reduces  policy  surprises. 
Businesses and consumers are more informed about the course of monetary policy because 
they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances 
even if they are not certain what those economic conditions might be. Equally important in 
my  view 
function  strengthens 
transparently,  strengthens 
accountability.  Thus,  systematic  policy,  communicated 
accountability and serves to preserve the central bank’s independence. 
that  greater  clarity  about  policymakers’  reaction 
is 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
