  William C Dudley: Panel remarks at the International Symposium of the 
Bank of France 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the International Symposium of the Bank of France “Central 
Banking: The Way Forward?” Paris, 7 November 2014. 
 If  all  goes  according  to  our  forecast  and  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  make  progress 
towards the Fed’s dual mandate goals of maximum sustainable employment and 2 percent 
inflation, the Federal Reserve will likely begin to raise its federal funds rate target off the zero 
lower bound sometime next year. For the United States, the start of the normalization of U.S. 
monetary policy will be a very welcome development. It will indicate that the U.S. economy 
has made great strides in healing itself from the damage caused by the U.S. housing boom 
and bust, and the financial crisis. 
However,  this  shift  in  policy  will  undoubtedly  be  accompanied  by  some  degree  of  market 
turbulence.  Moreover,  it  could  create  significant  challenges  for  those  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs) that have been the beneficiaries of large capital inflows in recent years. 
What  can  the  Federal  Reserve  do  to  minimize  these  risks?  These  are  some  of  the  very 
important issues raised by Helene Rey’s work. 
Let me begin by highlighting some of the key points I will be making. As always, the thoughts 
I offer today are my own, and should not be interpreted as representing the position of the 
FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. 
First, what we may see in terms of market strains and macroeconomic adjustment during this 
normalization process will not be new. Changes in Fed policy, and especially the tightening 
of monetary policy, have often created challenges for countries abroad, especially in EMEs. 
Second, these countries, as a group, are better equipped today to handle those challenges 
than  at  perhaps  any  time  in  the  past.  This  reflects  the  fundamental  improvements  and 
stronger policy frameworks that many EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years. Third, 
given  the  dollar’s  role  as  the  global  reserve  currency,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  special 
responsibility to manage U.S. monetary policy in a way that helps promote global financial 
stability. 
Like  other  central  banks,  our  monetary  policy  mandate  has  a  domestic  focus.  But,  our 
actions  often  have  global  implications  that  feed  back  into  the  U.S.  economy  and  financial 
markets, and we need to always keep this in mind. For most of us, the market volatility that 
we saw during the so-called “taper tantrum” in the spring and summer of 2013 still remains 
fresh in our minds. EME financial markets were hit hardest, with declines in equity prices, a 
widening in sovereign debt spreads and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. 
In  the  U.S.,  we  saw  a  spike  in  Treasury  yields,  with  the  10-year  rate  rising  by  more  than 
100 basis points from early May before peaking in early September. 
Most commentary about this period has focused on the shift in expectations with respect to 
U.S. monetary policy – and, in particular, to uncertainty about the timing and implications of 
Fed  tapering  –  as  the  catalyst  for  these  moves.  This  focus  seems  generally  right  to  me, 
although other factors also played a role.1 
                                                
1   Market participants also had to evaluate the possibility that growth in China and other EMEs might be slowing 
even  as  growth  in  the  U.S.  and  other  advanced  economies  was  picking  up.  The  subsequent  market 
movements  as  investors  withdrew  funds  from  EME  investments  were  an  abrupt  shock  for  these  EMEs 
generally, especially after the long earlier period of abundant liquidity and ample inflows. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little 
that  is  fundamentally  new  to  the  challenges  that  face  the  EMEs.  These  policies  simply 
represent  a  way  of  easing,  necessitated  by  our  coming  up  against  the  zero  lower  bound. 
Central bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy 
stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally different. But, from 
another  perspective,  we  have  less  experience  operating  with  unconventional  monetary 
policy, and this creates more potential uncertainties. These uncertainties put a premium on 
keen listening skills on our part and continued dialogue both among central bankers as well 
as between central bankers and the market. In my view, it is important to recognize that our 
large scale asset purchase programs affect the size of term risk premia globally. This new 
set of monetary policies affects financial asset prices in a different way compared to changes 
in  short-term  interest  rates,  and  we  should  be  humble  regarding  what  we  claim  about  our 
understanding of the importance of this distinction. 
Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities that they 
might  have  ignored  prior  to  the  taper  tantrum  in  2013.  The  greater  premium  on  strong 
fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right 
answer in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment 
will  sometimes  be  difficult.  Moreover,  we  will  undoubtedly  experience  further  bumps  in  the 
road. The renewed volatility we saw last month is evidence enough of that. Yet, I think we 
can  remain  generally  optimistic  on  the  outlook  so  long  as  market  participants  continue  to 
appropriately  discriminate  across  countries,  rather  than  treating  EMEs  as  a  homogenous 
group. 
Furthermore, many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed’s 
prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were in past tightening 
cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms these EMEs have put in place over the past 15 
years, as well as the hard lessons they learned from past periods of market stress. Among 
the positives are: 
• 
The  absence  of  the  pegged  exchange  rate  regimes  that  often  were  undermined 
violently in the past during periods of stress; 
Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; 
Larger foreign exchange reserve liquidity cushions; 
Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now 
generally low to moderate inflation rates; 
Generally improved fiscal discipline; and 
Better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks. 
  Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further 
strengthen  institutional  structures  in  some  countries.  In  particular,  vulnerabilities  remain  in 
several  important  EMEs.  Still,  the  fundamental  improvements  I’ve  cited  leave  many  EMEs 
better  positioned  than  in  the  past  to  weather  those  times  in  the  cycle  when  the  external 
environment turns from welcoming to wary. 
The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to 
do  more  to  internalize  those  impacts,  or  even  further,  to  internationally  coordinate 
policymaking.  As  I’ve  already  noted,  Fed  policies  have  significant  effects  internationally, 
given the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status 
as  the  global  reserve  currency.  In  pursuing  our  policy  responsibilities,  we  seek  to  conduct 
policy  transparently  and  based  on  clear  principles. We  are  mindful  of  the  global  effects  of 
Fed  policy.  Promoting  growth  and  stability  in  the  U.S.,  I  believe,  is  the  most  important 
contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, 
creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully 
the  counterfactual. Would  countries  beyond  our  borders  really  have  been  better  off  with  a 
weaker U.S. economy? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped 
support our dual objectives of stable prices and maximum sustainable growth, and whether 
this support is consistent with a healthy global economy. 
Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes 
for the global economy generally, or the EMEs specifically. Central banks have challenges 
enough in tailoring policies to their own domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be 
taking on too much to attempt to collectively fashion policy in reference to global conditions. 
Monetary  policy  meant  to  suit  everybody  is  likely  in  the  end  to  suit  nobody.  Similar 
considerations  underlie  the  widespread  move  in  the  emerging  world  away  from  fixed 
exchange rate regimes. Policymakers worldwide have learned that a framework capable of 
responding in a disciplined but flexible manner to changing domestic conditions works best 
over the long run. 
While  explicit  coordination  looks  neither  feasible  nor  desirable,  there  is  more  that  central 
banks  in  general,  and  the  Fed  in  particular,  could  do  to  be  better  global  stewards.  As  an 
example,  recent  events  demonstrate  the  importance  of  effective  Fed  communication.  It  is 
clear  in  retrospect  that  our  attempts  in  the  spring  of  2013  to  provide  guidance  about  the 
potential  timing  and  pace  of  tapering  confused  market  participants.  In  particular,  markets 
seemed to conflate tapering with monetary policy tightening and raised their expected paths 
for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: markets now seem to understand that 
policy rates will likely remain exceptionally low for a considerable period of time even now 
that the asset purchase program has been completed. 
As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and 
improve  our  communications.  This  includes  regular  press  conferences  following  Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings by the Fed chair; the publishing of growth and 
inflation forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts 
that  the  FOMC  will  look  at  to  assess  progress  toward  our  mandate.  We  are,  though,  still 
learning how to more effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of 
policy instruments. 
A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply 
put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses 
that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this 
shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have 
done  better.  We’ve  taken  important  steps  reflecting  both  new  legislative  mandates  and  a 
broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically 
important  banking  organizations  must  now  hold  amounts  of  capital  and  liquidity  that  are 
better  aligned  with  their  risk  profiles,  compensation  schemes  for  these  institutions  will  be 
more  focused  on  rewarding  long-term  results  and  the  official  sector  is  making  progress  in 
solving the “too-big-to-fail” dilemma. 
All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid 
repeating  the  mistakes  of  the  recent  past,  and  to  take  a  more  proactive  stance  toward 
mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since 
the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking 
of how to better fulfill their mandates. 
Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often 
emanate  from  getting  policy  wrong  domestically.  Recession  or  instability  at  home  is  often 
quickly  exported.  Equally  important, growth  and  stability  abroad  makes all  our  jobs  easier. 
This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of 
our  domestic  mandates  helps  to  bring  us  to  a  better  place  collectively.  Ensuring  global 
growth and stability is and will remain our joint and common endeavor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
