  Benoît Cœuré: Laying the foundations of the Cypriot recovery 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the 10th Cyprus Summit “Current developments in the euro area”, Nicosia, 
4 November 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today is an important day for the ECB and the euro area. The ECB has become the banking 
supervisor for the euro area, directly supervising 120 significant banks, including four banks 
based in Cyprus. This marks the single biggest step in European economic integration since 
the inception of the euro. We are ready for this step, but we are also very well aware of the 
important additional responsibility we will be taking on. 
The economic and financial landscape is changing, not only in the euro area but also here in 
Cyprus. Since the start of the international financial assistance programme, important steps 
have  been  taken  to  stabilise  and  restructure  the  banking  system,  correct  macroeconomic 
imbalances and create the conditions for a renewed economic recovery. My main message 
today is that a healthy and well-functioning banking system is crucial in this regard, both in 
the euro area and in Cyprus. 
But let me begin by saying a few words on the economic situation in the euro area. 
I  ask  for  your  understanding  that  my  remarks  on  the  economic  outlook  should  not  be 
construed as providing indications on the perspective monetary policy stance of the ECB, as 
we  are  in  the  so-called  quiet  period,  during  which  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council 
refrain from comments on the current outlook for monetary policy. The legacy of the crisis -
weak  demand,  high  debt  and  unemployment-  continues  to  weigh  on  the  pace  of  growth. 
Unless  an  adequate  mix  of  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural  policies  is  in  place  to  create 
confidence and sustain private consumption and investment, we once again run the risk of a 
self-fulfilling loss of momentum and a delayed recovery. 
From our side, we are fully committed to play our part in this policy mix, which is to fulfil our 
mandate and bring inflation back towards 2%. But it is also clear that our monetary policy 
stance can only have its full impact on the real economy if the banking system is in good 
financial shape. Let me therefore turn to a key step we are currently taking which will support 
that process: the ECB’s comprehensive assessment of bank’s balance sheets. 
The comprehensive assessment 
The comprehensive assessment was one of the pillars of our preparatory work before taking 
over  banking  supervision.  It  involved  over  6,000  experts  at  the  ECB,  national  competent 
authorities, and private firms. The exercise comprised both the asset quality review, which 
harmonised  the  valuation  standards  and  accounting  practices,  and  the  stress  test,  which 
measured the resilience of banks to adverse macro-financial shocks. 
Nearly two weeks ago, the results of the comprehensive assessment were published. Let me 
recall  here  some  of  the  key  findings.  The  adverse  scenario  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment would lead to a capital reduction in the euro area banking sector by €263 billion, 
including  a  €25  billion  shortfall  for  those  banks  that  were  found  to  be  non-compliant  with 
minimum capital requirements. The asset quality review found that euro area banks should 
increase their provisions and adjust the asset valuations by a total of €48 billion. And the total 
non-performing  credit  exposures  under  the  harmonised  definition  employed  in  the  asset 
quality review would increase by €136 billion in comparison to the banks’ own definitions. 
We  expect  that  the  rigour  of  the  exercise  and  the  unparalleled  degree  of  transparency 
brought about by the public disclosures will improve public confidence in the banking sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Banks  have  already  responded 
to  the  announcement  of  the  ECB  comprehensive 
assessment  and  strengthened  their  balance  sheets  by  over  €200  billion  prior  to  the 
completion of the exercise. This includes €2.5 billion of capital raised by two Cypriot banks. 
Looking forward, the comprehensive assessment confirms that the vast majority of euro area 
banks are already able to support the economic recovery. On average, the capital levels of 
the banking sector exceed the regulatory minimum requirements by a large margin. Those 
banks  which  face  a  capital  shortfall  have  undertaken  remedial  action  and  will  reach  the 
required capitalisation levels. Banks are therefore on the whole well equipped to withstand a 
severe economic downturn. The ECB will now use the unprecedented amount of information 
that has been gathered on the directly supervised banks to enforce a strict and evenhanded 
supervisory  approach  across  the  euro  area,  and  carry  forward  the  harmonisation  effort 
across member states. 
Inadequate  supply  of  credit  should  therefore  no  longer  be  the  main  constraint  on  viable 
businesses and good lending opportunities. The most recent results of the ECB bank lending 
survey, which were published last week, point to this direction. Euro area banks continued to 
ease their credit standards in the third quarter of this year for all loan categories. 
Nevertheless, the repair of the banking sector is not sufficient by itself to bring about robust 
growth.  Risk  premia  and  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  the  private  sector  remain  high  in  large 
parts of the euro area. There are remaining hurdles to a credit recovery emanating not only 
from subdued domestic demand, but also from the high level of corporate sector debt and, in 
many places, business environments and tax structures that stifle private investment. 
Governments should therefore continue to build on the progress achieved in their budgetary 
position and implement structural reforms. Our experience with adjustment during the crisis – 
for  example  in  the  Baltic  countries  –  shows  that,  on  the  whole,  frontloaded  reforms  yield 
better results than a more gradual approach. If reforms are implemented rapidly, wages and 
prices can adjust quickly – without becoming entrenched in expectations and drawing out the 
disinflationary process – allowing growth to recover swiftly. 
Such policies will help the real economy to overcome financing challenges and fully benefit 
from our very accommodative monetary policy. Growth in the euro area can also benefit from 
the completion of the single market in services. If the right policies are implemented, the euro 
area could significantly increase its growth potential. By raising permanent income, this can 
encourage  consumption  and  investment,  lift  the  purchasing  power  of  households,  and 
recreate fiscal space already today. 
Benefits for Cyprus 
These points are particularly important for Cyprus. Banks are an essential part of the service-
oriented  Cypriot  economy.  In  fact,  healthy  banks  are  crucial  to  pass  on  the  expansionary 
stance of monetary policy to the real economy via the provision of credit to households and 
businesses. 
The comprehensive assessment concluded that the two largest Cypriot banks, which have 
raised €2.5 billion of capital this year, are resilient to an adverse macro-financial scenario. 
The  third  one,  Hellenic  Bank,  is  undertaking  measures  to  improve  its  capital  position  and 
address the shortfall. 
The conclusions of the comprehensive assessment come after a period in which the Cypriot 
banking  sector  has  been  facing  major  challenges.  Following  EU  entry  in  2004,  significant 
foreign inflows led to a rapid expansion of the banking system, with its total assets peaking at 
seven times GDP. Easy credit fuelled a housing boom and an increase in private sector debt 
to over 300% of GDP, which stretched private sector balance sheets. The challenge now is 
to  restore  the  financial  intermediary  function  of  the  banking  system  in  support  of  Cypriot 
households and companies, while it restructures and becomes less leveraged. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Since  the  start  of  the  financial  assistance  programme,  Cyprus  has  achieved  a  lot. 
Responding  to  the  seriousness  of  the  economic  situation,  the  Cypriot  authorities  took 
unprecedented measures. For example, two systemically important banks were resolved and 
the resulting institution was recapitalised. Domestic and external payment restrictions were 
imposed. And the government has started implementing a sizeable fiscal adjustment, and is 
carrying  out  some  important  structural  reforms  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  the 
economy in a durable way. 
Those  measures  were  painful  and  they  have  imposed  a  large  short-term  cost  on  the 
economy and Cypriot society. But they have started to pay off. 
The  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  sector  have  led  to  a  significant 
improvement in the health of the financial system. Payment flows have normalised, while the 
domestic payment restrictions have been gradually lifted. The current account deficit of the 
balance of payments has almost been eliminated, from a peak of 15.6% of GDP in 2008. The 
general government deficit has fallen by around half from a peak of close to 6% of GDP in 
2012, consistently over-performing the fiscal targets in the programme. Those achievements 
are impressive and command respect from the rest of Europe. They have helped Cyprus to 
regain access to international capital markets earlier in 2014. 
Looking forward, the successful completion of the comprehensive assessment should not be 
seen  as  the  end  of  the  efforts  to  put  the  banking  sector  in  the  best  position  to  serve  the 
Cypriot economy. Overcoming the legacy of the crisis requires further crucial steps. 
The quality of bank assets continues to be a cause for concern. At more than half of the total 
loan portfolio, non-performing loans (NPLs) are the highest in the euro area, and among the 
highest  following  any  recent  banking  crisis.  Addressing  the  high  level  of  NPLs  is  critical. 
NPLs are a major hurdle to the provision of credit to the economy, as the attention of banks 
is  diverted  to  the  work-out  of  legacy  problems  instead  of  looking  forward  to  profitable 
business  opportunities.  Exposure  to  the  fragile  property  market  remains  in  banks’  balance 
sheets. 
The new foreclosure framework is necessary for the resolution of the high levels of NPLs. 
Taking  into  account  last  week’s  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,  it  is  now  time  to  make  a 
major push in this regard. Fundamental drivers do not fully explain the NPL levels observed 
in Cyprus. Under the legislation prevailing before the recent reform, there were insufficient 
incentives  for  borrowers  and  lenders  to  find  solutions  to  restructure  debt.  The  foreclosure 
process in Cyprus could take 10 to 15 years, much longer than in most other countries. In the 
absence  of  a  credible  perspective  of  the  collateral  being  seized,  borrowers’  payment 
discipline has been adversely affected. 
What  follows  is  that  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  implementing  legislation  that  speeds  up 
private sector debt restructuring. This does not necessarily mean that this legislation will lead 
to  a  widespread  increase  in  foreclosures.  What  matters  is  that  sufficient  incentives  are  in 
place for borrowers and lenders to collaborate in case of repayment difficulties and to work 
out solutions acceptable to both borrowers and lenders. 
In addition to a strong private sector debt restructuring framework, banks will also have to 
step  up  their  efforts  to  reduce  their  NPLs  in  other  ways.  For  example,  banks  will  have  to 
further  enhance  their  operational  capacity  to  manage  NPLs,  and  to  become  more  alert  in 
identifying prospective NPLs. 
Addressing  the  high  levels  of  NPLs  needs  to  be  embedded  in  a  broad  structural  reform 
strategy, building on what has already been done under the programme. Regarding property 
markets, there is an urgent need for stepping up the reduction of the backlog of title deeds 
and streamlining their issuance process. This is a very important area given its significance 
for  restoring  demand  for  property  and  reducing  the  cost  of  credit.  Securitisation  could  be 
used  to  offload  the  risk  to  specialised  investors,  if  the  legal  framework  is  established  to 
facilitate the transfer and work-out of bank assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  addition,  fiscal  policy  should  continue  on  the  path  of  consolidation,  which  is  needed  to 
ensure  fiscal  sustainability,  consolidate  access  to  international  capital  markets  and  further 
restore confidence in the Cypriot economy. This should be complemented with measures to 
make the economy more efficient and attractive to domestic and foreign investors, such as 
reforming public administration, improving corporate governance and privatising state-owned 
enterprises. Experience shows that reforms pay off. And other euro area countries that have 
implemented reforms in recent years are now starting to reap the benefits. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, a healthy and well-functioning banking system is indispensable for a 
sustainable  economic  recovery.  Unprecedented  steps  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the 
banking sector, both in the euro area and in Cyprus. 
The successful completion of the comprehensive assessment creates the potential for credit 
supply constraints to diminish, supporting the economic recovery. The ECB will play its part 
by  enforcing  a  strict,  fair  and  harmonised  supervision  of  euro  area  banks.  It  is,  however, 
essential  that  the  progress  achieved  so  far  in  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  is 
accompanied  by  the  completion  of  legislation  that  would  facilitate  incentives  for  borrowers 
and lenders to cooperate. 
This means reforming the legal framework for private debt restructuring, coupled with further 
implementation of the measures agreed under the programme. We should not expect to see 
a notable decline in NPLs, a pick-up in credit and a sustainable recovery in Cyprus unless 
this issue is addressed forcefully. 
Cyprus’  achievements  command  respect  and  are  starting  to  pay  off.  It  is  time  to  build  on 
them and make a decisive step forward. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
