  Jon Cunliffe: Regulatory reform and returns in banking 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at Chatham House, London, 20 October 2014. 
 On 13 October 2008 – just over 6 years ago – the UK government injected nearly £40bn of 
public  funds  to  stabilise  Royal  Bank  Scotland  and  Lloyds  Banking  Group.  Parts  of  both 
banking  groups  had  started  the  year  in  a  precarious  position,  with  swollen,  highly  levered 
balance sheets and a reliance on short-term wholesale funding. By October, losses had left 
them dangerously undercapitalised. Absent a resolution regime for dealing with failing banks, 
and given the importance of these two banks to domestic lending, the government was left 
with no choice but to inject public funds, bailing out the banks’ creditors. 
In the intervening 6 years the landscape of banking has changed beyond recognition. Some 
of this is due to a very different approach to regulation and supervision. Some is due to a 
very different commercial environment. And most important, there has been a sea change in 
public attitudes towards banking and bankers. 
Bankers should not expect to be popular. But the outburst of public anger that accompanied 
the crisis and its very painful and protracted impact on the real economy – families and jobs 
– has not abated much. The latest polls put public trust in bankers at nearly the bottom of the 
class – only marginally above politicians. It is a hard truth, but I fear a truth nonetheless, that 
it will be some time yet before trust between banking and society is established. That societal 
anger has motivated much of the reform effort that has been the story of the past 5 years. 
The  message  to  politicians,  policy  makers,  regulators  and  supervisors  has  been  loud  and 
clear: a repeat of the events of the crisis and recession will not be tolerated. 
Against  that  background,  I  want  to  look  at  the  key  new  approaches  that  define  the  new 
landscape from the regulatory perspective. 
I  do  not  want  to  list  in  detail  the  reforms  that  have  been  implemented  and  that  are  in 
prospect.  It  is  an  impressive  list,  especially  when  one  looks  at the  amount  of  international 
agreement that has been reached on new international standards. 
• 
Globally  there  is  already  more  than  $500bn  loss  absorbing  equity  capital  in  the 
system and, 
for the first time, an international standard for the liquidity banks should hold. 
UK  banks  have  £150bn  more  capital  than  before  the  crisis  and  their  holdings  of 
liquid assets have trebled. 
International  standards  are  in  prospect  on  leverage  and  on  the  amount  of  debt 
banks must hold that can be “bailed in” if a bank fails. 
  Rather, I want to look at three fundamental changes in approach that have driven and will 
continue  to  drive  these  reforms.  –  macro-prudential  policy,  international  governance  and 
intensive supervision. 
And I want to look not just at the regulatory landscape but at the commercial one too. What 
business  models  work  in  this  new  landscape?  Banks,  particularly  those  engaged  in 
investment banking, are currently wrestling with this question. 
Macro-prudential policy 
The crisis and the determination not to allow a repeat has led to a much more intense focus 
worldwide on the stability of the financial system as a whole. This has led to the development 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of  what,  rather  inelegantly,  is  called  “macro-prudential  policy”  to  protect  that  stability.  Put 
simply,  whereas  “micro-prudential”  regulation  and  supervision  address  the  safety  and 
soundness of individual firms, macro-prudential tries to address the safety and soundness of 
the system as a whole; to monitor whether risks are building up in the system and to take 
action to prevent those risks jeopardising financial stability. 
Monetary policy, of course, provides a powerful instrument for preventing risks building up in 
the financial system. But monetary policy also has a very powerful impact on the economy as 
a whole and there is a broader cost to directing it to address financial stability risks. So it is 
very much a last line of defense for managing financial stability risks, after macro-prudential 
policy. 
Many jurisdictions have put or are putting in place macro-prudential “machinery” responsible 
for assessing macro-prudential risks. In some cases, that has meant new macro-prudential 
authorities with both the responsibility to assess risk and the powers to address them. This, 
of course, is the case in the UK with the establishment of the Financial Policy Committee of 
the Bank of England. 
Macro-prudential policy is still in its infancy. But the new macro-prudential machinery will, I 
think, play an increasing role in determining the future landscape for the financial sector as a 
whole,  and  banking  in  particular.  Macro-prudential  policy  will  be  motivated  by  two  rather 
different impulses. 
The first impulse is the need to establish and preserve resilience in the financial system as a 
whole.  The  crisis  was  what  statisticians  call  a  “tail  event”;  a  highly  improbable  event 
statistically,  that  had  not  occurred  for  80  odd  years.  But  while  such  an  event  seemed  in 
advance  very  improbable,  very  much  in  what  statisticians  call  the  “tail  of  the  probability 
distribution”, it happened. And because the system did not have the resilience to weather it, 
the system failed. 
For  macro-prudential  policy  makers,  like  the  members  of  the  Bank’s  Financial  Policy 
Committee, the FPC, systemic resilience in the face of improbable and incalculable risks is 
an ever present concern. 
Their colleagues on the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee focus on charting the best short 
to  medium  term  path  for  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy  that  is  consistent  with  the 
inflation  objective.  But  the  members  of  the  FPC  focus  much  more  on  the  robustness  and 
resilience of the financial system to events in the tail of the distribution, and to events that are 
difficult  to  place  in  any  measured  probability  distribution  –  the  so  called  “unknown 
unknowns”.  And  that  of  course,  is  why,  unlike  monetary  policy,  it  is  so  difficult  to  define 
financial stability with a numerical target. 
This  motivation  has  been  the  starting  point  for  the  new  international  standards  for  bank 
capital and liquidity which have been set at levels calculated relative to the extreme levels of 
losses and liquidity stresses observed through the crisis. 
It  is  also  the  motivation  behind  the  concurrent  stress testing  of the  banking system that  is 
becoming the norm in advanced economies. The current Bank of England stress test, which 
will  report  in  December,  subjects  the  banking  system  to  a  tail  event  –  an  improbable  but 
plausible set of circumstances. The objective is to ensure not only that individual banks can 
weather  such  an  event  but  also  that  when  we  aggregate  the  actions  that  individual  banks 
take in such a stress, the system as a whole does not fail. 
The second impulse of the macroprudential policy maker is much closer to monetary policy. 
It is to act counter-cyclically against the upward spiral of exuberance which can easily set in 
to the financial system as rising asset values provide additional collateral for more and more 
lending and weaken lending standards. In the old days, central bankers simply called all of 
this “leaning against the wind”. Nowadays, when done to restrain risk in the financial sector, 
we call it “counter-cyclical macro-prudential policy”. But however called, we can expect such 
action by macro-prudential authorities to be a feature of the banking landscape for the future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  When leaning against the wind of the credit cycle, macro-prudential authorities do, like their 
monetary policy colleagues, still need to find the optimal path. To use the words of the UK 
Chancellor, their objective is not to ensure “the stability of the graveyard”. How they balance 
cost and risk, where they set the trade-offs, will depend in large part on how confident they 
are about the underlying resilience of the system – in other words how well they have done 
on the first impulse. 
International governance 
The second big change I want, therefore, to highlight is the development since the crisis of 
much stronger international governance. This stems from the creation, at the April 2009 G20 
London  summit,  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  And,  equally  important,  from  the 
decision at the Summit that the FSB should report directly to the G20 Leaders and Finance 
Ministers to give it the necessary “clout”. 
Working  with  the  standard  setting  organisations  like  the  Basel  Committee,  the  FSB  has 
provided the drive and coordination to reform and develop global standards for bank capital, 
liquidity, and resolution. If one remembers the best part of a decade that it took to develop 
and reach agreement on the Basel 2 capital standard, the progress made and international 
agreement reached over the past 5 years has been extraordinary. 
The G20 summit in Brisbane will, I hope, mark the end of a major phase in this work with 
proposals  to  help  end  “too  big  to  fail”,  including  ensuring  that  banks  hold  debt  that  can 
absorb  losses  –  i.e.  be  “bailed  in”  –  if  the  bank  fails,  and  a  private  sector  agreement  to 
provide for stays on derivative contracts during resolutions of failed banks. 
This  stronger  international  framework  has  not  been  an  accident.  The  crisis  brutally 
underlined  the  degree  to  which  countries  were  connected  to  each  other  through  the 
operation  of  a  global  capital  market  and  banking  system  –  and  the  dangers  of  regulatory 
arbitrage between jurisdictions. 
The FSB and the international standards that have been developed are, it is true, only “soft 
law”. They are not legally binding. They constrain neither the powers of national regulators to 
set  the  rules  for  their  jurisdictions  nor  the  accountability  of  national  regulators  to  national 
legislatures.  But  this  soft  law  is  powerful  because  it  is  grounded  in  the  recognition  by  the 
major  jurisdictions  that  we  can  only  have  a  globally  integrated  capital  market  –  and  the 
benefits that brings – if we can agree and implement key common minimum standards. 
That impulse to work together, internationally, to provide stronger governance of the global 
financial  sector  will  inevitably  wane  somewhat  the  further  in  time  we  get  from  the  crisis  in 
which this was born. 
I don’t think the more powerful, more comprehensive international machinery that has been 
built since the crisis will disappear. But the challenges will change. It will need increasingly to 
pivot  from  design  of  new  international  standards  to  ensuring  consistent  implementation 
across jurisdictions. It will need to be prepared to speak out loudly when standards are not 
being met. Where standards have been met, it will need to encourage national authorities in 
one jurisdiction to recognise and defer to equivalent regulation and supervision in another. 
And it will need to monitor and address risk throughout the system. 
Of  course,  while  I  think  and  hope  we  can  continue  and  indeed  reinforce  the  international 
governance that has been developed, it is not a given that we will succeed. It is very much in 
everyone’s  interest  to  ensure  that  we  do.  If  we  cannot  ensure  consistent  application  of 
international standards, the result is very unlikely to be more unconstrained global financial 
activity of the sort we saw before the crisis. Rather it is likely to be the further rolling back of 
financial  globalisation  to  the  detriment  of  the  global  economy  as  national  regulators  feel 
compelled take local action to protect their own jurisdictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Intensive supervision 
It is not all about new approaches to regulation – to how you set the rules. It is also about 
new approaches to supervision – to how you apply those rules, day to day. From the outset, 
a  key  element  of  the  international  reform  agenda  has  been  more  intense  and  more 
internationally co-ordinated supervision of systemically important firms. 
Unlike  macro-prudential  policy,  micro-prudential  supervision  –  the  supervision  of  individual 
financial firms – is not at all new. But it has changed materially. I recall quite clearly from my 
time at the Treasury, in charge of financial regulation in the early years of this century, the 
underlying belief among the regulatory and supervisory authorities that the management and 
boards  of  firms  had  an  even  stronger  reason  than  the  supervisor  to  control  risk  and  the 
safety and soundness of their firm – and that they had the capacity and capability to do so. 
The crisis revealed a very different picture in many institutions worldwide. We have learned 
from this experience. 
In  the  UK,  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority’s  new  and  more  intensive  supervisory 
approach reflects this. There is also a much more intensive focus on the firms that pose the 
greatest risks to financial stability than was the case before the crisis. 
This more intensive approach involves a higher reliance on judgment based supervision and 
a  more  forward  looking  and  proactive  stance.  Supervisors  are  empowered  to  use  their 
judgment. They no longer need to wait for a problem to occur to take action. An example is 
the UK stress test I referred to earlier which is carried out jointly by the FPC and PRA: firms 
who do not meet the standard will be required to take action. 
A crucial part of this more intensive supervision is not just to look at the activities of the firm, 
but  also  much  greater  scrutiny  of  the  quality  of  its  governance  and  management.  This 
includes a very thorough and careful assessment of the suitability of those who run regulated 
firms, as well as time spent looking at the Board as a whole to ensure that it has sufficient 
experience  and  character.  For  the  largest  firms,  the  PRA  Board  is  involved  in  these 
judgments and in approving the appointments of the most senior staff. 
And,  in marked  contrast  to the  pre-crisis  period,  there  is  a  much greater focus  on  a firm’s 
business  model  and  the  firm’s  understanding  of  their  vulnerabilities.  This  enables  the 
supervisors to assess if there are risks posed to financial stability by the way that the firm 
chooses to conduct its business, or if indeed it is not viable. 
The aim is not that the supervisors should run firms. But they should not be shy to question if 
executives and boards have the right capabilities, if they understand the business model and 
the particular risks to which it is exposed and, overall, whether that business model can be 
operated successfully while managing the risks it entails. 
These  three  changes  in  the  official  landscape  –  macroprudential  policy,  more  powerful 
international governance and more intensive supervision have shaped, and will continue to 
shape the world in which banks operate. But it is less clear what the changes on the other 
side will be: how banks will respond to the new regulatory and economic environment. There 
is much soul searching in the industry about what the future looks like. 
The reform programme and returns in banking 
The most marked change in this new landscape is the much greater amounts of capital in 
banks  and  as  a  consequence  the  much  reduced  level  of  leverage.  Headline  levels  of 
required  capital  have  increased.  And  the  risk  associated  with  many  types  of  assets  and 
business  activities  has  been  fundamentally  re-appraised.  For  the  largest  firms,  the  equity 
levels required will be around 7 times higher than before the crisis on a risk weighted asset 
basis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moreover, international standards will determine not just the leverage firms can carry on a 
risk  weighted  basis  but  also,  when  an  international  leverage  ratio  is  agreed  in  2019,  the 
absolute amount of assets they can carry for any given level of capital. A number of major 
jurisdictions such as the US have implemented leverage ratio rules in advance of that; the 
FPC will shortly issue proposals to do so in the UK. 
Lower leverage will reduce the returns that banks’ shareholders make, relative to pre-crisis. 
But it also means that banks will be safer investments which should also reduce the returns 
that investors require. 
The second big change for the industry is the reduction and I hope removal of the implicit 
taxpayer  subsidy  that  came  from  the  perception  –  and  as  it  proved,  the  reality  –  that  the 
largest banks were too big to be allowed to fail. New powers to bail-in banks’ creditors, living 
wills, international standards on the debt that can be bailed in – all of these mean that we are 
getting closer to be able to say “no bank is too big to fail”. 
This  will  change  banks’  costs.  Being  too  big  to  fail,  the  implicit  taxpayer  subsidy,  reduced 
large banks’ borrowing costs in relation to their smaller brethren. As we make it more and 
more possible for a big bank to fail – like any other company – without having to be bailed 
out by the taxpayer, creditors are realising that they bear more risks than before. The cost of 
insuring  £100  UK  banks’  senior  debt  against  default  was  just  8  pence  before  the  crisis. 
Today that cost has increased by almost a factor of 10, driving up banks’ cost of funds. 
This is part of the reason why the spread over the risk-free rate on banks’ lending is higher 
now than before the crisis and is likely to remain so. 
Put  simply,  credit  was  mispriced  before  the  crisis,  in  part  due  to  the  implicit  insurance  of 
taxpayer bailouts. 
Taken  together,  lower  levels  of  leverage,  higher  liquidity  and  the  removal  of  the  implicit 
taxpayer  subsidy  will  mean  changes  to  banks’  business  models.  It  has  started  to  happen, 
particularly in the US, but there is a long way to go. As the IMF noted a fortnight ago, global 
banks accounting for 80% of the total assets of the largest institutions are still earning profits 
below their cost of capital. 
Prior to the crisis, global banks’ return on equity averaged 15%. In those years, global banks’ 
actual returns on the assets they held were pretty much flat in that period. Indeed, in the UK, 
banks  in  the  years  immediately  before  the  crisis,  return  on  assets  actually  fell.  The  high 
returns were not fuelled by a better return on the underlying assets banks were holding. In 
the UK, for example, banks’ assets grew from 20 times equity to more than 30 times equity. 
Put simply, banks maintained and increased shareholder returns by dangerously increasing 
leverage and thinning their capital cushions. 
Of course, shareholder returns collapsed when the crisis struck and risk across the system 
was  re-priced.  In  the  depths  of  the  crisis,  global  banks’  earned  negative  returns  for 
shareholders. UK banks’ return on equity plunged to –10%. 
Today, returns on underlying assets remain lower than they were before the crisis. In 2013, 
global banks’ average return on assets was 0.3%. For the largest UK banks, return on assets 
was just 0.01%. Return on equity in the UK, the shareholders’ return, was just 0.3%. 
Today’s low returns both on assets and on equity reflect a number of factors. One driver of 
low return on assets for many banks has been the continued effect of low levels of long-term 
interest rates, which can drag on net interest margins. For this reason, when long-term yields 
fell on renewed fears about the strength of the global recovery last  week, bank stocks fell 
disproportionately. The return to strong global economic growth that we all hope to see, and 
to more normal monetary policy settings should support banks’ earnings. 
There have also been, unfortunately, a series of “one-off” effects – the necessary redress of 
previous episodes of misconduct. These have reduced UK banks’ pre-tax profits from around 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  £20  billion,  to  less  than  £10  billion  during  2013.  One  hopes  this  will  also  be  a  temporary 
effect. 
But some of the effect of the new landscape will be more permanent. This is particularly true 
of leverage; it will not in future be possible to drive up shareholder returns by levering up on 
ever  thinner  capital  cushions.  For  the  large  UK  banks,  average  levels  of  leverage  have 
broadly halved and seem unlikely to increase materially. 
And that is not all of the story. Another driver of low returns on assets and equity is the fact 
that banks’ paybill has not adjusted to the smaller returns banks are now earning. 
It was not just the shareholders who enjoyed high returns pre-crisis. Bank employees did too, 
or at least some of them did. In the decade before 2007, bank paybills, broadly defined, grew 
at broadly the same rate as shareholders’ profits. In the 10 years before the crisis, for the 
global banks, profits attributable to shareholders averaged 60% of the paybill. For the big UK 
banks, profits were about 75% of the paybill. 
Since  the  crisis  that  picture  has  changed  markedly.  In  2013,  profits  attributable  to 
shareholders were down from 60% to around 25% of the large global banks’ paybills in 2013. 
Put simply, shareholders have gone from getting 60 cents for every dollar in pay for staff to 
getting 25 cents per dollar. Across the big UK banks in 2013, the fraction had fallen to just 
2% – ie to 2 pence per pound paid to staff. 
Averages, of course, mask some very different performances by individual institutions. But it 
is noticeable that, since the crisis, for the industry as a whole, employees have received a 
larger share of a smaller pie relative to shareholders. And in the UK, due in no small part to 
one-off  factors,  this  effect  has  been  particularly  pronounced.  UK  banks’  returns  on  equity 
would have been nearly 6 percentage points higher in 2013 if the ratio of staff costs to the 
sum of staff costs and shareholders’ profit had been at its 2000–07 average. 
The sluggish adjustment in pay may well reflect the expectation that returns in banking are 
set to increase in the future. There are good reasons why they may do so. But, given lower 
levels of leverage, it is unlikely that we will see, or want to see again, the returns on equity 
that we saw before the crisis. In the new world, paybills may well have further to adjust. 
A major element of the rethinking of business models in global banks has concerned their 
Fixed  Income,  Commodities  and  Currency  business  –  charmingly  known  as  FICC.  A 
consequence  of  higher  risk  aversion  and  tougher  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  have 
been  a  step  reduction  in  FICC-related  activity,  especially  proprietary  trading  and  market-
making.  Inventory  levels  held  in  banks’  FICC  areas  have  nearly  halved  since  the  boom 
years. A consequence has been falling income from FICC trading over the past five years. 
It is not yet clear how this very material element of banks’ business models will evolve. Many 
banks,  reacting  to  both  low  profitability  and  regulatory  pressure,  are  continuing  to  shrink 
these operations. And as the data suggest the average pay bill in banking is skewed very 
heavily  towards  the  top  earners,  such  as  principal  risk  takers  in  investment  banking  and 
trading, this should both restore return-on-equity and reduce the pay bill. 
To  sum  up.  The  landscape  has  changed  with  key  changes  to  the  way  the  official  sector 
approaches  regulation  and  supervision.  Those  changes  have  generated  changes  in  rules 
and in supervisory practice that have changed the world for banks. Banks are now wrestling 
with the changes they need to make to thrive both in the new economic environment and in 
this new landscape. 
It is important, in seeking to restore returns, that banks and investors do not think in terms of 
“back to the future”. With less leverage and more liquidity in banks, required returns ought 
generally to be lower than prior to the crisis. 
Trying  to  offset  that  by  taking  excessive  risk  or  evading  regulation  will  not,  I  think,  be 
tolerated in the new world. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
