  Jens Weidmann: Forging strategic plans without a crystal ball – the 
importance of target-based management within the German authorities, 
with the Bundesbank as a case study 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  top-level 
meeting on “target-based management within the German authorities”, Berlin, 29 September 
2014. 
 Opening remarks 
1. 
Dr de Maizière 
Mr Bullerjahn 
Professor Weber 
Professor Hirsch 
Mr Weise 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome to the Bundesbank’s Regional Office in Berlin and Brandenburg. 
Some of you may already have visited the Regional Office to attend one of the events in our 
“Bundesbank  in  dialogue”  series.  If  not,  I  can  highly  recommend  it.  Three  weeks  ago, 
Bundesbank experts were here providing information and fielding questions on the banking 
union. I hear that it was a very lively event. 
Today, we aren’t here to discuss banks and the financial industry but to talk about ways to 
make our authorities and public institutions more effective overall, and I’m delighted that the 
Bundesbank is hosting this event. 
Authorities need to adapt to new requirements 
2. 
The  setting  in  which  we  operate  is  evolving  so  rapidly  that  we  also  need  to  be  swift  in 
implementing the necessary changes in the right way. 
The  ever-changing  possibilities  and  requirements  in  the  world  of  IT  mean  that  we  are 
constantly obliged to review our processes. Only recently, the Bundesbank set up a brand 
new data centre in the north of Frankfurt to make its IT infrastructure less prone to errors. 
Growing European integration is also changing the requirements we face. This is, of course, 
particularly  true  of  the  Bundesbank,  as  it  forms  part  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks. Yet the Federal Employment Agency, the Federal Statistical Office and the German 
Patent Office are also embedded in a European framework, which means that they think and 
act  in  a  European  context.  And  I’m  sure  that  the  same  can  be  said  of  many  of  you  here 
today. 
For  some  of  us,  the  European  setting  not  only  means  being  being  part  of  a  European 
framework; it also creates quite specific competitive pressures. This is again particularly true 
of the Bundesbank; it often offers the same services as the central banks of the other euro-
area countries. Yet it is not alone: the German weather services also have to compete with 
other providers in Europe. EU-wide tenders are already being held for certain meterological 
services designed to ensure safe air travel. The providers of these services therefore have to 
attract clients by offering top quality and service and competitive prices. 
In  the  world  of  politics,  too,  we  are  all  competing  with  other  ideas  and  approaches  from 
across Europe. How can monetary policy best respond to the gloomier economic outlook and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  price  prospects?  How  should  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  operate  in  future?  What 
should  we  make  of  the  idea  to  introduce  a  single  European  unemployment  insurance 
scheme?  These  issues  aren’t  just  on  the  Bundesbank’s  agenda;  they  also  occupy  the 
German  government  and  many  of  you  here  today,  and  they  are  met  with  a  throng  of 
proposals from across Europe on how to address them. 
Germany  has  rightly  introduced  a  debt  brake  in  response  to  the  difficult  public  finance 
situation that this country is destined to face: fewer employees paying income tax and more 
pensioners.  That  is  no  easy  scenario  for  our  public  coffers.  The  debt  brake  rules  out  the 
supposed “quick fix” of funding public expenditure through new borrowing. 
You don’t need a crystal ball to see that the pressure on public authorities to provide their 
services  cost-effectively  is  set  to  increase.  And  public  authorities  will  also  face  increasing 
competition: they will be competing for scarce funds. 
I make no secret of the fact that, in this regard, the Bundesbank is undoubtedly in a better 
position than the public authorities. After all, it is not funded from the public coffers but from 
its own profit. But the Bundesbank, too, is monitored by the Federal Court of Auditors. Any 
euro that it wastes is one euro less for the Finance Ministry. 
The  tighter  budget  will  also  reduce  the  options  open  to  public  authorities  –  including  their 
ability to fulfil the public’s wishes. I’m sure that is a fairly bitter pill for some of you to swallow, 
as focusing on the public’s needs has been made a major priority in recent years – and with 
great  success.  A  very  recent  Forsa  study  indicates  that  the  public  now  rate  the  services 
provided by public authorities more positively than in previous years, which shows that they 
notice and appreciate these efforts. 
Yet this means that, in future, the authorities will need to be even more creative and willing to 
innovate  in  order  to  meet  the  growing  demand  to  address  the  public’s  needs  even  when 
budgets are tight. Even so, it will probably no longer be possible to fulfil some of the public’s 
wishes. For example, the Bundesbank now declines to accept coins in bags, as it is not cost-
effective to do so. Accepting them would make life easier for some of the Bank’s customers. 
But the Executive Board has decided on a “wholesaler” business model for cash processing, 
and so the Bank now only accepts standard coin containers. 
Despite our best efforts to innovate and find new solutions, we will all increasingly feel the 
squeeze, faced with limited funds and growing expectations to perform effectively. 
And, ultimately, competition for young talent is going to get tougher. Our so-called population 
pyramid  already  looks  more  like  a  mushroom.  There  are  fewer  and  fewer  young  people 
entering  the  labour  market,  yet  demand  for  highly  qualified  young  workers  in  particular  is 
growing ever larger. 
On the surface, it might seem reassuring that today’s students seem particularly drawn to a 
career  in  the  public  sector.  Students  do  not  rate  other  sectors,  such  as  the  car  industry, 
nearly as highly. And a third of students would like to work solely in the public sector, not in 
private industry. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as public-sector employers that is, of course, music to our ears. Yet I 
have my concerns about this desire among young people to work in the public sector. After 
all,  Germany’s  economy  is  doing  well,  and  there  are  a  whole  host  of  opportunities  on  the 
labour  market  for  young  people  with  qualifications.  I  feel  that,  for  society  as  a  whole,  it  is 
better if the mood among young people does not become too biased towards security and 
reliability. 
Ultimately,  a  market  economy  does  not  thrive  on  the  work  of  public  authorities  but  on 
successful  business  activities.  Germany’s  prosperity  is  founded  on  innovation  and  the 
willingness  of  companies  and  their  employees  to  take  risks;  it  is  based  on  them  truly 
engaging  with  their  customers’  needs  and  on their  openness  to the  rest  of  the  world.  And 
public authorities should create the best possible conditions for all this to take place. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Given the changing needs in today’s environment, we too need to innovate and be willing to 
adapt. 
The Bundesbank also constantly has to adapt to new challenges 
3. 
I’d now like to give you a brief overview of the major challenges that the Bundesbank has 
faced since the turn of the millennium. The environment in which the Bank fulfils its statutory 
mandate  has  undergone  numerous  and  major changes.  And  that  is  why  the  Bank  already 
began with its target-based management more than ten years ago. 
In  2002,  the  Bundesbank  decided  to  implement  a  fundamental  structural  reform  which 
radically changed its set-up. European monetary union gave the Bundesbank a new role in 
Europe.  The  banking  sector  underwent  a  significant  concentration  process.  Automated 
processes  were  introduced  for  many  banking  services.  The  Seventh  Act  Amending  the 
Bundesbank  Act  (Siebente  Bundesbankänderungsgesetz)  ultimately  provided  the  crucial 
impetus for a structural reform by further developing the tasks and set-up of the Bank. The 
Bundesbank made a virtue of necessity. It aligned its set-up to its role in the Eurosystem and 
became more cost-effective. 
At the same time, the launch of the Eurosystem gave rise to joint projects. In these projects, 
selected central banks – on behalf of all Eurosystem central banks – provide services for the 
Eurosystem  or  for  European  banks.  This  allows  all  concerned  to  benefit  from  greater 
efficiency. As a service provider, the Bundesbank is involved in the largest European projects 
on financial market infrastructure. We can therefore be sure that our standards are feeding 
into these areas. And, at the same time, we benefit from this cooperation with our partner 
central banks. 
That is true of TARGET2, a payment system operating across national borders in the EU, 
which  the  Bundesbank  launched  and  now  runs  in  cooperation  with  the  central  banks  of 
France and Italy. This system enables banks to execute payments in real time and to settle 
transactions  in  central  bank  money.  And  it  is  also  true  of  TARGET2-Securities,  which  will 
soon offer users throughout Europe a harmonised and centralised service for the settlement 
of securities in central bank money. 
Alongside the structural reform and the transfer of tasks and functions to the European level, 
the  financial  crisis  is  another  factor  that  has  radically  changed  the  setting  in  which  we 
operate. 
• 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB)  was launched in 2010. Since then, it 
has  been  responsible  for  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  in  the 
EU, focusing on risks to financial stability in the EU. The ESRB is also tasked with 
helping  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  makes  a  sustainable  contribution  to 
economic growth. 
At the beginning of 2013, the Bundesbank was given a mandate to monitor financial 
stability in Germany. And ... 
the banking union will be launched in five weeks’ time, on 4 November 2014. From 
that point on, the ECB will be responsible for European-level banking supervision. 
That  won’t  put  the  Bundesbank’s  supervisors  out  of  a  job;  far  from  it.  But  it  will 
change some of the key focuses of their work. 
  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  view  of  the  dizzying  pace  of  change  in  China  at  the  turn  of  the 
millennium, it was said that you could be glad if your bed was still in your bedroom when you 
woke up in the morning. The pace of change in Europe is certainly slower than that – and, to 
borrow  that  same  image,  I  would  say  that  some  countries’  beds  have  remained  in  the 
bedroom far too long. Yet Europe is also experiencing rapid and major innovations – and that 
is bound to continue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 4. 
Target-based management: the Bundesbank’s response to the pressure to 
change 
 In view of this situation, the Bundesbank views target-based management as a vital tool. 
Of course, the Bundesbank is not a private business. It isn’t listed on the stock exchange, 
and its main “customers” are the general public, who benefit from a stable currency, a secure 
cash supply and payment systems which function smoothly. 
Target-based  management  ensures  that  the  Bank  is  managed  with  results  in  mind.  The 
focus here is on an effective and efficient use of resources. This is not only important for the 
Bundesbank,  but  probably  for  all  public  authorities.  Ultimately,  target-based  management 
contributes to the objective of sound budgetary management, and this is also of significance 
at the macroeconomic level. After all, sound public finances are an essential precondition for 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  not  a  danger  to  it,  as  some  commentators  in  the 
discussions on the euro area crisis – which is still far from over – would have us believe. 
At the Bundesbank, target-based management is implemented by a cutting-edge controlling 
department.  This  team  of  employees  is  responsible  for  the  two  important  and  intertwined 
building blocks of “strategic planning” and “operational planning”, for which the Bank adopted 
its first strategic plan in 2002 and its third in 2012. 
The strategy acts as an important roadmap, both within the Bank and externally. It provides 
clarity, which I already touched upon when talking about the “wholesaler” business model for 
cash processing. And, what’s more, the strategy allows us to hold our own in the European 
“competition  for  ideas”,  which  I  have  also  already  mentioned.  Ultimately,  the  strategy 
provides  a  framework  for  assigning  resources  to  individual  areas  of  responsibility  and 
deciding which projects and measures should be implemented there. 
The title of my speech is “Forging strategic plans without a crystal ball.” Having a crystal ball 
would be the best of all worlds; there would be no uncertainty, no surprises, and no doubts 
about what the future holds – and all this with minimal resource input. At the Bundesbank, we 
are  forced  to  make  do  without  a  crystal  ball  –  and  this  means  deploying  considerable 
resources to produce economic forecasts. Strategic planning is a tried and tested instrument 
used  by  the  Bundesbank  to  ensure  that  we  are  ready  to  respond  to  the  influences  of  a 
dynamic environment at any given moment. We do this in a way that is as resource-efficient 
as possible. 
The primary objective of the Bundesbank is achieving its statutory mandate of ensuring price 
stability. In keeping with the idea of a strategic vision, we have defined the primary objective 
of  our  strategy  in  slightly  broader  terms.  In  our  strategy  we  therefore  speak  of  “ensuring 
stability” as opposed to merely “ensuring price stability”. 
We  have  used  this  strategic  vision  as  the  basis  for  defining  a  number  of  fields  of  activity, 
including, first and foremost, the tasks of our five core business areas. These are 
• 
• 
• 
first, implementing monetary policy in Germany; 
second, and closely related to the first, maintaining the supply of cash; 
third,  executing  domestic  and  cross-border  payments,  thus  contributing  to  the 
smooth functioning of payment and clearing systems; 
fourth, ensuring the stability of the financial and monetary system; and 
fifth, carrying out banking supervision. 
• 
• 
These core business areas are supplemented by a number of other fields of activity, such as 
statistics and research, which see to it that the right conditions are in place for successful 
work in the core business areas. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5. 
The Bundesbank’s strategic planning is carried out in the form of an open 
process, thus ensuring it is firmly entrenched within the organisation 
 In strategic planning terms, the Bank has learned new tricks with each round of planning. Our 
third  strategy  cycle,  which  involved  drawing  up  the  current  “Strategy  2016”,  was 
characterised by the realisation that a strategy only has a chance of being implemented if it is 
rooted across the entire institution. 
The  strategy  was  therefore  drawn  up  in  a  transparent,  open  process  involving  the  senior 
management  of  our  Central  Office  and  our  nine  Regional  Offices.  At  a  management 
conference,  the  Executive  Board  discussed  the  Bank’s  strategic  options  with  the  senior 
managers of the business units at Central Office and the presidents of the Regional Offices. 
The  conference  rested  on  two  pillars:  top-down  guidance  outlining  the  Executive  Board’s 
fundamental approach and a discussion paper based on a scenario analysis. This discussion 
paper  was  prepared  in  advance  by  the  Controlling  Department  in  consultation  with  the 
responsible business units of the five core business areas. 
This  management  conference  laid  the  groundwork  for  the  future  strategy.  The  Executive 
Board  then  set  up  working  groups  and  tasked  them  –  alongside  Controlling  –  to  develop 
strategic and development objectives as well as corresponding measures and indicators. The 
working  groups  presented  their  results  to  the  Executive  Board  at  a  second  management 
conference and the Controlling Department subsequently used these as a basis to prepare a 
draft “Strategy 2016” for the Executive Board. 
The  principles  of  transparency  surrounding  the  strategy  and  its  firm  rooting  within  the 
organisation have been upheld to this day. Indeed, they are part of our everyday business 
life at the Bundesbank. 
For example, when providing information on the steps taken to develop the strategy, we did 
not limit ourselves to the various internal communication channels available. We also placed 
the  adopted  strategic  and  development  objectives  of  each  strategy  on  the  Bank’s  intranet. 
Speeches at staff assemblies and talks with staff representatives form part of the traditional 
set of tools used to communicate internally within the Bank. 
At the Bundesbank we are also seeing very positive results from the new dialogue-oriented 
formats in which we openly invite a large number of employees to participate. For example, 
since  2012  we  have  been  holding  events  with  the  appealing  title  “Weidmann  direct”.  Our 
employees  are  invited  to  these  Regional  Office  events  twice  a  year,  where  I  speak  about 
current topics and, above all, engage in dialogue. This form of direct contact is also offered 
by the Bundesbank’s Deputy President – though here of course with the title “Buch direct”. 
We reach 250 employees directly in this way. 
In our event series “Lunch with ...”, things are significantly more focused on the individual. 
The format entails one member of the Executive Board going for lunch with 15 employees. 
Since  2012,  this  kind  of  lunch  has  been  scheduled  once  a  year  for  each  member  of  the 
Executive Board. 
And, for  nearly  a  year  now,  we  have  organised  ad-hoc  online  chats  on  a  specific  subject. 
Regardless of their location, employees can direct questions to the member of the Executive 
Board taking part in the chat. On average, just over 400 employees follow these chats, which 
can be organised at very low cost. 
These various communication vehicles give the Executive Board the opportunity to clarify its 
strategic outlook and to garner employees’ support. The new communication formats have 
been particularly well-received. In contrast to the existing formats that have been around for 
some time such as the Bank’s employee magazine or the intranet, they are dialogue-oriented 
and largely open to everybody. 
So  why am I talking about instruments of internal communication in the context of “target-
based  management”?  Because,  in  my  experience,  they  are  decisive  in  ensuring  that  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  strategy is worth more than the paper it’s written on. It’s only by working inwardly within our 
institution and taking our employees with us on this strategic journey that we will have any 
chance at all of reaching our destination. 
In this context, one of the results of the 2012 employee survey was particularly gratifying for 
me in my capacity as Bundesbank President: 65% of those surveyed feel they have a good 
level of knowledge on the Bundesbank’s strategy. That’s not bad going. 
In  order  to  ensure  support  for  our  strategy  among  employees,  it  is  also  essential  that  the 
Executive Board identify with that strategy. The members of the Executive Board need to be 
seen  to  accept  and  respect  it,  even  if  it goes  against  the  short term  interests  of their  own 
area of responsibility. I am firmly convinced that without this visible support, it won’t work. 
Indeed, sometimes implementing a strategy means having to face up to harsh realities. For 
example,  some  time  ago  the  Executive  Board  took  a  strategic  decision  to  streamline  the 
branch  network.  At  the  start  of  the  structural  reform  in  2002,  the  Bank  still  had  over  100 
branches.  Today  there  are  41,  providing  coverage  for  the  entire  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany.  This goes  hand  in  hand  with  fundamental  procedural  changes  that first  need  to 
take root in the organisation. 
In 1996, John Kotter, a pioneer in change management, was the first to suggest that only 
30% of change efforts succeed. Numerous subsequent studies have confirmed this to be the 
case. One of the many responses to this has been to ascribe greater importance to the role 
of CEO and senior managers in the context of such changes. 
It therefore strikes me as pertinent that the working group “Management and Controlling in 
Public Institutions” has chosen “Change Management” as its annual topic for 2014–15. 
Strategic planning needs to be translated into operational planning 
6. 
It  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  aforementioned  strategy  is  firmly  anchored  within  the 
organisation  but  we  also  we  also  need  target-based  management.  We  can’t  have  one 
without the other. 
In  light  of  the  environmental  changes  that  I  outlined  at  the  start  of  my  speech,  once  a 
strategy has been adopted it needs to be monitored on a regular basis to ensure it remains 
up to date. This is why  we have annual strategy reviews, which look at both the extent to 
which strategic measures have been implemented and any changes that have occurred in 
the environment. These reviews also act as the basis for operational planning. 
Translating  strategic  planning  into  operational  planning  is  a  second  challenging  area  of 
target-based management. The motivation and willingness of staff to implement a strategy is 
one  thing,  but  translating  this  strategy  into  measurable  –  and  therefore  reviewable  – 
operational objectives is quite another. 
“What gets measured gets done” is a well-known maxim in the Anglo-Saxon management 
literature. This is why  we are in the process of devising a cascading series of measurable 
indicators for our strategic goals. This too, is anything but trivial. Indeed, there are grounds 
for a lively debate about whether some indicators accurately measure the phenomenon they 
are supposed to gauge. 
Please  allow  me  to  explain  the  way  indicators  are  assigned  to  strategic  goals  using  the 
example of “external communication”. 
The core objective of external communication is “to ensure that the Bundesbank’s positions 
are communicated credibly, consistently, transparently and effectively to the outside world.” 
We have broken this down into a number of development targets, such as: 
• 
• 
“Improving our ability to promptly take a stance” 
“Increasing transparency with respect to the impact of communications”, and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “Expanding direct public communications.” 
• 
To  illustrate  the  point  further,  I  will  now  outline  the  two  measures  and  corresponding 
indicators that have been assigned to our target of expanding direct public communications. 
These are 
• 
first,  “setting  up  and  maintaining  up-to-date  webpages  for  the  public”,  with  the 
indicator being the “number of website visits”, and 
second, “holding an open day”, with the indicator being an “evaluation of the open 
day” – for example by analysing visitor numbers, evaluating the media response or 
interviewing visitors. 
 Only when the strategy has been fleshed out with indicators down to the operational level will 
it be possible to effect its implementation. If this does not occur, there is a serious risk that 
the strategy will simply be filed away and forgotten. 
“Making our case” is something we all need to see as part of our daily work 
7.  
The  operational  implementation  I  have  just  described  falls  under  the  responsibility  of 
Controlling. On the other hand, as I have already pointed out, it is quite clearly the task of 
senior  management  to  practise  open  communication  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  strategy  is 
firmly anchored across the organisation. 
Based on my experience, the importance of this cannot be overstated. With every step we 
take, we are constantly reminded of the need to make the case for our plans and projects. 
We need to convince our employees of the merits of our strategy and make the case to the 
public of the importance of price stability; target-based management and confidence in the 
euro are additional areas where we must win over support – and I am sure that you could 
continue this list with any number of examples from your authorities. 
I have set myself the personal objective of creating a culture of openness at the Bundesbank 
– both within the bank and in relation to the outside world. For many in the Bank, this means 
changing  one’s  mindset.  But  it  is  most  often  people  outside  the  Bank  who  continue  to 
perceive it as a rather closed institution. They often see the Bundesbank as a “fortress”, with 
the grey,  austere-looking  building  at  our  Central  Office  certainly  contributing to this  image. 
David  Marsh  once  wrote  that  the  way  the  Bundesbank  operates  and  the  sort  of  people 
running it are things that people rarely hear about. Let me assure you that there is nothing 
secretive about the Bank’s work or its way of thinking. This is something I want to really spell 
out through my actions and words. 
The culture of openness is an important new area of focus for the controlling department; a 
conclusion also reached by the “Management and Controlling in Public Institutions” working 
group. With  this  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  wish  the  working  group  continued  success  in  the 
important work it is carrying out. 
It’s time to act 
8. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am now coming to the end of my remarks. We have all been aware 
for some time of the need to manage in a target-based way. The necessary concepts and 
instruments  are  at  our  disposal.  Controlling  departments  are  increasingly  ready  to  work  in 
partnership  with  decision-makers.  They  don’t  want  to  merely  provide  data  and  information 
and be written off as number crunchers or nit-pickers. They want to advise. 
It is now up to us to get our institutions on track and ensure that we continually improve our 
target-based  management.  To  this  end,  we  need  suitable  processes.  And  this  requires 
leadership  at  the  top  and  much  effort  in  winning  over  people’s  hearts  and  minds.  I  am 
convinced that if we want our institutions to be able to hold their own in future then we have 
no choice but to pursue a target-based management approach. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
