  Juyeol Lee: Rebalancing an economy after the global financial crisis 
Opening address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea-
IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Joint Conference, Seoul, 20 November 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  all  to  Seoul,  for  the  Bank  of  Korea-IMF  OAP  Joint 
Conference. I wish to thank Director Odd Per Brekk of the IMF Regional Office for Asia and 
the  Pacific,  the  conference  co-organizer;  Senior  Fellow  John  Lipskyof  Johns  Hopkins 
University, our keynote speaker; President John C. Williams of the San Francisco Fed, and 
all program participants including our moderators, speakers, and discussants. 
The world economy is gradually recovering now, six years after the global financial crisis, but 
the pace of recovery remains painfully slow. It is well known that at the root of the financial 
crisis were the global imbalances, accumulated over a long time, and we also know that the 
structural imbalances, which worsened in each country during the crisis remain in place and 
continue to limit recovery today. 
History tells us that the more unbalanced an economy is, the lower its level of growth and the 
greater its vulnerability to negative external shocks. The correction of economic imbalances 
is  therefore  essential  for  preventing  future  crises  and  for  achieving  sustainable  growth. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  think  that  this  conference  focused  on  the  issue  of  economic 
rebalancing is both deeply meaningful and timely. 
Looking  back,  during  the  so-called  “great  moderation”  in  the  2000s,imbalances  in  many 
aspects had been built up and spread, both externally and internally. Globally, the external 
imbalances between countries running current account surpluses and those running current 
account deficits worsened. At the individual country level, various internal imbalances were 
also accumulating, such as financial imbalances, increased fiscal deficits, and widening gaps 
in output between the service and the manufacturing sectors. 
From  the  global  perspective,  the  external  imbalances  seem  to  have  narrowed  somewhat 
recently. This is due to the sluggishness of demand in the deficit countries, rather than to any 
improved competitiveness in their export sectors or to expansions in domestic demand in the 
surplus  countries.  From  the  individual  country  perspective,  however,  internal  imbalances 
continue to exist, and in some cases have even worsened. And when the global economy 
picks  up,  the  external  imbalances  are  likely  to  worsen  again.  Without  fundamental 
rebalancing,  a  full-fledged  recovery  of  world  economy  may  be  a  remote  possibility.  But 
rebalancing within a short period of time is no trivial task. It will require more proactive and 
concerted policy efforts than are currently being made. 
The  recent  expansionary  macroeconomic  policies  undertaken  in  response  to  the  sluggish 
economic  growth  are,  as  I  see  it,  temporary  measures,  and  not  ultimate  solutions  to 
rebalancing.  They  serve  to  mature  conditions  for  carrying  out  structural  reforms  that  are 
essential  to  remedying  the  imbalances.  In  this  regard,  the  following  can  be  suggested  as 
structural  solutions  for  rebalancing.  First,  the  current  account  surplus  economies  need  to 
expand  their  domestic  sectors,  and  thereby  establish  a  virtuous  circle  between  output, 
employment, and income. The current account deficit countries, on the other hand, need to 
nurture  their  manufacturing  industries,  so  as  to  improve  their  bases  for  exporting.  In 
individual  countries,  the  imbalances  between  their  real  and  financial  economies,  and 
between their manufacturing and service sectors, need to be corrected, while they must also 
work  to  reduce  their  debts  and  the  disparities  between  income  classes  within  their 
populations. 
To secure the impetus for sustainable growth, countries will also need to work together and 
combine their wisdom. The Brisbane Action Plan, a set of comprehensive growth strategies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  presented by the G20 Summit last weekend, is one result of such combined wisdom, arrived 
at after long discussion among member countries, and will be useful in the future rebalancing 
in each country. 
During this two-day conference, we will deal with the topics of rebalancing the economy in 
five separate presentations, as well as in a panel discussion participated in by former and 
current policymakers from major countries. I look forward to participants reaping many useful 
ideas  here,  and  to  this  conference  contributing  to  rebalancing  and  to  the  restoration  of 
sustainable growth. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
