  Peter Praet: Interview in De Tijd and L’Echo 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  De  Tijd  and  L’Echo,  conducted  by  Mr Wouter  Vervenne  and  Mr  Marc  Lambrechts,  and 
published on 28 October 2014. 
 Growth in the euro area has come to a standstill. When should we expect a revival?  
We are now seeing a loss of momentum. It is striking that growth is abating in an early phase 
of  the  business  cycle.  We  take  that  seriously,  but  we  shouldn’t  exaggerate:  our  base 
scenario  for  a  gradual  economic  recovery  is  still  realistic.  The  risks  have  increased  and 
deserve our attention.  
Regarding recent developments, the widest gap between expectations and reality was seen 
in Germany. France was weak and has remained so. Growth projections for Germany have 
been lowered, for both 2014 and 2015. The weakness there reflects the slowdown in trade 
with China and Brazil and the impact of the Ukrainian crisis, but also technical factors such 
as a higher than usual number of days leave in the motor industry.  
We  can’t  ignore  the  feeble  economic  climate.  That  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  took 
measures  in  June  and September  and further  loosened  monetary  policy.  But  we  shouldn’t 
over-dramatise.  
So you don’t fear a recession? 
No,  I  wouldn’t  say  that.  Confidence  indicators  for  the  third  and  fourth  quarter  suggest 
marginal growth in the euro area. That is rather worrying, as the momentum is certainly not 
strong enough for self-sustaining growth. 
Meanwhile, inflation and inflation expectations are still falling. Is there a likelihood of 
deflation?  
The risk of deflation is limited. I find it difficult to accept the high probability of deflation (30%) 
published by the International Monetary Fund for the euro area. Our models come up with 
much  lower  figures.  But  we  do  need  to  be  vigilant.  A  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation 
harbours  the  risk that  an  economic  shock may trigger  negative  inflation.  If  you’re  hovering 
close to zero and you experience a new shock, the risk of negative inflation is by no means 
negligible.  
Falling oil prices exacerbate the risk of deflation 
That’s a concern, but what matters are the inflation expectations for the medium term. Is the 
decline  in  oil  prices  temporary  or  lasting? The fall  in  oil  prices  is  bringing general  inflation 
down, but the impact also depends on the rate of the euro against the dollar.  
It’s hard to identify the primary cause of the fall in oil prices: the increased supply or the weak 
demand.  It  would  of  course  be  serious  if  prices  were  not  pushed  down  by  low  demand. 
Cheaper oil supports growth but also threatens to drag inflation expectations down too far. It 
is a mixed blessing. 
Will the ECB take extra measures to boost growth and inflation?  
We  already  further  loosened  monetary  policy  in  June  and  September.  We  do  not  feel 
comfortable  with  the  current  low  level  of  inflation  and  are  closely  monitoring  the  path  of 
inflation. We have clearly stated, and that is new, that the ECB’s balance sheet will increase 
considerably as a result of these measures. That is necessary because we want to stimulate 
lending. ECB President Mario Draghi has given an indication, but that is not an objective in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  itself. We do not target a specific balance sheet total, but rather inflation over the medium 
term.  
Are the current measures sufficient?  
Some  observers  doubt  whether  the  current  measures  will  be  enough  to  bring  about  the 
considerable expansion of our balance sheet. We are stating clearly: if we need to counter 
the risk of a prolonged period of low inflation, the Governing Council is unanimously prepared 
to  take  unconventional  measures.  The  debate  on  the  need  for  extra  measures  still  lies 
ahead.  
What do you think? 
As always, I  will thoroughly analyse the new  information. But let there be no doubt: if it is 
necessary, we will not hesitate. Nothing is being ruled out. We have two clear messages: we 
are  planning  a  significant  liquidity  injection  and  we  are  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the 
situation.  
What can governments do to stimulate growth? Germany and France are holding talks 
on that.  
Monetary  policy  alone  is  not  enough.  A  coherent  package  of  measures  is  required,  with 
contributions from monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural reforms. This combination is 
not  easy.  If  necessary,  we,  as  the  central  bank,  will  not  hesitate  to  do  more.  But  the 
politicians  must  also  shoulder  their  responsibilities.  They  must  find  the  right  mix  of  fiscal 
policy and structural reforms.  
France is once again seeking more time to reduce its budget deficit to 3%. 
I think that France must do more to restore public finances. But as structural reforms may 
have  a  negative  effect  on  growth  in  the  short  term,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  allows 
countries  that  implement  more  reforms  to  extend  the  deficit  reduction  programme  over  a 
longer period. The problem is that, in the past, many countries have abused that flexibility in 
fiscal  policy.  They  did  not  do  enough  to  stabilise  public  finances  and  did  not  reform  their 
economies. That is why there is now a problem of credibility. 
France  is  a  special  case.  Unlike  most  crisis  countries,  it  has  always  enjoyed  favourable 
financial conditions, such as low long-term interest rates. So you can’t say that France was a 
victim of high interest rates.  
What can Germany do? 
Germany recently decided to lower the retirement age for some groups and to introduce a 
minimum  wage.  Entrepreneurs  say  that  the  reforms  are  weighing  negatively  on  the 
investment climate. There was some complacency. Germany must now ask itself: how do we 
stay competitive over the next ten years. There is now much debate on the excessively low 
level of investment.  
Germany has some room to relax its fiscal policy without jeopardising stability in the medium 
term. It can use that scope to step up investment.  
I  am  always  surprised  that  the  United  States  takes  a  completely  different  approach  than 
Europe.  Some  US  policymakers  say  that  we  should  forget  about  structural  reforms  in  the 
current  circumstances;  we  should  only  support  demand  and  should  not  scare  people  with 
structural reforms. That is not what we believe in Europe, although it is of course true that 
market flexibility in the United States is far greater than in Europe.  
 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What is your view of the new Belgian government’s plans?  
Now that I have a European mandate, I am, in a manner of speaking, no longer a Belgian. In 
theory, I can take a neutral standpoint. But nobody will believe that I’m no longer a Belgian. I 
still  read  Belgian  newspapers  and  also  take  a  professional  interest  in  Belgium.  I  am  a 
displaced European. I look at Belgium as I would at any other country. Belgium has used the 
small fiscal margin cautiously. Just as for other countries, it’s good to announce all reforms at 
the start of the cabinet term and then to implement them properly.  
What  is  your  general  assessment  of  the  results?  Are  they  better  or worse  than  you 
expected?  
Given  that  banks  since  July  2013,  in  the  run-up  to  the  publication  of  the  results  of  the 
comprehensive  assessment,  have  already  taken  more  than  200  bln  in  balance  sheet 
repairing measures, the result is more or less what was to be expected. At the same time, 
this test is only a very good first step and the results will be taken into consideration in the 
day-to-day supervision which the ECB will conduct as of 4 November.  
Will the test be sufficient the restore trust in the banks? Was the adverse scenario of 
the stress test sufficiently severe? The inflation in 2014 is much lower than the stress 
test assumes and a deflation scenario was not tested.  
A deflation scenario is not an explicit part of the test and we do not expect it to happen. But 
the adverse scenario of the stress test does include inflation very close to zero (e.g. 0.3% in 
2016). The most important thing is that the set of shocks which we included in the adverse 
scenario leads to a capital loss of 263 bln, a very significant amount. But the exercise should 
not be seen as an assessment of each conceivable risk a bank can face. If this was possible, 
it would make day-to-day supervision largely redundant and the exercise is most certainly not 
a substitute for the day-to-day supervision by the ECB.  
Can we expect positive results on credit provision and economic growth quickly? 
The test as such is not sufficient to restore credit provision, but it is a minimum condition. The 
test, together with the balance sheet repair measures of the banks, should have an impact 
on credit provision in the euro area and thus be supportive to economic recovery, as banks 
will be able to access funding more easily, given that investors now have a clear picture and 
transparency has been improved. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
