  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
1 December 2014. 
 In my remarks, I would like to look at the situation of the Swiss banks from a financial stability 
perspective,  taking  the big  banks first  and  then  moving  on  to  a  discussion  of  domestically 
focused banks. 
Strengthening the resilience of the big banks 
Since  the  last  media  news  conference,  the  Swiss  big  banks  have  improved  their  capital 
situation once again. The Swiss National Bank recognises the considerable progress made 
in this area as regards both risk-weighted capital ratios and leverage ratios. It is also of the 
opinion  that  the  strengthening  of  the  big  banks’  resilience  must  continue,  for  the  following 
reasons. 
First, risks in the economic and financial environment remain high. In several of the adverse 
scenarios considered by the SNB, the estimated loss potential for the big banks continues to 
be substantial relative to their capitalisation. This is also the case when viewed in a historical 
perspective,  as  evidenced  during  the  recent  financial  crisis.  Second,  while  the  big  banks’ 
risk-weighted capital ratios are above the average for large globally active banks, the same 
still cannot be said for their leverage ratios. 
In this context, the SNB supports the recommendations by the group of experts headed by 
Professor Brunetti on the evaluation of the “too big to fail” regulatory framework. The report 
advocates a recalibration of capital requirements in order to ensure that Switzerland is in a 
leading  position  internationally  in  terms  of  the  requirements  for  both  risk-weighted  capital 
ratios and leverage ratios. In particular, the report stresses that leverage ratio requirements 
for systemically important banks have been increased in several countries compared to the 
minimum proposed by the Basel Committee. In the SNB’s view, a possible recalibration of 
capital requirements must reflect the size and concentration of our banking sector. In fact, it 
is imperative that a lasting solution be found for the “too big to fail” issue in Switzerland. 
Increasing the credibility of model-based risk-weighted assets 
Beyond recalibrating capital requirements, increasing the credibility of the model-based risk-
weighted  assets  (RWA)  is  essential.  This  is  all  the  more  important  as  RWA  remain  a  key 
element of banking regulation. 
The Brunetti group of experts, too, considers this to be a prime objective and the issue has 
also been recognised at international level. The Basel Committee has therefore announced 
the  release  of  a  set  of  measures  for  consultation.  These  measures  mainly  provide  for  the 
revision  of  the  standardised  approaches  for  RWA  calculation,  the  introduction  of  an  RWA 
floor  based  on the  standardised  approaches,  as  well  as  greater transparency.  The floor  is 
aimed at ensuring that the requirements for banks using the model-based approach remain 
sufficiently prudent. 
In  this  regard,  let  us  also  recall  that  FINMA  –  together  with  the  big  banks  and  with  the 
support of the SNB – has conducted a comparison of RWA calculated with the model-based 
approach  and  the  standardised  approach.  The  SNB  suggests  that  banks  consider  the 
possibility of publishing the results of this analysis in appropriate form. In any case, the SNB 
remains  convinced  that  banks  which  use  the  model-based  approach  for  calculating  their 
RWA  must  continue  to  improve  their  transparency  with  regard  to  their  risks.  Considerable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  progress has been made already, especially in terms of disclosing changes in RWA broken 
down  by  cause.  Publishing  a  parallel  calculation  of  RWA  based  on  the  standardised 
approach  would  greatly  contribute  to  building  trust  and  market  discipline.  Enhanced 
transparency is likely to be a key component of the measures that the Basel Committee will 
put in consultation. 
Domestically focused commercial banks 
I would now like to turn to the situation of the domestically focused banks. Risks facing these 
banks are still primarily connected with the mortgage and real estate markets. These risks 
have largely remained unchanged at a high level over the past six months. 
In the last half year, the momentum in the mortgage market slowed, with annual growth in 
mortgage  lending  slightly  less  high  than  in  the  previous  quarters.  The  mortgage  volume 
continued to rise more steeply than GDP, but the difference between the two growth rates 
has  become  smaller.  Furthermore,  real  estate  prices  continued  to  rise  but,  as  in  2013, 
momentum remained below the levels observed until 2012. Developments still varied widely 
from one region to the other. Whereas real estate prices in some regions hardly increased or 
even decreased, other regions continued to register significant price rises. 
However, it is still too early for an all-clear. First, the imbalances that have built up since the 
beginning  of the  low-interest-rate  phase  remain  at  a  high  level.  Second,  mortgage  interest 
rates have again dropped to historically low levels in the past few months. And third, there 
are  no  broad-based  indications  of  a  change  in  the  banks’  risk  appetite.  Mortgage  lending 
growth  at  the  domestically  focused  banks  has  also  decreased,  but  is  still  markedly  higher 
than overall market growth. Moreover, the affordability risk (loan-to-income ratio) in mortgage 
lending  has  continued  to  rise,  interest  rate  risk  remains  at  a  historically  high  level,  and 
interest rate margins have fallen even further, from a level which was already low. 
In these exceptional circumstances, banks should ensure that their resilience is high enough 
to be able to bear the risks taken, even in the event of a marked real estate price correction 
combined  with  an  interest  rate  shock.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  plays  a  significant 
role in this context by ensuring that banks hold additional capital as a buffer in the current 
situation. Adding to that, many banks have a surplus of capital with respect to the regulatory 
requirements. Such surplus capital is especially important under the current circumstances. 
Banks should therefore maintain these surpluses in future, or should establish and increase 
them in line with their risk profile. 
As before, the SNB will regularly assess whether the countercyclical capital buffer needs to 
be  adjusted  due  to  mortgage  and  real  estate  market  developments.  If  the  momentum  in 
these markets picks up again, additional measures to limit the affordability risk in mortgage 
lending should be taken into consideration. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
