  P Vijaya Bhaskar: Role of financial sector in spurring growth and 
expanding financial inclusion in North Eastern Region 
Speech  by  Mr  P  Vijaya  Bhaskar,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
CII Banking Collagium, Kolkata, 19 September 2014. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  M.  Sreeramulu,  Assistant  General  Manager,  Department  of  Non-Banking 
Supervision, is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
The  North  Eastern  Region  (NER)  of  India  constitutes  eight  states  namely  Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim.1The NER is 
a unique socio-cultural segment in the country, richly endowed  with natural resources with 
fertile  land,  identified  as  one  of  the  most  bio-diverse  regions  in  the  World.  However,  the 
development of the NER has lagged the rest of the country. The task of development of NER 
emanating  from  its  unique  features  has  been  accepted  as  a  national  mission  and 
accordingly,  since  1980s,  Government  has  been  making  special  efforts  for  all  round 
development of the region. In order to fast track the process of development in the region, a 
separate Ministry viz., Ministry of Development of NER was created in 2004.2 
Further, to investigate the issues related to limited success in achieving financial inclusion in 
NER,  the  RBI  constituted  a  committee  on  “Financial  Sector  Plan  for  NER”  under  the 
chairmanship of Smt. Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor, RBI in 2006. More recently, to address 
the  issues  related  to  development  of  MSME  sector  in  NER,  a  separate  sub-group  was 
constituted under the Prime Minister’s task force on MSMEs (Chairman Shri T.K.A.Nair) in 
2009.3 The major recommendations of both these reports are given in the Annex. 
Against the above backdrop, the present speech analyses the significant role which can be 
played by the financial sector in spurring growth and expanding financial inclusion in NER. 
The speech is organised into six sections, section 1 presents the unique features of NER, 
section 2 discusses the progress achieved in financial inclusion, section 3 presents trends in 
economic growth of NER over the period March 2006 to March 2013, section 4 discusses the 
role of Governments in providing necessary conditions for growth, section 5 analyses the role 
of  financial  sector  in  spurring  growth  and  expanding  financial  inclusion  and  section 6 
presents conclusion and the way forward. 
Section 1 
Unique features of NER 
• 
The  eight  North  Eastern  states  cover  an  area  of  around  2.62 lakh sq. km. 
constituting 7.9 per cent of the country’s total geographical area, but contains only 
                                                
1  Sikkim joined the Indian union through a referendum in 1975 and was recognised as part of Northeast India in 
the 1990s.  
2  Recently,  PMO  has  directed  the  Project  Monitoring  Group  to  fast  track  development  projects  in  NER.  The 
central government already identified 21 key projects worth over Rs.1 lakh crore for ensuring faster clearances 
to them. Of 21 projects, nine projects are from Arunachal Pradesh, seven from Assam, three from Tripura and 
one each from Meghalaya and Manipur (Source: Special group set-up to fast track development in Northeast 
India,  DNA,  Sept.  1,  2014).  Further,  the  cabinet  approved  over  Rs.  5,300  crore  project  to  boost  telecom 
infrastructure and connectivity in the NER (Source: Deccan Herald, Sept. 10, 2014).  
3  The group submitted its report in 2010.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
       45 million people or about 3.8 per cent of the total population of the country (source: 
Population Census, 2011). 
The  forest  cover  of  the  NER  accounted  for  more  than  50  per  cent  of  its  total 
geographical area. 
More than 80 per cent of the population lives in the rural areas while the remaining 
20 per cent in urban areas. 
State-wise distribution of population and area of NER is: 
 The  charts  indicate  that  68  per  cent  of  total  NE  population  lives  in  the  state  of 
Assam and the same accounts for 30 per cent of total NE area. Consequently, the 
population density varies greatly from 17 per sq.km in Arunachal Pradesh to 397 per 
sq. km in Assam. 
The per capita income (PI) at current prices of NE states also varies significantly. 
Sikkim had the highest PI at Rs.1,51,395 in 2012–13 and Manipur had the lowest PI 
at Rs.36,937 during the same period (Source: Central Statistical Organization, Govt. 
of India). 
Section 2 
Progress in financial inclusion in NER 
Extent of financial exclusion 
• 
As  per  NSSO  data  (59th  Round  Survey  Results),  in  NER,  the  proportion  of  farm 
households not accessing credit from formal sources in the total farm households is 
significantly high at 95.9 per cent as against national average of 73 per cent. 
Further, the proportion of non-indebted farmer households was most pronounced in 
all states (except Tripura) of NER (ranged between 61.2 per cent and 95.9 per cent). 
 Financial sector development indicators 
Number of bank branches 
• 
The number of branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks (including RRBs) in NER 
increased from 1952 in March 2005 to 2752 in March 2013 (Chart 1). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       Rural  segment  accounted  for  the  largest  share  in  total  branches  in  the  NER. 
However,  the  number  of  branches  increased  rapidly  in  semi-urban  and  urban 
segments since the launch of financial inclusion plans in the country (Chart 2). 
Across NE states, the ratio of number of bank branches (SCBs) per one lakh adult 
population  as  on  March  31,  2013,  ranged  between  5.77  in  Manipur  and  24.92  in 
Sikkim, with a regional average of 10.21, distinctly lower than the national average 
of 14.25. 
The population (adult) per branch4 for NER remained at 9795 far above the national 
average  7016  as  on  March  31,  2013.  The  ratio  varied  greatly  across  NE  states, 
between 4014 in Sikkim and 17323 in Manipur. 
The ratio of number of bank branches per one lakh adult population as on March 31, 
2013  across  rural  and  urban  segments  of  NER  remained  at  6.16  and  10.45 
respectively. It is revealed that the bank branch penetration in rural segment of NER 
is significantly lower as compared with urban segment despite around 80 per cent of 
its total population living in rural areas. 
                                                 
4  Lower the ratio, higher the outreach and vice-versa.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The  population  (adult)  per  branch  for  NER  across  rural  and  urban  segments 
remained  at  16242  and  9573  respectively,  while  the  same  for  all  India  stood  at 
13141 and 12641 respectively. 
Interestingly,  the  population  (adult)  per  branch  in  urban  segment  of  NER  is  better 
than all-India average. 
 Progress in bank credit 
• 
NER  accounted  for  a  meagre  share  in  all  India  credit  which  almost  remained 
stagnant at less than 1 per cent during the period between March 2005 and March 
2013 (Table 1). 
 Across  segments,  the  credit  disbursement  is  significantly  more  in  urban  and 
semi-urban  segments  as  compared  with  rural  segment  (Chart  3).  The  average  of 
rural credit in total credit of NER remained at 24.5 per cent while the same for urban 
and semi-urban segments stood at 42.8 percent 32.7 per cent respectively during 
the period between March 2005 and March 2013. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Growth in bank deposits 
• 
NER accounted for less than 2 per cent share in all India bank deposits and like the 
trend  observed  in  respect  of  bank  credit,  the  share  hovered  at  around  2  per  cent 
during the period between March 2005 and March 2013 (Table 2). 
 Across segments, the deposit collection is relatively more in urban and semi-urban 
segments. Accordingly, the average share of urban and semi-urban deposits in total 
deposits of NER remained at 46.0 per cent and 34.9 per cent respectively, while the 
same  for  rural  segment  stood  at  19.1  per  cent  during  the  period  between  March 
2005 and March 2013.  
 Trends in C-D ratio 
• 
The CD ratio of NER as whole as well as individual states is far below the national 
average. The performance of NER in respect of this indicator worsened from around 
40 per cent in March 2007 to 32.9 per cent in March 2013, which is a point to be 
noted. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    CD  ratio  of  rural  segment  decreased  from  around  54  per  cent  during  the  period 
between March 2007 and March 2008 to around 43 per cent in March 2013. 
 Villages covered by banks 
• 
The  total  number  of  villages  in  NER  remained  at  42,250  (source:  Census,  2011, 
Govt.  of  India).  Of  these,  only  1866  villages  (4.4  per  cent)  were  covered  under 
financial inclusion plans as on March 2012 (Table 3). On the other hand, the number 
of BCs appointed increased from 939 in March 2011 to 1592 in March 2012. 
Across eight NE states, the progress in number of villages covered is significantly on 
higher side in the case of Assam and Tripura than other states. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Urban co-operative banks 
• 
There are only 17 urban co-operative banks in NER out of 1586 urban co-operative 
banks in all India (Source: Urban Banks Department, RBI). 
Rural co-operative banks 
• 
There exists a two tier system of rural co-operatives in NER. All the states of NER 
are having two-tier short term cooperative credit structure i.e., a State Cooperative 
Bank at apex level and Primary Agriculture Cooperative Society (PACS) at ground 
level. There are no District Central Cooperative Banks functioning in these states. 
The PACS are direct members of the State Cooperative Banks. 
The  network  of  rural  co-operative  banks  in  NER  is  presented  in  the  following 
Table 4. The number of PACS of NER accounted for 3.8 per cent of all India PACS. 
 Distribution of NBFCs 
• 
The distribution of NBFCs across NE states for which data is available is furnished 
in the following Table 5. As on date, there are 108 NBFCs registered in NER. Of the 
total, 101 are registered in Assam state alone. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Except, four NBFCs which are systemically important, the asset size of other NBFCs 
is quite small. 
 MSME distribution 
• 
The state-wise distribution of MSMEs and employment in NER is as shown at Table 6. 
It was observed that NER accounted for only 5 per cent of total MSMEs in India. 
  Growth in SHG-bank linkage 
• 
The progress achieved in SHG-Bank Linkage during the last three years is furnished 
in the following Table 7. 
As  on  March  2013,  there  are  around  3.24  lakh saving  linked  SHGs  with  aggregate 
savings of Rs.130 crore and 1.44 lakh credit linked SHGs with credit of Rs. 796 crore. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 8 
   Section 3 
Economic growth in NER 
• 
Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) is generally considered as a reliable indicator 
of the performance of the states. The consolidated NSDP (at current prices) of eight 
NE states stood at Rs.2093 billion during 2012–13. The consolidated NSDP grew at 
an  average  annual  growth  of  over  13  per  cent  during  the  period  between  March 
2006 and March 2013. 
In tandem with the national trend, the NSDP of NER decelerated rapidly since 2010 
– from 18.7 per cent during 2009–10 to 9 per cent during 2012–13 (Chart 7). 
 Sector-wise contribution to NSDP 
• 
Services  sector  is  the  highest  contributor  of  NER’s  NSDP.  It  is  seen  that  since 
2009–10, the services sector grew at a steady pace of around 16 per cent (Chart 8). 
However, it declined to around 9 per cent during 2012–13. 
Agriculture  sector  is the  second most  important  sector for  NER. The  sector  which 
grew steadily between 2006–07 and 2008–09, declined rapidly since 2009–10. 
Industrial sector witnessed mixed trends. On an average, it grew at 12.2 per cent 
during the period between 2005–06 and 2012–13. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
   Sector-wise  contribution  to  NSDP  across  the  above  mentioned  three  sectors  are 
furnished in the following chart 9. 
Services  sector  constituted  the  highest  share  in  total  NSDP  of  NER  followed  by 
agriculture and industry. Except for a few years, the share of services sector in total 
NSDP of NER increased steadily while the share of agriculture declined and that of 
industry showed mixed trends. 
  Section 4 
Role of governments in providing necessary conditions for growth 
The  role  of  Governments  in  the  following  areas  would  be  paramount  in  providing  the 
necessary  conditions  for  growth,  so  as  to  enable  the  financial  system  to  further  galvanise 
their efforts for development of NER. 
Security: Many committees found that security is the most important factor which impedes 
growth of banking sector in NER. Therefore, there is an imperative need to ensure security in 
the region. 
Infrastructure  facilities:  For  up-scaling  financial  inclusion  efforts,  adequate  infrastructure 
facilities  such  as  digital  and  physical  connectivity,  uninterrupted  power  supply  etc.,  are 
prerequisites. 
Under  developed  rural  areas:  It  was  observed  from  the  banking  development  indicators 
viz., number of bank branches, growth in bank credit and deposits of rural NER have been 
witnessing decelerated trends in the recent years. As mentioned earlier, around 80 per cent 
of total NE population reside in rural areas. There is an imperative need to have a “special 
plan” to effectively address the specific issues pertaining to rural areas of NER to provide a 
fillip to the growth in the area. 
Savings and investment: It is widely held that for long-term economic growth, increase in 
savings  and  investments  are  vital.  Planning  commission,  for  12th  plan  period,  estimated 
state-wise and sector-wise rates of investment (gross capital formation as a % to GDP) for 
NER  (Table  8).  ,  The  estimated  investment  rate  for  NER  is  reasonably  good  and  is 
comparable  with  national  average.  However,  on  examining  the  savings  (i.e.,  only  bank 
deposits  for  which  data  is  available)  of  NER,  it  was  observed  that  there  is  deceleration  in 
bank  deposits  since  March  2006.  For  rapid  development  of  NER,  state  governments  and 
financial sector regulators should work together in enhancing investment and savings in the 
region, which may in turn boost the levels of growth. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Section 5 
Role of financial sector in spurring growth and expanding financial inclusion 
Given  the  ground-level  position  as  identified,  the  role  of  financial  institutions  in  spurring 
growth sector-wise and in enhancing financial inclusion in NER is detailed. 
(i) 
a) 
b) 
c) 
(ii) 
a) 
b) 
Agriculture sector: 
Agriculture & allied activities: As mentioned earlier, the forest cover of the NER 
accounts  for  more  than  50  per  cent  of  its  total  geographical  area.  Banks  may 
explore  the  possibilities  of  financing  of  industrial/  agriculture  and  allied  activities 
based  on  forest  produce/products.  Further,  given  the  peculiar  feature  of  NER  of 
having  a  large  rural  population,  banks  should  initiate  steps  for  development  of 
especially local arts and handicrafts, through intensive use of Self-Help Groups and 
Joint Liability Groups. 
Agriculture extension services: As agriculture is the second important economic 
activity  for  NER,  State  Governments  should  initiate  suitable  steps  to  educate 
farmers  about  new  technologies.  This  would  help  farmers  to  improve  their 
productivity,  earn  more  income  and  improve  their  standard  of  living.  These 
agricultural extension services bring about changes in farmers attitude, knowledge 
and skills through education and communication. 
Focus to thrust areas: As mentioned in Prime Minister’s Task Force Report (2010), 
to achieve all round development of NER, focus should shift on thrust areas such as 
handicrafts,  horticulture,  textiles,  livestock  development  and  food  processing 
industry. 
Industrial sector: 
MSMEs have a greater role in achieving financial inclusion in NER, as most of its 
population lives in the rural segment. There is a need for having an action plan for 
increasing MSMEs as a driver of employment in the area. 
Cluster development: As mentioned in Prime Minister’s Task Force Report (2010), 
to provide more focussed attention in the NER, a Regional Resource Centre (RCC) 
has  been  set  up  at 
Institute  of  Entrepreneurship,  Guwahati,  with 
7 sub-centres  in  the  NE  States.  The  RCC  caters  to  the  need  of  entire  NER  with 
respect to cluster development,5 training, mapping of clusters, advisory services etc. 
Indian 
                                                
5  Cluster development offers a holistic and integrated approach to the promotion and development of MSME 
sector.  This  envisages  measures  for  capacity  building,  skill  development,  technology  up-gradation  of  the 
enterprises, improved credit delivery, marketing support, setting up of common facility centres, etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 c) 
d) 
e) 
(iii) 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
 Marketing  support:  According 
to  Prime  Minister’s  Task  Force  Report, 
entrepreneurs  of  NER  are  facing  immense  difficulties  while  marketing  their 
agricultural/  industrial  products.  Governments  should  initiate  suitable  steps  in 
providing  adequate  marketing  support  in  order  to  encourage  entrepreneurs  / 
industrialists in NER. 
Skill  development:  Vocational  skill  building  and  training  in  NER  are  of  utmost 
importance to provide employment to the local unemployed youth. Currently, there 
are  27  Rural  Self  Employment  Training  Institutes  functioning  in  the  NER.  Urgent 
necessary steps may be initiated for increasing the skill development in the region. 
Setting-up of industrial estates: On  account  of  prevailing  unique  land mortgage 
system  in  NER,  availability  of  land  is  one  of  the  major  issues  faced  by  the 
prospective entrepreneurs in setting up of MSMEs/industries. Prime Minister’s Task 
Force Report recommends setting up/ earmarking of at least one industrial estate in 
each block for MSMEs to facilitate setting up of new MSMEs in the region. 
Services sector: 
Eco  and  leisure  tourism:  State  Governments  should  take  effective  steps  to 
promote  tourism  –  especially,  eco-tourism  and  leisure  tourism  given  the  pristine 
natural beauty of the region, with its numerous bird/animal sanctuaries. 
Financial  inclusion:  Since  the  launch  of  financial  inclusion  initiatives  in  India, 
financial inclusion in NER consistently showed upward trends in terms of number of 
bank  branches,  credit  and  deposit  growth.  Further  steps  needed  to  speed-up  the 
financial inclusion efforts in NER are: 
Increasing branch presence: In North-Eastern States and Sikkim, SCBs need to 
make cautious efforts to increase the number of branches. 
Villages  covered:  Since  the  number  of  villages  covered  accounted  for  only 
4.4 per cent of total villages in NER, there is an urgent case for increasing banking 
footprints in the region. 
Intensive financial literacy and awareness campaign in vernacular languages in all 
the  NER  States  is  needed  to  mitigate  risks  posed  by  activities  of  unauthorised 
deposit  collection  by  various  methods  by  multiple  agencies.  This  is  especially 
important in NER, given the fact that, relatively speaking, there is higher number of 
instances of unauthorised deposit collection through various dubious means. 
Rural co-operative banks: The NER is having poor network of rural co-operatives. 
For effective financial inclusion, efforts may be initiated to increase the same in the 
region. 
NBFCs:  There  are  around  108  NBFCs  registered  in  the  region. Of these  101  are 
registered in Assam state alone. Financial inclusion could be further deepened by 
opening of new NBFCs/opening branches of existing NBFCs. 
Caveats in the context of opening of accounts 
(iv) 
The financial  institutions  should  generally  in  the  context  of  opening  accounts  need  to  take 
effective steps to mitigate the following: 
a) 
The possibility of accounts being used as conduits for money laundering cannot be ruled out 
through  a  process  known  as  “Smurfing”,  a  process  by  which  amounts  are  split  below  the 
threshold level of Rs. 50,000/- to fly under the radar and thereby prevent detection. 
Smurfing: 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Opening of multiple accounts: 
Accounts being used as money mules: 
b)  
Accounts of vulnerable individuals may be used by third parties to launder money is another 
possibility regarding which the banks should be careful of. 
c)  
In the recent financial inclusion drive, multiple accounts have been opened by applicants in 
the hope that they would get an additional rupees one lakh insurance cover for every account 
so  opened.  However,  if  the  applicants  were  to  open  different  accounts  in  the  same  bank, 
using different documents like Aadhar Card, Pan Card, Passport etc., with slight variations in 
the  manner  in  which  their  names  are  written,  de-duplication  may  not  be  possible.  The 
problem gets compounded if an applicant opens multiple accounts in different banks. 
Section 6 
Conclusion and way forward 
Let me conclude by repeating what I have endeavoured to convey about the role of financial 
sector  in  spurring  growth  and  expanding  financial  inclusion  in  NER.  I  began  with  a  brief 
introduction of the subject and provided the unique features of the NER. Thereafter, progress 
achieved in Financial Inclusion is discussed to assess where the NER stands at the present 
juncture. Trends in economic growth of NER were analyzed to indicate the performance of 
NER. Thereafter, the roles of Governments and financial sector regulators in spurring growth 
and  expanding  financial  inclusion  in  NER  have  been  discussed,  along  with  caveats  to  be 
observed  while  opening  accounts  by  the  financial  institutions.  It  must  be  reiterated  that 
synchronised and simultaneous efforts by the governments and financial institutions cannot 
be overemphasized in the context of NER. 
Thank You. 
Annex 
Recommendations of committees/reports 
Usha Thorat committee on financial sector plan for NER (2006) 
A.  
Major recommendations made by the committee are as under: 
• 
The  banks  may  draw  up  plans  to  provide  at  least  50  new  households  per  branch 
each month for the next four years with a deposit account. 
Banks could introduce a pilot project in the rural and semi urban segments closest to 
the  bank  branches  by  customising  simple  deposit  and  credit  products  to  suit  the 
needs of the households. 
To encourage the flow of credit through General Credit Card (GCC), the committee 
recommend that 100 per cent of the advance under GCC at rural and semi-urban 
branches of NER would be treated as priority sector.6 
Given the unique cultural and language barriers in NER, the committee suggested 
an approach that is based on enhancing the capacities of the existing branches of 
commercial  banks,  RRBs,  and  Co-operative  banks  having  more  recourse  to 
bank/SHG  linkage  programme,  BC/BF  model  and  extensive  use  of  information 
technology enables services to facilitate offsite banking. 
                                                   
6  Previously, fifty per cent of credit outstanding under GCC up to Rs. 25,000 was eligible for being treated as 
indirect agriculture financing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Report of the task force on MSME (2010) 
B.  
To address the issues related to the MSME sector, a task force under the chairmanship of 
the principal secretary was constituted in 2009. A separate Sub-Group was also constituted 
to  look  into  the  development  of  MSMEs  in  the  North-East  and  Jammu  &  Kashmir.  The 
recommendations made by the sub-group pertaining to NER are discussed below. 
• 
Focus  to  thrust  areas:  Development  focus  should  shift  on  thrust  areas  such  as 
handicrafts,  horticulture,  textiles,  livestock  development  and  food  processing 
industry. 
Cluster development: To provide more focussed attention, in the NER, a Regional 
Resource  Centre  (RCC)  has  been  set  up  at  Indian  Institute  of  Entrepreneurship, 
Guwahati,  with  7  sub-centres  in  all  the  NE  States. The  RCC  cater  to the  need  of 
entire  NER  with  respect  to  cluster  development,  training,  mapping  of  clusters, 
advisory services etc. 
Marketing support: One among the major difficulties faced by the entrepreneurs of 
NER is marketing of their products due to their distant location and lack of adequate 
transportation/  communication  facilities.  The  National  Small  Industries  Corporation 
(NSIC)  organises  exhibitions  for  display  of  products  and  handicrafts  belonging  to 
NER. The sub-group recommends that (a) more exhibitions, both domestic as well 
as international, could be organised to expand the markets for NER products; and 
(b) market linkages should be encouraged under the schemes of various Ministries / 
Departments. 
Skill  development:  The  skill  and 
in  NER  must  be 
strengthened. New institutions must be encouraged to impart requisite skills to the 
local unemployed youth. 
Setting-up  industrial  estates:  On  account  of  prevailing  unique  land  mortgage 
system  in  NER,  availability  of  land  is  one  of  the  major  issues  faced  by  the 
prospective entrepreneurs in setting up of MSMEs. The subgroup recommends that 
setting up/ earmarking of at least one industrial estate in each block for MSMEs to 
facilitate setting up of new MSMEs in the region. 
infrastructure 
training 
References 
• 
Prime Minister’s Task Force on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Government 
of India. 
Report on Development of North Eastern Region, November, 1981. 
Report of the Committee on Financial Sector Plan for North Eastern Region, 2006. 
Report  of  the  Working-Group  on  Estimation  of  Investment,  its  Composition  and 
Trend for Twelfth Five-Year Plan, 2012. 
Reserve Bank of India, Basis Statistical Returns -7, Various Issues. 
Reserve Bank of India, Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, 2013–14. 
Status of Micro Finance in India, NABARD. 
      14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
