Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 November 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Following up on the 
decisions of 2 October 2014, we last month started purchasing covered bonds under our new 
programme. We will also soon start to purchase asset-backed securities. The programmes 
will last for at least two years. Together with the series of targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations  to  be  conducted  until  June  2016,  these  asset  purchases  will  have  a  sizeable 
impact on our balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it had at the 
beginning of 2012. 
Our measures will enhance the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
support financing conditions in the euro area, facilitate credit provision to the real economy 
and  generate  positive  spillovers  to  other  markets.  They  will  thereby  further  ease  the 
monetary policy stance more broadly, support our forward guidance on the key ECB interest 
rates  and  reinforce  the  fact  that  there  are  significant  and  increasing  differences  in  the 
monetary policy cycle between major advanced economies. 
With  the  measures  that  have  been  put  in  place,  monetary  policy  has  responded  to  the 
outlook for low inflation, a weakening growth momentum and continued subdued monetary 
and  credit  dynamics.  Our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  will  underpin  the  firm 
anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  in  line  with  our  aim  of  achieving 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. As they work their way through to the economy, our 
monetary policy measures will together contribute to a return of inflation rates to levels closer 
to our aim. 
However,  looking  ahead,  and  taking  into  account  new  information  and  analysis,  the 
Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  and  continuously  assess  the  appropriateness  of  its 
monetary  policy  stance.  Should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  too 
prolonged a period of low inflation, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to 
using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. The Governing Council has 
tasked  ECB  staff  and  the  relevant  Eurosystem  committees  with  ensuring  the  timely 
preparation of further measures to be implemented, if needed. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.1%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  second  quarter  of  this 
year, revised up as compared with the earlier estimate. Since the summer months, incoming 
data  and  survey  evidence  have  overall  indicated  a  weakening  in  the  euro  area’s  growth 
momentum. This information has now been incorporated into the most recent forecasts by 
private and public institutions, which indicate a downward revision of real GDP growth over 
the  projection  horizon  up  to  2016,  with  the  outlook  for  a  modest  economic  recovery 
remaining  in  place.  This  picture  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  current 
assessment.  On  the  one  hand,  domestic  demand  should  be  supported  by  our  monetary 
policy  measures,  the  ongoing  improvements  in  financial  conditions,  the  progress  made  in 
fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms,  and  lower  energy  prices  supporting  real 
disposable  income.  Furthermore,  demand  for  exports  should  benefit  from  the  global 
recovery.  On  the  other  hand,  the  recovery  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  dampened  by  high 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
unemployment, sizeable unutilised capacity, and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in 
the public and private sectors. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  In  particular,  the  weakening  in  the  euro  area’s  growth  momentum,  alongside 
heightened geopolitical risks, could dampen confidence and, in particular, private investment. 
In addition, insufficient progress in structural reforms in euro area countries constitutes a key 
downward risk to the economic outlook. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.4% in October 
2014,  after  0.3%  in  September.  Compared  with  the  previous  month,  this  mainly  reflects  a 
somewhat  less  negative  contribution  from  energy  prices  and  slightly  stronger  annual 
increases in food prices. A fall in industrial goods prices was partly compensated for by an 
increase in services price inflation. On the basis of current information and prevailing futures 
prices for energy, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain at around current low levels 
over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. This is also the 
picture portrayed by the most recent forecasts, which now incorporate the recent sharp fall in 
oil prices. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  we  will  focus  in  particular  on  the 
possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange 
rate and energy price developments, and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, data for September 2014 continue to point to subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3), with the annual growth rate increasing moderately, 
however, to 2.5% in September, after 2.1% in August. Annual growth in M3 continues to be 
supported by its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at 
an annual rate of 6.2% in September. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) remained negative at –1.8% in September, after –2.0% in August and –2.2% 
in  July.  On  average  over  recent  months,  net  redemptions  have  moderated  from  the 
historically high levels recorded a year ago. Lending to non-financial corporations continues 
to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and 
the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The  annual 
growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was 0.6% in 
September, after 0.5% in August. In line with some stabilisation in credit flows, the October 
bank lending survey for the euro area reported a net easing of credit standards on loans to 
enterprises  and  households.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  level  of 
credit  standards  is  still  tight  from  a  historical  perspective.  Following  the  completion  of  the 
ECB’s comprehensive assessment, a further strengthening of banks’ balance sheets can be 
expected to contribute to reducing credit supply constraints and facilitating more lending. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the recent decisions taken by the Governing Council to 
provide further monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the real economy. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  contributes  to  supporting  economic  activity.  However,  in  order  to 
strengthen investment activity, boost job creation and raise productivity growth, other policy 
areas  need  to  contribute  decisively.  In  particular,  the  legislation  and  implementation  of 
product  and  labour  market  reforms  as  well  as  actions  to  improve  the  business 
environment  for  firms  need  to  gain  momentum  in  several  countries.  The  effective 
implementation of structural reforms will raise expectations of higher incomes and encourage 
firms  to  increase  investment  today  and  bring  forward  the  economic  recovery.  As  regards 
fiscal policies, countries with remaining fiscal imbalances should not unravel the progress 
already  made  and  should  proceed  in  line  with  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Throughout the procedural steps under the agreed framework, the Pact should remain the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
anchor for confidence in sustainable public finances. The existing flexibility within the rules 
should  allow  governments  to  address  the  budgetary  costs  of  major  structural  reforms,  to 
support demand and to achieve a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. A full 
and  consistent  implementation  of  the  euro  area’s  existing  fiscal  and  macroeconomic 
surveillance  framework  is  key  to  bringing  down  high  public  debt  ratios,  to  raising  potential 
growth and to increasing the resilience of the euro area economy to shocks. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
