  Karnit Flug: Strengths and challenges facing the Israeli economy 
Main points of remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Jerusalem 
Ultra-Orthodox Campus of Ono Academic College, Jerusalem, 1 December 2014. 
 The Israeli economy is an open economy that is greatly influenced by developments abroad, 
which is reflected in growth rates in the economy, which are very much connected to those 
around the world. The influence of activity abroad is mainly reflected in global trade, which 
affects  demand  for  Israeli  exports,  both  in  goods  and  in  services.  Goods  exports  are  in  a 
virtual  standstill,  due  to  the  standstill  in  global  trade.  They  declined  slightly  in  2013  and 
recovered  slightly  during  2014.  Services  exports  showed  better  performance  than  global 
trade in services – meaning that the state of manufacturing was more serious than the state 
of the services industries, which is also a result of developments in the exchange rate. 
The  labor  market  is  in  relatively  good  condition,  with  the  unemployment  rate  at  very  low 
levels  despite  the  continuing  trend  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate,  and  the  result  is  a 
trend of increase in the employment rate. This is a different picture than what other countries 
are experiencing, and an indication that the labor market is showing relative robustness, as is 
also reflected in an international comparison of unemployment rates. 
Bank of Israel policy acts to achieve the Bank of Israel’s objectives as defined by law. The 
main objective is to attain price stability, meaning meeting the inflation target and, subject to 
that,  supporting  other  economic  objectives  such  as  growth,  employment,  and  financial 
stability. In recent months, the inflation rate has been below the target range, and in the past 
12 months, prices have declined by 0.3 percent. The main reason for this is the decline in 
commodities  prices  abroad,  reflecting  stagnation  in  the  global  economy,  apparently  low 
demand  abroad,  and  relatively  moderate  demand  in  the  Israeli  economy.  Even  though  we 
have not seen a decline in private consumption, we have seen a decline in investments and 
in exports. Until a few months ago, there was also a sharp appreciation of the shekel, which 
also contributed to lower prices. The appreciation also made it difficult for Israeli exporters to 
compete in the global economy, and it therefore definitely bothered us at the Bank of Israel. 
Monetary policy’s response to these developments was a prolonged reduction in the interest 
rate, to the historically low level of 0.25 percent, and foreign exchange purchases that acted 
to  moderate  the  appreciation  of  the  shekel.  In  recent  months,  we  have  experienced  a 
depreciation, which has made it easier for exporters to compete, and is also contributing to a 
return of inflation to the target range. 
The  Israeli  economy  enjoys  a  number  of  points  of  strength,  which  stand  behind  the 
technology driven growth of the economy in recent years. Israel enjoys a very high rate of 
people with post-secondary education, a very high level of research and development, which 
is  carried  out  mainly  by  the  private  sector,  and  a  high  percentage  of  high  technology 
industries  in  the  economy.  These  are  the  strong  points  upon  which  economic  growth  has 
relied thus far. 
The Israeli economy is also faced with many challenges. The level of per capita GDP is low 
compared to other advanced economies, so that we still have quite a way to go to reach the 
global  frontline  in  terms  of  quality  of  life.  The  main  explanation  for  this  is  that  labor 
productivity in Israel is significantly lower than in other advanced economies, and we are not 
succeeding  in  closing  the  gap  over  time.  The  productivity  gap  is  very  different  among  the 
various industries and sectors. In export-oriented industries, which need to compete with the 
parallel industries abroad, productivity is relatively high, and in most of them, it is higher than 
in other advanced economies. The industries that concentrate on production for the domestic 
economy suffer from relatively low productivity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Israel  has  one  of  the  highest  levels  of  income  inequality  in  the  world,  despite  a  slight 
improvement that has taken place in the past few years. The high poverty rates are also a 
significant  challenge.  We  can  see  that  in  households  with  two  wage  earners,  the  rate  of 
poverty  is  very  low.  This  is  not  a  surprising  statistic.  In  addition,  poverty  among  ultra-
Orthodox  households  (47  percent)  and  Arab  households  (54 percent)  is  much  higher  than 
among  the  general  population  (12.5  percent).  These  trends  are  very  much  a  result  of  the 
relatively low labor force participation and education levels, as I will show. 
In recent years, the achievements of the Israeli education system have been lower than the 
OECD  average,  which  is  certainly  a  worrying  situation,  mainly for  a  country  whose  growth 
strategy  is  based  on  human  capital. We  do  not  have  the  findings  of  international  tests  for 
ultra-Orthodox boys, but we can see that for girls in the ultra-Orthodox sector, the marks are 
lower than for girls in the public and public-religious school systems. 
Employment  rates  in  Israel  are  similar  to  those  in  other  OECD  countries,  and  the 
employment rate for ultra-Orthodox women is very similar to the general average. In contrast, 
employments rates for men are particularly low. Over time, we can see a sharp increase in 
employment among ultra-Orthodox women, but we cannot distinguish such a trend among 
ultra-Orthodox men. This is also obviously a result of education trends – the rate of higher 
education among the ultra-Orthodox population is particularly low, and we cannot distinguish 
a higher rate of those holding an academic degree among the younger population, which is 
certainly a worrying phenomenon. We can see that among the ultra-Orthodox students, there 
is a focus on professions such as business management and law, and that among women 
there is also a focus on therapeutic professions. Over time, we do not see growth in the rate 
of those with higher education among ultra-Orthodox men. There is no doubt that the way to 
integrate successfully in the labor market is to obtain an academic education. We can see 
that those holding degrees enjoy much higher rates of employment, and much higher wage 
levels, than those who do not hold such a degree. 
There  is  broad  agreement  regarding  the  policy  measures  required  in  order  to  increase 
education  and  employment  rates  among  the  ultra-Orthodox  sector.  These  need  to  be 
implemented: 
• 
It is important that the education system provide an infrastructure that will assist in 
obtaining a higher education later in life. 
The variety of higher education fields must be expanded so that it boosts broad and 
variegated integration in the labor market. 
It is important to adapt the professional training program to the needs of the labor 
market,  while  relating  to  various  population  groups.  Investment  in  professional 
training in Israel is relatively low, and it is important to expand it among the general 
population, not just in the ultra-Orthodox sector. 
An expansion of the active labor market policy is required. 
It  is  important that  employers  be  ready  to  absorb  employees  from  all  sectors  and 
population  groups.  Employers  who  are  open  to  taking  on  employees  from  the 
sectors with  which they  are less familiar will enjoy a broader variety of manpower 
that is available to them. 
   These policy tools can provide the opportunity. In the end, it is the individual that needs to 
take that opportunity. As such, I am very happy to say these things here, before a group of 
students that have chosen to obtain an academic education and make the required effort to 
successfully integrate in the Israeli labor market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
