  Már Guðmundsson: Economic outlook, monetary policy, and credit 
ratings 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Chamber 
of Commerce Monetary Policy Meeting, Reykjavik, 6 November 2014. 
 Madame Chairman, honoured guests, 
The Iceland Chamber of Commerce has a long-standing tradition of holding a meeting like 
this one on economic developments and prospects and monetary policy. The meeting is held 
following  the  publication  of  the  Central  Bank’s  autumn  forecast  and,  in  latter  years,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s interest rate decision. It often has an additional specific topic, 
and on this occasion, our hosts have expressed an interest in the outlook for credit ratings. I 
will touch on that towards the end of my talk today, but as I usually do, I will focus mainly on 
monetary policy and the current and future economic situation. 
The big picture regarding the economy is this: the recovery that began in Q2/2010 is now 
well enough advanced that the slack in the economy is almost fully absorbed. The domestic 
economy has seldom been as well balanced as it is now. There is internal equilibrium, in that 
inflation  has  been  at  or below  target for  nine  months  and  output  is  close  to  capacity.  And 
there  is  external  equilibrium,  in  that  we  have  had  a  sizeable  current  account  surplus  that 
covers  net  capital  outflows  with  room  to  spare,  as  the  Central  Bank  has  bought  foreign 
currency for a total of 95 b.kr., or 5% of GDP, so far this year. 
According to the Bank’s forecast, the near-term outlook is positive. GDP growth is projected 
to measure just under 3% this year and then rise to about 3½% in 2015 before tapering off 
again to 3% in 2016. This level of growth is expected to exceed that of potential output with 
the effect that a positive output gap might emerge, particularly in 2015. Other things being 
equal, this will contribute to higher inflation. 
GDP growth in 2014–2016 will be driven by domestic demand, both private consumption and 
investment, and the contribution from net trade will be negative for the entire period. As a 
consequence,  the  sizeable  current  account  surplus  we  have  seen  in  the  recent  term  will 
shrink rapidly next year and give way to a small deficit in 2016. This is cause for concern in 
and of itself, and we hope that the forecast will not materialise, as Iceland needs to maintain 
a current account surplus in the next several years as it focuses on putting its external debt 
onto  a  stronger  footing  and  building  up  domestically  financed  foreign  reserves.  Economic 
policy and economic incentives would then have to take into account the task of of improving 
the outlook for the current account balance. 
Inflation has been below the inflation target for nine consecutive months. This is the second-
longest such period since the inflation target was adopted in March 2001, the longest being a 
twelve-month period from November 2002 through October 2003. But it is not inconceivable 
that  we  might  break  that  record,  as  the  Bank’s  forecast,  published  yesterday,  entails  that 
inflation will remain below target through the early months of 2015. 
Inflation below target is not more desirable than inflation above target, though. In this context, 
we  mustn’t fall  into  the  trap  of  expecting  monetary  policy  instruments  to be  so  strong  and 
quick-acting that inflation will always measure 2.5%, no matter what shocks hit the economy. 
The main objective is to keep average inflation close enough to the target over a long period 
of  time  that  the  target  itself  provides  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations  and  the  many 
decisions that require an estimate of future inflation. 
But how close is close enough? In this context, our so-called tolerance limits for the inflation 
target – namely, 1% and 4% – are too wide, and it is worth noting that those limits are merely 
the  trigger  for  the  submittal  of  a  report  to  the  Government  explaining  how  inflation  will  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  brought back to target. In short, then, the inflation target is not 1–4%. In order to underline 
the control problem, I sometimes say that the inflation target is not 2.5% but 2½%. What this 
means  is  that,  if  we  think  in  whole  and  half  percentage  points,  a  deviation  of  half  a 
percentage  point  or  less  from  target  would  be  considered  within  the  boundaries  of  target-
level inflation. By that criterion, inflation as projected in the Bank’s forecast will be at target 
for the entire forecast horizon through end-2017, apart for the last quarter of 2015 and the 
first quarter of 2016. According to the forecast, inflation will average 2.6% during the period 
2014–17  and  will  therefore  be  at  the  2½%  target.  If  this  materialises,  it  is  hard  to  call  it 
anything other than an acceptable performance. 
It  is  naturally  less  of  a  concern  if  inflation  deviates  temporarily  from  target  if  inflation 
expectations do not deviate in the same direction. Early this year, inflation expectations were 
above  target  even  though  measured  inflation  was  below  it.  But  fortunately,  inflation 
expectations have subsided towards the target in the recent term and, by some measures, 
are close to it, particularly short-term expectations. This is important for monetary policy, as I 
will explain shortly. 
I  have  briefly  discussed  the  current  situation  and  the  economic  outlook.  But  what  about 
uncertainties and known risks? 
There are risks attached to the global economy, which seems to be on the downside, at least 
in the near term, as regards both output growth and inflation. And there is the risk that our 
economic policy and contractual wage negotiations will not be successful, as has so often 
been the case during upswings. GDP growth will then be somewhat stronger in the short run, 
but  the  current  account  balance  will  deteriorate  and  inflation  will  rise,  and  ultimately  GDP 
growth will fall below what it would have been otherwise. 
There is uncertainty about the exchange rate, in connection with the settlement of the failed 
banks’ estates and the liberalisation of the capital controls. There is little I can say about that 
at this point, but the aim of the work the authorities are doing at present is to minimise that 
risk. It can be done, but it is a risky process, and one that could be derailed at many points 
along the way if great care is not taken – and perhaps even if great care is taken. 
And now I will turn to monetary policy. Yesterday the Monetary Policy Committee decided to 
lower Central Bank interest rates by 0.25 percentage points, in view of recent developments 
and  the  near-term  outlook  for  inflation  and  the  decline  in  inflation  expectations,  which  I 
mentioned a moment ago. If the Bank’s interest rates had remained unchanged, its real rate 
would have been higher than is warranted by where we are in the economic cycle and by the 
near-term  outlook,  particularly  in  view  of  the  fact  that  it  could  rise  still  further  in  coming 
months. 
Estimating the Central Bank’s real rate is not always a simple matter, as different measures 
of inflation and inflation expectations give differing results. According to an estimate based 
on  the average  of  various  measures  of  inflation  and  inflation  expectations, the  Bank’s real 
rate  was  about  2½%  before  the  recent  reduction,  and  it  had  risen  by  approximately  a 
percentage point in the previous year, which is a large change in terms of real rates. It could 
be argued, too, that this is more likely an underestimation than an overestimation, as there is 
systemic positive bias in household inflation expectations and the breakeven inflation rate in 
the market entails risk premiums. 
The  effect  that  the  real  rate  has  on  domestic  demand  and  inflation  depends  on  what  the 
equilibrium real rate is considered to be at any given time; that is, the real rate that neither 
stimulates  nor  dampens  the  economy.  The  equilibrium  real  rate  has  probably  fallen  in 
Iceland, as it has in most economies in the wake of the financial crisis, but exactly where it 
lies is highly uncertain. One of the Monetary Policy Committee’s tasks is to attempt to assess 
it. It is normal that Central Bank interest rate should rise above equilibrium when a positive 
output gap  develops  and  inflation  is  above  target,  but  neither  is  the  case  at  present. That 
being so, it was appropriate to contain the rise in the real rate by lowering the Bank’s nominal 
interest rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some  will  surely  ask:  Shouldn’t  the  Bank  have  lowered  interest  rates  earlier?  Hasn’t  the 
monetary stance simply been too tight in the recent past? I don’t think this is the right time to 
dissect these questions, not least because many things look different in the rear-view mirror. 
As is said in Njáls saga, “Everything is ambiguous in retrospect.” That said, I think there are 
solid arguments in favour of a negative response to both questions. 
As  regards  timing,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  it  was  not  until  very  recently  that  inflation 
expectations have moved as close to target as they are now. As regards the latter question, 
most measures of the monetary stance have been well within normal range for quite a while, 
and  there  are  few  other  signs  that  it  has  been  too  tight,  expect  perhaps  in  the  past  few 
months. For example, nominal growth in broad money measures about 6% after adjusting for 
factors that are largely unconnected to domestic economic activity, such as deposits of failed 
financial  institutions  in  active  ones.  This growth  is  consistent  with  the  situation  that should 
exist  when  the  economy  is  at  equilibrium  –  when  inflation  is  at  target  and  output  is  at 
capacity. 
An examination of nominal GDP growth gives a similar result. Based on forecasts for 2014, it 
will average 5% in Iceland over the period 2011–2014, as compared with just under 4% in 
the US and the UK, about 2½% in Sweden – which is just above the inflation target alone– 
and about 1½% in the euro area, which is even below the inflation target for the region. This 
has been used to support the argument that monetary policy has been too tight in the euro 
area and Sweden, but as the figures show, this rationale does not apply to Iceland. 
And  last  but  not  least,  GDP  growth  has  been  relatively  robust  and  the  margin  of  spare 
capacity  in  the  economy  has  been  disappearing  at  the  same  time  as  inflation  has  been 
trending towards target. Many observers would consider this to be evidence that monetary 
policy has hardly been on the wrong track. 
Yesterday’s  announcement  that  future  interest  rate  movements  would  depend  on  wage 
developments in the labour market seems to have drawn some attention. But there seems to 
be some misunderstanding about what this means. Over time – but not necessarily at every 
moment in time – wages in the labour market as a whole – but not necessarily for each group 
– should rise by an amount equal to the inflation target plus productivity growth. How much 
this is depends, then, on productivity growth. At present, productivity growth appears to be 
low – about 1%. This means that the scope for wage increases consistent with the inflation 
target is 3.5%. What that means for wage settlements depends on the degree to which wage 
drift can be contained. 
Some groups could receive larger pay rises than this, but then others would have to have 
smaller increases. Sometimes there are grounds for this. Then it is important to bear in mind 
that this is a long-term relationship. For a period of time – even perhaps a few years – wages 
can rise somewhat more without jeopardising the inflation target – for example, if the ratio of 
wages  to  national  income  is  unusually  low  following  a  crisis  and  businesses  are  able  to 
absorb  some  of  the  increase.  This  has  been  the  case  to  an  extent  in  the  past  few  years. 
Other  factors  could  counteract  larger  wage  increases  as  well  –  for  instance,  declining 
foreign-currency prices of imports and a stronger króna have contributed to declining inflation 
even though wages have risen considerably more than the sum of the inflation target and the 
increase in productivity. 
But there are a number of indications that we will not be able to rely on these countervailing 
factors next year. By then, the slack will have  disappeared from the economy, the ratio of 
wages to national income is at or above its historical average, and there are no premises for 
further  appreciation  of  the  króna,  as the  current  account surplus  is  narrowing  and  the  real 
exchange  rate  is  no  longer  below  its  estimated  equilibrium  value.  Nevertheless,  different 
wage increases could be negotiated for different groups if there are grounds and will to do 
so. 
As I draw near the conclusion of my talk today, I would like to shift gears a bit and say a few 
words about credit ratings. When all is said and done, the primary objective of a credit rating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  is  to  estimate  the  probability  that  a  borrower  will  service  its  debt  in  full  and  on  time.  This 
probability depends on two factors – the ability to pay and the willingness to pay – which, as 
history has shown us, are not necessarily one and the same, as could maybe be seen in the 
examples of Finland and Argentina. 
Sometimes it seems as though rating agencies exceed their mandate and act as though they 
are  purveyors  of  some  sort  of  Good  Housekeeping  seal  of  approval  for  economies  and 
governments.  For  example,  one  could  ask  what  the  Republic  of  Iceland’s  probability  of 
default is, since the country didn’t default during the financial crisis.1 While it is pointless to 
debate  this  fact  with  them,  it  actually,  seems  to  me  that  a  number  of  improvements  have 
taken place in the wake of the crisis. Upon closer examination, much of what rating agencies 
take into account is clearly related to developments in both ability and willingness to service 
debt. Among the factors they consider are debt levels and guarantees, GDP growth potential, 
the size and structure of the economy, and other factors that affect vulnerability to shocks, 
institutional  quality,  governance  and  policy  continuity,  and  political  risk.  This  gives  some 
indication, of course, of which factors are a drag on Iceland’s credit rating at present, and 
how they could be addressed. 
Iceland’s  sovereign  credit  rating  soared  during  the  years  before  the  crisis,  and  Icelandic 
banks’  credit  ratings  followed  in  its  wake.  In  fact,  perhaps  they  rose  higher  than  was 
warranted and was good for us. In spite of the ensuing nosedive, we managed to keep the 
sovereign  rating  on  the  bottom  rung  of  investment  grade,  apart  from  two  years  in  Fitch 
Ratings’ speculative category after the first Icesave referendum. 
Keeping  Iceland’s  ratings  in  the  investment-grade  category  cost  an  incredible  amount  of 
effort, and other countries that have gone on an IMF programme in recent years have seen 
their ratings from Moody’s and S&P fall to speculative grade. Some of them have managed 
to rise up faster than Iceland has, however. 
Studying the rating agencies’ reports shows which factors will be most important in order to 
improve  Iceland’s  sovereign  rating  and  thereby  pave  the  way  for  the  banks  to  follow  suit. 
Among  them  are  continued  reduction  of  public  debt  levels  and  sound,  focused  economic 
policy that provides stability throughout the ongoing upswing. The liberalisation of the capital 
controls  is  an  extremely  important  factor,  but  it  could  work  both  ways.  Successful  moves 
towards liberalisation without jeopardising stability will have a positive effect, but disturbance 
of economic and financial stability will do the opposite. 
My assessment of this, and of conversations with the rating agencies, is that it is probably 
not realistic to expect an improvement in our sovereign rating in the very near term. But if we 
can preserve stability and GDP growth next year while demonstrating that we can at least 
begin lifting the capital controls without compromising stability and confidence, our chances 
for a higher credit rating should improve markedly. 
Thank you. 
                                                
1  For further information, see: the Governor’s comments at a panel discussion held at a BIS symposium entitled 
A world without risk-free assets? Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 8–9 January 2013. See: here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
