  Graeme Wheeler: Reflections on 25 years of inflation targeting 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  a 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  and  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking  conference, 
Wellington, 1 December 2014. 
 It  is  now  25  years  since  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Act  came  into  force.  The  Act 
established  the  operational  independence  of  the  Reserve  Bank  (Bank)  in  respect  of 
monetary policy, and specified price stability as the single monetary policy objective. A month 
later, the Minister of Finance and the Governor  signed the first Policy Targets Agreement, 
which specified an annual inflation target of 0 to 2 percent. 
Through  this  reform  New  Zealand  became  the  first  country  to  formally  adopt  inflation 
targeting as its monetary policy regime – that is, setting the Reserve Bank the explicit goal of 
maintaining  inflation  in  a  range  consistent  with  overall  price  stability,  giving  the  Bank  the 
independence to pursue that goal, and holding it – through its Governor in New Zealand’s 
case – accountable for reaching the price stability objective. 
In the lead up to this reform there was extensive debate within the Bank over the goals and 
transmission of monetary policy. Consistent with emerging international thinking, the concept 
of  a  long-run  Philips  Curve  trade-off  was  rejected,  as  were  policy  rules  around  monetary 
aggregates,  and  targeting  nominal  GDP.  The  literature  on  policy  credibility  and  time 
consistency  was  explored  in  depth,  along  with  insights  from  writings  on  corporate 
governance.  On  the  design  front,  considerable  effort  went  into  defining  price  stability, 
agreeing a target range for inflation (as price level targeting was ruled out), and establishing 
caveats whereby it might be acceptable for inflation to be outside the target range for short 
periods1. 
At  the  time,  these  developments  were  highly  controversial.  The  reforms  were  viewed  by 
many  here  and  overseas,  as  ambitious  yet  desirable.  They  were  in  line  with  efforts  being 
pursued in many countries to rein in high inflation, and were consistent with domestic reforms 
under way to strengthen public sector performance by holding public agencies accountable 
for reaching clear contractual objectives. But others questioned whether it was appropriate, 
or even feasible, to have the Bank pursue price stability as its primary responsibility, and to 
hold the Governor accountable for an outcome not directly under the Bank’s control. 
Twenty-five  years  on,  a  new  generation  has  grown  up  with  low  and  stable  inflation  as  the 
norm.  Much  the  same  has  occurred  elsewhere  in  the  world,  with  all  of  the  major  central 
banks  viewing  low  inflation  as  their  main  objective.  But,  beginning  in  the  US  in  2007,  and 
spreading  globally  during  2008,  we  saw  the  worst  financial  meltdown  since  the  Great 
Depression. The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) presented major challenges to policy makers 
and  raised  important  questions  about  the  conduct  and  focus  of  monetary  and  financial 
policies. 
This then is an appropriate time to take stock of our experience with inflation targeting: how 
have monetary and financial policies moved forward over the last 25 years, including in the 
aftermath of the GFC; and what issues and challenges lie ahead? I will offer some insights 
from the past 25 years. 
                                                 
1  For a full discussion of these issues see Grimes, A September 2013 “Inflation Targeting: 25 years’ Experience 
for the Pioneer”. NZ-UK Link Visiting Professorship Lectures at the Bank of England. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 i) 
Inflation targeting has delivered price stability without reducing our long term 
growth rate 
 The Bank continues to hold firmly to the view that the most important contribution monetary 
policy  can  make  to  promoting  efficiency  and  the  long-run  growth  of  incomes,  output,  and 
employment is the pursuit of price stability. Price stability preserves the purchasing power of 
the currency and enables producers and consumers to plan with greater certainty for longer 
periods, including by responding to relative price changes that would otherwise be obscured 
during times of high inflation. Price stability also reduces the inflation risk premium in interest 
rates,  facilitates  long-term  borrowing,  lending  and  contracting,  and  reduces  the  need  for 
speculative investments designed to protect against inflation risks. 
It  is  uncertainty  around  the  long  run  price  level  that  generates  the  costs  associated  with 
inflation. Inflation, particularly unexpected inflation, is a hidden tax, affecting most severely 
those  with  fixed  incomes  and  holders  of  cash  rather  than  inflation-protected  assets.  Price 
stability cannot by itself resolve concerns about inequality, but it does reduce the insidious 
toll that inflation exacts on the more vulnerable and less financially sophisticated. 
Unwinding  deeply  engrained  inflation  expectations  and  transitioning  to  the  target  band  for 
inflation involved difficult adjustment costs. This adjustment contributed to the depth of the 
1991 recession, which was also due to a marked slowdown in global growth. New Zealand’s 
annual inflation rate fell from 7.4 percent at the start of 1990 to 2 percent two years later. 
Real GDP declined by 1.6 percent in 1991 and the unemployment rate increased from just 
over 7 percent in 1990 to 11 percent at the start of 1992. 
Nevertheless, New Zealand’s macroeconomic record before and after the Reserve Bank Act 
came  into  effect  indicates  that  its  price  stability  objective  has  been  met  without  any 
diminution in our economy’s long term growth rate. In the 20 years before the Act, annual 
real GDP growth averaged 2.2 percent while annual inflation was volatile around an average 
of 11.4 percent. Since 1990, annual inflation and real GDP growth have averaged 2.3 and 
2.6 percent respectively and there has been a marked decline in inflation variability. 
Figure 1 
Inflation and GDP growth (annual) 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  International  experience  points  in  the  same  direction.  We  see  this,  for  example,  in  the 
number  of  countries  that  now  place  the  maintenance  of  low  inflation  at  the  core  of  their 
overall  policy  framework2.  Even  in  countries  where  central  banks  face  multiple  statutory 
objectives, the importance of the price stability goal as a precondition for reaching broader 
objectives is well accepted. 
ii) 
Low and stable inflation expectations increase monetary policy’s 
effectiveness 
Like other central banks, the Reserve Bank pursues flexible inflation targeting. This approach 
has been reflected more explicitly through time in the Policy Targets Agreements – notably 
by emphasising that, in pursuing its price stability objective, the Bank “should seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate” (included as of the 
1999  PTA),  and  in  specifying  the  inflation  target  as  one  to  be  met  “on  average  over  the 
medium term”(included as of the 2002 PTA.) 
The effectiveness of monetary policy measures in influencing the short-term path of variables 
in  the  real  economy  is  linked  closely  to  policy  credibility,  which  is  reflected  in  the  Central 
Bank’s  record  in  achieving  inflation  goals  and  shaping  expectations  as  to  future  inflation 
outcomes.  Stabilising  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations  close  to  the  price  stability 
objective provides the Central Bank with greater freedom in addressing inflation shocks and 
scope to take policy actions that influence output and employment growth in the short term. 
This  means  that  if  economic  shocks  or  a  monetary  policy  action  result  in  inflation  moving 
outside its target range, wage and price setters will expect it to return to its target band within 
an  acceptable  period.  Without  this  credibility,  such  shocks  and  policy  actions  would  lead 
mainly to variations in the rate of inflation – as we tended to see in New Zealand in the past. 
This flexible, medium-term approach to policy was drawn on at the onset of the GFC, when 
the Bank lowered the Official Cash Rate (OCR) by 575 points in 2008–2009, even though 
headline inflation was initially well above the target band. By focusing on the medium-term 
inflation outlook, the policy stance was able to cushion the impact of the crisis. In a similar 
vein, the Bank “looked through” the October 2010 increase in the Goods and Services Tax 
rate (from 12.5% to 15%) because it believed it would have limited impact on medium-term 
inflation expectations. 
iii) 
The long term path of the real exchange rate is unaffected by the monetary 
policy and exchange rate regimes 
Monetary policy affects consumer and investor behaviour through many channels including: 
the cost of borrowing; the tolerance for risk taking (which affects asset prices and borrowing 
capacity);  expectations  about  future  inflation;  and  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  In  a 
small  open  economy  like  New  Zealand,  the  exchange  rate  is  a  particularly  important 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  –  albeit  one  that  is  often  stronger  and  less 
predictable than we would wish. In recent years, New Zealand and many other economies 
have  experienced  an  appreciation  in  their  real  effective  exchange  rate,  driven  in  part  by 
spillovers  from  the  stimulative  monetary  policies  pursued  by  the  major  central  banks3. 
Despite a recent decline in the nominal rate, the high level of New Zealand’s real effective 
exchange rate remains unjustified and unsustainable. 
                                                 
2  Jahan  states  that  in  2010,  28  countries  were  inflation  targeting,  using  the  consumer  price  index  as  their 
monetary policy goal. He reports that several other central banks have adopted the main elements of inflation 
targeting,  and  many  others  are  moving  towards  it.  Jahan,  S.2012  “Inflation  Targeting:  Holding  the  Line,” 
Finance and Development. 
3  The real effective (or trade weighted) exchange rate is a better measure of overall competitiveness than the 
nominal  exchange  rate.  It  corrects  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  for  differences  in  relative  prices  (or 
relative unit labour costs) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Real  exchange  rate  appreciations  produce  mixed  results.  They  benefit  consumers  by 
lowering inflation in the tradables sector; make it cheaper for firms to import capital goods 
and  new  technologies;  and  can  thereby  support  growth  in  innovation  and  productivity.  But 
real appreciation can make life difficult for exporting and import-competing firms, especially if 
they have little ability to adjust their prices to compensate for exchange rate changes. And 
exchange rate fluctuations impose significant uncertainties and costs on firms when they are 
forced to exit and re-enter markets due to changes in their competitiveness. 
Since the float of the New Zealand dollar in 1985, New Zealand has experienced four major 
exchange rate cycles, including the current cycle. Each cycle has been characterised by a 
significantly  over-valued  exchange  rate,  followed  by  an  initial  correction,  then  a  rapid 
depreciation. 
Figure 2 
New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate 
 While we recognise the pressures associated with exchange rate overshooting, there is little 
the Bank can do to sustainably alleviate an overvalued real exchange rate, whether through 
monetary  policy  actions  or  the  choice  of  exchange  rate  regime.  New  Zealand  has  tried 
various exchange rate regimes over the past 40 years, including a fixed rate, crawling peg, 
and now a floating rate. We have found, however, that the choice of regime has had little 
impact on the medium-term level of the real effective exchange rate. Past policy attempts to 
give the exchange rate more weight in monetary policy decisions tended to generate more 
interest rate volatility, with little lasting effect on the real exchange rate. 
Instead,  the  appropriate  policy  response  often  lies  elsewhere  –  for  example,  through 
measures  to  improve  domestic  saving,  boost  competiveness,  and  raise  the  growth  rate  of 
potential output. I will take up these points next. 
iv) 
There are limits to what monetary policy can do: supportive structural and 
fiscal policies are also needed 
Monetary policy can complement but not substitute for other policies that influence long-term 
economic  performance,  including  growth,  employment,  and  the  real  exchange  rate.  Long-
term growth is primarily a function of the economy’s structural characteristics and policies, 
including  the  quality  and  quantity  of  labour  and  capital  inputs  available  to  the  economy, 
coupled with the productivity and innovation associated with their deployment. Similarly, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  level  of  employment  over  the  long  run  reflects  the  characteristics  of  the  labour  market, 
including skill levels, productivity, and institutional practices. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  substitute  for  structural  adjustment  policies,  nor  can  it  deliver 
“desired” long term social equity, or distributional outcomes. Such policy considerations often 
arise in respect of the housing market. By influencing mortgage rates and the demand for 
credit, monetary policy can affect the demand for housing and thereby help ease imbalances 
in the market while housing supply is increased. But monetary policy cannot free up more 
land  constrained  by  zoning  regulations,  address  procedural  and  pricing  issues  around 
planning consents, or raise productivity in the construction sector. 
Fiscal  policy  also  plays  an  important  role  in  the  economy’s  long-term  performance.  For 
example,  a  constrained  fiscal  stance  can  help  increase  private  saving,  take  pressure  off 
interest rates and the exchange rate; and provide the economy with a buffer against shocks 
by  restraining  the  build-up  of  public  debt.  The  stance  of  fiscal  policy  also  affects  inflation 
expectations and investor judgements as to the degree of coordination among policy makers 
over macroeconomic policy. 
New  Zealand’s  varied  economic  experiences  over  the  last  40  years  illustrate  how  policy 
choices  interact  to  either  hold  back  or  support  long-term  growth.  The  prolonged  period  of 
weak growth that the economy experienced in the 1970s and 1980s was partly triggered by 
terms  of  trade  shocks,  and  especially  the  rapid  rise  in  international  oil  prices  in  the  early 
1970s and the decline in commodity export prices. But the inflexibility of the New Zealand 
economy,  including  its  wage  and  price  setting  practices  and  external  trade  constraints, 
hindered its capacity to counter these external pressures. In these circumstances, fiscal and 
monetary policies were relatively ineffective in preventing the slowdown. Instead, the main 
macroeconomic  legacy  was  a  substantial  rise  in  public  debt  and  double-digit  inflation  for 
most of the period from the mid-1970s to late 1980s4. 
In contrast, reforms pursued since the mid-1980s – directed in particular at macroeconomic 
stabilisation and wide-ranging market deregulation– increased the capacity of the economy 
to adjust and grow in response to changing external and domestic conditions. For example, 
the  economy  has  responded  well  to  the  growing  importance  of  East  and  South  Asia  in 
international  trade  and  investment,  and  in  recent  years  has  withstood  shocks  such  as  the 
GFC,  the  Christchurch  earthquakes,  drought,  and  the  shifting  global  demand  for  our  dairy 
products and other commodities. 
v) 
Monetary policy independence requires a high level of accountability and 
transparency 
to 
increase  central  bank 
independence.  To  counterbalance 
The widespread move towards inflation targeting around the world has been accompanied by 
reforms 
their  greater 
independence, central banks faced stronger demands for transparency and accountability – 
to government, markets, and the public in general – over their policy performance. 
Transparency  has  two  main  dimensions.  It  enables  governments  and  the  public  to  assess 
whether  the  Bank  has  met  its  objectives  and  to  hold  it  to  account.  Transparency  also 
increases  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  by  boosting  its  predictability. 
Transparency  is  enhanced  through  regular  publications  such  as  the  Monetary  Policy 
Statement  and  Financial  Stability  Report,  publication  of  research  and  policy  pieces,  and 
                                                 
4  Over 1974–84, gross public debt increased from 40 to close to 60 percent of GDP, and net debt rose from 4½ 
to 30 percent of GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  through  extensive  communications  outreach.  A  recent  international  survey  ranked  New 
Zealand second among 120 central banks for transparency5. 
Multiple checks and balances are in place to monitor the performance of the Bank and hold 
the Governor accountable. The Reserve Bank Board meets 9 times a year to monitor and 
provide oversight on the Bank’s operations and policy decisions, and the Bank’s Governors 
appear before the Finance and Expenditure Committee 7 times a year. There are numerous 
other accountability measures: for example, the Board can recommend that the Minister of 
Finance remove the Governor due to inadequate performance; the Bank must have regard to 
any policy direction issued by the Minister in relation to government policies; the Bank places 
considerable  weight  on  communications;  and,  as  part  of  these,  publishes  full  economic 
projections, and since 1997, indicates an endogenous interest rate path. 
The Bank has a broader set of responsibilities than most central banks, and although it has a 
single  decision  maker  model,  a  Governing  Committee  was  established  in  2013  to  make 
major policy decisions. The committee comprises the four governors, and it reviews all major 
monetary  and  financial  policy  matters  falling  under  the  Bank’s  responsibilities,  including 
decisions  on  monetary  policy,  foreign  exchange  intervention,  liquidity  management  policy, 
prudential policy (both micro and macro) and other regulatory policies. The Governor retains 
a  casting  vote  and,  to  date,  formally  retains  sole  decision  making  power.  Several  policy 
committees, each chaired by a governor, provide advice to the Governing Committee. 
The  decision  to  establish  a  Governing  Committee  follows  similar  moves  by  the  Bank  of 
Canada,  which  also  has  a  single  decision  maker  model  for  monetary  policy  under  its 
legislation.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the  performance  of  the  RBNZ,  or  other  central  banks 
where the Governor is formally accountable for policy decisions, being any weaker or more 
volatile than that of central banks where accountability rests with a committee. However, the 
Governing  Committee  functions  very  effectively  and  the  case  for  decision  making  by 
committee rather than individuals is premised on the relative strengths afforded by  groups 
and the possible risk-reducing attributes of group decision making. 
Monetary policy needs to be supported by sound prudential policies 
vi) 
With the onset of the GFC the world again witnessed the destructive power of dysfunctional 
financial  markets.  Financial  sector  instability  can  arise  from  many  sources,  including 
unrealistic expectations as to the sustainability of future yields on financial assets, excessive 
risk  taking  by  investors,  poorly  designed  macro-economic  and  regulatory  policies,  and 
through regional or global contagion associated with failures in offshore financial systems. 
The  GFC  showed  how  negative  externalities  can  arise  when  financial  institutions  take  on 
excessive leverage and do not bear the full cost of their activities. These externalities can 
have  huge  economic  and  policy  consequences.  For  example,  more  than  6  years  after  the 
onset of the GFC most of the advanced economies have policy rates close to zero and the 
major central banks have undertaken around USD7 trillion of quantitative easing. Although 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  discontinued  its  bond  purchase  programme,  global  quantitative 
easing in 2015 is expected to be greater than at any time since 2011. Bank bail-outs during 
the GFC have imposed enormous costs on taxpayers (close to 30% of GDP in the case of 
Ireland)  and  at  home  we  saw  the  large  fiscal  costs  associated  with  the  support  for  South 
Canterbury Finance. 
Sound prudential policies relating to capital adequacy, liquidity management, core funding, 
disclosure  requirements,  and  stress  testing  of  balance  sheets  cannot  always  prevent 
financial crises and the need for unconventional monetary policy, but they can lower the risk 
of systemic failure. 
                                                 
5  Dincer  N,  and  B  Eichengreen  2014  “Central  Bank  Transparency  and  Independence:  Updates  and  New 
Measures” International Journal of Central Banking. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The emergence of macro-prudential policy 
vii) 
One of the insights from the GFC was how rapidly instability could develop even though an 
economy might be growing close to its potential, and be experiencing sound fiscal policy and 
price stability. 
An environment of low interest rates, rising leverage, aggressive competition among lending 
institutions,  and  a  widespread  search  for  yield  by  investors  usually  translates  quickly  into 
rising asset prices – especially when the global economy is growing at a rapid rate, as was 
the case during 2003–07. When financial crises occur, asset valuations decline and the lower 
asset prices may be unable to support the debt that financed their acquisition. 
We  are  currently  seeing  considerable  appreciation  in  asset  prices  (including  fixed  income 
securities,  equities,  and  real  estate)  in  many  countries  as  a  result  of  extensive  monetary 
accommodation  and  investors  aggressively  searching  for  yield.  Many  central  banks  and 
regulatory agencies have turned to macro-prudential policies in an attempt to reduce risks to 
financial stability, including those associated with an overheated housing market. 
In view of these concerns, the Reserve Bank introduced macro-prudential policy in the form 
of speed limits on high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) lending for existing residential property on 
1 October 2013. House prices were already significantly overvalued based on historical and 
international  indicators  and  were  accelerating  rapidly  in  Auckland  and  Christchurch  (which 
account  for  around  half  of  the  national  market)  and  gaining  considerable  momentum  in 
several  other  regions.  In  addition,  the  ratio  of  household  debt  to  household  disposable 
income  at  156  percent  was  high,  and  banks  were  competing  aggressively  to  provide 
mortgages to borrowers with small deposits. 
Macro-prudential policy requires policy makers to be clear about its goals, the duration of the 
measures,  and  how  such  measures  might  interact  with  monetary  policy.  These  measures 
often complement monetary policy when the real and financial cycles are in sync (i.e. with a 
strong  outlook  for  inflationary  pressures  and  the  asset  and  credit  cycle,  or  the  opposite)6. 
Although LVR speed limits were introduced for financial stability purposes, they have been 
an important consideration in our monetary policy assessment. We believe the dampening 
impact of LVRs on house price inflation and credit, and the diminished “wealth effects” have 
reduced  consumer  price  inflation  pressures  by  an  amount  similar  to  a  25–50  basis  point 
increase in the OCR. The introduction of LVR restrictions moderated excesses in the housing 
market,  thereby  enabling  the  Bank  to  delay  tightening  interest  rates,  and  reducing  the 
incentive for further capital inflows into the New Zealand dollar in search of higher returns. 
The impact of LVRs will weaken over time and they will be eased when housing pressures 
moderate  and  the  Bank  is  confident  that  there  will  not  be  a  resurgence  in  house  price 
inflation. But the Bank cannot prevent or control housing cycles. It can only hope to influence 
the demand for mortgage lending and the availability of credit, and buy time for the housing 
supply to increase. In the end, the challenge of rising house prices needs to be met through 
increases in housing supply. But, this often requires other issues to be addressed such as 
the approval procedures around land use decisions and building consents, and other matters 
such as the tax treatment of savings, the taxation of investment in real estate, and ways to 
increase productivity and reduce costs in the building sector7. 
                                                 
6  See Spencer G, March 2014. ‘Coordination of Monetary Policy and Macro prudential Policy’. Speech delivered 
to Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference in Hong Kong. 
7  Because investor’s mortgage interest payments are tax deductible and those of an owner occupier are not, 
investors face a lower cost of capital than owner occupiers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Future challenges 
viii) 
Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  reducing  inflation  and  lowering  inflation 
expectations  since  the  introduction  of  the  RBNZ  Act.  However,  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy continues to pose many challenges. These relate to the difficulties in fully 
understanding  economic  linkages  and  assessing  the  need  for  and  scale  of  policy  change. 
These policy judgements are particularly sensitive in light of the significance of cross-border 
financial flows, and their impact on exchange rates and long term interest rates. 
As  with  many  other  central  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  developed  a  quantitative  structural 
model  (a  dynamic  stochastic  equilibrium  model)  for  forecasting  purposes.  However, 
irrespective of the complexity of their models, all central bank models are at best rudimentary 
in their capacity to model the financial sector and integrate it into the real economy. 
Policy  judgements  involve  assessments  of  the  rate  of  growth  of  potential  output  and  the 
output gap, and the extent to which the current policy rate differs from the neutral rate (or the 
policy  rate  that  is  neither  stimulatory  nor  contractionary).  Although  the  “rate  of  potential 
output  growth’  and  “the  neutral  interest  rate”  are  critical  for  evaluating  the  need  for  policy 
adjustment,  they  are  model-based  concepts  and  neither  are  observable.  This  means  that 
policy  makers  often  need  to  “feel  their  way”  through  an  interest  rate  tightening  phase, 
especially given uncertainties around the lags before policy adjustments affect inflation and 
output. 
Global forces can have an enormous influence on inflation and other relative prices such as 
exchange  rates  and  interest  rates.  Inflation  pressures  have  been  moderated  by  structural 
changes in the global economy such as: the absorption of low cost producers into the global 
trading system; the dramatic reductions in the costs of processing, storing and transmitting 
information; falling capital goods prices; new forms of competition (e.g. associated with on-
line  selling);  and  cost  reductions  associated  with  global  supply  chains.  Productivity  growth 
tends  also  to  be  higher  among  producers  serving  regional  or  global  markets  rather  than 
domestic consumers only. 
With  integrated  global  capital  markets,  currency  volatility  and  movements  in  long-term 
interest  rates  can  be  heavily  influenced  by  cross-border  transaction  flows  around  capital 
movements, trade financing, remittances and price arbitrage, and risk transfer instruments. 
Empirical  studies  show  changes  in  long-term  interest  rates  are  highly  correlated  across 
countries.  This  means  that  central  banks  operating  in  floating  exchange  rate  regimes, 
particularly  in  smaller  countries,  are  significantly  constrained  in  their  ability  to  run 
independent monetary policies. They can influence short-term rates but cannot set their own 
long-term rates. Instead, international investor activity has a greater influence over long-term 
rates.8 We see this at present. The Reserve Bank raised short-term rates during the period 
March to July 2014 but longer-term mortgage rates have fallen as a result of the decline in 
long rates in the major economies. 
This means that macro-prudential policies may need to be called on to help prevent asset 
price booms and complement monetary policy. But there is still much to be explored around 
the  nature  of  the  interaction  of  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies,  the  costs  and 
benefits of such interventions, and the circumstances where such policy initiatives are likely 
to be successful. Particularly important in this regard will be considerations as to how best to 
coordinate  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  decisions  when  economic  and 
financial cycles are out of sync and the policies are not complementary. 
                                                 
8  For excellent discussions on this see Rey H. 2014 “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and 
Monetary  Policy  Independence”,  and  Turner  P.  2014“The  macroeconomics  of  macro  prudential  policies” 
presentation  at  the  Conference  on  “Effective  Macro-prudential  Instruments”,  The  University  of  Nottingham 
Centre for Finance, Credit and Macroeconomics. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Concluding comments 
Monetary  policy’s  focus  on  price  stability  has  played  a  vital  role  in  the  more  stable  and 
responsive  economic  climate  that  has  emerged  in  New  Zealand  over  the  last  25  years. 
Under  this  climate,  the  economy  has  been  able  to  take  advantage  of  new  trading 
opportunities in Asia and elsewhere; there has been strong growth in new sectors of activity 
–  including  in  the  information  technology  area;  and  the  economy  has  been  resilient  in  the 
face  of  severe  external  and  domestic  shocks,  notably  from  the  GFC  and  the  Christchurch 
earthquakes.  Moreover,  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  help  offset  short-term  shocks  to 
output and employment has grown as inflation expectations have stabilised at a low level and 
as  policy  credibility  and  transparency  have  increased.  New  Zealand  is  not  alone  in  these 
experiences: all major central banks now see price stability as their main objective and the 
most important contribution they can make to stronger long-term economic performance. 
While much has been achieved in these first 25 years of the Reserve Bank Act, important 
issues and challenges remain. The global economic environment remains difficult, we have 
experienced rapid increases in house prices, and we face the longer-term need to improve 
domestic productivity and savings and rein in the economy’s external imbalances. 
These  global  and  domestic  challenges  serve  as  a  reminder  of  what  can  and  cannot  be 
achieved through monetary policy to counter the sorts of pressures the economy may face in 
the years ahead. For example, monetary policy is relatively powerless to offset the spillovers 
that  global  economic  and  policy  developments  can  impose  on  our  exchange  rate  and 
commodity export prices. But, monetary policy can complement structural and fiscal policies 
in supporting the economy’s flexibility and adaptability, and help counter short-term economic 
fluctuations.  Moreover,  recent  financial  sector  reforms,  including  the  new  macro-prudential 
policy  framework,  have  given  the  Bank  additional  tools  for  containing  systemic  risks  and 
promoting macroeconomic stability. There is still much to learn in this area, including in the 
interactions between prudential and monetary policies, but the Reserve Bank is now much 
better equipped to help build a stronger and more resilient economy than we were prior to 
1991. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
