  Malcolm Edey: Inquiry into affordable housing 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Malcolm  Edey,  Assistant  Governor  (Financial  System)  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, and Ms Luci Ellis, Head of Financial Stability Department of the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, at Inquiry into Affordable Housing, Canberra, 2 October 2014. 
 Thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to discuss the Reserve Bank’s views on this important 
topic of housing affordability. 
This is a subject on which the Bank has published a good deal of analysis over the years. I 
will  refer  in  particular  to  our  submission  to  this  Inquiry  in  February,  and  also  to  our  most 
recent  Financial  Stability  Review,  released  last  week,  which  covers  our  assessment  of 
current  developments.  My  colleague  Luci  Ellis  was  the  author  of  the  February  submission 
and she  will be happy to answer any detailed questions on its contents in due course.1 In 
these opening remarks, I will be drawing on some of the key points from those two sources. 
There  are  a  number  of  things  that  people  might  have  in  mind  when  they  use  the  term 
“affordability”. Affordability measures will differ depending upon whether we are talking about 
owners or renters, and on whether we are interested in some specific market segment, like 
first  home  buyers  or 
low-income  households.  For  owner-occupiers,  perceptions  of 
affordability  will  depend  on  many  things  including  price,  household  income,  the  cost  and 
availability of finance, and a host of factors affecting the needs and aspirations of the buyer. 
In any analysis it is necessary to make use of summary measures, while acknowledging that 
these inevitably gloss over the diversity of experience across different types of households. 
Much  of  the  public  discussion  on  affordability  is  focused  on  home  purchasers.  A  useful 
summary measure is the repayment on a typical new housing loan expressed as a ratio to 
disposable income. On that metric, housing affordability in Australia has fluctuated around a 
broadly  stable  average  over  the  past  three  decades,  with  average  repayments  varying 
between around 20 and 30 per cent of disposable incomes. These data are reported in our 
submission. Currently this figure is a bit below average, but it has been rising in the period 
since the publication of the submission, as the housing market has gathered momentum. 
Over  the  same  30-year  period,  the  ratio  of  housing  prices  to  incomes  has  increased 
substantially.  These  developments  in  prices  and  affordability  have  been  inter  related. 
Housing  prices  received  a  substantial  boost  from  the  combined  effects  of  disinflation  and 
financial deregulation, which lowered the cost and increased the availability of finance. Much 
of the increase in the price-to-income ratio was concentrated over the 10-year period to the 
end of 2003, when this ratio increased by around two-thirds. 
It  is  reasonable  to  think  of  this  as  a  transitional  impact  on  housing  prices  that  will  not  re-
occur.  Both  the  shift  to  low  inflation,  and  the  comprehensive  deregulation  of  the  financial 
system,  are  things  that  only  happen  once.  In  broad  terms,  the  adjustment  of  the  housing 
market to this new environment seems to have been completed by around the middle of the 
last decade. Since then, the ratio of housing prices to incomes has been relatively stable but, 
for reasons already alluded to, it has been rising recently and is now at the upper end of its 
recent range. I will return to this point in a moment. 
To summarise these stylised facts: 
• 
the ratio of housing prices to incomes is at the top of its historical range; but 
                                                
1   RBA  2014,  Submission  to  the  Inquiry  into  Affordable  Housing.  Submission  to  the  Senate  Economics 
References Committee, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  over  time,  this  has  been  more  than  offset  by  falls  in  financing  costs,  so  that  the 
typical  repayment  burden  as  a  share  of  income  is  not  particularly  high.  This  of 
course does not rule out affordability problems in particular market segments or for 
particular types of households. 
 Our  submission  made  the  point  that  there  is  no  shortage  of  housing  finance  in  Australia. 
Housing  loan  interest  rates  are  currently  as  low  as  they  have  been  in  a  generation,  and 
households are not artificially constrained from borrowing as much as they can reasonably 
be expected to repay. I have already made the point that perceptions of affordability will differ 
across  different  types  of  households;  but,  if  there  is  a  perceived  affordability  problem  in 
Australia, it is not due to a lack of finance. 
An important theme of our submission was that housing prices and affordability are affected 
by the interaction of both supply and demand factors. The factors that I have mentioned so 
far, such as household incomes and the cost and availability of finance, primarily affect the 
demand side of the market. In the short to medium term, it is these factors that will tend to 
have the predominant influence on housing price movements. The reason for that is that the 
supply side of the market is dominated by a large existing stock of dwellings, and new supply 
takes time to come on stream. 
In the longer term, however, supply factors are critically important. It is the supply response 
that determines the extent to which additional demand results in higher prices over time. 
Our submission highlights that Australia faces a number of longstanding challenges in this 
area, including regulatory and zoning constraints, inherent geographical barriers and the cost 
structure of the building industry. There are also obstacles to affordable housing created by 
Australia’s unusually low-density urban structure, though this is gradually changing. 
Our  submission  does  not  seek  to  offer  policy  prescriptions  for  improving  the  supply-side 
response.  The  general  point  I  would  make  is  that  we  can’t  improve  housing  affordability 
simply by adding to demand. Targeted assistance can certainly help particular groups such 
as  first  home  buyers,  but  without  a  supply-side  response,  any  generalised  increase  in 
demand will just be capitalised into prices. Hence an important emphasis in our submission 
is  that  due  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  supply-side  factors  in  any  policy  response  to 
perceived problems of affordability. 
Let me turn now to some current developments. 
I have already mentioned the recent strength in Australian housing prices and I expect the 
Committee will be interested in the Bank’s current assessment of this, particularly in light of 
the comments made in our Financial Stability Review last week. 
Over the past couple of years, housing prices in Australia have been rising strongly. Some of 
this  perhaps  represented  an  element  of  “catch  up”  after  some  earlier  weakness. 
Nonetheless,  prices  have  continued  to  rise  significantly  faster  than  incomes,  and  this  has 
been associated with strong growth in investor activity. 
To cite a few key facts and figures: 
• 
National housing prices have been rising at a rate of around 10 per cent over the 
past year, and around 15 per cent in Sydney. 
The  rate  of  growth  of  investor  finance  is  significantly  outpacing  the  growth  in 
household incomes. 
Loans to investors currently account for close to 50 per cent of new housing loan 
approvals. 
Investor  activity  has  been  particularly  concentrated  in  New  South  Wales  and 
Victoria.  In  New  South  Wales  investor  loan  approvals  have  increased  by  about 
90 per cent over the past two years. 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is against this background that the Bank said in its Financial Stability Review last week that 
the  composition  of  housing  and  mortgage  market  activity  is  becoming  unbalanced.  The 
review  also  indicated  that  we  are  discussing  with  APRA  steps  that  might  be  taken  to 
reinforce  sound  lending  practices,  particularly  for  investor  finance,  though  not  necessarily 
limited to that. 
I  want  to  emphasise  that  the  banks  in  Australia  are  resilient,  and mortgage  lending  in this 
country  has  historically  been  relatively  safe.  APRA  has,  however,  noted  a  trend  to  riskier 
lending  practices,  and  over  the  past  couple  of  years  has  been  seeking  to  temper  these 
through its supervisory activities. There are also broader concerns with the macroeconomic 
risks  associated  with  excessive  speculative  activity,  since  this  activity  can  amplify  the 
property price cycle and increase risks to households. 
Our discussions with APRA and other agencies on these matters are ongoing, and there will 
be more to say about them in due course. For now, my colleague and I will be happy to take 
any questions that you might have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
