  Peter Pang: A decade of Hong Kong Dollar settlement in the CLS system 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the 10th anniversary celebration of Hong Kong Dollar settlement in CLS, Hong 
Kong, 21 October 2014. 
 David1, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am honoured to be here today to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Hong Kong dollar 
settlement in the CLS system. 
Opening 
2. 
If  we  were  a  married  couple,  this  event  would  mark  our  Tin  Anniversary,  with  tin 
symbolizing  durability  and  pliability.  It  is  good  to  note  that  our  bonding  remains  robust, 
despite the fact that CLS has 16 other currency partners, and its desire to have more in the 
future. 
3. 
According to Jane Austen, “happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance”. 
Being  a  monetary  authority,  the  HKMA  would  not  leave  such  an  important  financial 
infrastructure for addressing the FX settlement risk to chance. 
4. 
The one thing that keeps our bonding with CLS strong is our common vision – to 
provide the solution to help market players eliminate the FX settlement risks through a highly 
effective and efficient settlement platform. 
5. 
Our  decision  to  join  the  CLS  in  2004  was  based  on  the  simple  fact  that  CLS 
provides the most powerful global solution to eliminate the FX settlement risks among market 
players. And CLS has delivered such a solution without a hitch in the past decade. 
Good times 
6. 
Like all happy marriages, the bonding should foster growth and help the partners to 
realise  their  potential  during  good  times;  and  provide  an  anchor  to  help  them  to  face  the 
challenges of the bad times with resilience and confidence. 
7. 
Both partners have certainly done well during the good times in the past decade. 
 HK’s developments 
During  this  period,  Hong  Kong  has  continued  to  consolidate  its  role  as  a  premier 
(i) 
8. 
international financial centre and has become a more globalised economy: 
– 
The total assets of the banking system have increased 2.7 times to HK$18 trillion, 
with foreign currency assets accounting for about 60% of the pool. 
The market capitalization of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange has become more than 
4 times bigger, advancing from number 8 to number 6 in the global ladder. 
The  bond  market  has  also  increased  by  about  3  times,  with  foreign  currency 
denominated bonds accounting for about 40% for most of the time. 
9. 
Hong  Kong  has  also  become  a  hub  for  private  wealth  and  asset  management. 
Nearly 80 of the top 100 global money managers are in Hong Kong. The total assets under 
management hit a record high of US$2.1 trillion in 2013, with 72% of the funds sourced from 
                                                 
1  Mr David Puth, CEO of CLS Group Holdings, and CLS Bank International. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2004 also marked the commencement of offshore RMB business in Hong Kong and 
non-Hong Kong investors. Hong Kong’s net International Investment Position has also grown 
from 250% of our GDP in 2004 to close to 300% in recent years. 
10. 
we are now the global hub of offshore RMB business. 
11. 
Against this encouraging backdrop, the average daily FX turnover in Hong Kong has 
more than doubled, from US$102 billion in April 2004 to US$275 billion in April 2013. In fact, 
Hong Kong has become the 5th largest FX trading centre in 2013, up from the 6th place in 
2004. In short, Hong Kong has further consolidated its status as an international investment, 
banking, payment and commercial centre. 
12. 
Effective  FX  settlement  is  a  prerequisite  to  all  these  achievements,  given  the 
significant  fund  flows  that  an  IFC,  such  as  Hong  Kong,  needs  to  handle,  and  the  need  to 
maintain the stability of the Hong Kong dollar under the currency board arrangement. 
(ii) 
CLS developments 
13. 
As for CLS, as many of you know, it has gone from strength to strength in the past 
decade. For instance, the number of currencies it supports has grown from seven from the 
start, to 17 today. The number of settlement members has also increased from 39 to 62. 
14. 
Moreover,  the  volume  and  value  of  transactions  via  the  CLS  have  expanded 
significantly,  with  an  average  daily  value  of  US$5  trillion2  and  daily  volume  of  one  million 
transactions.  This  should  not  be  surprising  as  the  global  FX  market  has  become  much 
bigger, with the average daily turnover in 2013 (USD 5.3 trillion3) three times bigger than in 
2004. 
As close partners, we have also faced significant challenges during difficult times in 
Challenging times 
15. 
the past decade. 
16. 
We  all  remembered  vividly  how  a  large  part  of  the  financial  markets  had  almost 
come  to  a  standstill  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008.  Yet,  the 
foreign exchange market continued to operate smoothly. Many market players had attributed 
the market stability to the support provided by CLS. 
17. 
and, importantly, confidence, that our market players needed in those critical moments. 
18. 
This is certainly the case post Lehman’s collapse, as Hong Kong’s companies and 
individuals liquidated overseas assets and repatriated HK$220 billion back into Hong Kong to 
tide themselves over the liquidity and credit squeeze. 
I also believe that our linkage with CLS has also provided the functional resilience 
Looking forward 
19. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to say  that  CLS  is  now  one  of the  most  important  pieces  of 
infrastructure supporting the global financial market. The creation of the CLS Bank is also a 
shining  example  that  demonstrates  the  power  of  private  sector-public  sector  collaboration. 
The HKMA is proud to be part of that success story. 
                                                
2  CLS reports both sides of an FX transaction. To adjust the average daily value data to equate to the same 
reporting convention used by the Bank for International Settlements, the gross values should be divided by 
two. 
3  BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey, FX turnover in April 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So, what’s next? I expect markets to keep changing, and they will only change faster 
20. 
in the coming years. 
21. 
As  technology  advances,  and  Asia  providing  the  engine  for  global  growth  in  the 
medium term, I see plenty of opportunities for CLS to put its strategic focus in the region. The 
HKMA welcomes the CLS’ efforts to put more new currencies and members into its orbit. 
22. 
I  look  forward  to  seeing  this  happen  sooner  rather  than  later,  and  welcome 
opportunities for cooperation and knowledge sharing between us. This is all because of what 
I  said  earlier  –  that  we  shared  a  common  vision,  and  a  more  widely  participated  system 
should mean even less settlement risks for market players. 
23. 
Thank you. 
I look forward to celebrating our silver anniversary in 2029. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
