  Fritz Zurbrügg: The Swiss National Bank’s investment policy – some 
topical issues 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Geneva, 20 November 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome  to  the  Money  Market  Event  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  in  Geneva.  I  am 
delighted to be able to speak to you today about some of the topical issues facing the SNB’s 
financial markets department. As usual, I shall share the floor with the head of the Money 
Market unit, Sébastien Kraenzlin. I shall focus my remarks on some of the investment policy 
challenges currently confronting the SNB. Related issues – specifically the steep rise in our 
currency  reserves  following  our  decision  to  purchase  foreign  exchange  to  enforce  the 
minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 against the euro – were the focus of attention some two 
years ago at this same event. Since then, our currency reserves, which are primarily made 
up of foreign exchange reserves and gold, have stabilised (slide 1). However, the question of 
how to manage these investments as advantageously as possible is still a major concern for 
us. In this context, I shall speak about two issues this evening: first, the importance of the 
Asia-Pacific markets for the SNB; and second, the role of gold in our currency reserves. In 
doing  so, I  shall  reference  the  popular  initiative  “Save  our  Swiss  gold” (also  known  as the 
“gold initiative”), on which the Swiss electorate will be voting on 30 November. After I have 
spoken  to  you,  Sébastien  Kraenzlin  will  outline  some  of  the  latest  money  market 
developments. 
The SNB’s currency reserves – an overview 
The SNB’s currency reserves currently stand at more than CHF 500 billion – 80% of gross 
domestic  product  (Switzerland’s  annual  economic  output).  With  a  share  of  some 
CHF 460 billion,  foreign  exchange  makes  up  around  90%  of  our  currency  reserves.  Since 
autumn 2012, the size of the SNB’s currency reserves has principally  been determined by 
financial  market  valuations  and  by  interest  and  dividend  income.  Given  how  large  our 
portfolio of currency reserves is, fluctuations in value have a much greater impact today than 
they did in the past, as has once again become clear this year. The SNB reported a profit of 
CHF 28.5 billion for the first three quarters of this year. 
I  should  emphasise  at  this  stage  that  our  investment  policy  is  always  subordinated  to 
monetary  policy;  it  can  only  be  understood  in  this  context.  Since  September  2011,  our 
monetary policy has been dominated by the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 against the 
euro. With interest rates close to zero, the minimum exchange rate is the key instrument we 
are  deploying  to  avoid  an  undesirable  tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  The  SNB  will 
continue to enforce the minimum exchange rate with the utmost determination. To this end, it 
is  prepared  to  purchase  foreign  exchange  in  unlimited  quantities  and  to  take  further 
measures immediately if required. 
Once monetary policy requirements have been met, our foreign exchange investments are 
guided by three criteria: security, liquidity and return. In order to ensure that we meet the first 
two criteria – security and liquidity – we hold a substantial portion of our foreign exchange 
reserves in liquid government bonds, in the most important global currencies; almost three-
quarters of our foreign exchange reserves are currently invested in such instruments. When 
it comes to our third criterion – return – equities play an important role as they generally have 
a  higher  return  potential  than  the  government  bonds  of  the  major  advanced  economies. 
Currently, 16% of our foreign exchange reserves are invested in equities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Given how substantial our foreign exchange reserves are, doing justice to all three of these 
criteria simultaneously is no simple matter. On the one hand, the considerable growth of our 
foreign exchange reserves has increased the concentration risk associated with conventional 
government bonds; on the other hand, there is the risk that we may overuse certain markets, 
thereby potentially triggering undesired price fluctuations. We therefore evaluate investment 
possibilities  on  a  continual  basis.  As  part  of  our  search  for  diversification,  Asia-Pacific 
markets in particular have become increasingly important for the SNB’s investment policy in 
recent years. 
Growing importance of Asia for the SNB’s investment policy 
In  recent  decades,  the  focus  of  global  economic  activity  has  increasingly  been  shifting 
towards Asia. The region now accounts for more than a third of global economic output. Asia 
has contributed more than 50% to global growth over the last decade, with China and India 
together generating over 40% (left-hand side of slide 2). For Switzerland – a country that is 
highly  export-oriented  –  Asia  has  become  increasingly  significant,  too.  Swiss  companies 
exported almost CHF 30 billion of goods to the region last year, almost three times more than 
in 2000, bringing its share to 14% of the country’s total exports (right-hand side of slide 2). 
Asian countries have made substantial progress in developing their financial markets since 
the Asian crisis at the end of the 1990s. Most financial markets in the region have become 
significantly  more  liquid  and  diversified  than  they  were  15  years  ago  thanks  to  gradual 
liberalisation  of  capital  flows,  better  financial  market  infrastructure  and  an  expanding 
domestic  investor  base.  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  now  rank  among  the  world’s  most 
important  financial  centres.  Between  2003  and  2013,  Asian  stock  markets’  contribution  to 
global  market  capitalisation  increased  from  approximately  20%  to  over  30%.1  Bond  issues 
denominated  in  local  currencies  have  also  gained  steadily  in  importance.  This  market 
quadrupled in size between 2005 and 2014 and now totals some USD 8,000 billion.2 Equally, 
Asian financial centres have made substantial inroads into global foreign exchange markets 
in recent years (left-hand side of slide 3). In 2013, almost one-fifth of global foreign exchange 
transactions took place in Singapore, Japan, Hong Kong and Australia. While these centres 
have not yet reached the UK level, they are now almost on a par with the US. Singapore last 
year  supplanted  Japan  as  the  world’s  third-largest  foreign  exchange  trading  centre  (right-
hand side of slide 3).3 
Against  this  backdrop,  these  markets  have  understandably  gained  in  significance  for  the 
SNB,  too,  which  explains  why  we  decided  to  open  a  branch  office  with  eight  staff  in 
Singapore in mid-2013. This office is primarily significant from the point of view of investment 
policy, and to date our expectations on this score have been met in full. Our presence on the 
ground in Singapore enables us to manage our Asia-Pacific portfolio much more effectively. 
The importance of being able to operate on the Asian bond and stock markets during local 
trading hours, for instance, has been confirmed. Our office there also allows us to manage a 
host of on-site relationships, which deepens our understanding of Asian financial markets – 
and  economies  in  general.  Moreover,  having  a  local  presence  makes  it  easier  for  us  to 
monitor and enforce the minimum exchange rate round the clock, thereby contributing to the 
implementation of monetary policy. 
The  growing  importance  of  Asia  is  also  reflected  in  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  As  I 
mentioned  earlier,  given  the  enormous  increase  in  our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  the 
                                                
1  World Federation of Exchanges. www.world-exchanges.org, Statistics/Annual Query Tool. 
2  Asian  Development  Bank.  2006  and  2014.  Asia  Bond  Monitor.  Includes  bonds  issued  by  governments, 
regional authorities, supranational organisations and corporations. 
3  BIS.  2013.  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey,  Foreign  Exchange  Turnover  in  April  2013:  Preliminary  global 
results. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  broadest possible diversification of our investments is extremely important. Consequently, we 
have  increased  our  exposure  in this  region  over  the  last few  years,  in particular to  Japan, 
Australia,  Singapore  and  Korea.  Since  2010,  the  share  of  Asian  currencies  in  our  foreign 
exchange  reserves  has  almost  doubled,  from  just  under  6%  to  almost  12%.  Prior  to  the 
financial crisis, the SNB had less than CHF 5 billion  invested in Asian assets – and these 
investments were denominated exclusively in yen. Since 2010, we have been investing in the 
Australian and Singapore dollars, and since 2012, in the Korean won as well. At the end of 
2013, we had over CHF 50 billion invested in Asia, and of this, CHF 15 billion was invested in 
these three new currencies (left-hand side of slide 4).4 Today, 3.5% of the SNB’s total foreign 
exchange  reserves  are  allocated  to  these  currencies  (right-hand  side  of  slide  4).  We  see 
further potential in Asia as we move forward and it will not surprise you to hear that we see 
China playing an increasingly important role here. 
Investment quota for Chinese government bonds 
Why does China interest us? The size of the Chinese market is undoubtedly a key factor: 
central  government  has  outstanding  bonds  worth  approximately  USD  1,000  billion.5  This 
makes the onshore Chinese government bond market the fifth-largest in the world after the 
US,  the  euro  area,  Japan  and  the  UK  (left-hand  side  of  slide  5).  Over  and  above  the 
consideration of market size, investments in China are also attractive from the point of view 
of  our  security  criterion,  as  they  offer  additional  diversification  of  market,  credit  and 
concentration risks. 
As  regards  the  diversification  of  foreign  exchange  risks,  however,  China  offers  only  very 
limited potential for us, as the renminbi is pegged to the US dollar. Nonetheless, the renminbi 
has  been  allowed  to  appreciate  relatively  constantly  against  the  US  dollar  since  2005  and 
this  incremental  appreciation  has  had  a  positive  effect  on  onshore  Chinese  bond  yields  in 
francs.  In  Swiss  franc  terms,  investments  in  three  to  five-year  Chinese  government  bonds 
have, on average, yielded more than 5% per year since 2005; this is substantially higher than 
the yield available on other major government bond markets (right-hand side of slide 5). 
In addition to these financial market advantages, China has strong economic fundamentals. 
At  40%,  China’s  government  debt  ratio  is  much  lower  than  that  of  many  advanced 
economies.6  Furthermore,  the  credit  quality  of  Chinese  central  government  bonds  is  high 
compared to that of other emerging economies, as is reflected in the ratings. 
Foreign investors still enjoy only  very limited access to the onshore Chinese bond market, 
however,  as  the  renminbi  is  not  freely  convertible  and  capital  flows  are  still  subject  to 
controls. Notwithstanding this, the Chinese government has been working towards a gradual 
opening-up  of  its  domestic  capital  market  for  several  years  now.  As  part  of  this,  China’s 
central  bank,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  launched  a  so-called  Interbank  Market 
Programme  in  2010,  enabling  central  banks,  sovereign  wealth  funds  and  insurance 
companies to request an investment quota for the onshore Chinese interbank bond market 
from the PBC. Provided they do not exceed this quota, these entities may invest freely in the 
(onshore) Chinese government bond market. 
More  than  20  central  banks  –  including  those  of  France,  Austria,  Japan,  Australia  and 
Singapore  –  have  now  received  a  renminbi  investment  quota.  In  July  this  year,  the  SNB 
signed a renminbi investment quota agreement with the PBC. The SNB’s investment quota 
amounts to CNY 15 billion (in excess of CHF 2 billion). While this quota represents a very 
                                                
4  Swiss National Bank. 2013. 106th Annual Report. 
5  Measured against a standard market index. 
6 
IMF. 2014. Fiscal Monitor October 2014. Includes central and local government debt as well as government-
backed debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  small  proportion  of  our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  it  allows  the  SNB  to  gather  some 
experience of this market. 
We intend to make use of this quota in the foreseeable future. According to the agreement, 
the  SNB  is  authorised  to  exchange  currency  at  the  PBC  for  renminbi  up  to  a  maximum 
amount defined in the quota (slide 6). As in all global capital markets, bonds are traded over-
the-counter (OTC), in other words they are traded off-market via local investment banks or 
the PCB’s bureau in Shanghai. Approximately 90% of all bonds are traded on the interbank 
bond market, and the remaining 10% are traded on the exchange. The interbank market is 
regulated  by  the  PBC.  Bonds  issued  by  the  central  government,  local  governments  and 
quasi-government  banks  dominate  the  interbank  market,  while  corporate  bonds  play  a 
subordinate role. The SNB will only be investing in central government bonds – these make 
up around one-third of the interbank market – with maturities of up to 50 years. 
The role of gold in our foreign exchange reserves 
Let me now turn to an older – but no less topical – component of our currency reserves: gold. 
Since the foundation of the SNB over 100 years ago, gold has been an important part of our 
currency  reserves,  however  its  function  has  changed  significantly  over  time.  Until  1973, 
Switzerland was part of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates and the value of 
the Swiss franc was defined in grams of gold. Under this system, currency reserves – and 
thus also gold holdings – played an important role in monetary policy. The bulk of the SNB’s 
gold reserves were formed at this time. 
The move away from the system of fixed exchange rates enabled the SNB to structure its 
currency  reserves  more  and  more  independently  of  monetary  policy  requirements.  In  the 
1990s,  the  composition,  management  and  optimal  level  of  currency  reserves  were  the 
subject  of  intense  and  protracted  discussions  among  politicians  and  academics.  The  SNB 
was criticised for holding gold reserves that were in excess of what it needed for monetary 
policy and for the fact that they generated too little return. This debate finally resulted in a 
broad  consensus,  whereupon  the  SNB  reduced  its  gold  reserves  and  investment  policy 
considerations  became  increasingly  important  in  decisions  relating  to  the  remaining  gold 
holdings. 
This  brings  me  back  to  the  SNB’s  investment  criteria  mentioned  at  the  outset:  security, 
liquidity and return. Gold typically performs poorly when it comes to liquidity and return, and 
on  the  security  front,  gold  should  be  viewed  critically  in  the  context  of  investment  policy. 
Although a certain diversification effect can come into play between gold and equities, I am 
sure you are also aware that the gold price is even slightly more volatile than equity prices 
(slide 7). Just last year, this volatility made itself felt on our balance sheet. The collapse of 
the  gold  price  in  the  spring  of  2013  was  responsible  for  a  valuation  loss  of  approximately 
CHF 15 billion. 
The SNB has held 1,040 tonnes in gold reserves since 2008, putting Switzerland in seventh 
place internationally. At 125 grams per capita, Switzerland has the largest gold reserves per 
head of population of any country – triple those of Germany and quintuple those of the US 
(left-hand side of slide 8). The SNB’s gold reserves have remained constant in recent years 
and it has no plans to sell its holdings. The value of our gold reserves has thus moved in line 
with the gold price in recent years (right-hand side of slide 8). However, given the substantial 
increase  in  the  SNB’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  since  2009,  the  share  of  gold  as  a 
percentage of total currency reserves has indeed changed, recently falling to just below 8%. 
Now  let  us  turn  to  the  gold  initiative,  which  goes  to  the  vote  in  just  a  few  days.  The 
supporters of this initiative are demanding that the SNB hold at least 20% of its assets in gold 
and  at  the  same  time  requiring  a  ban  on  ever  selling  gold  again.  Moreover,  the  initiative 
demands  that  the  gold  must  be  stored  exclusively  in  Switzerland.  In  order  to  achieve  the 
share  of  20%,  the  SNB  would  have  to  almost  triple  its  gold  holdings  within  five  years.  In 
practice, given today’s balance sheet total and gold price, the SNB would have to purchase 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  around  CHF  70  billion  worth  of  gold  –  around  two-thirds  of  the  world’s  total  annual  gold 
production. 
The  SNB  considers  the  initiative  to  be  unnecessary  and  harmful.  Its  legal  mandate  is  to 
ensure price stability. In a system of flexible exchange rates, gold is no longer required for it 
to perform this function and the gold initiative is therefore unnecessary. Price stability and the 
stability  of  the  Swiss  franc  are  not  determined  by  the  share  of  gold  in  the  SNB’s  balance 
sheet, but by its monetary policy. It has achieved these goals more effectively than virtually 
any other central bank: average inflation has remained below 1% for the last 20 years, and 
never in the history of the SNB has there been such a sustained period of low and stable 
inflation. 
Prescriptions  on  the  share  of  gold  in  the  balance  sheet,  coupled  with  a  sales  ban,  would 
make it considerably more difficult for the SNB to fulfil its mandate in future. For this reason, 
the gold initiative is harmful. In order to pursue a stability-oriented monetary policy, the SNB 
needs to be able to supply the Swiss economy with Swiss franc liquidity quickly in periods of 
crisis. The SNB’s balance sheet expands when liquidity is increased. In the aftermath of a 
crisis, it is critical that this newly injected liquidity be reduced again, in order to prevent an 
undesirable rise in inflation. Scaling back liquidity, on the other hand, reduces the balance 
sheet total. Given that the initiative is calling for gold to make up at least 20% of the SNB’s 
assets, a temporary liquidity increase would require gold holdings to be increased, too. In a 
post-crisis scenario, the excess gold would have to be retained on the balance sheet for ever 
due to the sales ban, and the SNB would have to sell some of its foreign exchange reserves 
in  order  to  effect  a  liquidity  reduction.  Consequently,  this  prescription  regarding  the 
percentage of gold to be held, as well as the ban on sales, could ultimately lead to a situation 
in which the SNB’s assets consist almost entirely of gold, but in which it is unable to perform 
balance sheet reductions required for monetary policy. In the long term, the passing of the 
gold initiative could therefore threaten price stability in Switzerland. 
Even  with  regard  to  security,  the  demands  made  by  the  backers  of  the  initiative  are 
misguided. Insisting that the SNB hold a higher proportion of gold on its balance sheet even 
though  this  gold  cannot  be  deployed  in  an  emergency  is  counterintuitive.  In  such 
circumstances, the SNB’s gold would lose its significance as a currency reserve; the notion 
that gold should be held even though it cannot be utilised quickly and freely runs counter to 
the very raison d’être of currency reserves. We may even go so far as to say that gold which 
cannot  be  sold  in  a  crisis  no  longer  meets  the  definition  of  a  reserve  and  thus  offers  no 
security at all. 
While the gold initiative’s third demand – that all of the SNB’s gold holdings should be stored 
in Switzerland – may be unproblematic in monetary policy terms, this too runs counter to the 
notion  of  security.  Gold  is  stored  in  multiple  locations  for  reasons  of  risk  diversification,  in 
other words to improve security. The lion’s share of the SNB’s gold reserves (approximately 
70%)  is  already  stored  in  Switzerland  and  an  appropriate regional  diversification  serves  to 
enhance the SNB’s market access. 
Concluding remarks 
Please allow me to make a few closing remarks. Managing Switzerland’s substantial foreign 
exchange  reserves  in  the  country’s  best  interest  remains  our  key  investment  policy 
challenge.  New  markets  are  playing  an  important  role  here.  I  have  discussed  the  growing 
significance of Asia and explained the process by which we plan to be able to invest a small 
fraction of our foreign exchange reserves in China in the near future. Thanks to our branch 
office in Singapore, we  are optimally positioned to monitor developments and manage our 
investments in the Asia-Pacific region efficiently. 
Within  the  scope  of  its  mandate,  the  SNB  needs  a  certain  amount  of  latitude  in  order  to 
continue  fulfilling  its  monetary  and  investment  policy  objectives,  especially  given  that  the 
Swiss  monetary  policy  landscape  is  set  to  remain  challenging  in  the  foreseeable future.  A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  “yes” vote for the gold initiative would severely restrict our scope for action. It would therefore 
make  it  considerably  more  difficult  for  the  SNB  to  conduct  successful  monetary  policy 
operations in future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for the trust you have placed in the SNB in the past. We 
look forward to your continued support in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
