  Njuguna Ndung’u: Putting banking at the centre of the economy’s 
sustainable growth 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
opening of the KBA 3rd Annual Banking Research Conference, Nairobi, 25 September 2014. 
 The Chairman, KBA Governing Council; 
Members of the KBA Governing Council; 
Banks’ Chief Executive Officers; 
Distinguished participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my honour and pleasure to join you this morning at this very important Conference that 
focuses on the role of the banking sector in the economy’s growth. It is therefore my singular 
pleasure to be invited to open the KBA Third Annual Banking Research Conference and to 
make some remarks at its commencement. 
First and foremost, I would like to commend the KBA for its consistency in hosting the Annual 
Banking Research Conference. This is further evidence that the banking industry is keen on 
having its operations and strategic focus informed by analytical work. 
This  being  the  Third  Annual  Conference,  the  body  of  knowledge  that  the  process  has 
generated  is  without  a  doubt  going  to  be  beneficial  to  all  stakeholders.  Research  and  its 
output is a “public good”. The broader benefits arising from knowledge cannot be restricted to 
those  who  have  a  direct  interest  in  the  research.  Research  that  improves  the  policy 
environment benefits all and indeed the economy at large. 
This  year’s  Conference  theme  of  “Putting  banking  at  the  centre  of  the  economy’s 
sustainable growth” is an example of this point. 
Several  papers  focusing  on  finance  and  economic  growth  have  confirmed  the  causal 
relationship. It is on that basis that I consider this Conference’s theme on sustainability of this 
relationship to be inspiring, given that it provides an opportunity for deeper reflection taking 
us beyond the general finance – growth nexus. 
The Kenyan economy has an ambitious real output growth target of at least 10 percent to 
enable  the  realization  of  the  aspirations  of  Vision  2030.  The  high  and  sustained  growth 
targets will only be achieved through increased investment and increased productivity. The 
Banking industry must intermediate and provide the funding required for the investment but 
even more important is long-term finance with attractive terms. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The presentations lined up for this Conference give me confidence 
that we are embarking on a conversation that will lead to the consolidation of the gains to the 
economy from the dynamism of the banking industry. Let me make a quick reflection over the 
five areas around which the Conference presentations focus; 
• 
Firstly, increasing support for agriculture is important and in the right direction. This 
is because the agricultural sector – the leading contributor to the economy’s output, 
to direct and indirect employment, and to export earnings – does not attract as much 
bank credit as it requires. The importance will be supported by tangible solutions for 
financing agriculture. 
Secondly, sustainable development is a very important subject today. A market-led 
process that will culminate in the development and adoption of sustainable finance 
principles must be backed by research. Sustainability in this case must also look at 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     the investments supported by the banking sector and their outcomes to growth. This 
also looks at boom-bust cycles. 
Thirdly, the interactive dynamics of the banking industry and housing development is 
a further area that touches on both commercial and social interests of households. 
Facilitation of home ownership needs to be seen beyond mortgage financing, which 
is only a demand side remedy; there are a host of supply side constraints some of 
which are financial in nature while others are non-financial – both sets require critical 
examination.  But  more  important  are  the  macro-prudential  indicators  and  property 
boom we have seen. 
Fourthly,  a  credible  measure  that  tracks  the  changes  in  housing  prices  is  very 
important.  Our  mandate  at  the  Central  Bank,  particularly  as  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, of ensuring stability in the economic system necessitates that we look at 
all the key markets and track price evolution beyond inflation dynamics; the foreign 
exchange market is always on our radar, given that its policy management is under 
our purview; we are also able to track price evolution in the securities market. Given 
that instability could emerge from the housing market, making it imperative that we 
have a price tracking measure that can stand the test of scrutiny and therefore can 
be  relied  upon  to  identify  any  early  signs  of  volatility  from  that  segment  of  the 
economy that easily proliferates to other sectors, as has been proved internationally. 
It is gratifying therefore, that the KBA desires to have a housing price index that will 
fill this gap. We need to move away from the thinking of a bubble in the market and 
especially property prices driven on one hand by a supply constrained market, and 
on the other hand a transitioning demographic structure. 
Fifthly and finally: a revisit to the dynamics of credit demand for the private sector, 
its  drivers  and  whether  there  are  international  dimensions  that  influence  the 
domestic  credit  market  is  interesting.  This  is  an  area  that  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
finance-growth nexus. Beyond the policy interest of determining how credit affects 
aggregate  demand,  a  clear  understanding  of  what  motivates  the  private  sector  to 
seek bank credit enables the industry to react in a timely manner. And by identifying 
constraints, it can propose modalities for overcoming them. At the top in this agenda 
is to link it to investment. Is our investment constrained by credit? We need to know 
more. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The body of research work arising from the Conference’s theme will 
obviously not be definitive; but it will surely provide a good platform for reflection on the many 
ways through which the banking industry is readying itself towards further enhancing its role 
in the economy’s progress. There is also a possibility that ideas will emerge which have a 
quick  response  that  can  be  put  into  practice  in  the  short  run;  furthermore,  there  is  an 
opportunity to pick areas for further investigation. 
I am confident that the banking industry, that has remained stable on the back of the steady 
growth seen over the past decade, will continue to play an important role in supporting the 
various economic sectors through provision of credit. With an asset base of Ksh.2.70 trillion 
as  at  the  end  of  December  2013  compared to  Ksh.2.33  trillion  as  at  the  end  of  2012, the 
industry  is  clearly  maintaining  the  growth  path.  Similarly,  customer  deposits  grew  by  14 
percent in the period from Ksh.1.71 trillion to Ksh.1.94 trillion. The banking industry’s asset 
growth of 16 percent between 2012 and 2013 at a time when the economy’s real growth rate 
was less than 5 percent points to the possibility of the acceleration of the growth momentum 
emanating  from  finance.  That  growth  will  be  accelerated  once  the  overall  cost  of  doing 
business that is being addressed, declines. This will ensure that the underlying asset quality 
accompanying the growth in the banking industry remains good. 
As  a  country,  we  are  making  strides  in  ensuring  that  financial  inclusion  is  enhanced.  The 
FinAccess  2013  survey  results  revealed  that  Kenya’s  financial  inclusion  landscape  has 
undergone considerable improvement. The proportion of the adult population using different 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  forms of formal financial services was at 66.7 percent in 2013 compared to 26.4 percent in 
2006. This is a notable achievement. The proportion of the adult population totally excluded 
from  financial  services  has  declined  to  25.3  percent  in  2013  from  38.4  percent  in  2006. 
Similarly, the proportion of Kenyans accessing informal financial sources dropped from 35.2 
percent in 2006 to 7.8 percent in 2013. This is a reflection of the positive outcomes of policy 
initiatives by the Government and the Central Bank as well as the initiatives of the financial 
sector players and their innovations. 
There  is  scope  for  further  deepening  of  the  financial  sector,  and  especially  the  banking 
industry, and as a result, this will lead to further financial inclusion. Even with the industry’s 
assets looking impressive at the levels I highlighted earlier, they still remain below 50 percent 
of our GDP. Economies that have achieved higher levels of development, accompanied by 
high levels of financial inclusion have a higher banking assets to GDP ratio, with some well 
over 100 percent. With the level of innovation and dynamism in our banking space, there is 
no reason why we cannot aspire to be like those economies and grow our assets with strong 
banks and a strong policy drive to financial inclusion for financial development. 
I  see  research  being  at  the  centre  of  such  growth.  As  a  researcher  myself,  I  know  that 
collaboration  will  remain  core.  I  commend  the  KBA  for  seeking  collaboration  with  other 
institutions, among them the Central Bank, in its research efforts. I see that collaboration in 
this research Conference manifested in the diversity of paper authorship. 
I look forward to seeing the Conference papers reviewed and put in the public domain so that 
the  intended  purpose  of  promoting  an  idea-based  engagement  is  realized  as  well  as 
development based on a certainty policy path. 
With  those remarks,  I declare  this  Conference officially  open,  and  wish  all  the  participants 
fruitful engagements over the next two days. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
