Stephen S Poloz: The legacy of the financial crisis – what we know, and 
what we don’t 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Council 
for Public-Private Partnerships (CCPPP), Toronto, Ontario, 3 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted to be here with you today, thank you. I applaud the Council’s efforts to foster 
stronger  partnerships  between  the  public  and  private  sectors  in  the  development  of 
infrastructure, which is absolutely critical to our economic future. 
I’ll speak today from the perspective of a monetary policy-maker, whose mandate also is to 
contribute to the economic and financial well-being of Canadians. I’d like to talk about two 
subjects today: what we know, and what we don’t know. 
I’m sure it won’t be a surprise that the first part will be shorter than the second part. My goal 
is to help you understand better the risks that we face. If I do my job well, I’ll leave you with a 
sense of how the Bank weighs the known and the unknown when setting monetary policy. 
What we do know 
Let’s start with what we do know about our current situation. Most of us acknowledge that it 
all  began  with  a  period  of  exceptionally  strong  global  economic  growth  in  the  mid-2000s, 
some creative financial engineering, an explosion of leverage and a speculative bubble that 
touched a lot of markets. The bubble burst when the U.S. housing market rolled over and 
some significant financial vulnerabilities were laid bare. 
The ensuing global financial crisis in the fall of 2008 was truly dire. Monetary policy and fiscal 
policy were quick to respond around the world, with collective G-7 and G-20 announcements 
on Thanksgiving weekend that year. Since then, we’ve seen policy rates near zero in several 
countries  and  an  unprecedented  use  of  unconventional  monetary  policy, 
including 
quantitative easing. 
We will never know how bad things would have been without that aggressive, coordinated 
policy response. But as a student of economic history, I can say that all the ingredients of a 
second Great Depression were present. We’ve managed to avoid that extreme scenario, but 
the damage wrought by the Great Recession has been brutal nonetheless. By the end of last 
year, the loss to global output from the crisis was roughly US$10 trillion, which is close to 15 
per cent of global GDP. Today, there are over 60 million fewer jobs around the world than 
had the crisis not occurred. 
Still,  memories  of  that  near-disaster  are  fading,  and  today  people  are  wondering  why  our 
policies  have  so  far  failed  to  foster  a  true  global  recovery,  one  that  is  natural  and  self-
sustaining. 
The  G-20  has  acknowledged  this  disappointing  growth  outlook,  and  has  set  out  a  plan  to 
collectively boost global GDP by 2 per cent over the next five years. Success will hinge on 
such  policy  actions  as  reforms  to  improve  the  functioning  of  labour  markets,  international 
trade  liberalization  and  investment  in  infrastructure  –  your  favourite  area  –  just  to  name  a 
few. These things are clearly worth doing, and that boost to global GDP will be worth having. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What we don’t know 
Even  so,  when  we  see  a  world  economy  that  is  growing  this  slowly,  despite  the  fact  that 
interest rates are at historic lows, it is natural to ask some pretty basic questions. So, let’s 
turn now to what we don’t know. 
Let  me  focus  on  three  questions  that  people  have  been  asking  me  of  late.  First,  what  is 
preventing  a  full-fledged  global  economic  recovery?  Second,  will  there  be  any  permanent 
damage to the economy due to the crisis and its aftermath? And third, by trying so hard to 
improve our situation, are policymakers simply sowing the seeds of the next financial crisis? 
What is preventing a full-fledged economic recovery? 
If interest rates are at zero or nearly zero, it follows that something is holding the economy 
back. Think of paddling a kayak against a strong headwind – it can take a lot of effort just to 
hold your position, let alone make real progress. 
It  is  widely  agreed  that  the  conditions  that  led  to  the  financial  crisis  included  taking  on 
excessive leverage. As individuals and financial institutions have attempted to deleverage in 
the wake of the crisis, economic growth has been held back. It is difficult to say when the 
deleveraging process will be complete, at least at the global level. 
To illustrate, in the United States, private sector deleveraging was painful and swift as people 
cut back on debt and walked away from their over-mortgaged, devalued houses. In Europe, 
in contrast, this process is less well advanced, while in Canada, households continue to add 
to their debt loads. 
Another  headwind  has  come  from  governments,  which  responded  to  the  global  recession 
with additional fiscal stimulus. As the situation stabilizes, though, it is natural for governments 
to aim to bring their fiscal situation back into balance. This reversal of fiscal stimulus creates 
a  headwind  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  masking  the  private  sector  recovery  that  is 
happening underneath. Again, the status of this headwind varies from country to country, but 
it is clearly in play at the global level. 
The  third,  and  probably  the  most  important,  headwind  is  lingering  uncertainty  about  the 
future,  whether  from  geopolitical  developments,  market  volatility  or  just  the  trauma  that 
companies have been through. Some people look at companies with strong balance sheets 
and wonder why they are not investing. Some have suggested that we have too much risk 
taking in financial markets, but not enough risk taking in the real economy. 
But  that’s  not  what  we’re  hearing  from  the  companies  we  talk  to  here  in  Canada.  In  this 
uncertain  economic  climate,  companies  actually  feel  like  they  are  taking  a  lot  of  risk.  And 
until  the  recovery  is  more  certain,  especially  in  export  demand, for many,  it  is  too  risky  to 
expand their businesses. 
What  that  seems  to  mean  is  that  the  expected  risk-adjusted  rate  of  return  on  a  new 
investment  can  appear  low  to  a  company,  and  we  can  settle  into  a  temporary  low-
confidence/low-investment  equilibrium,  even  when  borrowing  costs  are  extraordinarily  low, 
until uncertainty subsides and confidence returns. 
It  seems  to  me  that  we  must  allow  for  the  possibility  that  the  combined  effects  of 
deleveraging,  fiscal  normalization  and  lingering  uncertainty  will  continue  to  restrain  global 
economic  growth  for  a  prolonged  period.  We  are  confident  that  these  headwinds  will 
dissipate in time, but in the meantime interest rates will remain lower than in the past in order 
to work against those forces. 
Will some of the post-crisis economic damage be permanent? 
Still, it is important to acknowledge that global economic growth is simply not heading back to 
the high rates we saw before the financial crisis. For one thing, those rates were boosted by 
unsustainable  leverage. For  another,  we  have  entered the retirement  window  for the  post-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
war baby boomers, and that means that global economic capacity is moderating as growth in 
the workforce slows. 
In  Canada, for  instance,  potential  economic growth  has  drifted  down  to  around  2  per  cent 
and will remain there for the next few years. Globally, potential growth is probably down to 
around 3 to 3 1/2 per cent. Both figures are lower than before the crisis. 
But  this  modest  deceleration  in  global  growth  potential  is  a  natural  consequence  of 
demographics, not the product of the crisis. The more important question is whether any of 
the problems we see today will become permanent. This question is relevant at the global 
level, but let me illustrate it with direct reference to our own situation here in Canada. 
Historically,  a  typical  recession/recovery  cycle  has  taken  a  couple  of  years  to  complete. 
During the recession – let’s say it originates with a drop in export demand – companies cut 
back production, lay off workers, and investment and consumption spending fall. Monetary 
and  fiscal  policies  respond,  exports  recover,  companies  rehire  their  workers  and  move 
production back to normal. 
But this cycle has not been a typical one. The downturn was deep and has proved to be long 
lasting. Canada’s export sector not only cut back on production and laid off workers, many 
companies restructured, many simply disappeared. 
Recent Bank of Canada research on exporters sifted through more than 2,000 categories of 
underperforming,  non-energy  exports.  We  found  that  the  value  of  exports  from  about  a 
quarter of them has fallen by more than 75 per cent since the year 2000. Had the exports of 
these products instead risen in line with foreign demand, they would have contributed about 
$30 billion in additional exports last year. By correlating these findings with media reports, we 
found that many were affected by factory closures or other restructurings. 
Obviously, not all of this can be blamed on the financial crisis and the ensuing downturn, but 
for  companies  that  were  already  struggling  with  competitiveness,  the  crisis  surely 
accelerated things. The point is, when companies downsize, relocate or close their doors, the 
effects  on  the  economy  are  permanent.  Those  specific  lost  exports  will  not  recover  – 
something else is more likely to take their place, but that requires that surviving companies 
expand, or new exporting companies be created. And both such processes are bound to be 
much slower than in the typical recession/recovery scenario. 
A  destructive  downturn  also  creates  long-lasting  effects  in  our  labour  market,  since  the 
associated jobs are lost permanently. We have recovered well from the employment losses 
during the downturn, but our labour market has not yet returned fully to normal. 
Indeed, labour conditions in Canada point to material slack in the economy. We have been 
creating jobs at a trend rate of less than 1 per cent, well below what one would expect from 
an  economy  that  is  recovering.  Furthermore,  much  of  the  recent  employment  growth  has 
been  part  time.  There  are  over  900,000  people  in  Canada  who  are  working  part  time  but 
would prefer to be in full-time positions, and total hours worked are barely growing at all. 
And  then  there  are  the  young  people  who  are  out  of  work,  underemployed  or  trying  to 
improve their job prospects by extending their education. We estimate that there are around 
200,000 of these people, and I bet almost everyone in this room knows at least one family 
with  adult  children  living  in  the  basement.  I’m  pretty  sure  these  kids  have  not  taken  early 
retirement. 
The  good  news  is  that  these  destructive  effects  should  be  reversible  over  time.  Once  we 
have seen a sustained increase in export demand, uncertainty about the future will diminish 
and firms will respond. Our research indicates that many of the export sectors that we expect 
to lead the expansion still have some excess capacity to meet higher demand. This is one 
reason why our productivity growth has picked up recently – firms are responding with what 
they  have,  and  job  creation  has  remained  modest.  But  once  those  capacity  limits  are 
reached, exporting firms will begin to rebuild their production capacity with new investments 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  job  creation  will  pick  up.  Those  same  conditions  will  be  ideal  for  fostering  new  firm 
creation, and as we all know, new companies create a disproportionate share of new jobs. 
The  implication  is  clear:  a  sustained  expansion  in  our  exports  not  only  will  represent  new 
demand,  it  will  ignite  the  rebuilding  phase  of  our  business  cycle,  which  will  create  new 
supply.  This  virtuous  cycle  continues  until  the  excess  capacity  in  the  labour  market  is 
reabsorbed. 
By our estimation, it will take around two years for us to use up our excess capacity, at which 
point inflation will be sustainably at our target. In the meantime, continued monetary stimulus 
is  needed  to  keep  the  process  in  motion,  and  if  the  headwinds  discussed  earlier  persist, 
continued policy stimulus may still be needed to offset them even after our excess capacity 
has been absorbed. 
Are we simply sowing the seeds of the next financial crisis? 
To summarize to this point, the global headwinds that are preventing a return to natural, self-
sustaining growth remain considerable, and some of the damage already experienced in our 
economy will be long lasting. On the positive side, though, our conservative assessment is 
that global momentum is building, Canada is beginning to benefit, and with the assistance of 
continuing monetary stimulus, we can return to natural growth at full capacity over the next 
two years. 
This leads to my third question: Is all of this monetary stimulus simply sowing the seeds of 
the next financial crisis? 
The  side  effects  of  aggressive  and  prolonged  monetary  stimulus  are  well  known  –  it 
promotes excessive risk-taking in financial markets and excessive borrowing by individuals. 
These  are  the  very  ingredients  that  led  to  the  2008  financial  crisis  in  the  first  place. 
Accordingly, this question merits a serious response. 
To begin, we knew back in 2008 that stimulative monetary policies would encourage people 
to borrow more to buy more homes and cars. That is why we do it – to buffer the downturn in 
the economy. This happens in every business cycle, not just this one. What distinguishes this 
cycle  is  its  duration,  which  is  leading  to  a  buildup  of  financial  stability  risks  over  time. We 
study these risks in detail in our Financial System Review, which is published twice a year. 
The next issue will be released on 10 December. 
Importantly, the world has changed since 2008. A key commitment of the G-20 in 2008 was 
to strengthen the global financial system. That work is very well advanced, and the system is 
far better capitalized and more resilient today. 
Furthermore, there have been a variety of macroprudential policy changes that have made 
the system safer. Here in Canada, for example, we have strengthened the rules around the 
mortgage  market  in  several  ways.  Those  changes,  combined  with  very  high-quality 
underwriting  even  before  those  changes  were  made,  make  the  Canadian  situation  very 
different from what we saw in the United States just before the crisis. 
That being said, some critics would still say that we are running the risk of creating the next 
financial crisis through our actions. I might ask in response: What is it you would have us do, 
then? 
As the central bank, we only have one real channel of influence, which is to set short-term 
interest  rates.  Right  now,  we  are  providing  monetary  stimulus  sufficient  to  bring  inflation 
sustainably  to  our  target  within  a  reasonable  time  frame,  around  two  years  from  now.  To 
argue that we should instead set interest rates in a way that reduces financial stability risks, 
then, is clearly a call for higher interest rates. 
Let’s walk through a thought experiment together. What would our world look like today if, 
instead of keeping interest rates low to stimulate the economy, both Canada and the United 
States  had  moved  their  policy  rates  back  up  to  neutral  at  the  beginning  of  2011?  We 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
estimate that the neutral rate of interest today is between 3 and 4 per cent for Canada, and 
use  a  similar  number for  the  United  States,  so our  thought  experiment is  to  raise  rates to 
about 3 1/2 per cent in both countries. 
Such  a  move  would  of  course  allow  those  headwinds  we  talked  about  earlier  to  blow  us 
backwards.  We  estimate  that,  under  this  hypothetical  scenario  the  output  gap  in  Canada 
would have been around 5 1/2 per cent today, instead of around 1 per cent. Unemployment 
would have been around 2 percentage points higher than it is today, and core inflation would 
be running somewhere between 0 and 1 per cent. 
Most of the impact would be felt in reduced housing construction and renovation and auto 
production, as these were the sectors that responded to the policies put in place after the 
crisis. Moreover, these estimates do not capture the range of confidence effects that would 
permeate the rest of the economy under such a difficult scenario, so the story could even be 
worse. 
From this monetary policy-maker’s perspective, that’s an unattractive alternative. Our primary 
job  is  to  pursue  our  2  per  cent  inflation  target,  with  a  degree  of  flexibility  around  the  time 
horizon  of  its  achievement;  that  flexibility  permits  the  Bank  to  give  due  consideration  to 
financial stability risks, provided they do not threaten macroeconomic performance. 
Currently,  inflation  is  close  to  target,  but  some  of  its  strength  is  due  to  temporary  factors, 
such  as  increases  in  prices  for  meat,  electricity  and  telecommunications,  and  the  pass-
through of past exchange rate depreciation. Unless the output gap closes as expected over 
the  next  two  years,  inflation  will  drift  back  down  significantly  below  2  per  cent  as  the 
temporary effects of these factors wear off. 
Meanwhile, financial stability risks are clearly on our radar. In particular, housing activity  is 
showing renewed momentum and consumer debt levels are high, so household imbalances 
appear to be edging higher. But it is our judgment that our policy of aiming to close the output 
gap  and  ensuring  inflation  remains  on  target  will  be  consistent  with  an  eventual  easing  in 
those  household  imbalances.  Accordingly,  we  judge  that  the  overall  risks  of  attaining  our 
inflation target over a reasonable time frame fall into the zone of balance at this time. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I have put a lot of emphasis today on the things we don’t know. But it is 
important to underscore that we have a wide range of tools, some of them very sophisticated 
and others as simple as having conversations with Canadian companies, to help us reach 
judgments on those issues. 
The  Bank’s  approach  to  policy  is  evolving  in  light  of  these  developments. We  have  made 
some major advances in our thinking in the past year, and in the transparency with which we 
present  these  issues  to  you.  Many  of  the  key  variables  that  are  essential  to  the  policy 
decision  –  measures  of  capacity,  the  neutral  rate  of  interest,  our  outlook  for  growth  and 
inflation, and so on – are now conveyed in ranges. These elements of uncertainty are being 
explicitly incorporated into our decision making. 
All  of  this  demands  that  we  think  of  monetary  policy  as  an  exercise  in  risk  management. 
Although  we  regard  the  risks  around  attaining  our  inflation  target  over  a  reasonable  time 
frame to be balanced, as policy-makers, we acknowledge that, in the current situation, the 
consequences  of  an  upside  risk  would  be  more  manageable than those  associated  with  a 
downside risk. If this makes central bankers seem overly preoccupied with downside risks, 
and seem gloomy to you, then take heart – we are just doing our job. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
