  Rundheersing Bheenick: A new digital ecosystem for banking? 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the opening of 
a new branch of AfrAsia Bank, Ebène, 24 October. 
 It gives me great pleasure to address you this evening on the opening of this avant-garde 
branch of AfrAsia in Ebène. It is not quite branch-less banking. But it is nothing like any other 
bank branch in the country. It is a denizen of the new digital ecosystem for banking whose 
birth pangs we are witnessing. 
AfrAsia  was  the  first  bank  that  I  licensed  on  taking  office  in  2007.  In  my  address,  at  the 
inauguration  of  the  bank,  when  they  unveiled  their  logo,  with  the  taunting  tagline  “Bank 
Different”, I had observed: 
…  your  business  model  is  your  business  and  the  business  of  your  directors, 
your Chief Executive and your shareholders. It’s up to you to ensure that you 
are profitable. “Bank Different”, yes, but “Bank Prudent” as well. “Bank Prudent, 
Always!” is what I say. 
In  less  than  eight  years,  AfrAsia  has  turned  into  a  force  to  reckon  with,  with  assets  worth 
Rs50 billion. It has extended its footprint beyond our borders. On the way, it has garnered a 
rich harvest of accolades, both locally and internationally. 
It  is  fitting,  therefore,  that  AfrAsia  should  be  revolutionising  the  staid  world  of  domestic 
branch-banking, with this modern and digitalised branch, the first one of its kind in Mauritius 
to be using such state-of-the-art technology. It boasts pioneering digital features, which they 
have dubbed the three I’s – the I-Wall, the I-Table and the I-Display. The thought occurred to 
me that they have perhaps overlooked the fourth I, I-Location, I for Ideal, to make it the Ideal 
Location. Indeed, Ebène, also known as our Cybercity, is the right pick for such a pioneering 
branch. It is ideally located amidst the highest concentration of tech-savvy population in the 
country. These digital natives will no doubt push AfrAsia to go ever deeper into the world of 
digital banking. 
So  congratulations  to  you,  the  management  team  of  AfrAsia,  for  this  innovative  move!  I 
secretly nurse the hope that where AfrAsia leads today, others will follow, fast on their heels, 
keen to compete away any momentary advantage resulting from this move. 
Age of digitalisation 
Banking is in a state of flux. This has little or nothing to do with the financial crisis that has 
rocked the industry and put both banks and regulators on the firing line. It is the result of the 
continuing digital revolution, building successively on the transistor, the microchip, faster and 
more powerful computers, broadband connectivity, cloud computing, smartphones and other 
communication devices. The media and entertainment industries have borne the brunt of the 
digital revolution so far. It may now be the turn of the banking and payments sector to benefit 
from  a  similar  radical  transformation.  Paul  Volcker,  former  Chairman  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve, once said that the last truly great financial innovation was the invention of the ATM: 
“It really helps people, it’s useful.” What would he say about what we are unveiling today? 
This  goes  beyond  cash  and  payment  transactions  of  the  ATM,  and  transforms  the  entire 
banking experience. 
Conditions are certainly ripe for such a transformation here in Mauritius. With a mobile phone 
penetration rate of 121%, of which 35 to 40% are smartphones, mobile banking is set to lead 
the way and take us to the Brave New World of digital banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Customer behaviour and expectations 
What is driving this transformation in the delivery of banking services? Pressure to lower the 
costs  of  financial  intermediation  is  obviously  a  powerful  driver.  Changing  consumer 
behaviour  and  higher, more  demanding,  expectations  are  even  stronger  push  factors.  The 
biggest  driver  is,  of  course,  technology.  The  digital  ecosystem,  now  in  the  making,  can 
disrupt – and even dislocate – myriad activities, traditionally dominated by banks. 
How are banks responding to this? 
The banking industry finds itself in the delicate position of the proverbial cat on the hot tin 
roof. It stands on a “burning platform”, red-hot with technological innovation, and attracting 
intense competition from mobile operators, internet companies, and many others occupying 
adjoining space. Bankers must not only defend their territory but also need to venture out to 
take on their nimble challengers. Their long-term survival depends on how well they respond 
to the growing expectations of consumers. As consumers become more confident in the use 
of the full range of current digital banking offerings, banks must be constantly on the lookout 
to offer products more tailored to individual needs. In the process, banks need to re-engineer 
outdated approaches and procedures: they must re-invent themselves to adapt to the new 
digital ecosystem. 
If  banks  are  to  remain as  the core  of  financial  intermediation,  they  must  retain  customers, 
now  increasingly  susceptible  to  be  poached  away  by  non-banks  offering  cheaper,  more 
convenient services. To do so, they must move with the times. This was very much at the 
back of my mind when we empanelled a Task Force to examine the terms and conditions in 
banking  contracts  in  response  to  growing  customer  complaints.  A  report  containing  100 
recommendations  for  improving  the  bank-customer  relationship  is  currently  under  public 
consultation. 
While the need for a fair and inclusive banking sector is the raison d’être of this report, we 
also want to drive home the point that the long-term survival of banks rests on the extent to 
which they are able to place the customer at the centre of their business. Banks must work 
with their customers, not against them, and look for win-win outcomes. This is the “burning 
platform”  I  mentioned  earlier  which  pits  traditional  banks  against  new  entrants  in  financial 
services,  offering  peer-to-peer  lending,  crowd-funding,  and  cheap  settlement  in  crypto-
currencies, amongst others. 
Innovation is key. It will emerge as the single most important factor driving sustainable top- 
and bottom-line growth in banking. Innovation is not just the provision of new products or the 
creation of a new customer experience. It goes beyond this. It implies doing things differently 
right  across  the  entire  business  model.  Archaic  structures  need  to  be  dismantled,  and  old 
mindsets discarded, to create a new, nurturing environment. Consolidated IT platforms will 
provide the launch pad for new successive waves of change. 
Digital  banking  will  force-feed  change  in  back-office  procedures,  payment  and  clearing 
processes,  and  bank  documentation.  One  example  among  many 
finance 
documentation  which  is  changing  very  rapidly  to  adapt  to  the  world  of  e-commerce  and 
e-tailing. 
trade 
is 
Implications for the regulator 
What  about  the  regulator  in  all  this  ferment  of  change  going  on  all  around  us?  The  Bank 
could  hardly  stand  by  as  a  spectator.  We  have  been  preparing  for  transition  to  a  new 
business era. We are rejuvenating our staff, renewing and updating our skills set, and rolling 
out  new  rules  and  regulations.  We  have  inducted  a  Director  of  Technology  in  the  highest 
echelons  of  the  Bank.  Coping  with  the  “Bank  Different”  credo  of  AfrAsia  has  itself  been  a 
learning experience for the Bank! We must continue on this path, enhance our supervisory 
agility, and step up our processes to remain effective in our oversight functions. Wherever 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  possible, the Bank must catalyse change in our jurisdiction. Let me mention three such Bank-
driven catalysts. 
First, the Cheque Truncation System. In July 2011, we transformed the clearing of cheques 
with the introduction of the Cheque Truncation System (CTS). This did away with the manual 
processing  of  cheques  that  had  been  going  on  for  more  than  44  years.  The  physical 
exchange  of  cheques  was  eliminated  and  replaced  by  their  digital  image,  transmitted 
electronically by the presenting bank to the paying bank through the Clearing House at the 
Bank.  A  daily  volume  of  20,000  cheques  for  a  value  slightly  more  than  Rs1  billion  goes 
through the CTS. It has reduced processing time and brings efficiency in the entire banking 
system. 
Second,  the  XBRL  project.  XBRL  –  or  the  Extensible  Business  Reporting  Language  −  will 
completely transform the entire data chain from collection, management, to processing, with 
powerful  analytics  as  an  added  advantage.  The  Bank  expects  the  project  to  be 
commissioned by next year. It provides for an advanced online reporting platform for banks, 
as well as a data warehouse, and a Business Intelligence platform for the central bank. The 
new system will bring efficiency gains in data processing and analysis, and timely availability 
of information which can be expected to improve policy formulation and decision-making. No 
wonder, therefore, that our fellow regulator, the Financial Services Commission, our fellow 
data gatherer, Statistics Mauritius, and the Registrar of Companies are all showing a keen 
interest  in  XBRL.  The  benefits  are  by  no  means  limited  to  the  providers  of  banking  and 
financial  services  and  their  regulators.  Customers  also  stand  to  gain.  ING,  a  Dutch  bank, 
announced last week that borrowers filing loan applications in XBRL will receive a reduction 
in costs. We are paving the way for similar initiatives in Mauritius. 
Third, the National Payment Switch. This is yet another transformative project which we have 
under  way.  It  is  slated  to  become  a  key  element  of  our  national  payments  infrastructure, 
serving  as  a  sound,  low-cost  platform  for  future  e-payments.  It  will  enable  us  to  handle 
domestic ATM and POS transactions without the extra charges now incurred as processing 
is done through card networks. Once the National Switch is in place, our payment system 
infrastructure can stand comparison with the best in the world. 
Bank different, but bank prudent, always 
These three projects show that the Central Bank is also moving rapidly to harness the power 
of  new  technology.  We  are  working  closely  with  our  commercial  banks  and  the  Mauritius 
Bankers  Association  to  ensure  that  these  potentially  disruptive  projects  proceed  smoothly. 
AfrAsia is now stealing a march over its local peers. 
I had urged AfrAsia, at the launching ceremony of the bank, seven years ago, “Bank Prudent, 
Always!” These words of caution ring even truer today, in the aftermath of a little accident 
AfrAsia has had recently in Zimbabwe. Domestic depositors’ money was never at risk. The 
Central Bank had taken extra pains to ensure that “ringfencing” was in place before we gave 
our green light to this overseas foray. And, just to make assurance doubly-sure, we had also 
insisted  on,  and  secured,  a  capital  buffer  –  the  kind  of  approach  that  will  become  more 
common  once  Basel  III  kicks  in.  I  note  that  the  Zimbabwe  issue  is  being  adequately 
addressed, in consultation with the host regulator. On looking back on the AfrAsia/Zimbabwe 
problem, one can wonder how the Central Bank could have been so pre-scient … but were 
we really pre-scient? I would like to believe it was more a case of prudence, not pre-science. 
The Bank practices what it exhorts its regulatees to do: “Bank Prudent, Always.” 
I acknowledge that you at AfrAsia bank differently. The evolution of your off-balance sheet 
business is very telling – it does show that your appetite for risk is different. There is nothing 
wrong  with  that.  But,  shareholders,  directors,  and  executives  of  AfrAsia  should  always 
remember that their bank does not operate on a stand-alone basis, that it is one of several 
players,  that  it  is  part  of  a  system,  and  that  any  laxity  can  spread  contagion  and  inflict 
reputational damage to the jurisdiction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Our  relationship  with  AfrAsia  has  often  been  marked  by  tension,  occasionally  by  mutual 
incomprehension, but I know that you never doubted our motivation. You learnt to work with 
a regulator which you found intrusive at times. We at the Bank had to learn to work with a 
bank that was constantly pushing in new directions – and in the process, pushing my Bank 
inspectors beyond their comfort zone. But it has been worth it. 
Starting from a standing position, your bank has determinedly made its way up. Your growth 
has been remarkable. Over the six-year period to December 2013, your assets have risen 
35 times, your deposits 38 times, and your loan book more than 40 times. We shall soon be 
opening the club of DSIB’s – Domestic Systemically Important Banks. In July last, we issued 
the conditions of membership by way of a guideline. Your explosive growth would appear to 
qualify  you  for  membership  of  this  exclusive  club.  You  will  then  be  held  to  even  higher 
standards  of  behaviour  and  compliance.  This  is  a  matter  that  we  shall  be  discussing  with 
your management and your board of directors in the coming months. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. The banking industry is in transition. Banking and financial services can no 
longer be conducted according to a model where customers are the ones who have to adapt 
to the banking products on offer. The shoe is on the other foot: it is the product which must 
be designed around the customer. 
We  are  in  a  futuristic  setting.  AfrAsia’s  new  branch,  with  its  pioneering  digital  features, 
promises  what  is,  for  now,  the  ultimate  client  experience.  The  customer  has  access  to  a 
range  of  information  on  markets  and  rates  at  his  finger  tips,  and  he  can  conduct  banking 
transactions by a simple click of the mouse, or a tap of his finger on the smart screen. 
As we look around us this evening, we are left wondering what the banking landscape of the 
future will look like? Will there be fewer branches? Will they be fully digital? How do we retain 
the  personal  touch?  We  cannot  halt  the  march  of  technology  and  its  impact  on  so  many 
areas of human activity. In banking, are we looking at a branchless, paperless, contactless 
banking? How distant is the prospect of a cashless society? Such questions, I am sure, must 
be  exercising  the  minds  of  many  bankers,  their  technology  providers,  and  their  potential 
competitors. What we are witnessing today is the strategic orientation of one bank which is 
already projecting itself in the future. 
I  congratulate  the  management  and  board  of  AfrAsia  for  undertaking  this  first  mini- 
transformation which will take it nearer to a more digitalised bank. I wish you all the best as 
you branch out in this new direction. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
