  Joanne Kellermann: Welcoming speech at the IAIS Conference 2014 
Welcoming speech by Ms Joanne Kellermann, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, 
at  the  21st  Annual  Conference  of  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors 
(IAIS), Amsterdam, 23 October 2014. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
• 
I  hope  you  all  had  an  enjoyable  evening  last  night.  For  those  who  arrived  this 
morning,  welcome  to  Amsterdam  and  to this  year’s  IAIS  Conference. My  name  is 
Joanne Kellermann and I have the honour of representing De Nederlandsche Bank 
or  DNB  and  welcoming  you  as  host  to  our  beautiful  city.  The  governor  of  DNB, 
Mr. Knot, regrets that he is unable to be here today to welcome you. However, he’ll 
be able to attend the gala dinner on Friday. 
Amsterdam  has  played  a  key  role  in  the  cultural,  nautical,  financial  and  trading 
history of the Netherlands. In the 17th Century, the Dutch Golden Age, ships set sail 
from Amsterdam to trade across the globe. This boosted the economy of what was 
then known as the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands. Amsterdam became 
the trade and financial hub of the Netherlands and – as the Dutch like to believe – 
the trade center of the world. 
Insurance has a longstanding connection with maritime affairs and it is therefore no 
coincidence that the setting for the Gala Dinner tomorrow evening and sponsored by 
the Dutch Association of Insurers, will take place at the National Maritime Museum. 
There you will have a chance to learn more about our country’s intense relationship 
with the seas. 
Two hundred years ago this year, King William the First founded DNB. At that time 
DNB  was  the  first  truly  national  credit  institution  incorporated  to  boost  the  ailing 
Dutch  economy.  Today,  DNB  is  a  central  bank,  part  of  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks  and  member  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  as  well  as  the 
prudential supervisor of the pension and insurance sector of the Netherlands. 
The IAIS, too, is celebrating an anniversary – it was founded 20 years ago. To mark 
this event, there will be special ceremony during the last session today. I believe the 
IAIS  has  put  together  an  excellent  and  varied  programme  that  will  inform  and 
inspire. The six panels of this conference bring together perspectives on the past, 
present and future of the insurance industry. Allow me to look briefly into that past 
and glimpse into the future. Insurance is a dangerous game; risk being the industry’s 
business  model.  Ever  since  the  merchants  in  Edward  Lloyd’s  coffeehouse  began 
covering  maritime  risks,  the  industry  has  helped  others  absorb  the  effects  of 
damaging events.  
In doing so insurers have helped people progress and businesses boom. Of course, 
as we at DNB know all too well: Those who deal within an industry based on trust 
and reliability must themselves show outstanding behavior. In other words: Insurers 
must adhere to the highest of principles. 
And luckily many of them do and more than that! I can give you several impressive 
examples  of  insurers  stepping  in  to  help  rebuild  and  reimburse  damages,  even 
beyond what was promised. 
Take  for  instance  a  Lloyd’s  member  named  Cuthbert  Heath:  in  1906  a  massive 
earthquake destroyed much of San Francisco.  
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
          2 
  Heath  insisted  on  paying  not  just  for  earthquake  damage  but  also  for  what  was 
destroyed  by  the  fires  that  raged  thereafter  for  three  days.  He  instructed  his  San 
Franciscan  agent  to  pay  all  policyholders  in  full,  irrespective  of  the  terms  of  their 
policies. The agent followed his orders and the insured were promptly paid. 
More recently and closer to our home: just days after the tragic event of the downing 
of flight MH17 in July of this year – in which 298 passengers lost their lives, 198 of 
whom were Dutch citizens – Dutch Insurers collectively announced they would pay 
out all damages to policyholders, even if certain terms of their policies would prohibit 
this. 
And to give you a few more examples of the industry helping people to get back on 
their feet: 
– 
– 
It paid out damages after cyclone Sandy flooded large  parts of New York City;  
It  paid  policyholder  claims  when  floods  and  bushfires  destroyed  lives  and 
properties in Australia;  
and it helped people and businesses in Japan recover  from the destruction 
caused by the 2011 tsunami. 
 In  doing  so  in  all  of  these  cases,  the  industry  helped  those  in  need  and  also 
cemented its reputation as a solid and reliable industry. This promptness to deliver 
gives people the means to carry on and businesses the confidence to start over. 
As for the future, it will be interesting to see how the insurance industry deals with 
new  and  emerging  risks  such  as  climate  change,  but  also  cyber-crime  and 
reputational damage. Or how the advent of selfdriving cars will affect their business 
model. 
IAIS’s role in in this cannot be overstated, as it sets standards for supervisors for the 
development and maintenance of fair, solid and safe insurance markets. 
I  am  confident  that  this  conference  will  provide  excellent  platforms  for  insurers, 
regulators and supervisors to exchange ideas on these subjects and more, and to 
enhance our understanding of the key issues of the day. 
This  morning  His  Excellency  Jeroen  Dijsselbloem,  the  Minister  of  Finance  of  the 
Netherlands and President of the Eurogroup, will be sharing with us his ideas on the 
subject of insurance and financial matters. I am very grateful for his making time, in 
what must be a very busy schedule, in order to speak to us today. 
In closing I would like to thank everyone who contributed to making this year’s event 
possible, and I wish you all a successful and productive conference. And of course a 
pleasant stay with us in Amsterdam. 
Thank you. 
I will now give the floor to Mr. Peter Braumüller, Chairman of the IAIS, who will take 
you through the programme of the next two days. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
