  Mario Draghi: Stronger together in Europe – the contribution of banking 
supervision 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  marking  the 
inauguration of the ECB’s new supervisory responsibilities, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 
2014. 
 the 
Inauguration  of 
Summary 
Speaking  at 
the  European  Central  Bank’s  new  supervisory 
responsibilities, Mario Draghi, the President of the European Central Bank, reflected on the 
creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, reminding the context that lead the Council 
and the Parliament to entrust the ECB with supervisory tasks. 
According to Mr Draghi, the setting-up of European banking supervision has been the largest 
step towards deeper integration since the creation of our Economic and Monetary Union. 
The President restated that the ECB was and remains determined to protect the euro, while 
reminding that more works needs to be done to improve “our” union, not only in the banking 
sector  but  also  in  relation  to  capital  markets  and  in  the  economic  and  fiscal  realms.  “Our 
responsibility  towards  the  people  of  this  continent  is  indeed  to  put  in  place  a  sustainable 
economic model that helps to increase employment and boost growth”, he said. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to the inauguration of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Today, I would like to reflect on what made this joint achievement possible and how it can 
inspire us as we strive to make Europeans stronger together. 
The crisis has caused many of our fellow citizens to question whether the European project 
can keep its promise of shared economic prosperity. And the response to the crisis indeed 
took time to take shape, as we did not initially have all the instruments to address its causes 
and  consequences.  This  has  forced  us  to  fundamentally  reflect  on  what  is  necessary  to 
achieve a genuine economic and monetary union. 
In particular, we needed to decisively and credibly address the weaknesses in the banking 
sector. This was not only key to restoring investors’ confidence. It was also key to protecting 
citizens and businesses as taxpayers, depositors and borrowers. 
We agreed that this challenge would be best addressed together through the establishment 
of  a  banking  union.  It  entailed  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism and a common rulebook, including for harmonised deposit guarantee schemes, 
which may evolve into a common European deposit guarantee. 
This was a fundamentally political decision, taken by the European legislators – the Council 
and the European Parliament. And once the decision to establish the SSM had been made, 
the ECB assumed a key role in bringing about this change in only one year. 
The setting-up of European banking supervision has been the largest step towards deeper 
integration  since  the  creation  of  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  One  that  provides  a 
determined response to the crisis, strengthens the euro and will protect us in the future. One 
that shows that, if we decide to act together, we can be stronger together in Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, a collective achievement 
Fragilities  in  the  banking  sector  were  a  major  risk  that  had  to  be  directly  confronted.  In  a 
context  where  the  integrity  of  the  euro  area  had  been  threatened,  the  Council  and  the 
Parliament entrusted the ECB with supervisory tasks. 
We were and remain determined to protect the euro. We are thus proud to take on this new 
role and committed to fulfilling the high expectations. 
It was nevertheless a major organisational challenge to get the SSM up and running in only 
one year, whilst also conducting the comprehensive assessment. 
Together, we have successfully accomplished this task. 
Let  me  pay  tribute  to  all  the  ECB  staff,  old  and  new,  who  made  banking  supervision  a 
European  reality.  Thanks  to  their  hard  work,  the  ECB  has  shown  an  impressive  ability  to 
adapt.  And  while  we  ensure  a  strict  separation  between  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision, both these areas of activity will be able to rely on the accumulated expertise in 
shared services areas and of course be inspired by the European spirit that guides our work. 
The SSM is also benefiting from the experience and resources of the national authorities. We 
have combined all these strengths. They make up our DNA. 
We are however creating something new. 
The  SSM  creates  the  institutional  conditions  for  overcoming  fragmentation  in  supervisory 
practices  and  allows  us  to  define  a  single  model.  We  are  establishing  common 
methodologies, a joint culture, a shared reputation. They will ensure that we have the right 
instruments and incentives to effectively carry out our supervisory tasks. They have already 
been successfully tested – as the comprehensive assessment shows. 
Let us at the same time recognise that this is just the beginning. 
The ECB will have to perform consistently well day after day, years after year, in the face of 
very challenging supervisory tasks. 
Moreover,  we  need  to  further  think  about  how  we  can  improve  our  union,  not  only  in  the 
banking sector but also in relation to capital markets and in the economic and fiscal realms. 
Our responsibility towards the people of this continent is indeed to put in place a sustainable 
economic  model  that  helps  to  increase  employment  and  boost  growth.  I  believe  the 
experience of setting up the SSM and the banking union can inspire us in this respect. Let 
me explain what I mean. 
Banking supervision: gaining from a European approach 
The SSM, and more broadly banking union, show that Europe can make a difference. We 
can draw lessons from this achievement, from both a policy and institutional perspective. 
From a policy standpoint, adopting a European approach to tackle risks in the banking sector 
clearly helps protecting individuals and businesses. 
 
First, it protects them as taxpayers. During the crisis, the cost of restructuring failing 
banks  was  borne  disproportionately  by  taxpayers.  This  was  not  only  unfair,  as  it 
entailed  in  some  instances  large  social  and  economic  costs.  It  also  created  the 
wrong  incentives  for  banks’  shareholders  and  creditors.  Fairer  and  more  effective 
burden-sharing rules have now been put in place and resolution costs will be borne 
primarily by the banks themselves. 
Second, it protects them as depositors. Deposits under €100,000 will not be touched 
and  those  above  that  amount  will  benefit  from  preferential  treatment  compared  to 
other unsecured creditors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
   Third, the banking union, and the SSM in particular, aims to protect borrowers by 
restoring trust in the soundness of the banking sector thereby increasing its capacity 
to lend to the real economy. 
 Fairer and more sustainable conditions have thus been created. And this achievement can 
serve as inspiration in other areas of economic policy. 
There are also lessons to be learned from the institutional perspective. 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  are  strong 
enforcement mechanisms. Both institutions follow a governance model which seems to work 
well, be it at euro area level or EU-wide. This approach involves three components: a political 
agreement  at  European  level  based  on  well-defined  objectives,  a  European  authority  with 
strong enforcement powers and an integrated system reflecting Europe’s diversity. 
This is the approach of competition policy, monetary policy and single market policies. It is 
now the model of banking supervision and is set to be the model for banking resolution. In 
the future, we can learn from this experience as we progress towards economic union and 
capital markets integration. 
This governance model is in fact a valuable, practical example of the EU’s motto: “United in 
diversity”.  Internally,  it  makes  us  stronger  together:  for  instance,  the  SSM  reinforces  the 
banking system of the euro area as a whole, thus reducing systemic risk to the benefits of all. 
Externally,  it  provides  a  basis  for  increasing  our  global  influence  in  setting  high  regulatory 
standards. 
Finally,  European  action  needs  to  be  fully  legitimised.  As  part  of  our  Inter-Institutional 
Agreement with the European Parliament and of our Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Council,  we  are  committed  to  very  high  standards  of  accountability,  which  compare 
favourably at international level. But let us not forget that our legitimacy crucially depends on 
the  ability  to  fulfil  the  mandate  that  was  democratically  assigned  to  us.  This  requires  our 
constant attention and continuous effort. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  While  we  celebrate  today  an  important  achievement,  we  need  to  be 
humble for the future and to ensure that we deliver on our tasks, old and new. The ECB has 
at  the  core  of  its  mandate  the  protection  of  price  stability.  We  now  need  to  protect  the 
economy in one additional way, by preventing excessive risks in the banking sector. 
Protecting our fellow citizens as well as businesses from the dire effects of the crisis was the 
driving  force  behind  the  ‘Four  Presidents’  report’,  which  established  a  roadmap  towards  a 
genuine Economic and Monetary Union. 
Dear Herman, 
You were the chef d’orchestre of our quartet. 
I believe it is no exaggeration to say that you have left your mark on history by masterfully 
conducting  the  discussions  between  European  leaders  which  led  to  the  creation  of  the 
banking union. This has been an inspiring first movement. 
While  we  enjoy  today’s  short  entr’acte,  we  should  also  look  ahead  and  prepare  for  the 
movements  still  to  come,  as  we  progress  together  towards  a  genuine  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
