  Boštjan Jazbec: Reinvigorating credit growth in central, eastern and 
southern European economies 
Opening remarks by Mr Boštjan Jazbec, Governor of Bank of Slovenia at the IMF/Bank of 
Slovenia  high-level  seminar  on  “Reinvigorating  Credit  Growth  in  Central,  Eastern  and 
Southern European Economies”, Portoroz, 25 September 2014. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  high-level  seminar  on  reinvigorating  credit 
growth in Central, Eastern, and South European Economies organized jointly by the Bank of 
Slovenia  and  International  Monetary  Fund.  It  is  indeed  a  great  honour  to  have  a  very 
distinguished gathering of central bank governors and vice governors, senior officials of other 
international financial institutions, former public officials and leading academics to discuss a 
very critical issue that occupies the minds of policymakers in the region and elsewhere. 
The  objectives  of  the  seminar  are  to  learn  about  the  diverse  experiences  of  different 
countries  in  the  region  and  to  exchange  views  on  the  policy  challenges  and  possible 
responses. The appropriate policy responses necessarily are country-specific and must take 
into  account  the  heterogeneity  within  the  various  sectors  of  the  economy  and  the  role  of 
idiosyncratic  and  institutional  factors.  Still,  important  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  cross-
country comparisons. 
The presentations and discussion in the seminar will focus on four main themes: (1) repairing 
balance sheets in the financial system and the corporate and household sectors; (2) the role 
of foreign banks in fostering credit growth; (3) best practices for reviving credit markets and 
the pitfalls; and (4) risks of a new financial crisis. I will now briefly touch on these themes in 
general terms. 
How  the  situation  has  changed!  Not  that  long  ago,  policymakers  in  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe  were  concerned  about  the  issue  of  rapid  credit  growth.  A  key  question  then  was 
whether rapid credit growth should be seen as an endless boom or as an early warning. 
As  we  all  know  very  well,  the  boom  turned  to  bust  abruptly  in  2008.  The  turmoil  in 
international  financial  markets  and  the  consequent  collapse  in  output  in  major  developed 
economies also adversely impacted the countries in central, eastern and southern Europe in 
varying  degrees  through  a  combination  of  the  trade,  financial  and  domestic  demand 
channels. 
A fallout of the global financial crisis was balance sheet recession in the region. The rapid 
credit  growth  during  the  pre-crisis  boom  period  was  grounded  in  excessive  borrowing  and 
risk taking by banks and enterprises. Banks relied heavily on external wholesale funding and 
the  rapid  credit  expansion  took  place  against  very  limited  equity  capital  in  the  corporate 
sector. The global financial crisis exposed these balance sheet vulnerabilities. The onset of 
the  crisis  caused  a  sudden  stop  in  external  financing,  and  countries  in  the  region  were 
caught  in  a  vicious  cycle  of  reduced  credit  availability,  deleveraging,  rising  non-performing 
loans, and a cutback in corporate investment and output. 
Much of the region is still suffering from the fallout of the global crisis. In a large number of 
countries, economic recovery remains feeble and bank credit is still contracting. For these 
set  of  countries,  reviving  credit  growth  is  considered  essential  to  achieving  a  strong  and 
durable output expansion. However, the task is complex. 
Boosting  credit  growth  without  addressing  the  large  sectoral  and  aggregate  imbalances  in 
the  economy  that  had  built  up  during  the  credit  boom  years  can  be  risky.  Matters  may 
become worse if additional credit availability enables enterprises to postpone balance sheet 
adjustment. In the wake of a balance sheet recession, the allocation of credit matters more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  than its aggregate amount. It is important that good borrowers rather than the bad ones are 
the main beneficiaries of credit growth. 
It is not surprising that much of the CESEE region is experiencing a slow so-called credit-less 
recovery. Balance sheet recessions are typically not very responsive to traditional demand 
management  measures.  This  is  because  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channel  is 
impaired by the weak balance sheets of banks and the corporate sector. As long as asset 
quality  is  poor  and  capital  is  inadequate,  banks  will  tend  to  restrict  overall  credit  supply. 
Liquidity may not be a binding constraint in such a situation. As has been argued by some 
analysts in the context of an unexpectedly low take up in the recent first auction of liquidity 
under  the  ECB’s  TLTRO  programme,  the  profitability  of  borrowing  very  cheaply  for  the 
central  bank  to  lend  to  the  private  sector  (especially  SMEs)  is  not  guaranteed  if  non-
performing loans are high and banks would need to discount high expected default rates and 
if lending to SMEs implies high risk weights and, consequently, capital charge. 
Credit demand also is weak in a balance sheet recession. Bank lending surveys in the region 
indicate that credit demand has decreased since the onset of the global crisis. An important 
factor weighing down credit demand is the corporate debt overhang. The easing of monetary 
conditions will not necessarily induce higher borrowing while highly indebted companies are 
focused on deleveraging. 
Thus,  repairing  the  balance  sheets  of  both  the  banking  sector  and  corporate  sector  is  a 
priority for unlocking credit growth. A complicating factor here is that the maximum possible 
speed  for  completing  bank  restructuring  is  typically  faster  than  that  for  corporate 
restructuring, even if all the enabling legislative and institutional frameworks for the latter are 
in place. So, the resumption of credit growth may take a while. There also is a worrisome 
aspect of the different restructuring speeds of the two sectors. Experience shows that, when 
enterprise restructuring is lagging, non-performing loans continue to accumulate and erode 
the capital buffer of banks created by their recapitalization, creating a likely need for another 
round of capital injection. 
Revival  of  credit  growth  is  also  difficult  because  of  the  tensions  between  monetary  policy 
considerations and financial stability considerations. The global crisis has demonstrated very 
clearly  the  importance  of  having  adequate  safeguards  in  place  to  prevent  unhealthy  risk 
taking and creation of credit bubbles. All central banks in the region are now in the process of 
putting in place frameworks to strengthen bank supervision, enhance risk management and 
governance  standards,  and  increase  transparency  and  statistical  disclosure.  National 
authorities also are establishing the institutional framework for macroprudential oversight of 
the financial system. These prudential aspects of the financial policy framework are meant to 
reduce the amplitude of financial cycles. However, they also are likely to dampen the pace of 
credit growth. 
It also should be recognized that it will not be possible to achieve durable economic growth 
underpinned  by  abundant  credit  in  the  same  manner  as  that  pursued  during  the  pre-crisis 
boom  period.  It  will  be  necessary  to  limit  the  reliance  on  debt-financing  and  shift  towards 
more equity financing. Given the need to ensure fiscal sustainability, recourse to more state 
funding for restructuring the economy and increasing investment is not a feasible option. An 
appropriate  business  environment  has  to  be  created  for  attracting  new  non-debt  capital 
flows. This will require addressing the institutional and regulatory bottlenecks that currently 
inhibit  investment.  In  this  context,  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  legislative  and  judiciary 
systems would be extremely important. 
Not all CESEE countries have been equally hit by the crisis. Indeed, a few countries in the 
region  managed  to  escape  the  worst  effects  of  the  financial  crisis,  highlighting  the  role  of 
country-specific  factors.  Economic  growth  and  strong  credit  expansion  in  these  countries 
have resumed after a brief pause. For them, an important question is whether the momentum 
can  be  sustained.  Based  on  the  lessons  from  the  crisis,  a  key  priority  for  these  countries 
should  be  to  prevent  a  build-up  of  imbalances  that  could  threaten  financial  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  macroeconomic  stability.  The  main  tasks  are  to  identify  and  implement  on  a  timely  basis 
measures  to  curb  the  boom  and  to  build  the  capacity  to  cope  with  a  possible  bust.  An 
advantage here is that, because of the differences in cyclical position, policy conflict between 
monetary policy and prudential policy is absent, unlike in the case of countries suffering from 
balance sheet recession. 
Given  the  integration  of  CESEE  countries  in  the  world  financial  markets,  credit  growth  in 
these  countries  has  acquired  an  international  dimension.  There  is  significant  presence  of 
foreign-owned  banks  and  external  funding  is  an  important  source  of  bank  liquidity.  While 
external  bank  funding  for  the  region  has  been  on  a  declining  trend  since  the  onset  of  the 
global  crisis  and  sizeable  deleveraging  has  already  occurred,  parent  bank  funding  still 
represents a large share of bank funding in several CESEE countries. Thus, countries in the 
region are highly vulnerable to changes in the external environment. If parent banks come 
under  pressure  to  deleverage  and  build  up  capital  in  the  period  ahead  on  account  of  the 
results of the just concluded euro area asset quality review and stress tests or because of 
tighter global financial conditions, the liquidity support for credit growth in the daughter banks 
may not be forthcoming. 
I would like to conclude by pointing out that central banks alone cannot succeed in reviving 
credit growth and economic growth. Putting the economies in the region back on track will 
require  an  integrated  national  policy  strategy  to  restore  the  health  of  the  financial  sector, 
restructure the corporate sector, reinforce the sustainability of the public finances, improve 
the flexibility of product and labor markets, and reform the business environment. Because of 
the complementarity of the measures, coordination between government agencies and other 
stake  holders 
timely  policy 
implementation will require political resolve and social consensus. If there is no determined 
follow  through  on  policies,  the  fragile  recovery  that  is  underway  will  come  to  an  end  and 
economic problems will intensify.  
 
implementation.  Successful  and 
is  essential 
in  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
