  Andreas Dombret: Big Bang banking union – what can we expect? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the invitation and the opportunity to speak again at the Euro Finance Week. It 
is a pleasure to be here today. Let us briefly discuss physics before we turn to a topic that is 
more related to the Euro Finance Week. 
The  British  astronomer  Martin  Rees  once  said:  “We  can  trace  things  back  to  the  earlier 
stages  of  the  Big  Bang,  but  we  still  don’t  know  what  banged  and  why  it  banged. That’s  a 
challenge for 21st century science.” 
Well, the euro area had its own “Big Bang” two weeks ago, and in this case we know pretty 
well what banged – and why. On 4 November, the ECB became the direct supervisor for the 
120 largest banks in the euro area which, in terms of assets, represent more than 80% of the 
euro  area’s  banking  system.  Thus,  with  a  big  bang,  the  ECB  became  one  of  the  largest 
banking supervisors in the world. 
Taking  banking  supervision  from  the  national  to  the  European  level  has  been  the  biggest 
step  of  financial  integration  in  Europe  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999.  This  big 
bang created a new universe for the banks and the financial markets. 
But what exactly can we expect from the new European banking supervision? And probably 
even more importantly: what is it that we cannot expect from it? In the following I would like 
to discuss both questions. 
 The Single Supervisory Mechanism – just the first step 
2. 
Taking  banking  supervision  from  the  national  level  to  the  European  level  addresses  three 
problems that became apparent during the recent crisis. 
First, European banking supervision will allow banks in the entire euro area to be supervised 
according to the same high standards. These standards will emerge from sharing experience 
across  borders  and  taking  the  best  parts  from  every  national  approach  towards  banking 
supervision. Germany, for instance, could benefit from a more quantitative-oriented approach 
towards banking supervision which other countries already follow. 
Second,  European  banking  supervision  will  make  it  possible  to  effectively  identify  and 
manage  cross-border  problems.  This  is  essential  because  today,  large  banks  are  usually 
active in more than one country. The failure of the Franco-Belgian bank Dexia in 2011 is a 
classic example in which banking supervision with a cross-border focus could have improved 
crisis management. Another example is the case of German Hypo Real Estate, which failed 
in 2009. 
Third, taking banking supervision from the national to the European level will add a degree of 
separation between supervisors and the banks they supervise. This will prevent supervisors 
from treating their banks with kid-gloves out of national interest. Nevertheless, we can expect 
European  banking  supervision  to  draw  upon  the  experience  and  resources  of  national 
supervisors.  Supervision  itself  will  take  place  in  so-called  joint  supervisory  teams.  These 
teams are headed by ECB staff but are composed of national supervisors. 
To sum up: there is a lot we can expect from European banking supervision, and now it has 
to deliver. In this regard, we should remember one thing: European banking supervision is an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  immensely complex operation that has been put together in a very short time. Thus, it would 
probably  be  unrealistic  to  expect  everything  to  run  smoothly  from  day  one.  It  will  certainly 
take  some  time  before  every  detail  is  sorted  out  deep  down  in  the  engine  room  of  actual 
banking  supervision.  Nevertheless,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  get  there  and  that  our 
expectations will be fulfilled. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism – the necessary second step 
3. 
But  we  should  not  let  unrealistic  expectations  become  the  roots  of  complacency  and, 
consequently, disappointment. European banking supervision is not the holy grail of financial 
stability. It certainly contributes to making banks more stable, but it is no panacea. Thus, we 
have to supplement it with other measures. Let me elaborate on one point in that regard. 
Banking supervision cannot prevent individual banks from failing – not at the national level 
and  not  at  the  European  level.  Is  this  a  problem?  Not  at  all:  the  possibility  of failure  is  an 
essential element of a market economy. 
Nevertheless, banks are special in that respect. Just remember the 15th of September 2008, 
when  the  failure  of  a  single  investment  bank  pushed  the  financial  system  to  the  brink  of 
collapse. The lesson is that the failure of very large or interconnected banks can lead to a 
systemic crisis. Thus, these banks are perceived as being “too big to fail”: when push comes 
to shove, the government might be compelled to step in to prevent disaster. 
Consequently, “too big to fail” banks operate with an implicit and cost-free insurance. Apart 
from  the  costs  this  insurance  imposes  on  taxpayers,  it  most  definitely  sets  the  wrong 
incentives  for  the  risk-conscious  behaviour  of  banks.  Thus,  solving  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
problem  is  paramount  for  making  the  financial  system  more  stable  and  saving  taxpayers’ 
money. 
Can European banking supervision solve that problem? Well, it can certainly contribute by 
putting “too big to fail” banks under close observation. And yet it has to be supplemented with 
other measures. And here, we recently made some progress – at the global level and at the 
European level. 
At the global level, the G20 Heads of Governments and States have just this Sunday decided 
on  international  criteria  that  global  systemically  important  banks  will  have  to  fulfil  in  future 
regarding their capital structure. In particular, these banks will need a  minimum amount of 
Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  –  in  short  TLAC.  This  approach  combines  the  existing 
minimum  capital  requirements  with  new  requirements  to  ensure  that  large  banks  have 
sufficient capacity to absorb losses, both before and during resolution. 
TLAC therefore, in my view, represents a watershed in ending “too big to fail”. It will allow for 
the  orderly  resolution  of  those  banks  without  disrupting  the  financial  system  and  while 
protecting taxpayers from having to foot the bill. For the TLAC-concept, I wish to signal my 
strong support. 
To  achieve  these  worthy  goals,  I  suggest  agreeing  upon  a  figure  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
range of 16% – 20% proposed by the FSB. However, reaching an agreement on TLAC is not 
the finish line of the regulatory agenda. The next months need to be used for in-depth public 
consultation  as  well  as  an  impact  study  of  the  new  rules.  I  hope  that  this  study  will  lend 
support  to  a  figure  at  the  upper  end  of  the  proposed  range.  Finally,  after  both  the  impact 
study  and  the  public  consultation,  implementation  is  the  next  step,  and  this  should  not  be 
underestimated. 
Another major step towards solving the “too big to fail” problem has been taken with regard 
to  cross-border  resolution.  In  October,  18  global  banks  and  the  International  Swaps  and 
Derivatives Association agreed to implement new rules on derivatives trading. Whenever a 
large  bank  fails,  these  rules  will  allow  authorities  to  temporarily  suspend  the  right  of  other 
banks to terminate derivatives contracts. This will buy precious time to organise an orderly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  resolution of the failed bank. However, it is paramount that we not only have the necessary 
procedures in place to wind down a failed bank, but the political will to go through with it. This 
political will exists in Germany and is a universal pre-condition for ending “too big to fail”. 
We  have  also  made  progress  at  the  European  level.  The  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive spells out clear rules on who has to bear the costs when a bank fails. In a nutshell: 
bail-out is out and bail-in is in. In future, shareholders and creditors will be first in line when it 
comes to bearing losses; taxpayers will be last in line. This directive will be implemented in 
Germany in early 2015; the latest possible date for implementation in other countries is 2016. 
Also  from  2016  onwards,  European  banking  supervision  will  be  supplemented  with  a 
European resolution mechanism for banks. From then on, the banking union will rest on two 
pillars and provide a stable framework for European financial markets. 
What about the banks? 
4. 
What does all that mean for the banks? In essence, regulators and supervisors are working 
towards strengthening the principles of a market economy. Naturally, this puts more weight 
on the shoulders of market participants, that is, the banks. In future, there will be no public 
lifeguard  standing  by  to  bail  banks  out  when  things  go  wrong.  Failure  has  become  a  real 
possibility and banks have to acknowledge that. 
They  should  have  an  interest  in  safeguarding  their  stability  and  strengthening  their 
profitability.  Regarding  the  stability  of  banks,  the  comprehensive  assessment  provided  a 
deep  insight  into  the  state  of  the  European  system.  So  let  us  take  a  closer  look  at  the 
German banks that were subjected to that assessment. 
All in all, German banks did rather well. Of the 25 German banks that were examined, there 
was only one “technical” failure, since the bank in question has already remedied its capital 
shortfall. Over all, it could be concluded that German banks are stable enough from a capital 
point of view to cope with severe economic stress. 
But  again,  no  bank  should  give  in  to  complacency.  And  neither  should  supervisors.  We 
should, for instance, be aware that the comprehensive assessment focused on risk-weighted 
capital  ratios.  Markets  and  supervisors,  however,  also  cast  an  eye  on  unweighted  capital 
ratios. And with regard to these leverage ratios, German banks are below average compared 
to  other  euro-area  countries.  Thus,  there  is  ample  room  to  catch-up  and  improve  stability 
even further. 
Nevertheless,  while  stability  is  necessary  for  a  bank,  it  is  not  sufficient.  Banks  have  to  be 
profitable as well. And in this regard, too, German banks need to catch up. Their return on 
assets  and  their  return  on  equity  are  also  relatively  low  compared  to  other  euro-area 
countries.  A  recent  study  even  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  only  6%  of  German  banks 
earned their cost of capital last year. 
What can  explain  these  weak  earnings? Well, the  main  culprit  in  Germany  seems  to  be  a 
business  model  that  is  relatively  dependent  on  interest  income.  Such  a  business  model 
poses a major challenge in the current environment of low interest rates. Consequently, in 
the first six months of this year, the operative results of the large German banks were about 
8%  below  their  2013  levels  –  a  result  which  was  largely  driven  by  a  contracting  interest 
margin.  Nonetheless,  banks  are  also  faced  with  a  structural  problem  in  this  context:  the 
interest margin has been declining constantly since the mid-1980s. 
The  banks  should  therefore  reconsider  their  business  models  and  gear  them  towards 
sustainable profitability. To be sure, the need to adapt business models is not only relevant 
for  German  banks.  However,  in  its  recent  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  IMF  finds  that 
German banks are again below average in terms of reforming their business models. Again, 
there is room to catch up with international peers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  An  obvious  strategy  for  the  German  banks  would  be  to  diversify  their  sources  of  income 
away  from  interest  income.  Looking  at  the  cost-side,  German  banks  fare  rather  well 
compared  to  other  countries.  That  is  the  good  news.  But  there  are  still  options  to  reduce 
costs. In this regard, mergers may well be a potential strategy. The German banking market 
still offers scope for further consolidation – the focus here should, of course, always remain 
on arriving at a sustainable business model. 
As a side note: in future, European banking supervision will also keep a close watch on the 
business  models  of  banks.  However,  we  should  not  expect  supervisors  to  be  the  better 
bankers. At the end of the day, management decisions have to be taken by those who bear 
the risks and reap the rewards. What the supervisors could do is impose additional capital or 
liquidity  requirements  whenever  they  have  doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  a  bank’s 
business model. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
There is no doubt: European banking supervision is an important step forward in ensuring 
financial stability in the euro area. Nevertheless, as I said earlier, unrealistic expectations are 
the roots of complacency and, consequently, of disappointment. 
European banking supervision is just the first pillar of the envisaged banking union. It has to 
be supplemented with the European resolution mechanism for banks. This second pillar of 
the banking union will be erected in 2016. Eventually, the banking union will provide a stable 
framework for the banking system and strengthen market forces. 
This, in turn, puts more responsibility into the hands of banks. It is up to each individual bank 
to ensure its own stability and profitability. This requires the banks to rethink their business 
models and to rethink their culture. Regulatory measures like TLAC that will abolish implicit 
guarantees for banks will also necessitate changes in banks’ behaviour for the better. 
The  original  role  of  banks  is  to  service  the  real  economy.  Putting  this  idea  back  into  the 
heads of bankers would contribute greatly to making the financial system more stable. We 
have to do away with a culture in which everything is allowed that is not explicitly forbidden. 
We  need  a  culture  which  encourages  bankers  to  look  beyond  the  horizon  of  short-term 
returns. 
If banks succeed in creating such a culture, they will eventually regain the trust of the people 
that  got  lost  in  the  crisis.  Regulation  and  supervision  can  play  a  supporting  role,  but  the 
burden ultimately lies with the banks. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
