  Haruhiko Kuroda: The evolution of payment and settlement systems and 
the role of central banks 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Symposium for the 
30th  Anniversary  of  the  Center  for  Financial  Industry  Information  Systems,  Tokyo, 
2 December 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to speak at the symposium commemorating the 
30th anniversary of the Center for Financial Industry Information Systems (FISC). Since its 
establishment  in  1984,  the  FISC  has greatly  contributed to  strengthening the  safety  of  the 
financial information system and improving the efficiency of financial services in Japan. As it 
marks its 30-year milestone, I would like to express my respect and gratitude for the work it 
has done over the years. 
For  the  past  30  years,  the  FISC  has  been  engaged  in  enduring  work  such  as  developing 
industry  guidelines  and  standards.  These  include  “FISC  Security  Guidelines  on  Computer 
Systems for Banking and Related Financial Institutions” and “FISC Information System Audit 
Guidelines for Banking and Related Financial Institutions.” It also publishes its “White Paper 
on Financial Information Systems” every year. With new payment methods such as internet 
banking  and  electronic  money  making  their  appearance,  maintaining  the  security  of  such 
payment  methods  has  become  an  important  issue.  The  FISC  has  also  been  active  in 
addressing a number of challenges related to information systems by revising the industry 
guidelines  or  standards  in  order  to  address  these  issues.  Furthermore,  through  its  wide-
ranging  research,  analysis,  and  publicity  activities  –  including  various  surveys  or  the 
organization of study groups and seminars – the FISC’s efforts have significantly supported 
the development of payment and settlement systems, through which economic and financial 
transactions are “settled.” 
Today, under the title, “The Evolution of Payment and Settlement Systems and the Role of 
Central Banks,” I will outline these systems’ developments from the past to the future, and 
explain the present and future challenges to be tackled by the Bank of Japan while touching 
on the role of central banks within the systems. 
Evolution of payment and settlement systems 
I.  
Looking  back  over  several  decades  at  the  history  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  in 
Japan,  both  efficiency  and  safety  have  significantly  improved.  To  put  this  in  perspective, 
certain periods from the middle of the 1960s to the beginning of the 1990s were ones when 
more  emphasis  was  put  on  raising  efficiency.  Since  then,  the  emphasis  has  shifted  to 
enhancing the safety of the systems. 
Let me be more concrete. From the middle of the 1960s to the beginning of the 1990s, on the 
back  of  progress  in  financial  liberalization  and  globalization  as  well  as  the  increasing 
issuance  of  JGBs,  it  was  difficult  to  manually  process  the  large  number  of  payment  and 
settlement transactions. It was against this background that financial institutions implemented 
the  online  processing  of  settlement  and  dematerialization  of  securities  certificates.  As  a 
result, the efficiency of payment and settlement systems significantly improved. 
The periods coincided with those in which major payment and settlement systems initiated 
their operations, including the Zengin Data Telecommunication System (Zengin System) in 
1973,  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System  (BOJ-NET)  in  1988,  and  the  Japan 
Securities Depository Center’s system in 1991. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  During and after the 1990s, payment and settlement systems put priority on strengthening 
their safety by making use of the existing financial institutions’ computer systems and market 
infrastructures.  From  the  1990s  to  the  beginning  of  the  2000s,  efforts  to  reduce  the 
settlement risks made significant progress against the backdrop of the Asian currency crisis 
and  Japan’s  financial  crisis.  The  BOJ-NET  introduced  delivery-versus-payment  (DVP)  for 
JGBs in 1994 and real-time gross settlement (RTGS) in 2001. In 2002, major central banks 
jointly  supported  the  launch  of  the  payments  of  two  different  currencies  on  a  payment-
versus-payment (PVP) basis by Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS). By the middle of the 
2000s,  all  other  central  counterparties  (CCPs),  including  the  current  Japan  Securities 
Clearing Corporation (JSCC), were established. 
After the global financial crisis in 2008, further initiatives were taken in order to enhance the 
safety  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  These  include  the  introduction  of  international 
regulations, such as the obligation to use the CCPs for standardized over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives and the publication of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs) 
jointly  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO)  in  2012.1  The  PFMIs  were  introduced  with  the  intent  to  reinforce  the  global 
standards set during the first half of the 2000s. 
The  question  now  is: What  does  the  future  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  look  like? 
Looking  at  the  environment  surrounding  the  current  situation  in  Japan,  economic  activity 
continues  to  be  globalized  at  a  faster  pace.  For  example,  Japanese  firms  and  financial 
institutions  are  increasingly  deploying  their  operations  in  Asia,  and  businesses  and 
households are diversifying their needs for payment and settlement services in light of rapid 
progress in information technology. In order to respond to these wide-ranging needs of end 
users,  it  is  important  that  we  take  measures  to  improve  the  efficiency  and  convenience  of 
these services while maintaining their safety. 
In overseas economies, we have witnessed that their payment and settlement systems are 
making some improvement. Major central banks have substantially extended the operating 
hours of their payment and settlement systems since the beginning of the 2000s. Moreover, 
in the United Kingdom, bank transfers have become available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
on a real-time basis since 2008. In Europe, a standard format for credit transfers and direct 
debits  became  obligatory  this  August  as  part  of  the  initiatives  taken  by  the  Single  Euro 
Payments Area (SEPA) to make euro payments faster and cheaper. 
Looking  at  the  situation  in  Japan,  a  similar  progress  is  also  underway,  including  initiatives 
taken  by  the  Japanese  Bankers  Association  (JBA)  and  the  Japanese  Banks’  Payment 
Clearing Network (Zengin-Net) with the aim of enhancing the retail payment services. Going 
forward,  it  is  important  for  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  to  understand  overseas 
developments and take measures as appropriate. 
Role of central banks in payment and settlement systems 
II.  
Before discussing the Bank’s initiatives in light of such circumstantial changes, let me now 
explain the role of central banks in payment and settlement systems. 
Payment  services  constitute  the  core  of  banking  business.  As  “the  bank  of  banks,”  this  is 
also  true for  a  central  bank,  as  it  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  payment  and  settlement  systems. 
Moreover, central banks conduct monetary policy and fulfill their policy objectives, such as 
ensuring  financial  stability,  through  the  provision  of  their  banking  services.  In  order  to 
implement  their  policies  effectively,  payment  services  and  those  systems  provide  vital 
underpinnings. 
                                                
1   CPSS has been renamed as CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The first role of central banks in payment services is to provide the means of payment with 
finality.  These  include  banknotes  and  current  accounts  held  at  central  banks.  In  addition, 
central banks operate interbank payment and settlement systems in order to facilitate smooth 
online settlements of funds and JGBs between financial institutions.2 Moreover, central banks 
are engaged in the oversight activities for payment and settlement systems provided by other 
entities to call for the enhancement of these systems as appropriate while taking account of 
the balance between safety and efficiency. Furthermore, they are involved in such activities 
as  helping  market  participants  formulate  appropriate  market  practices  spanning  from 
execution to settlement. These activities are conducted from the viewpoint that payment and 
settlement  systems  provide  the  foundation  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
sound development of the economy. 
Looking  to  the  future  of  payment  and  settlement  systems,  central  banks  are  expected  to 
contribute to economic growth and financial stability not only by improving their own payment 
services  but  also  by  helping  financial  institutions  enhance  services  provided  by  those 
institutions. 
Bank of Japan’s initiatives: present and future 
III.  
Next, I would like to explain the Bank’s initiatives in four areas at present and in the future. 
They are namely (i) to build the New BOJ-NET and extend its operating hours, (ii) to consider 
improving cross-border transactions, (iii) to support enhancing retail payment services, and 
(iv) to support shortening the JGB settlement cycles. Let me explain these items in turn. 
New BOJ-NET and extension of its operating hours 
A.  
At present, the Bank is in the middle of building the New BOJ-NET. 
Since its inception in 1988, the environment surrounding the BOJ-NET has been changing 
dramatically. On the back of financial globalization and innovation in information technology, 
people  involved  in  major  payment  and  settlement  systems  around  the  world  have  been 
making  efforts  to  strengthen  the  IT  infrastructure  to  cope  with  the  diversified  needs  in 
transactions and settlement. On the part of financial institutions, connecting their computer 
systems  directly  with  the  BOJ-NET  has  become  widespread,  and  this  enables  those 
institutions  to  realize  straight-through  processing  (STP).  Moreover,  a  cross-border  linkage 
among payment and settlement systems has become more widespread, as exemplified by 
the enlargement of cross-currency PVP transactions through the CLS and the cross-border 
linkage  of  securities  settlement  systems.  It  is  against  this  background  that  the  BOJ-NET 
needs to meet the diversified needs in response to the enlargement of the network structure 
and the globalization of financial transactions. 
The New BOJ-NET, which is due to be in full operation in October 2015, is based on several 
overarching  principles.3  First,  we  employ  the  latest  information  technology  to  enrich  our 
services and improve convenience for our customers in the future. Second, the New BOJ-
NET  is  designed  to  accommodate  greater  flexibility  so  that  it  can  respond  to  ongoing  and 
future banking needs and market developments. Last, but not least, it enhances accessibility, 
allowing  longer  operating  hours,  in  light  of  the  globalized  financial  markets  to  encourage 
interconnectedness among market infrastructures. 
                                                
2   As such, central banks provide “ultimate settlement” to the economy by assuring the provision of banknotes 
and  current  accounts  (these  means  of  payments  with  finality  provided  by  central  banks  are  called  “central 
bank money”) to payment and settlement systems where financial institutions can effectively use them, when 
necessary. 
3   The full launch of the New BOJ-NET is planned to take place on October 13, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In particular, as Japan is in the first set of time zones, we aim to contribute to invigorating 
financial  markets  and  enhancing  financial  services  by  encouraging  financial  institutions  to 
make the most of the longer operating hours of the New BOJ-NET. It is for that reason that 
the Bank decided to extend the operating hours until 21:00 from February 2016 after the New 
BOJ-NET starts full operation in October 2015, at which point its operating hours will be up to 
19:00.4,  5 Further extended operating hours are expected to be used by respective financial 
institutions at their own judgment.6 
At the forum toward making effective use of the New BOJ-NET, we have been discussing 
issues with major financial institutions and those institutions’ associations, such as covering 
the  same-day  cross-border  settlements  in  the  afternoon  in  Asia  and  in  the  morning  in 
Europe.  For  example,  the  New  BOJ-NET  enables  financial  institutions  to  collect  and 
distribute their customers’ funds between Japan and Asia within the same day, to allow JGBs 
to be posted to the CCPs overseas, and to increase cross-currency repos by posting JGBs 
as collateral in European markets. 
Improvement in cross-border transactions 
B.  
Looking further out, by taking advantage of the enhanced accessibility of the New BOJ-NET, 
we aim to build an infrastructure that facilitates the smooth delivery of the Japanese yen and 
JGBs anywhere and anytime. This is what I would call the ubiquity of the Japanese yen and 
JGBs. 
On  this  point,  the  ASEAN+3  economies  have  started  discussing  a  possible  cross-border 
linkage  between  the  securities  settlement  system  in  one  country  and  the  funds  settlement 
system  in  another  with  a  view  to  establishing  a  cross-border  securities  settlement 
infrastructure in the region. The Bank is also participating in this discussion. In May this year, 
finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  agreed  with  the  direction  of  developing  an 
implementation  roadmap  of  CSD-RTGS  linkages  in  the  medium  term  so  as  to  make  it 
possible  to  deliver  securities  smoothly  and  safely  versus  payment  across  borders.  Further 
study and analysis on CSD-RTGS linkages is expected to be carried out by practitioners. 
Given that market participants and central banks are undertaking similar initiatives in Europe 
with  an  aim  of  improving  securities  settlement  across  borders  in  the  region,  it  would  be 
conceivable  that  market  participants  in  Asia  will  start  dialogue  with  their  counterparties  in 
regions outside Asia to review the possibility of a cross-border linkage between settlement 
infrastructures. 
Such cross-border linkage will enable market participants to settle foreign currency funding 
transactions  against  domestic  sovereign  bonds  as  collateral  –  this  is  known  as  cross-
currency repos – on a DVP basis by using safe central bank money. Facilitating smooth and 
safe  cross-border  settlement  will  be  expected  to  contribute  to  enhancing  the  convenience 
and  efficiency  of  the  Japanese  yen  and  JGBs,  and  eventually  to  raising  the  profitability  of 
financial institutions. 
Developing an infrastructure that will enable the smooth delivery of the Japanese yen and 
JGBs  anywhere  and  anytime  will  support  the  globalization  of  the  yen  –  a  longstanding 
challenge  –  from  the  settlement  aspect.  The  Bank  is  committed  to  enhancing  payment 
services by utilizing the renewed functionalities of the New BOJ-NET and to underpinning the 
                                                
4   The  current  operating  hours  on  regular  business  days  are  9:00–19:00  for  Funds  Transfer  Services  and 
9:00-16:30 for JGB Services. 
5   The extension of the operating hours until 21:00 is planned to take place on February 15, 2016. 
6   Those  operating  hours are  expected  to  be  used  by  financial  institutions  that have current  accounts  or  JGB 
accounts at the Bank’s Head Office. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  medium-  to  long-term  growth  of  Japan’s  economy  from  not  only  the  monetary  policy 
perspective but also the settlement perspective. 
Enhancement of retail payment services 
C.  
Next,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  initiatives  taken  to  enhance  retail  payment  services. 
Currently, the JBA and the Zengin-Net have started looking into the issues of extending the 
Zengin System’s operating hours and achieving financial electronic data interchange (EDI). 
These also were included in the revised Japan Revitalization Strategy, which was released 
by  the  Japanese  government  in  June  2014.  The  Bank,  as  a  provider  of  the  settlement 
platform  for  interbank  settlement  in  the  Zengin  System,  will  play  an  active  role  to  support 
these actions taken by the JBA and the Zengin-Net. 
Extension of the Zengin System’s operating hours 
First, let me explain the extension of the operating hours of the Zengin System. The Zengin 
System  is  a  system  operated  by  the  Zengin-Net,  through  which  interbank  payment 
instructions for bank transfers are processed in Japan. Since it started its operation in 1973, 
the Zengin System has allowed near real-time payment services during the daylight hours of 
working  days,  and  has  long  been  regarded  worldwide  as  one  of  the  most  advanced  retail 
payment  services  provided  to  customers.  More  recently,  however,  some  countries  have 
developed near real-time payment services available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (known 
as “24/7 services”), beginning with the launch of the Faster Payments Service by the United 
Kingdom in 2008. Singapore also initiated Fast and Secure Transfers, called FAST, in March 
this year, and Australia is expected to launch 24/7 services in the second half of 2016. In the 
United States, the Federal Reserve has been playing an active role in enhancing payment 
services. In September 2013, the Federal Reserve Banks released the paper in which they 
identified  the  establishment  of  a  ubiquitous  system  for  near  real-time  payments  as  one  of 
desired outcomes. 
In recent years, more and more consumers are making purchases through the internet. The 
use of credit cards and electronic money is also increasing, and new payment instruments 
such as payment via mobile phone are making their appearances  one after another. If we 
look  at  the  situation  in  Japan,  the  vast  majority  of  people  hold  bank  accounts,  so  bank 
transfers  play  a  key  role  both  as  a  payment  instrument  and  as  an  infrastructure  for  other 
payment instruments. We expect this convenience of bank transfers to be enhanced through 
advances in information technology, which will lead to further innovation via competition with 
other  means  of  payment,  therefore  allowing  for  the  smooth  operation  of  retail  payment 
services to underpin business and household activities. 
The JBA and the Zengin-Net are currently considering the extension of the operating hours 
of the Zengin System in light of the need to facilitate better access to the end users, and are 
expected to release a final report on their decision by the end of this month. After the release 
of the report, the Zengin-Net is expected to give consideration on the details. The Bank will 
continue to support these initiatives in order to enhance retail payment services. 
Realization of financial EDI 
Another issue is the use of financial EDI. With regard to their purchasing, firms often opt for 
payments  to  be  processed  together  at  a  certain  future  date  instead  of  immediately. 
Therefore, they have to manually reconcile payment information with remittance information, 
which is a process called accounts receivable reconciliation. In particular, for industrial firms 
with a number of purchasing/selling transactions going on, this reconciliation involves large 
operating costs. Financial EDI is seen as a solution that will address this problem. 
EDI is a framework in which businesses electronically exchange remittance information, such 
as  purchases  and  sales  orders.  Since  remittance  information  can  be  in  diverse  formats, 
businesses are adopting a more flexible and extensible data format, called XML (eXtensible 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Markup Language) format, in realizing EDI, instead of the fixed-length data format currently 
used. 
If  a  framework  were  built  in  which  remittance  information  could  be  attached  to  payment 
information, such as a beneficiary’s bank account or payment date information, firms would 
be able to automate accounts receivable reconciliation, thereby considerably enhancing the 
efficiency  of  payment-related  operations.  This  framework  that  enables  the  link  of  payment 
information and remittance information is financial EDI. 
In  Europe,  with  the  aim  of  maximizing  the  benefits  stemming  from  the  single  currency,  a 
project  is  underway  in  order  to  achieve  financial  EDI,  including  the  adoption  of  the  XML 
format as a standardized data format. This is a grand project that has been worked on by 
stakeholders  for  more  than  10  years.  At  present,  banks  have  finished  complying  with  the 
XML format, and are now providing their customers with services that convert the remittance 
information from the old format to the XML format, with a view to encouraging use of the new 
format. 
In Japan, the banking industry, led by the JBA and the retail industry, jointly conducted an 
experiment  last  month  related  to  the  use  of  financial  EDI.  Both  industries  and  other 
stakeholders  will  collaborate  to  make  further  efforts  to  realize  the  utilization  of  remittance 
information in bank transfers. The Bank will again help promote these initiatives. 
Shortening of JGB settlement cycle 
D.  
The Bank also has been supporting market participants with regard to shortening the time lag 
between  the  execution  of  JGB  trading  and  settlement.  Back  in  1984,  when  the  FISC  was 
established,  there  was  no  standard  settlement  cycle  for  JGBs,  varying  among  each  trade. 
From 1986 to 1987, the settlement cycle was standardized to within 10 business days from 
the  trade  date,  with  settlement  only  on  particular  days.7  The  settlement  cycle  was  then 
shortened  to  T+7  in  1996,  and  to  T+3  in  1997,  each  through  rolling  settlement,  which 
became the standard settlement cycle for JGBs for 15 years. 
Apart  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States,  which  had  already  realized  T+1 
settlement from an early stage, T+3 settlement had long been recognized as the international 
standard  for  the  securities  settlement  cycle.  However,  since  the  financial  crisis  of  autumn 
2008, the world has been moving toward a shorter settlement cycle in order to reduce risks 
arising  from  unsettled  positions.  In  Europe,  the  basic  settlement  cycle  for  a  wide  range  of 
securities  moved  to  T+2  this  October.  Meanwhile,  in  the  United  States,  an  industry-wide 
committee  was  established  this  October  to  facilitate  the  move  toward  T+2  settlement  for 
trades in equities, corporate and municipal bonds, and unit investment trusts.8 
In April 2012, JGB trading moved to a shorter settlement cycle, from T+3 to T+2, for the first 
time in 15 years. In accordance with the global move, further efforts toward shortening of the 
settlement  cycle  are  being  made  in  Japan,  with  an  aim  of  achieving  T+1  for  JGB  outright 
transactions. Last month, the Working Group on Shortening of JGB Settlement Cycle, which 
was  set  up  under  the  auspices  of  the  Japan  Securities  Dealers  Association,  released  the 
final version of “Grand Design towards Shortening of JGB Settlement Cycle (T+1)” (hereafter, 
“Grand Design”), revealing the challenge and strategies that could be taken for realizing T+1 
settlement. 
In  some  cases,  shortening  the  settlement  cycle  can  be  viewed  as  unprofitable,  since  the 
short-term merit is hard to see and large investment to streamline post-trade operations often 
                                                
7   Namely, these are the 5th, 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, and the last day of each month. 
8   The  Depository  Trust  and  Clearing  Corporation  (DTCC)  launched  an  industry  steering  committee  in 
collaboration with other stakeholders such as the U.S. Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association 
(SIFMA) and Investment Company Institute (ICI). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  is  required.  In  the  medium  to  long  run,  however,  the  Japanese  economy  as  a  whole  can 
greatly benefit not only from the reduction of settlement risks arising from unsettled positions, 
but  also  from  the  enhanced  efficiency  of  settlement  operations  and  through  financial 
innovation. In that context, the Grand Design also identifies the reduction of operational risk 
through  standardized  operations  and  the  development  of  STP  as  another  aim  of 
achieving T+1. Other issues, such as the creation of market-wide infrastructure for collateral 
management,  as  well  as  unifying  the  form  of  repo  trades  to  the  globally  used  repurchase 
agreement,  are  also  discussed  in  the  Grand  Design,  indicating  that  we  can  expect  a 
strengthening of the global competitiveness of the JGB market and the expansion of related 
services.  Furthermore,  when  JGB  outright  transactions  move  to  T+1  settlement,  it  is 
envisaged that most repo transactions will move to T+0 settlement. This warrants attention, 
as  it  also  means  the  development  of  a  new  large  money  market  for  same  day  funds 
transactions.  While  I  am  very  grateful  for  the  stakeholders’  unremitting  efforts,  we  will 
continue to provide support toward achieving T+1 settlement. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  When  developing  payment  and  settlement  systems,  it  is  essential  to 
capture  and  analyze  the  needs  and  risks  of  those  systems  from  broader  perspectives.  In 
addition, it is important to build an infrastructure from the medium- to long-term perspective 
due to the fact that it usually takes considerable time from developing plans to managing the 
operation. 
I explained earlier today the measures taken in Europe for making use of financial EDI by 
utilizing  XML  formats.  In  Japan,  the  core  payment  and  settlement  systems  –  such  as  the 
BOJ-NET, the Zengin-System, and the system operated by the Japan Securities Depository 
Center  (JASDEC)  –  have  already  incorporated  such  formats.  We  expect  that  financial 
institutions participating in those systems will make effective use of the formats to enhance 
the quality of services they provide. In light of such circumstances, the FISC is expected to 
act as a “catalyst of global knowledge,” by collaborating with relevant parties in Asia and the 
rest of the world, thereby steering the initiatives taken by financial institutions in our country. 
The FISC is also expected to play an important role in overcoming new challenges arising 
from  information  security,  such  as  cyber-attacks.  Currently,  high  attention  has  been  paid 
around the globe to the cyber resilience of payment and settlement systems. In this regard, 
the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  published  a  report  last  month  titled,  “Cyber  resilience  in  financial  market 
infrastructures.” As more and more security violations are being witnessed around the world, 
the serious influence of these is attracting much more attention, and new findings in terms of 
strategic  decisions  and  technical  options  are  being  made.  The  FISC  is  again  expected  to 
play  a  key  role  in  research,  analysis,  and  public  relations  activities  with  regard  to  these 
issues. 
Before  closing  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  pay  great  respect  to  the  FISC  for  its  enduring 
efforts over the past 30 years, and am sure that it will continue to play an important role in 
the various fields relevant to developing payment and settlement systems in our country. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
