  Jwala Rambarran: Monetary policy presentation for November 2014 
Speech by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Chaguanas Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Port-of-Spain, 1 December 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I thank the Chaguanas Chamber of Industry and Commerce for graciously agreeing to host 
our third Monetary Policy Forum. Events such as this Monetary Policy Forum are important 
to  Central  Bank’s  communication  strategies,  as  communication  is  now  the  new  monetary 
policy tool for central banks around the world. From Debe to Tobago and now Chaguanas, 
this  Forum  provides  a  platform  to  explain  the  thinking  behind  our monetary  policy  actions, 
interact with stakeholders and account to the national community, who we are here to serve. 
As we enter the final month of 2014, global economic prospects are muted compared to the 
more optimistic sentiments which prevailed at the start of the year. Recovery from the global 
crisis is taking longer than anyone expected. More than a half decade onwards and many 
countries are still struggling with painful legacies of the crisis, including extraordinarily high 
debt and soaring unemployment and it’s not yet over. 
The Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde, at the recent 
Annual  Meetings  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank,  talked  about  the  “new  mediocre”  as  the 
descriptor for low economic growth which is now the new reality. In the advanced economies, 
the United States grew at its fastest pace in over decade and the United Kingdom is showing 
encouraging  signs  of  steady  growth.  Recovery  in  the  Eurozone  remains  fragile.  Japan’s 
economy has slipped back into its fourth recession since 2008. 
Emerging markets, which fuelled a great deal of global activity in the recent past, are likely to 
do  their  heavy  lifting  at  a  slower  pace  than  before.  Output  growth  in  China,  the  world’s 
second-largest  economy,  has  slowed  to  a  five-  year  low.  The  Indian  economy  is  rallying, 
while  the  other  two  members  of  the  BRIC  bloc,  Russia  and  Brazil,  are  facing  significant 
headwinds to growth. 
Still on the international front, there are dark clouds gathering. These clouds coming from the 
United States are bringing murky conditions associated with normalization of US monetary 
policy. These conditions have the potential to have a powerful impact on emerging market 
economies such as Trinidad and Tobago, when they reach us. 
As  expected,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  ended  its  era  of  quantitative  easing  at  its  October 
2014 meeting. Next year, for the first time in eight years, we are likely to see a hike in the 
Fed  funds  rate,  probably  in  summer  of  2015.  There  is  considerable  uncertainty  in  global 
financial markets about the pace and magnitude of these expected increases in US interest 
rates. 
For Trinidad and Tobago, this uncertainty could result in a  weakening of capital inflows or 
acceleration  of  capital  outflows.  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  already  putting 
measures  in  place,  through  available  monetary  policy  tools,  such  as  increasing  its  policy 
interest  rate,  to  insulate  our  economy,  as  much  as  possible,  from  the  shocks  we  are 
expected to feel by rising US interest rates. 
Apart from the dark clouds hovering in the United States, geopolitical risks are mounting in 
various  parts  of  the  world. We  started  2014  with  a  possible  escalation  of  conflict  between 
Russia  and  Ukraine.  We  are  ending  the  year  with  an  Ebola  outbreak  in  Africa  and  an 
upsurge of ISIS in the Middle East. 
So, you will realize I have gone through the trouble of first raising these murky international 
matters  as  they  are  early  warning  signs  for  global  financial  markets.  Developments  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  battlefields across the world can have an impact on our small island state. This is why I have 
raised them as they set the tone of how things are likely to unfold. 
Recent economic developments 
I’ll begin with a brief overview of domestic economic conditions. Following no growth in 2010 
and  in  2011,  our  economy  recovered  by  approximately  1 ½ percent  in  2012  and  grew  by 
1.7 percent in 2013. In early 2014, Central Bank expected the Trinidad and Tobago economy 
to  have  continued  its  recovery,  with  growth  projected  at  2½ percent.  For  a  number  of 
reasons, this did not materialize. 
Central Bank’s latest economic review of the year now indicates economic growth is likely to 
be  a  modest  ½  percent  for  2014. This,  of  course,  is  well  below  our  forecast for  economic 
growth,  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  of  2 ½ percent.  So  what  accounts  for  this 
deviation? How could we the experts, as well as other agencies such as the IMF, S&P and 
our own CSO, get it so wrong? 
The  unexpected  slowdown  in  the  economy  was  caused  by  a  dismal  performance  in  the 
energy  sector,  with  declines  most  pronounced  in  natural  gas  and  LNG  production.  Energy 
companies  had  indicated,  in  October  2013,  the  planned  supply  shutdowns  and  stoppages 
that had been taking place for the past two years would be no more and energy production 
would  have  normalized  in  2014.  However,  supply  disruptions  mainly  from  the  two  largest 
energy companies continued throughout 2014 and stifled the recovery process. 
In  January  and  May  2014,  bpTT  took  down  the  company’s  largest  production  platform, 
Savonette,  to  facilitate  drilling  activities.  BGTT  had  a  planned  shutdown  of  its  Dolphin 
platform for five days in June 2014 to facilitate the installation of equipment required for the 
Starfish  development  programme.  BG  also  took  the  opportunity  to  undertake  a  parallel 
maintenance  exercise.  These  are  just  a  few  instances  of  shutdowns  by  the  country’s  two 
largest  natural  gas  producers.  Routine  maintenance  by  Atlantic  LNG  Train  2  facility  and 
Petrotrin’s oil refinery worsened the situation in our energy sector. 
Energy output, therefore, contracted by an estimated 1 ½ percent in the first nine months of 
2014. Energy production rebounded to an extent – within the last two months but not strong 
enough to compensate for the prolonged sharp drop in output. NGC’s gas pipeline leak over 
the  last  few  days,  which  led  to  the  shutdown  of  the  country’s  main  power  provider,  is 
expected  to  be  resolved  soon  and  should  not  have  a  significant  impact  on  production. 
Central Bank expects growth in the energy sector to decline by a little over 2 percent in 2014. 
This is the harsh reality to which we are tied in an energy- based economy. The bright spot of 
news in the midst of all these dreary developments came from the non-energy sector, as its 
steady performance prevented the economy from veering completely off its growth trajectory. 
Output in the non-energy sector increased by just over 2 percent in the first nine months of 
2014 and indications of non-energy performance remain encouraging in the final quarter of 
2014. Overall growth in the non-energy sector is expected to be around 3 percent in 2014, 
which surpasses Central Bank’s projected growth rate of 2 percent. Much of the growth in the 
non-energy  sector  has  been  concentrated  in  three  areas  –  construction,  distribution  and 
finance. 
In  the  construction  sector,  local  sales  of  cement  have  been  expanding  strongly,  reaching 
almost  8 ½  percent  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2014.  Higher  construction  activity  reflects 
several  on-going,  large  public  sector  projects  such  as  the  Point  Fortin  Highway,  the 
Children’s Hospital, the National Aquatic Centre and the Port at Galeota. Further impetus is 
coming from private sector projects breaking ground, such as the “C3” movie and shopping 
complex in Corinth, South Trinidad. 
New car sales – a main indicator of distribution activity – are still hitting double-digit rates. 
Dealers  sold  just  under  14,000  new  cars  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2014.  At  the  end  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  November, we had already reached near the 4,500 marker on the PDE series. For the first 
time in five years, new car sales have surpassed 18,000 units on an annual basis. 
Low  interest  rates,  high  liquidity  and  the  cautiously  optimistic  sentiment  of  the  business 
community have supported the expansion in private sector lending. The recovery in business 
lending  which  emerged  in  the  first  quarter  of  2014  strengthened  as  the  year  progressed. 
Over  the  nine  months  leading  up  to  September  2014,  business  lending  increased  by  an 
average of 4 ½ percent compared to an average decline of nearly 4 percent over the same 
period in 2013. 
Consumer  loans  continued  to  accelerate  into  2014.  The  expansion  in  consumer  loans 
averaged  7 ½ percent  over  the  period  January  to  September  2014,  up  from  an  average 
increase  of  5.0  percent  over  the  first  nine  months  of  2013.  A  disaggregation  of  consumer 
credit showed strong growth of loans for the purchase of vehicles, home renovation and debt 
consolidation. Record low mortgage rates continue to spur demand for real estate mortgage 
financing. 
I now turn to a matter grabbing headlines and generating intense interest in the country over 
the past month – falling international crude oil prices and the impact on the budget. 
Prices for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) fell by 30 percent since the start of the fiscal year 
on October 1st to a four-year low of US$66 per barrel, last Friday, following OPEC’s decision 
not to cut output. This is lower than the 2014/2015 Budget estimate of US$80 per barrel. The 
weakness in oil prices is due to abundant global supply from OPEC and the United States 
combined  with  slower  growth  in  world  demand  especially  from  Europe  and  China.  The 
general expectation is lower crude oil prices could persist for some time. 
There are several reasons why we should be concerned about falling oil prices but I hasten 
to  add,  we  should  not  suffer  a  panic  attack  or  hyperventilate  yet.  First,  we  have  become 
accustomed to using the oil price as a psychological barometer of our economic forecast of 
sunny  skies  or  murky  weather.  Oil  prices  rise…we  feel  euphoric;  oil  prices  fall…we  feel 
“doom  and  gloom”  and  reach  for  a  paper  bag  to  breathe  into.  This  see-saw  sentiment 
neglects  the fact  there  is  another  even  more  important,  but  apparently  not  as  well  known, 
barometer of our economic outlook. I refer to the natural gas price. This is not breaking news, 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  members  of  the  media.  Trinidad  and  Tobago  became  a  gas-
based economy 18 years ago in 1996. 
Last  year,  we  produced  about  nine  times  more  natural  gas  than  crude  oil  on  an  energy 
equivalent basis. A large portion of our energy production and exports are natural gas-based. 
At Central Bank, we estimate natural gas now contributes roughly 70 percent to Government 
revenue and oil the remaining 30 percent. 
The  second  reason  we  should  not  panic  over  plummeting  oil  prices  is  because  budgeted 
revenue estimates are based on the Henry Hub natural gas price in the United States, even 
though less than 10 percent of our LNG exports go to the United States. We now have more 
varied  LNG  export  markets  which  consist  of  South  America,  Europe,  the  Middle  East  and 
Asia. This means our LNG is sold at different prices in these various markets. Government’s 
natural  gas  revenue  is  based  on  the  net  back  price  for  LNG  at  Point  Fortin,  which  is  an 
average price tallied from the various markets for our LNG exports. The Henry Hub natural 
gas price is currently trading at US$4.00 per million British thermal units, that is, 45 percent 
above the budgeted natural gas price. The netback price for LNG at Point Fortin is currently 
around US$5.50 per million British thermal units, which is double the budgeted natural gas 
price. However, in some regions, such as Asia and Europe, natural gas prices are indexed to 
oil and can move in tandem with movements in oil prices. Even so, Central Bank estimates 
the netback price for LNG at Point Fortin would have to fall by 50 percent for an extended 
period of time to significantly compress energy revenues. Therefore, the bottom line is this: 
falling oil prices should not have an immediate impact on our budget, as 70 percent of our 
revenue  comes  from  the  sale  of  natural  gas-based  exports  which  are  currently  trading  at 
double the budgeted natural gas price. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The third reason we should avoid hysteria over falling oil prices is that the Minister of Finance 
and the Economy has several fiscal options he can exercise to adjust to a shortfall in energy 
revenues.  Last  Friday,  Minister  Howai,  indicated  his  plan  of  action  would  be  to  slash 
$1.3 billion in expenditure across Ministries. The Minister also has the option to access the 
Heritage  and  Stabilization  Fund  to  partly  finance  budgetary  shortfalls.  However,  as  I’ve 
advised Government, the current situation does not warrant withdrawals from the HSF, and 
further  expenditure  cuts  should  be  made  if  shortfalls  in  energy  revenues  persist  for  an 
extended period of time. 
We have lived with oil price volatility for more than 100 years. Trinidad and Tobago survived 
the  collapse  of  oil  prices  in  the  mid1980s  and,  more  recently,  in  2008  when  oil  prices 
dropped  by  more  than  30  percent.  What  is  important,  as  I  have  advised  the  Minister  of 
Finance  and  the  Economy,  is  the  need  to  exercise  prudence  when  making  choices  to 
stabilize the fiscal position. 
I would now like to turn to another murky matter that has grabbed headlines for most of the 
year – foreign exchange, but not just foreign exchange, everyone’s needs for precious US 
currency  being  unfulfilled,  from  the  vacationer  wanting  US$500,  to  you,  the  business 
community being unable to pay for goods, and seeing your credit standing being affected. 
Foreign exchange has been turned into a murky matter by some with agendas and others 
who pretend to be ignorant about how our system works. 
I’m sure when the business reporters write the 2014 year in review, they will probably say the 
so called, “foreign exchange shortage” is the business story of the year and perhaps it is – 
but there are always three sides to a story… yours, mine and the truth… and may be after a 
year and more, some of you will see the truth today. 
Let’s start at the beginning. As banker to the Government, we receive the country’s revenue 
from  the  energy  sector  through  the  taxes  energy  companies  are  required  to  pay  every 
quarter  in  US  dollars. That money forms most of  the  country’s  “Official  Reserves”.  Central 
Bank invests the reserves and we use the interest income we make from those investments 
to fund the operations of the Bank itself. Central Bank is not funded by the taxpayer, and we 
do not receive funding from the Government. In fact, it is the other way around. At the end of 
the  fiscal  year,  we  send  our  surplus  to  Government. We  also  use  the  reserves  to  service 
Government’s external debt payments and to sell foreign exchange to the banking system to 
meet shortfalls in supply. Through our sales of US to the financial system we foster orderly 
conditions in the foreign exchange market, thereby maintaining exchange rate stability. 
As you are well aware, demand for foreign exchange from the business community and the 
public is perennially high, but supplies come to the market at discrete intervals, usually when 
energy  sector  companies  convert  foreign  exchange  with  the  banking  system  to  pay  local 
bills. So foreign exchange supplies to the country come in two ways: 
1. 
Directly to the Central Bank when energy companies pay their quarterly taxes in US 
dollars and; 
When energy companies convert US dollars through the banking system year-round 
to meet local commitments. 
2. 
However,  demand  is  always  higher  than  supply  and  these  gaps  result  in  shortfalls  in  the 
system and it is at these points when Central Bank steps in to meet the shortfalls by selling 
foreign exchange from our stock of official reserves. Therefore, Central Bank only enters the 
system to meet shortfalls in foreign exchange supply, not to provide the entire supply to the 
financial system. Right now we account for just over 25 percent of the total foreign exchange 
supply while the money that comes directly from the energy companies account for the rest. 
What then, based on this structure, has created all the noise in the past year? There was a 
time when shortfalls would occur seasonally, close to Christmas and the hectic August travel 
period. Over the last two decades, demand for foreign exchange not only expanded but its 
composition has also changed to reflect new patterns of consumer spending, for example, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  use of credit cards for making online payments. Today is now known as “Cyber-Monday” in 
the  United  States  and  many  locals  will  flood  US  retailers’  websites  from  the  comfort  and 
warmth of their homes in Trinidad and Tobago thanks to the Internet, credit cards and US 
delivery addresses. 
Foreign credit card purchases devoured US$570 million for the year so far. That excludes 
today’s  Cyber-Monday  sales  and  upcoming  Christmas  purchases.  Last year, foreign  credit 
card payments consumed US$530 million. That is more than US$1 billion spent foreign credit 
card purchases in just two years. Commercial banks must meet these credit card payments 
before they meet any other foreign exchange demand. 
That’s  one  source  of  demand,  then  there’s  that  double-digit  growth  in  sales  of  new  cars, 
many  of  which  are  higher-end  luxury  vehicles.  For  the  year  so  far,  we’ve  spent 
US$205 million on purchases of new cars; last year that figure was US$340 million. That is 
nearly US$750 million on purchases of new cars in two years. 
Foreign  currency  deposits  are  another  source  of  foreign  exchange  demand.  Currently,  we 
have US$ 3.3 billion dollars in foreign currency deposits in the banking system. 
Here’s where it gets interesting, and the foreign exchange story gets a bit murkier. There are 
many business leaders who often give their opinions freely on foreign exchange, many go 
the media and have been extremely vocal on the matter. Many businesses have legitimate 
requests  for  foreign  exchange  and  we  acknowledge  your  requests  are  not  always  met  on 
time, and it is for this reason Central Bank has taken US$1.7 billion dollars from our reserves 
for the year so far to help meet your unsatisfied demand. However, we’ve noticed a trend, 
where  businesses  make  noise  for foreign  exchange  to  pay  bills  for trade-related  purposes 
and actively lobby the authorized dealers and Central Bank for US dollars. When the money 
is  provided,  the  funds  are  promptly  deposited  in  their  foreign  currency  account  and  left 
unused and the noise about not being able to get money for business continues. I do have 
one tip for businesses trying to get foreign exchange; it helps if you don’t conduct business 
with  companies  with  terrorist  links  as  we  have  strict  laws  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Combatting the Financing of Terrorism. 
As  I  indicated  before,  Central  Bank  steps  into  the  market  to  meet  the  shortfall  in  foreign 
exchange supply and that presently accounts for just over 25 percent of total supply. So why 
can’t we supply 50 percent or 80 percent, or even all? Why must we ensure that we have 
enough official reserves put aside? 
Well...let me ask you this...What if the global financial crisis goes on for another five years? 
What if the Fed raises interest rates faster and more than expected next year and causes 
tremendous  volatility  in  global  currency,  stock  and  bond  markets? What  if  the  Ebola  virus 
spreads  to  the  Caribbean  region? When  we  factor  in  the  chance  of  these  external  events 
happening, we have to ensure we have enough official reserves as insurance just in case 
something does happen. 
The  plan  is  to  ensure  we  don’t  deplete  these  reserves,  as  we  once  did  in  the  late  1980s, 
because  it  took  us  30  years  to  finally  reach  to  today’s  US$11  billion.  And  yes,  this 
US$11 billion  includes  US$1.175  billion  from  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  MHTL.  In 
benchmarking, we have just over one year’s worth of official reserves. This means if I took all 
the official reserves and gave it to the business community, you would actually be able to buy 
everything you need for a year. Is that enough?  
Should I keep using the country’s official reserves to ensure every commercial activity that 
demands foreign  exchange gets  it from  Central  Bank?  I  will  not  be  the  Governor  who  ran 
down  the  country’s  reserves  to  make  everyone  happy.  I  prefer  to  continue  to  be  the 
Governor, who all armchair economists say disrupted the foreign exchange market, because 
of improvements I know will benefit you and the entire country in the long run, than the one 
who  tried  to get  everyone  to  like  him  and  make friends  by  playing  loose  and fast  with  the 
country’s foreign exchange reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Central bank’s monetary policy actions 
I now turn to Central Bank’s monetary policy actions. 
At  its  November  2014  meeting,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  of  Central  Bank 
resolved to again increase the “Repo” rate by another 25 basis points to 3 ¼ percent. This is 
the second hike in just two months, after holding the Repo rate at an historical low for nearly 
two years. The MPC is sending a signal it believes higher interest rates are now necessary in 
our financial system to mitigate the disruptive effects of higher portfolio capital outflows and 
to pre- empt a potential rise in inflationary pressures. The MPC based its decision to start a 
gradual withdrawal of the accommodative monetary stance of the past four years on three 
main factors. 
First,  forward  guidance  from  the  US  Fed  has  altered  market  expectations  about  the  time 
frame for the end of quantitative easing and the start to an increase in the Fed funds rate. As 
indicated before, the US Fed ended its quantitative easing programme in October 2014 and 
is  expected  to  gradually  increase  its  policy  interest  rate  from  around  summer  of  2015.  At 
current  interest  rates,  US  dollar  assets  are  more  attractive  to  TT  dollar  assets,  prompting 
movements of portfolio capital in search of higher yields. We need to stay well ahead of the 
curve if we are to enhance the appeal of TT dollar assets. 
Second,  headline  inflation  is  accelerating,  reaching  just  shy  of  10  percent  double-digit 
territory  in  October  2014,  up  from  3  percent  at  the  start  of  the  year. This  was  the  highest 
headline inflation rate since July 2012, when I assumed office as Governor. The pick-up in 
headline  inflation  is  mainly  due  to  an  escalation  in  food  price  inflation,  which  is  currently 
hitting almost 20 percent. Rising food prices reflect lower domestic agricultural output partly 
due to the cessation of planting by Caroni Green Limited as a consequence of its prolonged 
organizational  restructuring.  With  the  recent  heavy  rainfall  and  flooding  in  some  parts  of 
Trinidad,  we  expect  further  increases  in  food  crop  prices.  Looking  ahead,  higher  public 
spending through the expansionary 2014/2015 Budget is already adding to elevated liquidity 
levels (currently nearly $8 billion) and may further push up core inflationary pressures. 
Third,  the  non-energy  sector  has  delivered  fairly  respectable  growth  for  14  consecutive 
quarters to September 2014 and the near-term outlook is for continued steady performance 
in non-energy output. This suggests the non- energy sector is developing enough resilience 
to withstand a gradual increase in interest rates. In addition, growth is strengthening in the 
United States, and this augurs for CARICOM countries which are the major market for our 
non- energy exports. 
Apart from increases to the Repo rate, Central Bank has been very active over the past year 
managing  excess  liquidity.  The  main  source  of  this  liquidity  arises  from  financing 
Government’s net domestic budget deficit. For the year-to-date, net domestic fiscal injections 
added over $11 billion into the system, while the maturity of two Central Government bonds 
previously  issued  for  liquidity  absorption  purposes,  also  returned  approximately  $1.5 billion 
into the system. 
In order to effectively manage liquidity levels, the Bank utilized several tools at its disposal. 
Given the increased limits under the Treasury Bills and Notes Acts, over the period January 
– October 2014 the Central Bank intensified its use of open market operations and withdrew 
$10.7 billion from the banking system. Of this amount, $7 ½ billion in open market securities 
were  issued  to  sterilize  or  lock  away  the  liquidity  arising  from  an  extraordinary,  one-off 
purchase of US$1.175 billion in foreign exchange from a bank. 
In  addition,  Central  Bank  rolled  over  three  commercial  banks’  fixed  deposits  totalling 
$4.5 billion and facilitated the issue of a $1 billion liquidity sterilization Treasury bond in June 
2014.  Further,  Central  Bank  sales  of  foreign  exchange  to  authorized  dealers  indirectly 
removed $9.1 billion from the system over the review period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Bank  plans  to  re-open  the  un-issued  portion  ($440 million)  of  the  $1 billion  liquidity 
Treasury bond issued in August 2013 as well as use other liquidity absorption measures to 
rein in excess liquidity in coming months. 
Short-term prospects 
I would like to turn now to the outlook for 2015. 
We are facing weaker global growth prospects with significant downside risks. Perhaps the 
most immediate downside risk to Trinidad and Tobago stems from market volatility about the 
future  path  of  US  monetary  policy.  Against  this  backdrop,  Central  Bank’s  outlook  is 
circumspect for 2015. 
Several factors support central bank’s 2015 outlook: 
• 
  First,  we  expect  energy  production  to  return  to more  reasonable  levels  next  year, 
providing a firmer boost to economic growth. This, of course, is dependent on many 
factors. So far, both bpTT and BGTT, the two main gas producers, have given no 
indication  of  any  major planned  supply  disruptions. We  expect  some  resolution  to 
the on-going negotiation of gas supply contracts. In addition, oil production appears 
to have stabilized driven by Petrotrin and the smaller, independent producers. 
Second,  we  expect  the  non-energy  sector  to  maintain  its  respectable  growth 
performance.  With  general  elections  due  in  2015,  construction  activity  is  likely  to 
remain  strong  even  if  Government  slows  down  its  heavy  capital  expenditure 
programme which plays a critical path in providing fiscal stimulus to the economy. 
This, combined with other projects undertaken by the private sector, is expected to 
further boost non-energy activity. 
Third,  we  are  guarded  in  our  2015  outlook,  as  results  from  the  third  Business 
Confidence  Survey,  conducted  by  Central  Bank  and  Arthur  Lok  Jack  Graduate 
School of Business, once again point to cautious optimism among the local business 
community.  Just  over  half  of  respondents  anticipate  improvements  in  the  local 
economy  over  the  coming  year,  while  65  percent  expect  their  financial  outlook  to 
improve  over  the  next  12  months.  Businesses  in  Central  Trinidad  and  in  Tobago 
remained the most confident about the business and economic outlook in the short-
term. 
Conclusion 
As I conclude, I know many of you will leave  here today with the ½ percent growth in our 
economy as the number on your mind, and the projected growth that didn’t happen. What 
you need to contemplate as you walk out of here is this: the biggest threat to our economy’s 
growth prospects at this time will not come from the weak performance of the energy sector 
nor will it come from falling oil prices. The peril that has the potential to test us the most in 
2015 will come from those storm clouds gathering over increases in US interest rates. Two 
consecutive  increases  in  the  Repo  rate  by  Central  Bank  will  mean  higher  lending  rates. 
However, it is difficult and painful action needed to shield the Trinidad and Tobago economy 
from  the  murky  weather  ahead.  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  make  the  difficult  and  tough 
choices to help keep our economic house in order. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
