  Charles L Evans: Patience is a virtue when normalizing monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
Peterson  Institute’s  Conference  on  Labor  Market  Slack,  Washington  DC,  24  September 
2014. 
 Thank you. 
I would like to thank the Peterson Institute and Adam Posen for organizing this conference 
focusing  on  labor  market  issues.  The  functioning  of  the  labor  market  is  always  of  great 
interest to both academics and policymakers. But today, with the collapse of labor demand 
during the Great Recession and ongoing structural changes, judging the health and future of 
labor  markets  is  both  especially  challenging  and  important.  The  work  presented  at  this 
conference and others like it offers an opportunity to integrate the most recent research with 
the thinking of policymakers. In keeping with this theme, I will first offer my views on the labor 
market and how the issues raised here influence my thinking on monetary policy, and I will 
then  discuss my  more general  strategy for  considering  when  and  how  we  should  begin to 
normalize monetary policy. 
Before  I  begin,  let  me  note  that  the  views  I  express  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily 
represent those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or within 
the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction and summary 
Five long years have passed since the trough of the Great Recession, in mid-2009. Late that 
year the unemployment rate stood at an astonishing 10.0 percent. Since then, we have made 
significant progress in moving the unemployment rate back to a more normal number. Yet, at 
6.1 percent, it remains too high. And, as we have heard all morning, other measures of labor 
market activity remain suppressed. 
We  have  underperformed  on  the  inflation  front  as  well.  Since  2008,  year-over-year  total 
inflation  as  measured  by  the  Personal  Consumption  Expenditures  Price  Index  (PCE)  has 
averaged  just  1.4  percent,  well  below  its  2  percent  target.  Today,  PCE  inflation  stands  at  
1–1/2 percent and is expected to move up only slowly toward the FOMC’s target. 
Nonetheless, we have come a long way  in healing the injuries the financial crisis  inflicted. 
Certainly  monetary  policy  has  been  doing  some  heavy  lifting.  The  Federal  Reserve 
responded quickly to the unfolding recession by cutting the fed funds rate to near zero by 
December  2008.  At  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB),  we  then  turned  to  unconventional 
measures,  such  as  large-scale  asset  purchases  and  forward  guidance  about  the  federal 
funds rate to provide further accommodation. In the fall of 2012, with the unemployment rate 
hovering  stubbornly  at  around  8  percent  and  core  inflation  steadily  drifting  lower  than  our 
2 percent  target,  the  Fed  introduced  open-ended  asset  purchases  and,  later,  forward 
guidance that related federal funds rate actions to thresholds explicitly expressed in terms of 
our  policy  goals.  Together,  these  efforts  have  helped  the  economy  make  impressive 
progress  toward  our  employment  mandate  and  appear  to  be  moving  us  closer  to  our 
2 percent inflation target as well. 
With the economy undershooting both our employment and inflation goals, monetary policy 
does not presently face a conflict in goals; actions that support employment growth also help 
move inflation up toward our target. Yet, as I look to the future and assess risks, I foresee a 
time when a policy dilemma might emerge: Namely, we could find ourselves in a situation in 
which  the  progress  or  risks  to  one  of  our  goals  dictate  a  tightening  of  policy  while  the 
achievement of the other goal calls for maintaining strong accommodation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  So what happens when a conflict emerges? In such cases, the FOMC has said that it will 
follow a “balanced approach” to achieving its policy goals. I will elaborate at length on this 
later, but let me summarize how I think we should operationalize this approach today. We 
should keep our focus on our policy goals and should be highly attuned to both the likelihood 
and  the  costs  of missing those goals. To me,  the  risks  imposed  on  an  economy forced  to 
operate at the zero lower bound on policy rates are paramount. Accordingly, before the Fed 
raises rates we should have a great deal of confidence that we won’t be forced to backtrack 
on our moves and face another painful period at the ZLB. We should be exceptionally patient 
in  adjusting  the  stance  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  –  even  to  the  point  of  allowing  a  modest 
overshooting of our inflation target to appropriately balance the risks to our policy objectives. 
Conflicting signs in the labor market 
Of course, to judge the success of policy, you have to know when you’ve actually reached 
your targets. Knowing when we hit our inflation target is straightforward. After all, a 2 percent 
increase  in  PCE  prices  is  an  easily  identifiable  number.  But full  employment  is  a far more 
nuanced  concept.  As  the  FOMC’s  annual  January  “Statement  on  Longer-Run  Goals  and 
Monetary Policy Strategy” recognizes, maximum employment can be influenced by a large 
number of structural factors that can change over time and may not be directly measureable. 
In  light  of  this  uncertainty,  the  Committee  considers  many  factors  in  gauging  maximum 
employment. As the extremely relevant research presented at this conference makes clear, 
judging the degree of slack along these many dimensions is a difficult and complex task. But 
it is one that is critical for the conduct of monetary policy – we must have a good idea of what 
constitutes achievement of our full employment target. 
Our Chicago Fed research staff has been working long and hard, and in my remarks today, I 
will briefly talk about some of our results that touch on several of the most contested labor 
market issues on the table today. These involve labor force participation, job openings and 
wages. To give you the punch line, this research and work done by others in the field lead 
me to conclude that, although we have made great strides, a good deal of slack remains in 
the labor market. 
Labor force participation and employment 
As everyone in this room is aware, the labor force participation rate has fallen throughout the 
recession and recovery and is now at a 35-year low.1 As Julie Hotchkiss described earlier 
this morning, it is well understood that much of the decline is due to trends that far predate 
the  Great  Recession.  The  movement  of  baby  boomers  into  retirement  age  and  the  long-
running  declines  in  teenager  and  prime-age  male  participation  would  have  significantly 
reduced labor force participation rates independently of the economic downturn. 
Chicago  Fed  economists  first  did  work  on  the  prospects  for  a  declining  labor  force 
participation  trend  back  in  2001  –  near  the  time  the  rate  peaked  at  just  over  67  percent.2 
Even  after  revisiting  this  topic  numerous  times  and  with  multiple  generations  of  research 
assistants  running  the  programs,  their  views  about  the  trends  that  are  consistent  with  the 
composition of the population and a labor market near equilibrium have not changed much 
                                                
1  The labor force participation rate is defined as the share of the population aged 16 and older who are either 
employed or unemployed. To be unemployed, a person has to not have a job but be actively looking for work 
in the prior four weeks and to be currently available to work. These data are collected by the U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics as part of its monthly Current Population Survey. 
2  Aaronson and Sullivan (2001). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
since  then.3  Among  the  many  robustness  analyses  they  performed,  their  models  produce 
nearly the same trend for labor force participation as they have since 2001.4 
Depending on the details of the specification, Chicago Fed economists estimate that at the 
end of the second quarter of 2014, the labor force participation rate was between 1/2 and  
1–1/4 percentage points below trend. Furthermore, the participation rate was as much as 3/4 
of  a  percentage  point  below  predictions  based  on  its  historical  relationship  with  the 
unemployment  rate.  This  disparity  suggests  that  there  likely  is  an  extra  margin  of  slack  in 
labor markets beyond that indicated by the unemployment rate alone. 
It is interesting to dig further into these “labor force participation gaps.” Virtually all the gap 
during  this  cycle  has  been  due  to  withdrawal  from  the  labor  market  of  workers  without  a 
college  degree.  By  contrast,  a  participation  gap  never  materialized  for  college  graduates, 
even  during  the  depths  of  the  recession.  There  is  no  simple  explanation  for  this  striking 
contrast. It could be yet another symptom of long-running but difficult-to-model trends in the 
economy, such as job polarization and changes in social programs, which particularly impact 
the lower-skill work force.5 Regardless, the divergent work behavior across education groups 
strikes me as an important fact and deserving of much further research attention. 
The  declining  trend  in  labor  force  participation  also  influences  how  fast  the  economy  can 
produce new jobs in the long run. Our estimate of the trend in payroll employment growth 
over the past 15 years averages roughly 100,000 jobs per month. Looking ahead, we think 
that declines in the labor force participation rate and population growth will bring the trend in 
payroll  employment  growth  down  to  fewer  than  50,000  jobs  per month  by  2016.  This  new 
benchmark probably will only become apparent in the monthly data once the economy closes 
the current 3.8 million employment gap. But barring sizable changes in immigration policy, 
policymakers  and  the  public  will  need  to get  accustomed  to  a  slower  base  of  employment 
growth by the latter part of the decade. 
Job openings and hiring 
This brings me to the issue of hiring and job openings. The job openings rate, as measured 
by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) 
data, started climbing immediately after the recession and made it back to its pre-recession 
high  this  summer.6  Yet,  despite  some  improvement,  the  JOLTS  hiring  rate  remains 
disappointingly below where it stood before the recession began.7  
Why  might  firms  advertise  openings  aggressively  but  be  slower  to  fill  them?  Posting  a 
vacancy  is  only  part  of  the  hiring  process.  Jason  Faberman  of  the  Chicago  Fed,  in 
collaboration  with  Steve  Davis  of  the  University  of  Chicago  and  John  Haltiwanger  of  the 
                                                
3  Aaronson et al. (2014). 
4  Specifically, the trends generated by Chicago Fed economists’ preferred models are very close whether they 
are estimated using data through 2002, 2007 or 2014. 
5  See,  for  example,  Acemoglu and  Autor  (2011)  and  Charles,  Hurst and  Notowidigdo  (2013).  See  Shierholz, 
Mishel and Schmitt (2013) for a skeptical view. An alternative explanation is based on changes in the use of 
social safety net programs, especially disability insurance (DI), that are partly cyclical in nature. The DI rolls 
have  been  increasing  throughout  this  business  cycle,  although  they  have  been  on  the  rise,  more  or  less 
uninterrupted, since the 1990s (Autor, 2011; and Burkhauser and Daly, 2011). The DI program tends to be 
cyclical partly because eligibility standards ease amid deteriorating labor market conditions (Mueller, Rothstein 
and von Wachter, 2013). That is, people with moderate disabilities are more likely to qualify for the DI program 
when there are fewer suitable jobs available. 
6  The job openings rate is the number of job openings on the last business day of the month as a percent of 
total employment plus job openings. 
7  The hiring rate stood at 4.0 percent at its 2006 peak and fell to as low as 2.8 percent in 2009. Today, it is 
3.5 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  University of Maryland, estimate that the overall effort that firms actually are putting into filling 
a job vacancy fell by over 20 percent during the recession. It has been slow to recover since 
and today still stands 8 percent below its 2006 peak and, for that matter, below where it was 
anytime during the last expansion.8  
Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger argue that low recruiting intensity may reflect employers’ 
increased hiring standards. It could be that hiring standards become more stringent during an 
economic downturn. For example, if there is an unusually high degree of downward nominal 
wage rigidity, as Mary Daly and Bart Hobijn of the San Francisco Fed document has been 
the case over this cycle,9 then employers may respond by filling fewer openings. If this story 
is true, then the high ratio of vacancies to hires is a further indication of slack in the labor 
market. 
Alternatively, more stringent hiring standards might signal a persistent structural problem. For 
years, I’ve been hearing business people complain of difficulty in finding sufficiently qualified 
candidates. Furthermore, we hear anecdotes about firms being extremely picky and waiting 
for  the  perfect  applicant.  These  behaviors  may  be  indicative  of  a  skills  mismatch  between 
jobs  and  workers.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  it  is  possible  that  the  steady-state  level  of  the 
vacancy  rate  has  increased,  which  would  help  explain  why  the  improvement  in  vacancies 
we’ve seen over the past few years has been slow to translate into similar progress on hiring. 
Wages 
If skills mismatch were an ongoing problem, we’d expect to see wages rising for those with 
the skills in demand. There is evidence of increasing wages in some occupations, but wage 
growth  in  general  continues  to  be  very  modest at  about  2–1/4  percent per  year. That  is  a 
long way from the 3 to 4 percent benchmark implied by productivity growth and our inflation 
objective.  Indeed,  over  the  past  three  years,  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  by  a 
percentage  point  per  year;  yet  real  wage  growth  has  barely  budged.  It’s  hard  for  me  to 
imagine a full labor market recovery without genuine improvement in compensation growth. 
But am I wrong? Has the wage Phillips curve completely broken down? 
Some claim the answer is no – you just have to look at the right measure of unemployment. 
Alan Krueger, Judd Cramer and David Cho, among others, have shown that the relationship 
between real wages and the short-term unemployment rate during this cycle has been in line 
with  historical  norms,  whereas  the  historical  spike  in  long-term  unemployment  exerted 
minimal  pressure  on  real  wage  growth.10  Of  course,  the  short-term  unemployment  rate  is 
now close to its pre-recession level. So their model implies nominal wage growth should be 
returning to something close to the fundamentals implied by productivity growth and inflation. 
My staff’s research comes to a somewhat different conclusion. Using models similar to those 
Michael Kiley presented here this morning,11 they find that pools of potential workers other 
than the short-term unemployed, notably the medium-term unemployed and the involuntary 
part-time  work  force,  substantially  influence  wage  growth  at  the  state  or  metropolitan 
statistical  area  level.12  Today,  medium-term  unemployment  is  down  a  good  deal,  but  the 
involuntary part-time work force is still very high. According to their model estimates, if labor 
                                                
8  See Dice Hiring Indicators (2014). 
9  Daly and Hobijn (2014). 
10  Krueger,  Cramer  and  Cho  (2014).  This  same  result  appears  for  the  price  Phillips  curve,  as  shown,  for 
example, by Gordon (2013). 
11  Kiley (2014). 
12  Aaronson and Jordan (2014). The medium-term unemployed are those unemployed five to 26 weeks. Persons 
employed  part  time  involuntarily  for  economic  reasons  (such  as  slack  work  or  unfavorable  business 
conditions) are those who want and are available for full-time work but have had to settle for a part-time job. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market conditions were at their 2005–07 levels, average real wage growth would be roughly 
1/2 to 1 percentage point higher over the past year – another sign of the cyclical shortfall in 
labor market health. 
To  sum  up,  with  many  important  measures  of  labor  market  activity  still  well  short  of  our 
estimates of cyclical norms, I believe it is a bit premature to say that we are close to our full 
employment target. That said, while it has taken longer than anyone would like, our progress 
has been good. And there is good reason to anticipate that we will achieve full employment 
and  price  stability  within  the  FOMC’s  current  forecast  horizon.  Indeed,  in  the  Committee’s 
Summary of Economic Projections released about a week ago, most participants anticipated 
that the unemployment rate would return to its long-run neutral level by the end of 2016 and 
that inflation then would be in the range of 1–3/4 to 2 percent. 
A balanced approach to monetary policy 
Now let me turn to my views on monetary policy. 
I  can’t  speak  to  my  FOMC  colleagues’  forecasts  and  how  they  interact  with  their  views 
regarding appropriate policy. But, for my part, I think it is more likely that we will achieve our 
employment mandate before inflation is clearly headed back to 2 percent. Conceptually, this 
could  raise  a  policy  dilemma  –  achieving  our  inflation  objective  would  call  for  strong 
accommodation, while achieving our employment target usually would call for earlier policy 
normalization. However, the story is even more complicated than that because important risk 
factors also come into play. In some ways the insight from Nobel laureates Lars Hansen and 
Tom  Sargent  regarding  robust  control  evaluations  help  form  my  assessment.13  I  see  two 
important  and  divergent  ways  my  forecast  could  go  wrong.  One  is  that  I  may  be 
overestimating  the  underlying  strength  in  the  real  economy  and  its  ability  to  exit  from  the 
ZLB.  Guarding  against  this  risk  calls  for  a  more  patient  removal  of  accommodation.  The 
second is that I may be wrong about the inflation outlook, and we could be poised for a much 
stronger rise in inflation than I am forecasting. This risk calls for more aggressive rate hikes. 
How do I think policy should balance these divergent risks? How should these risks affect my 
views about how to follow the FOMC strategy of pursuing a balanced approach to achieving 
our policy goals? 
In my mind, current circumstances and a weighing of alternative risks mean that a balanced 
policy  approach  calls  for  being  patient  in  reducing  accommodation  –  that  is,  being  patient 
about when we first increase the federal funds rate and being patient about setting the pace 
of rate increases once we have begun to move. Let me explain how I get there. 
Proceed cautiously in normalizing policy 
To say the least, conducting monetary policy at the ZLB has been a difficult experience that 
we all want to avoid repeating unnecessarily. In the winter of 2009, with the unemployment 
rate  soaring  to  double  digits,  the  Fed  would  have  very  much  liked  to  lower  the  nominal 
federal  funds  rate  an  additional  300  basis  points;  but  we  couldn’t  because  the  rate  was 
already at zero. Faced with a pressing need to provide additional accommodation, we were 
forced  to  turn  to  innovative,  but  controversial,  unconventional  monetary  policies.  These 
policies  have  been  extremely  helpful.  But  there  is  no  denying  that  they  were  second-best 
options; the ZLB had made lowering the fed funds rate, which is our first-best interest rate 
tool, infeasible. 
Everyone will welcome a return to more normal times and a reliance on the traditional policy 
framework of adjustments to the federal funds rate. But the decision about when to begin to 
                                                
13  See, for example, Hansen and Sargent (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  raise  rates  shouldn’t  be  made  prematurely.  Rather,  the  decision  for  policy  liftoff  has  to  be 
made for the right reasons – that is, it should be dictated by economic conditions. 
I have said many times that I agree with Minneapolis Fed President Narayana Kocherlakota: 
Policy  at  all  times  must  be  goal-oriented.14  Our  experiences  since  the  crisis  began  and 
current economic conditions are highly unusual. The FOMC should not simply set its policy 
instruments  by  mechanically  aligning  them  with  historical  norms  if  those  norms  are  not 
relevant harbingers for the attainment of both of our dual mandate goals. Rather, our policy 
instruments  should  be  set  to  achieve  our  ultimate  goals  as  efficaciously  as  possible  given 
current and prospective economic conditions, all the while with an eye on managing against 
important risks to the outlook. 
What  does  that  mean  now?  I  believe  that  the  biggest  risk  we  face  today  is  prematurely 
engineering restrictive monetary conditions. In this scenario, the FOMC could misjudge the 
presence  and  magnitude  of  economic  impediments  and  misread  the  recent  progress  we 
have made as evidence of sounder economic trends. If we were to presume prematurely that 
the U.S. economy has returned to a more “business as usual” position and reduce monetary 
accommodation  too  soon,  we  could  find  ourselves  in  the  very  uncomfortable  position  of 
falling back into the ZLB environment. Such an outcome could be a serious setback to the 
timely attainment of our dual mandate policy objectives.  
This  risk  consideration  means  that  the  decision  to  lift  the  funds  rate  from  zero  should  be 
made only when we have a great deal of confidence that growth has enough momentum to 
reach full employment and that inflation will return sustainably to 2 percent. We should also 
proceed cautiously and keep the path of rate increases relatively shallow for some time after 
we  begin  to  raise  rates.  This  approach  will  allow  us  time  to  assess  how  the  economy  is 
performing  under  less  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  reduce  the  odds  of 
overaggressive rate hikes choking off progress toward our policy goals. 
History shows that premature exit is a risk 
Great Depression 
Past experience with the zero lower bound also counsels patience. History has not looked 
kindly on attempts to prematurely remove monetary accommodation from economies that are 
in or near a liquidity trap. The U.S. experience during the Great Depression – in particular, in 
1937 – is a classic example for monetary historians: In response to the positive growth and 
reinflation  that  occurred  after  devaluation  and  suspension  of  gold  convertibility,  the  Fed 
raised  reserve  requirements,  the  Treasury  sterilized  gold  inflows,  and  there  was  a  fiscal 
contraction. Subsequently, the economy dropped back into recession and deflation. During 
this  time,  interest  rates  remained  very  low.  The  discount  rate  was  lower  after  1937  than 
before, and Treasury bill rates were less than 1 percent. By many economic accounts, it took 
the big fiscal expansion associated with World War II to exit the Great Depression. 
Japan over the past 20 years 
We can also learn from the Japanese experience over the past 20 years. After attempting to 
expand  production  and  avoid  deflationary  prospects  in  the  late  1990s,  monetary  policy 
reversed  course  prematurely  in  the  early  2000s  as  the  inflation  rate  inched  above  zero; 
deflationary  pressures  soon  reemerged  and  policy  rates  returned  to  zero  by  2001.This 
experience was repeated again later in the decade. Indeed, it has only been over the past 
year  –  following  nearly  20  years  of  stagnation  –  that  we  see  the  recent  goal-oriented 
                                                
14  See, for example, Kocherlakota (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary  expansion  making  significant  headway  in  extracting  Japan  from  below-target 
inflation. 
Recent European experience 
The  recent  European  experience  in  2011  is  yet  another  example  of  premature  tightening. 
Despite  the  headwinds  from  continuing  debt-overhang  and  recent  financial  distress, 
European  authorities  in  2011  judged  that  the  eurozone  economy  was  emerging  from 
recession and headline inflation was at risk to rise persistently above target. The European 
Central Bank (ECB) responded by raising policy rates in 2011. They soon had to backtrack 
as output in the eurozone fell again and inflation began to march down below target. Today, 
the eurozone faces continued economic weakness and an inflation rate that is just about 1/2 
percent.  As  a  result,  the  ECB  recently  lowered  policy  rates  to  the  ZLB,  has  started 
undertaking  additional  unconventional  monetary  policies,  and  is  now  encouraging  fiscal 
expansion among eurozone countries that are able to do so. 
These lessons from monetary history strongly suggest that there are great risks to premature 
liftoff  from  the  zero  lower  bound  or  near-ZLB  conditions.  Unless  economic  conditions  are 
fundamentally strong and the previous impediments to growth have receded sufficiently, the 
odds remain high that monetary authorities will need to retreat right back into the ZLB. 
And the costs of being mired in the zero lower bound are simply very large. I have already 
talked  about  how  the  ZLB  prevents  using  our  very  best  policy  tools  to  address  negative 
shocks. The constraint also means that interest rates cannot fall low enough to equate the 
supply  of  saving  with  the  demand  for  investment.  This,  of  course,  significantly  impedes 
capital formation, future economic growth, and further employment expansion. Furthermore, 
the ZLB often comes hand in hand with undesirably low inflation or even a falling price level, 
carrying with it the associated costs of debt deflation on the real economy. 
The risk of too-high inflation 
What  about  the  other  risk  to  our  policy  goals  that  I  mentioned  –  the  risk  that  the  U.S. 
economy could face pricing pressures that accelerate rapidly and ultimately leave inflation far 
above our 2 percent target for an unacceptably long period? 
At some point when the economy has clearly overcome the remaining impediments from the 
largest  economic  and  financial  downturn  since  the  Great  Depression,  the  odds  of  inflation 
rising noticeably above target could become palpable. But such a breakout is just not at all 
very likely today. Indeed, many Fed critics have been voicing this concern since 2009, and it 
hasn’t even come close to happening. 
What if inflation just ran moderately above target for some time? Well, I see the costs of this 
outcome as clearly being much smaller than the costs of falling back into the ZLB. First, I 
believe the U.S. economy could weather the modest increases in interest rates that would be 
needed  to  keep  inflation  in  check.  Such  rate  increases  would  be  manageable  for  the  real 
economy; this is particularly true if industry and labor markets have already made the most 
difficult  reallocations  of  jobs  and  overcome  other  factors  so  that  productive  resources  are 
more  efficiently  and  fully  employed.  Second,  as  I’ve  noted  many  times  in  the  past,  a 
symmetric inflation target means we should be averaging 2 percent inflation over time. We’ve 
averaged well under that 2 percent mark for the past six and a half years. With a symmetric 
inflation  target,  one  could  imagine  moderately-above-target  inflation  for  a  limited  period  of 
time as simply the flip side of our recent inflation experience – and hardly an event that would 
impose great costs on the economy. 
The murky state of inflation expectations is another factor that enters my risk management 
considerations. For inflation to take off rapidly, we would have to see a jump in inflationary 
expectations. But inflationary expectations have been quite stable. Indeed, we may be facing 
a quite different problem. Many forecasters – myself included – assume that stable 2 percent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  inflation expectations will be an important factor helping to pull actual inflation up. Over the 
past five years, professional forecasters’ projections for long-run inflation have been at the 
2 percent target and Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) break-evens have been 
flat. Yet actual inflation has only just recently made it back up to 1–1/2 percent. Moreover, we 
still  have  not  seen  much  at  all  in  the  way  of  higher  inflation  compensation  being  built  into 
interest rates or wages. So there is cause for concern that expectations might not produce as 
strong a pull on inflation as we hope. 
We  can  turn  to  the  Japanese  experience  again  to  highlight  this  risk.  Long-run  inflation 
expectations in Japan have averaged a little over 1 percent. Yet during that period, the only 
time  inflation  was  palpably  above  zero  –  let  alone  not  in  outright  deflation  –  was  when 
consumption  taxes  increased  or  oil  prices  spiked.  So  inflation  expectations  may  remain 
stable while inflation itself lags for a prolonged period. 
Conclusion 
As I think about the process of normalizing policy, I conclude that today’s risk-management 
calculus  says  we  should  err  on  the  side  of  patience  in  removing  highly  accommodative 
policy. We need to solidify our confidence that our ultimate exit from the zero lower bound 
will occur smoothly – and in a way that sustains our escape from it. A corollary to this is we 
should  not  shy  away  from  policy  prescriptions  that  generate  forecasts  of  inflation  that 
moderately  overshoot  our  2  percent  target  for  a  limited  time.  Such  a  policy  strategy  more 
properly  balances  expected  costs  and  benefits.  And  it  would  leave  me  with  much  more 
confidence that inflation will not stall out below target once we start raising rates. 
I agree with Atlanta Fed President Lockhart in thinking that we ought to be “whites of their 
eyes” inflation fighters.15 The last thing we want to do is regress back into the ZLB. Indeed, 
such a relapse would be a sign there was something else going on that was preventing the 
economy from being as vibrant as we thought possible. 
To summarize, I am very uncomfortable with calls to raise our policy rate sooner than later. I 
favor  delaying  liftoff  until  I  am  more  certain  that  we  have  sufficient  momentum  in  place 
toward our policy goals. And I think we should plan for our path of policy rate increases to be 
shallow in order to be sure that the economy’s momentum is sustainable in the presence of 
less accommodative financial conditions. 
References 
Aaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini and Daniel G. Sullivan, 2014, “Estimating and 
forecasting trend labor force participation,” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, Vol. 38, forthcoming. 
Aaronson, Daniel, and Andrew Jordan, 2014, “Understanding the relationship between real 
wage growth and labor market conditions(pdf),” Chicago Fed Letter, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago, No. 327, October. 
Aaronson, Daniel, and Daniel G. Sullivan, 2001, “Growth in worker quality(pdf),” Economic 
Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Vol. 25, Fourth Quarter, pp. 53–74. 
Acemoglu, Daron, and David H. Autor, 2011, “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for 
employment and earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley Ashenfelter and David 
Card (eds.), Vol. 4B, Amsterdam: Elsevier / North-Holland, pp. 1043–1171. 
                                                
15  Lockhart (2014). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Autor,  David  H.,  2011,  “The  unsustainable  rise  of  the  disability  rolls  in  the  United  States: 
Causes,  consequences,  and  policy  options,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
working paper, No. 17697, December. 
Burkhauser, Richard V., and Mary C. Daly, 2011, The Declining Work and Welfare of People 
with Disabilities: What Went Wrong and a Strategy for Change, Washington, DC: AEI Press. 
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, 2013, “Manufacturing decline, 
housing  booms,  and  non-employment,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  working 
paper, No. 18949, April. 
Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn, 2014, “Downward nominal wage rigidities bend the Phillips 
curve(external-pdf),” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, working paper, No. 2013–08, 
January. 
Dice  Hiring  Indicators,  2014,  “Average  job  vacancy  duration  is  25  working  days  (external-
pdf),” release, Chicago, August. 
Gordon, Robert J., 2013, “The Phillips curve is alive and well: Inflation and the NAIRU during 
the  slow  recovery,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  working  paper,  No.  19390, 
August. 
Hansen, Lars Peter, and, Thomas J. Sargent, 2008, Robustness, Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
Kiley, Michael T., 2014, “An evaluation of the inflationary pressure associated with short- and 
long-term  unemployment(external),”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, No. 2014–28. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2013, “A time of testing,” speech, St. Paul Chamber of Commerce, 
St. Paul, MN, November 12. 
Krueger, Alan B., Judd Cramer and David Cho, 2014, “Are the long-term unemployed on the 
margins of the labor market? (external),” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring. 
Lockhart, Dennis, 2014, “Thoughts on liftoff,” speech, Global Interdependence Center, Sixth 
Annual Rocky Mountain Economic Summit, Jackson Hole, WY, July 11. 
Mueller,  Andreas  I.,  Jesse  Rothstein  and  Till  M.  von  Wachter,  2013,  “Unemployment 
insurance  and  disability  insurance  in  the  Great  Recession,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, working paper, No. 19672, November. 
Shierholz,  Heidi,  Lawrence  Mishel  and  John  Schmitt,  2013,  “Don’t  blame  the  robots: 
Assessing  the  job  polarization  explanation  of  growing  wage  inequality,”  Economic  Policy 
Institute, working paper, November 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
