  Richard W Fisher: R.I.P. QE3 ... or will it? 
Remarks (with reference to Shakespeare, Betsy Duke, Janet Yellen, Yogi Berra and Lenny 
Kravitz)  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  Shadow  Open  Market  Committee  Manhattan  Institute, 
New York City, 3 November 2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Mickey [Levy], for that colorful introduction. 
Unless  you  have  been  living  under  a  rock  (and  no  one  in  this  audience  looks  like  a  cave 
dweller),  you  know  that on Wednesday  of  last  week,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Federal  Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) ended its program of purchasing Treasury bonds and mortgage-
backed securities (MBS). Thus endeth QE3. 
May it rest in peace. 
Effects and efficacy of QE3 
Under  QE3,  the  FOMC  directed  the  New  York  Fed’s  trading  desk  to  purchase  a  total  of 
$1.7 trillion in longer-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities, on top of the $2 trillion 
invested in the first two rounds of quantitative easing. When we started the first tranche of 
asset purchases in late 2008, our balance sheet had footings of around $900 billion; as the 
third and final round of quantitative easing ends, our balance sheet has reached $4.5 trillion. 
The initial impetus for MBS purchases was a wide gap between MBS and Treasury yields, 
symptomatic  of  a  dysfunctional  mortgage-finance  market. The  Federal Reserve  responded 
by purchasing $1.3 trillion in MBS and agency debt as part of QE1, the program of balance-
sheet expansion that ran from late 2008 through the spring of 2010. Holdings of MBS and 
agency debt were then allowed to run off and by September 2011 had fallen to a little under 
$1 trillion.  Holdings  were  stabilized  at  that  level  when  proceeds  from  maturing  agency 
securities and MBS began to be reinvested in MBS, starting October 2011. 
The renewed expansion of MBS holdings that began in October 2012 as part of QE3 was 
motivated less by any sense that the mortgage-finance market was dysfunctional than by the 
notion that normal frictions in that market potentially provided monetary policy with leverage 
to stimulate the housing sector – and thus the economy as a whole – at a time when more-
traditional policy tools had been exhausted. The FOMC majority pushed aside concerns that 
providing targeted support to housing is more properly the province of fiscal policy, and voted 
to proceed. From the start of QE3 to its conclusion, the Fed’s portfolio of agency securities 
and MBS expanded by about $850 billion. In the latest version of its normalization principles, 
released this September, the FOMC indicated that it expects to reduce its holdings in future 
years primarily through attrition. 
What of the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term Treasury securities 
under  QE3?  Fed  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasuries  amount  to  nothing  more  than  the 
transformation  of  long-term  Treasury  obligations  into  short-term  obligations  of  the  Federal 
Reserve.  Essentially,  long-term  government  obligations  are  transformed  into  short-term 
government obligations. The government benefits from lower interest costs in the near term, 
but  its  future  net  revenues  become  more  sensitive  to  future  interest-rate  increases. 
Government finance problems are reduced today, at a cost of potential future problems. The 
larger bank reserves become, the greater is the government’s future interest-rate exposure. 
Chairman Ben Bernanke famously said that “the problem with QE is that it works in practice, 
but it doesn’t work in theory” – QE3 seemed to succeed in pushing interest rates lower out 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  along  the  yield  curve,  energizing  the  bond  market  and  lowering  the  hurdle  rate  for 
discounting cash flows and earnings of companies whose shares traded in stock markets.1 
This came, of course, at the expense of savers who kept their money in the most basic of 
short-term  investments.  But  this  was  a  cost  that  the  committee  felt  was  exceeded  by  the 
expected wealth effect. 
Well before last week’s FOMC meeting, it seemed to me that QE3’s effectiveness had waned 
while  its  current  and  potential  future  costs  were  mounting.  I  was  thus  an  enthusiastic 
supporter of killing the program. 
Indeed, I would rather we had never had QE3 in the first place. To this day, I feel that the 
costs of accumulating another $1.7 trillion of Treasuries and MBS will be shown to exceed 
the benefits. And yet, as I have said on countless occasions, drawing on former Dallas Fed 
board Chairman Herb Kelleher’s love for bourbon, once we had QE3 in place, I considered it 
unwise  to  go  directly  from  Wild  Turkey  to  cold  turkey  for  fear  of  getting  the  financial 
equivalent  of  delirium  tremens;  indeed,  we  saw  that  with  the  “taper  tantrum”  the  markets 
threw  in  May  of  2013.  So  I  was  an  eager  proponent  of  the  tapering  program  the  FOMC 
initiated in January of this year. 
I want to be clear here. Especially at the beginning of QE3, when the nonsense term “QE 
infinity” was being broadcast by otherwise responsible analysts, journalists and pundits, rates 
dipped  to  lows  that  helped  creditworthy  businesses  bolster  their  balance  sheets  and 
strengthen  their  wherewithal  for  future  expansion.  Again,  even  if  you  were  living  under  a 
rock, you know that this gift of near-cost-free debt as measured in inflation- and tax-adjusted 
terms  has  thus far  been  used  primarily  to finance  stock  buybacks,  increase  dividends  and 
fatten cash reserves, and recently, finance mergers by the most creditworthy companies. For 
those  with  access  to  capital,  it  was  a  gift  of  free  money  to  speculate  with.  (One  wag  –  I 
believe it was me – quipped that there was, indeed, a “positive wealth effect… the wealthy 
were affected most positively.”) 
We know that monetary policy acts with long and variable lags. That characterization applies, 
in spades, to the unorthodox policy we have pursued at the zero bound, in terms of achieving 
full employment and hitting our 2 percent inflation target. 
Together with the healthy rejuvenation of the balance sheets and equity prices of investment 
grade companies, we have seen what I consider to be a manifestation of an indiscriminate 
reach  for  yield,  a  revival  of  covenant-free  lending,  and  an  explosion  of  collateralized  loan 
obligations (CLOs), pathologies that have proved harbingers of eventual financial turbulence. 
Noticeably affected by QE3 have been the nominal yield levels of subpar credits and their 
spreads relative to investment-grade issues. Some 40 percent of newly issued CCC credits 
have negative cash flows.2 And yet “junk” bonds have been trading at or near record historic 
low  yields  both  in  absolute  terms  and  as  measured  by  spreads  over  investment-grade 
credits. I worry about this as a risk that has been propagated by QE3, though I do not believe 
it is the Fed’s job to rescue reckless investors from the errors of their ways. 
The stock market bottomed in March 2009 and had already more than doubled by the time 
we  initiated  QE3.  It  has  since  risen  by  another  40  percent;  equities  have,  all-in,  tripled  in 
price since the lows of 2009. Only time will tell if stocks have risen to unsustainable heights 
and,  if  so,  how  deep  a  correction  might  be  needed  to  bring  them  back  to  sustainable 
valuations. 
The last FOMC 
I  believe  that  the  Fed  should,  in  most  circumstances,  not  directly  concern  itself  with 
fluctuations in financial-asset prices. If the economy is strong, the securities markets will be 
propelled by that strength. If the real economy is hearty, it can withstand reversions to the 
mean of junk bond or any other trading market and stock market corrections: It did so during 
the prolonged correction of 1962 and again in 1987. For this reason, as we approached our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  deliberations at last week’s FOMC, I saw no reason for the Fed to react to the heightened 
volatility that occurred in mid-October and strongly advised my colleagues that we should be 
wary of any action we might take at the FOMC that would lead investors to assume there is a 
“Yellen  Put”  hidden  in  our  pocket.  For  this  would  only  encourage  continued  indiscriminate 
investing. 
I view the economy as becoming stronger. My colleagues and I at the Dallas Fed realize that 
the current unemployment rate, at 5.9 percent as of September, is still somewhat above most 
estimates  of  the  “natural,”  or  minimum-sustainable,  rate  of  unemployment.  But  the  gap 
between actual and “natural” unemployment has been rapidly shrinking and is now less than 
1 percentage point. 
Some  commentators  argue  that  the  unemployment  rate  hasn’t  been  a  reliable  indicator  of 
labor-market  slack  during  the  last  five  years.  As  evidence,  these  commentators  point  to 
subdued  wage  growth.  We  at  the  Dallas  Fed  have  investigated  the  links  between  wage 
inflation and the unemployment rate using the aggregate data that are available for the U.S., 
and also using state-level data. These investigations have led us to three main conclusions. 
First, wage growth responds to the unemployment rate with a lag. That’s no mystery: Many 
employers  adjust  wage  and  salaries  just  once  each  year.  Second,  wage  growth  becomes 
increasingly  sensitive  to  the  unemployment  rate  as  the  unemployment  rate  reaches  lower 
and lower levels. A drop in the unemployment rate from 9 percent to 8 percent may not do 
much for the negotiating leverage of the typical worker. But the story is different when the 
unemployment rate drops from 6 percent to 5 percent or below, for example. 
Finally, taking these two factors into account, there’s been nothing at all unusual about the 
behavior  of  wage  growth  over  the  period  since  the  national  unemployment  rate  peaked 
nearly five years ago. We went through a deep recession. Coming out of a deep recession, it 
takes time for the unemployment rate to reach levels where wage growth picks up noticeably. 
Wage growth was about 1½ percent in both 2010 and 2011 – not too surprising, given that 
the  unemployment  rate  was  9.9  percent  in  the  final  quarter  of  2009  and,  at  9.6  percent, 
nearly as high in the final quarter of 2010. Since then, the unemployment rate has fallen by a 
little  less  than  1  percentage  point  each  year,  and  wage  growth  has  picked  up  by 
0.2 percentage  points  each  year.  Three  quarters  into  2014,  wage  growth  is  already  up 
another two-tenths, to 2.1 percent at an annual rate. 
This  pattern  of  rising  wage  growth  is  roughly  what  one  would  have  expected  judging  by 
prerecession data.3 If anything, wage growth has been running a bit above what we should 
have expected. This contradicts the view that the unemployment rate has understated labor-
market slack. 
Of course, the Federal Reserve has a target for price inflation, not wage inflation. The rate of 
wage inflation consistent with our 2 percent price-inflation target depends on secular trends 
in labor productivity growth and in labor’s bargaining power – trends over which the Federal 
Reserve has no control and about which it can only make informed guesses. Nevertheless, 
the Dallas Fed’s study of the Phillips curve has an important lesson for Fed policymakers: If 
we  keep  pushing  on  the  accelerator  pedal  until  wage  growth  matches  the  rate  that  we 
believe to be sustainable, we will likely have pushed too far and missed our exit. Because 
wage growth reacts to slack with a lag, it will continue to increase even after policy stimulus 
is removed. Because wage growth rises at an increasing rate the farther the unemployment 
rate declines, the overshoot is likely to be large. 
I liken monetary policy to duck hunting. If you want to bag a mallard, you don’t aim where the 
bird is at present, you aim ahead of its flight pattern. To me, the flight pattern of the economy 
is  clearly  toward  increasing  employment  and  inflation  that  is  approaching  our  2-percent 
target. 
Thus,  I  was  encouraged  by  the  wording  we  negotiated  at  the  last  FOMC  meeting.  I  was 
pleased  that  we  dropped  the  reference  to  “significant”  in  describing  the  remaining  labor-
market  slack  and  that  wording  was  included  indicating  we  might  well  move  to  raise  rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  sooner than thus far assumed, should the economy proceed along the trajectory I think we 
are  on.  To  me,  this  neutered  the  adjective  “considerable”  in  stating  the  time  frame  under 
which we might act. This is why this particular hawk voted “yes” in support of the statement 
we released on Wednesday. 
Now to the exit... 
Of course, I am concerned with what will happen to all the liquidity that remains in the system 
in the aftermath of our QE programs. The depository institutions we transact with have put 
back to the 12 Federal Reserve Banks some $2.7 trillion in excess reserves. “Excess” means 
they cannot find better uses for that money than earning the 25 basis points (25/100ths of 
one percent per annum) we pay them until they can find creditworthy borrowers to lend to at 
significant multiples of that amount. And considering that this $2.7 trillion represents perhaps 
as little as one-fifth of the amount of ready liquidity in the U.S. financial system – that being 
held not just on deposit at the Fed Banks but also by nonfinancial corporations, private equity 
funds, other investors and households – there is a lot of inflationary tinder available should 
the  Fed  mismanage  its  exit  from  the  hyper-accommodative  policy  we  have  pursued  and 
augmented with QE3. 
Thus, only time will reveal the efficacy of the policy we have pursued and whether the risks 
that  I  and  other  observers  (among  them  my  mentor,  Paul  Volcker)  fret  over  are  as 
substantial, or whether we have made much ado about nothing. 
My former colleague, the wonderful ex-banker and much-admired Fed Governor Betsy Duke, 
was quoted on Oct. 28 in The Washington Post as saying this about QE3: “It’s still important 
to  see  what  the  ultimate  costs  are  going  to  be.  You  can’t  really  judge  those  until  it’s 
completely unwound.”4 Betsy is spot on. 
Channeling Shakespeare 
In  June  of  last  year,  I  gave  a  speech  in  Toronto  in  which  I  likened  the  post-zero-bound 
monetary policy to a Shakespearean drama with five acts, suggesting we were then in the 
last scene of the third act of a play titled “The Grand Experiment in Modern Monetarism.”5 I 
posited we will not know until the final act whether the play will end felicitously or otherwise. 
I thought I would update that analogy here today. Here is the CliffsNotes summary: The play 
opened with the great financial tempest of 2008–09, during which it appeared the ship of the 
mighty American economy would founder. A humble, once unassuming but suddenly daring 
captain  named  Ben  Bernanke  took  firm  control  of  the  nation’s  monetary  helm  in  Act  II, 
working  with  his  officers  –  the  FOMC  –  to  contrive  innovative  ways  to  keep  the  economy 
afloat by jury-rigging monetary policy and adopting radical tactical maneuvers. These efforts 
succeeded  in  steering  the  ship  of  the  economy  away  from  the  shoals  of  depression  and 
deflation and into more tranquil waters. 
Act  III  began  with  a  recovering  economy  heading  on  a  more  promising  course.  But  the 
headway  being  made  was  substandard,  hindered  by  the  flotsam  and  jetsam  of  fiscal 
incompetence and rising fears of a new storm brewing in Europe. In an effort to propel the 
economy  forward  at  a  better  clip,  the  FOMC  commanded  that  unprecedented  amounts  of 
monetary fuel be provisioned for the financial system through large-scale asset purchases, 
the proceeds of which were pumped into the stores of banks. 
But as Act IV began, the banks lingered in the wings rather than taking center stage. Rather 
than  shovel  their  abundant  means  into  their  loan  boilers,  they  were  parsimonious  and 
hoarded their fuel. Other members of the financial fleet, however, were heartened by the turn 
of  events,  especially  those  who  finance  themselves  through  the  issuance  of  stocks  and 
bonds rather than through bank loans. They danced a happy jig while they decorated their 
balance  sheets  with  cheaper  debt  and  improved  their  margins  and  earnings  per  share 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  through  share  buybacks.  Slowly  they  began  to  hire  new  workers,  and  the  ship  of  the 
economy started gathering momentum to steam along at an improved clip. 
As  Act  IV  came  to  an  end,  the  FOMC  evaluated  the  utility  of  its  navigational  tactics,  and 
having tentatively decided that it was on course to its desired destination, began cutting back 
on  the  amount  of  fuel  it  was  pumping  into  the  financial  system.  Initially,  it  fumbled  the 
dialogue, but eventually the articulation of its intention was accepted, if not applauded, by its 
audience. 
Now  we  have  entered  Act  V.  Not  until  the  final  scene  will  we  know  whether  we  have 
achieved the auspicious outcome of arriving at the desired port of an economy that grows 
sufficiently to bring about full employment without giving rise to inflation. With Shakespeare, 
the  most  pleasant  plays  typically  end  in  marriage.  The  happy  outcome  to  our  economic 
predicament would entail the marriage of sensible fiscal policy with prudent monetary policy, 
carrying the American economy to new horizons, allowing the Fed to emerge a hero. 
One can envision less-pleasant outcomes, however, some of them tragic. If, even after the 
mid-term  elections  tomorrow,  the  fiscal  authorities  –  Congress  and  the  president  –  are 
unable to provide tax, spending and regulatory incentives for job creators to use the cheap 
and  abundant  capital  the  FOMC  and  other  creditors  have  made  available,  the  economy 
might  once  again find  itself  becalmed. In  the  speech  I  gave  nearly  four years  ago  to  your 
sponsor,  the  Manhattan  Institute,  I  specifically  said  of  the then  new  Congress:  “For  all  the 
hoopla (surrounding it), it will prove to be nothing more than a case of putting old, rancid wine 
in new bottles.”6 Pray this does not happen again. Should the FOMC then try to compensate 
for fiscal  authorities’  inability  to  act  by  provisioning  still  more  monetary fuel,  it  may  risk  an 
explosion  of  speculative  excess,  or  worse:  an  eventual  inflationary  conflagration,  the 
debasement of money and the ruination of our economy and lifestyle. Should this prove the 
outcome, the Fed will be transmogrified from hero to villain. 
To thicken the plot, as Act V began, Captain Bernanke exited stage right and a new skipper 
entered stage left. I should say here that I advocated for this particular skipper. Janet Yellen, 
when she was just another member of the crew as a Fed governor, was pigeonholed as a 
“dove” (forgive the double-entendre; doves are, ornithologically speaking, part of the pigeon 
family) but has proven herself in her role at the helm of the FOMC to be neither dove nor 
hawk. Rather, she is impressively balanced and fully aware, at least in my opinion, that her 
legacy will be whether she can successfully complete Act V by realizing the Fed’s mandate 
to maintain price stability while providing the monetary means to achieve full employment. 
All of which means that despite the mighty efforts of Captains Bernanke and Yellen and their 
officers and crew, present company included, we do not know how “The Grand Experiment” 
drama will end. We certainly all hope it proves an inspiring history, not a tragedy. But, we will 
not know for some time. We will not know until the curtain drops on Act V. 
R.I.P? 
Betsy Duke had it right: Only when we have normalized monetary policy – only when the play 
is done – will we know if QE3 rests in peace or comes back to haunt us. Only when it is done 
will we know if “The Grand Experiment in Modern Monetarism” is a smash hit or a bomb or 
something in between. 
As Yogi Berra said and Lenny Kravitz sang: “It ain’t over till it’s over.” But one thing I know for 
sure: This speech is over. Thank you for listening. 
And  now,  Mickey,  time and  patience  permitting,  I  would  be  happy  to  avoid  answering  any 
questions you and your colleagues might have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Notes 
 
1 
“A  Conversation:  The  Fed  Yesterday,  Today  and  Tomorrow,”  a  discussion  with  Federal  Reserve  Chairman 
Ben Bernanke on the Fed’s 100th anniversary, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., Jan. 16, 2014. 
2  See “The Next Default Wave: Slow and Low,” in The HY Wire, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Sept. 24, 2014. 
3  The following charts illustrate the recent acceleration in wage growth (Chart 1) and the relationship between 
rising wage growth and falling unemployment (Chart 2). For more information, see the Dallas Fed Economic 
Letter titled “Are We There Yet? Assessing Progress Toward Full Employment and Price Stability,” available 
at www.dallasfed.org/assets/documents/research/eclett/2014/el1413.pdf.  
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
    
4  See  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Experiment  in  Quantitative  Easing  Is  Coming  to  an  End,”  by 
Ylan Q. Mui, The Washington Post, WonkBlog, Oct. 28, 2014. 
If 
www.dallasfed.org/news/speeches/fisher/2013/fs130604.cfm. 
you  wish 
speech 
read 
that 
its 
to 
in 
5 
entirety, 
it 
can 
be 
found 
at 
6  See  “The  Limits  of  Monetary  Policy:  ‘Monetary  Policy  Responsibility  Cannot  Substitute  for 
Government Irresponsibility’,” remarks by Richard W. Fisher, Jan. 12, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
