  Agathe Côté: Inflation targeting in the post-crisis era 
Remarks  by  Ms  Agathe  Côté,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Calgary 
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Society, Calgary, Alberta, 18 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation. I am pleased to be here. One of my main responsibilities at the 
Bank is overseeing the analysis of domestic economic developments in support of monetary 
policy decisions. It is always very helpful to meet the people and visit the places behind the 
economic trends we are tracking. 
My speech today is about inflation targeting. It might be difficult to imagine now, but back in 
the 1980s, interest rates on mortgages topped 20 per cent. That, of course, was before we 
signed a pioneering inflation-control agreement with the federal government in 1991. 
Canada  was  the  second  country  in  the  world  –  after  New  Zealand  –  to adopt  an  inflation-
targeting  regime. It  is  not  often you  can say  that  a  product  worked  better than  advertised. 
Inflation targeting has. It has easily exceeded our expectations. 
Since  1991,  inflation  in  Canada,  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  has 
averaged 2 per cent, and its variability has fallen by roughly two-thirds. 
Canadians have benefited in a number of important ways. Greater price stability has allowed 
consumers  and  businesses  to  manage  their  finances  with  more  certainty  about  the  future 
purchasing  power  of  their  savings  and  income.  Real  and  nominal  interest  rates  have  also 
been lower across a range of maturities. As a result of these developments, low, stable and 
predictable inflation has encouraged more solid economic growth and a well-functioning and 
more stable labour market. 
In  addition,  our  inflation-targeting  regime  provided  both  a  beacon  and  an  anchor  as  we 
navigated the global financial crisis. 
The  inflation-targeting  agreement  is  renewed  with  the  federal  government  approximately 
every five years. The agreement sets the inflation objective at 2 per cent – the midpoint of a 
1 to 3 per cent target range – and gives the Bank effective independence for achieving it. It 
was last renewed in 2011. We view these periodic reassessments as an essential element of 
our commitment to good governance. 
With the next renewal set for 2016, I want to talk to you today about the key issues that we 
reviewed in 2011, major developments since then and outstanding questions that we will be 
analyzing over the next two years. 
I want to emphasize at the outset that nothing’s broken. Our flexible inflation-targeting regime 
has served Canadians well, both in calm and turbulent times. So the bar for change is high. 
Where we were in 2011 
In the run-up to the 2011 renewal, the Bank focused its research on three questions: whether 
to adopt a lower inflation target; whether to move to price-level targeting; and how monetary 
policy  should  take  account  of  financial  stability  considerations.  These  questions  were  not 
new. But the global financial crisis cast them in a different light. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let me outline where the Bank came out on each of these three questions in order to give 
you some context for the discussion that follows about our current research.1  
Should we target a lower rate of inflation? 
Canada, like most other inflation-targeting central banks in advanced economies, has been 
aiming at an inflation target of 2 per cent. Why 2 per cent? 
We  know  that  high  and  variable  inflation  is  costly.  It  erodes  purchasing  power,  creates 
uncertainty,  distorts  relative  prices  and  investment  decisions,  and  causes  arbitrary 
redistributions of wealth between savers and borrowers. So the inflation target should be low 
enough to minimize these distortionary effects. At the same time, there are risks associated 
with  very  low  rates  of  inflation,  the  most  important  being  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB)  on 
interest  rates.  The  lower  the  inflation  target,  the  lower  the  average  nominal  policy  interest 
rate will be. Therefore, the greater the likelihood that adverse shocks will push interest rates 
to the ZLB and hence limit the central bank’s ability to respond with conventional policy. A 
positive  inflation  rate  also  helps  to  “grease  the  wheels,”  since  it  is  less  likely  that  the 
economy  will  be  constrained  by  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity.2  Another  argument for  a 
slightly positive inflation target is that official price statistics are subject to measurement bias, 
in effect, overstating true inflation.3  
Would there be net benefits to targeting an inflation rate lower than 2 per cent? 
A  lower  target  is  intuitively  appealing,  since  even  with  2  per  cent  inflation,  the  price  level 
doubles  every  35  years.  A  lower  target  could  further  reduce  distortions  stemming  from 
incomplete  indexation  of  nominal  contracts  and  the  tax  system,  and  the  disincentives  for 
holding money. The Bank’s research leading up to the 2011 renewal strengthened the case 
for  lowering  the  target.  However,  our  research  and  the  experience  of  the  crisis  also 
highlighted the sizeable risks associated with the ZLB. While unconventional monetary policy 
(UMP)  instruments,  such  as  asset  purchases  and  forward  guidance,  appeared  to  provide 
stimulus, their benefits and costs would only be known in the fullness of time. 
Our research indicated that encounters with the ZLB should be quite rare with a 2 per cent 
target, but were much more likely to occur with a target below 2 per cent. The Bank therefore 
concluded that the benefits of a lower inflation target were insufficient to justify the increased 
risk of being constrained by the ZLB. 
Should we move to price-level targeting? 
The  second  question  we  addressed  was  whether  there  would  be  net  benefits  to  adopting 
price-level  targeting  (PLT). The  distinguishing feature  of  price-level  targeting  is that,  unlike 
                                                
1  For  more  detail  on 
the  2011 
renewal,  see  www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/ 
background_nov11.pdf. See also M. Carney, “A Monetary Policy Framework for All Seasons” (speech to the 
U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Forum,  New  York,  NY,  24  February  2012),  and  M.  Carney,  “Renewing  Canada’s 
Monetary Policy Framework” (speech to the Board of Trade of Metropolitan Montreal, Montréal, Quebec, 23 
November 2011). 
2  The  lower  the  inflation  target,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  nominal  wages  will  occasionally  need  to  decline  to 
facilitate  economic  adjustment.  If  workers  are  reluctant  to  accept  these  declines,  the  process  of  real 
adjustment in the labour market will be impeded. While there is some evidence of downward nominal wage 
rigidities in Canada, Crawford and Wright (2001) conclude that their effects do not appear to be economically 
significant.  See  A.  Crawford  and  G. Wright,  “Downward  Nominal-Wage  Rigidity:  Micro  Evidence  from  Tobit 
Models,” Working Paper No. 2001–07, Bank of Canada, 2001. Others, however, have argued that this could 
be  an  important  issue.  See,  for  example,  P.  Fortin,  “The  Macroeconomics  of  Downward  Nominal  Wage 
Rigidity: A Review of the Issues and New Evidence for Canada,” Centre Interuniversitaire sur le Risque, les 
Politiques Économiques et l’Emploi, Working Paper 13–09. 
3  The measurement bias is estimated to be around 0.5 per cent in Canada. See P. Sabourin, “Measurement 
Bias in the Canadian Consumer Price Index: An Update,” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2012): 1–11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation  targeting,  bygones  are  not  bygones.  Past  inflation  misses  must  be  corrected.  For 
example, following  a  period  of  below-target  inflation,  policy  would  seek  a  period  of  above-
target inflation to ensure the desired rate of change in the price level over time. In addition to 
providing  greater  price-level  certainty  over  the  long  run,  PLT  could  reduce  the  volatility  of 
output and inflation through automatic, self-correcting changes in inflation expectations. This 
could be particularly useful at the ZLB. 
However, for PLT to work, people need to be forward looking and the policy well understood 
and  credible.  In  the  end,  the  Bank  concluded  that,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  the 
expected benefits of PLT would be too small to justify the risks of abandoning our existing 
well-understood policy objective. 
How to address financial stability considerations? 
The crisis made it clear that price stability and financial stability are inextricably linked and 
that  pursuing  the  first  without  regard  for  the  second  risks  achieving  neither.  Indeed,  low, 
stable and predictable inflation and low variability in activity can breed complacency among 
financial market participants as risk taking adapts to a perceived new equilibrium. The critical 
question  this  poses  for  policy-makers  is  whether  monetary  policy  should  lean  against  a 
buildup of financial imbalances. 
Monetary policy influences markets and the leverage of financial institutions so broadly that it 
cannot  easily  be  avoided.  As  former  Federal  Reserve  Governor  Jeremy  Stein  once  put  it, 
monetary policy “gets in all of the cracks.”4 This makes monetary policy an inappropriate tool 
to  deal  with  sector-specific  imbalances,  but  a  potentially  valuable  one  for  addressing 
economy-wide imbalances. 
However, we concluded that monetary policy should be our last line of defence. It should be 
preceded by responsible behaviour by individuals and institutions and by effective micro- and 
macroprudential  regulation  and  supervision.  These  defences  should  go  a  long  way  to 
mitigate the risks. Still, in some cases, monetary policy may have a role to play. This is most 
obviously  the  case  when  financial  imbalances  affect  the  near-term  outlook  for  output  and 
inflation. 
In  exceptional  circumstances,  particularly  if  imbalances  and  excessive  risk  taking  are 
widespread or encouraged by a low interest rate environment, monetary policy might have to 
be used even if it means that inflation would deviate from target for an extended period of 
time.  Our  credible  inflation-targeting  framework  facilitates  this  flexibility  while  remaining 
perfectly consistent with ensuring long-run price stability. 
So, let me sum up our review preceding the last renewal. After considerable research and 
discussion, the Bank concluded in 2011 that our existing framework was robust and the right 
tool for delivering price stability and enhancing the economic welfare of Canadians. 
What we are focusing on now 
How have things changed since then? What have we learned, and what are the issues that 
we will be researching ahead of the 2016 renewal? 
The optimal inflation target – 2 per cent under increased scrutiny 
Experience and analysis since the 2011 renewal has reinforced our view of the importance of 
the ZLB. At the same time, interest rates are likely to be lower, on average, in the future than 
                                                
4  J.  C.  Stein,  “Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy  Responses”  (speech  at  the 
Research Symposium, “Restoring Household Financial Stability After the Great Recession: Why Household 
Balance  Sheets  Matter,”  sponsored  by  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  7  February 
2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  they were before the crisis. As a consequence, ZLB episodes could become more frequent. 
Together, these factors suggest that consideration should be given to an inflation target that 
is above 2 per cent. 
In  recent  years,  global  economic  growth  has  repeatedly  fallen  short  of  expectations.  For 
many advanced economies, this means that the ZLB has been a more enduring constraint 
on monetary policy than anticipated. This is not to say that central banks are powerless at 
the ZLB. In fact, a growing body of evidence suggests that UMPs have had a positive impact 
on economic activity and inflation.5  
That said, it is still unclear to what extent UMPs can effectively substitute for conventional 
monetary policy. As well, there are potential issues associated with the use of UMPs, such 
as  risks to  central  bank  independence  and  complications  related  to  exit.  Our  research  will 
aim to shed additional light on the ability of UMPs to mitigate the effects of the ZLB. 
The lessons we draw from recent experience with the ZLB are buttressed by analysis of the 
longer-term outlook for interest rates. In the mid-2000s, we estimated the real neutral rate of 
interest to be in the 2 1/2 to 3 1/2 per cent range. Today, we think it is more likely in the 1 to 
2 per cent range (or 3 to 4 per cent in nominal terms).6  
All else being equal, a lower neutral rate implies a greater probability of being constrained by 
the ZLB. Preliminary evidence for Canada suggests that with an unchanged inflation target, 
the probability increases from about 5 per cent to about 15 per cent. This is not trivial. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  factors  that  will  work  in  the  opposite  direction,  reducing  the 
likelihood of ZLB episodes. The most important is global financial regulatory reform, which is 
expected  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  financial  crises  –  a  common  cause  of  shocks  large 
enough to necessitate near-zero interest rates.7, 8 
While a number of prominent economists have argued for a higher inflation target, there is 
good reason to be cautious.9 The credibility of the 2 per cent target is invaluable. It accrued 
gradually over time as 2 per cent came to be perceived as a stable and achievable objective. 
Changing  the  target  could  cause  it  to  become  regarded  as  temporary  in  nature.  A  less-
credible target would limit the flexibility and effectiveness of monetary policy as a stabilization 
tool. 
Our  research  will  undertake  a  careful  analysis  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  adjusting  the 
target. 
                                                
5   See  E.  Santor  and  L.  Suchanek,  “Unconventional  Monetary  Policies:  Evolving  Practices,  Their  Effects  and 
Potential Costs,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2013): 1–14. 
6  We  define  the  neutral  rate  as  the  policy  rate  that  will  prevail  after  the  effects  of  all  cyclical  shocks  have 
dissipated. The estimated decline in the neutral rate mainly reflects lower potential growth rates and higher 
global  savings.  See  C.  Wilkins,  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Underwhelming  Recovery”  (speech  to  the  CFA 
Society  Toronto,  Toronto,  Ontario,  22  September  2014);  and  R.  Mendes,  “The  Neutral  Rate  of  Interest  in 
Canada,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2014–5, September 2014. 
7  For  example,  a  study  conducted  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, with the participation of Bank of Canada staff, found that an increase of 2 percentage points in 
bank capital ratios reduced the probability of a financial crisis from 4.5 per cent to 1.6 per cent. 
8  We also need to consider the possibility of reduced measurement bias in the CPI, given improvements made 
by Statistics Canada in the past few years. A lower bias would lead to a higher true rate of inflation for a given 
inflation target, thus mitigating the need for a higher target. 
9  See P. Krugman, “Inflation Targets Reconsidered,” ECB Sintra Conference, May 2014; and L. Ball, “A Case 
for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent,” IMF Working Paper 14/92, June 2014. For an earlier appeal 
to  central  banks  to  at  least  consider  a  higher  target,  see  O.  Blanchard,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro, 
“Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF Staff Position Note, 12 February 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The integration of financial stability considerations – a work in progress 
The Bank concluded in 2011 that monetary policy should be the last line of defence against 
financial  imbalances.  This  has  since  become  the  dominant  view  in  the  central  bank 
community.  Nonetheless,  after  years  of  aggressive  monetary  stimulus  in  major  advanced 
economies,  concerns  about  the  buildup  of  financial  stability  risks  have  increased,  leading 
some to question whether the appropriate trade-offs are being made between price stability 
and financial stability. Indeed, some critics have argued that the current monetary stimulus is 
simply sowing the seeds of the next financial crisis. However, as Governor Poloz discussed 
in a recent speech, the alternative is not attractive.10  
Here in Canada, financial stability risks – mainly household imbalances – have been on our 
radar.  To  address  these  imbalances,  a  number  of  regulatory  changes  were  made,  which 
have  contributed  to  a  more  constructive  evolution,  although  the  risks  have  been  edging 
higher.11  
Financial stability risks have also been taken into account as part of our risk-management 
approach to monetary policy.12 When the flexibility inherent in getting inflation back to target 
within a reasonable time frame permits, the Bank has opted for tactics that do not exacerbate 
financial stability concerns. The Bank adopted a tightening bias from April 2012 to October 
2013,  noting  that  the  evolution  of  risks  related  to  household  imbalances  may  be  a  factor 
affecting the timing and degree of withdrawal of monetary stimulus. Thus far, however, the 
Bank has not had to use its monetary policy instrument to lean against financial risks. Going 
forward,  additional  research  will  be  helpful  to  specify  more  fully  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the  Bank  to  use  monetary  policy  for  financial  stability 
purposes. 
Recent work at the Bank suggests that the best outcome is achieved when macroprudential 
policy  targets  emerging  imbalances  in  the  economy,  such  as  excessive  growth  in  credit, 
leaving monetary policy free to focus on price stability.13 Of course, these polices must take 
account  of  one  another.  Thus,  for  example,  tighter  macroprudential  policy  would  require  a 
more stimulative monetary policy, other things being equal, and vice versa. 
How  to  best  integrate  price  stability  and  financial  stability  remains  a  work  in  progress. 
Implementation of the global financial reform agenda both here and abroad should increase 
the resilience of our financial system and reduce the need for monetary policy to react. Still, 
much remains to be learned about the effectiveness of macroprudential instruments and the 
optimal  mix  of  policy  tools.  Communication  challenges  associated  with  potentially  moving 
macroprudential and monetary policies in opposite directions should also be examined. 
The measurement of core inflation – should CPIX continue to beour main guide? 
As  much  as  we  aim  for  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation,  there  will  always  be  sharp 
movements in CPI inflation. These are generally driven by volatile price changes in a small 
number of goods and services that often tend to reverse quickly. Such price changes add 
considerable “noise” to total CPI, making it difficult to discern genuine movements in trend 
                                                
10  S. Poloz, “The Legacy of the Financial Crisis: What We Know, and What We Don’t” (speech to the Canadian 
Council for Public-Private Partnerships, Toronto, Ontario, 3 November 2014). 
11  The Minister of Finance has tightened mortgage insurance rules, the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
has developed stronger mortgage underwriting principles, and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
has restructured its programs. 
12  S.  Poloz,  “Monetary  Policy  as  Risk  Management”  (speech  to  the  Canadian  Club  of  Montreal,  Montréal, 
Quebec,  12  December  2013).  See  also  S.  Poloz,  “Integrating  Uncertainty  and  Monetary  Policy-Making:  A 
Practitioner’s Perspective,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2014–6, October 2014. 
13  S. Alpanda, G. Cateau and C. Meh, “A Policy Model to Analyze Macroprudential Regulations and Monetary 
Policy,” BIS Working Paper 461, September 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  inflation.  For  this  reason,  many  central  banks  calculate  core  inflation  measures,  which  are 
designed to minimize the influence of the most volatile components of the CPI. 
An effective core measure must have four key properties. It must be less volatile than total 
inflation;  track  long-run  movements  in  the  total  CPI  very  closely  (in  other  words,  be 
“unbiased”);  reliably  predict  future  trend  movements  in  the  total  CPI;  and  be  easy  to 
understand and explain to the public. 
The Bank calculates and publishes several core measures that meet these criteria to varying 
degrees. Within this set, CPIX has been our main guide since 2001.14 Although CPIX isn’t a 
perfect measure of underlying inflation, it has a number of advantages. It depicts relatively 
low volatility and is fairly straightforward to calculate.15 However, excluding some of the most 
volatile components from the CPI doesn’t guarantee that the resulting measure will always 
be smooth. Some components included in CPIX (for instance, electricity) have shown fairly 
high volatility in recent years, while others, such as the prices of autos and certain regulated 
services, have tended to move countercyclically, thereby obscuring the relationship between 
CPIX and the output gap.16  
Alternative measures of core inflation provide additional valuable information in this context. 
For instance, the Bank’s common component is well suited to seeing through one-off isolated 
price changes and tends to be more highly correlated with measures of economic slack.17 
But  it  isn’t  perfect  either.  It  can  be  hard  to  explain,  given  its  reliance  on  more  advanced 
statistical methods. 
Against  this  background,  the  properties  of  various  measures  of  core  inflation  will  be  re-
examined to determine whether the Bank should continue the practice of identifying one pre-
eminent  measure  of  inflation  as  its  operational  guide  and,  if  so,  whether  CPIX  should 
continue to play that role. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Canada’s inflation-targeting framework merits top marks. It has performed 
extremely  well  in  good  times  and  helped  us  weather  the  bad  times.  For  this  reason,  any 
modification to the framework must be thoughtfully researched and carefully considered. This 
doesn’t mean there is no room for improvement, just that – as I emphasized earlier – the bar 
for  change  is  high.  By  anchoring  inflation  expectations,  the  policy  has  earned  invaluable 
credibility. It would be a mistake to compromise that credibility. 
Although the financial crisis and its aftermath are forcing all central banks to reassess their 
operating frameworks and mandates, conducting such reviews is a well-established routine 
for  us  at  the  Bank  of  Canada.  We  believe  that  one  of  the  core  strengths  of  our  policy 
framework  is  the  research  program  we  undertake  leading  to  the  periodic  renewals  of  the 
agreement  with  the  Government  of  Canada.  Research  on  the  issues  I  have  raised  in  this 
speech  will  help  to  inform  the  next  renewal  and,  more  broadly,  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. 
                                                
14  CPIX excludes eight of the most volatile components of the consumer price index and adjusts the remainder 
for the effect of changes in indirect taxes. The components are fruit, vegetables, gasoline, fuel oil, natural gas, 
intercity transportation, tobacco and mortgage-interest costs. 
15  T. Laflèche and J. Armour, “Evaluating Measures of Core Inflation,” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2006): 
19–29. 
16  See Box 2, Monetary Policy Report, April 2014. 
17  The  common  component  uses  a  factor  model  to  extract  the  component  of  inflation  that  is  common  across  
the  individual  series  that  make  up  the  CPI.  See  M.  Khan,  L.  Morel  and  P.  Sabourin,  “The  Common  
Component  of  CPI:  An  Alternative  Measure  of  Underlying  Inflation  for  Canada,”  Bank  of  Canada  Working  
Paper No. 2013–35, October 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Transparency is important to us. We will keep the public informed about the progress of our 
work  over  the  next  two  years.  We  are  assembling  on  our  website  material  related  to  the 
framework and research we are undertaking in the run-up to the 2016 renewal. 
One thing is certain: no matter what is decided, the most important contribution that a central 
bank  can  make  to  the  economic  well-being  of  households  and  businesses  is  the 
achievement  and  maintenance  of  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation.  This  will  not  be 
sacrificed.  The  only  question,  as  always,  is  whether  it  can  be  delivered  in  an  even  more 
effective and reliable manner. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
