  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Global perspectives on sovereign debt 
restructuring 
Comments  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda, 
Kampala, 7 August 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Otieno  for  a  very  insightful  and  thought  provoking  paper.  As 
Mr. Otieno noted, the HIPC and MDRI debt relief initiatives had brought down external public 
debt  levels  substantially  by  the  mid-2000s  in  those  African  countries  which  had  access  to 
debt relief. At that time, the recipients of external debt relief agreed to curtail future external 
borrowing,  especially  on  non-concessional  terms,  usually  under  the  auspices  of  an  IMF 
programme.  However,  as  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Otieno,  since  the  mid-2000s,  sovereign 
borrowing has accelerated, and now includes borrowing on semi concessional and even fully 
commercial  terms.  Three  factors  lie  behind  the  increase  in  external  borrowing  by  African 
countries.  First,  many  countries  have  large  needs  for  public  investment  which  cannot  be 
financed without increased borrowing. Secondly, in real terms, the economies of SSA were 
more than twice as large on average in 2013 than they were in 2000, because of annual real 
growth of GDP averaging 5.6 over this period. This growth has raised the capacity of African 
economies to service debts and thus raised the amount of public debt that they can safely 
contract  without  risking  running  into  problems  of  debt  sustainability.  Finally,  because  of 
developments within global capital markets, notably the very low interest rates and abundant 
liquidity,  some  African  countries  are  now  able  to  access  commercial  debt  at  reasonably 
attractive rates. 
Nevertheless, we should not be complacent about the dangers of too large and rapid a build-
up of sovereign debt. It would be unwise to ignore the possibility that African countries will 
never again have to seek debt relief in the future. As such we need to think very carefully 
about the modalities through which sovereign debt relief might be applied in circumstances 
where sovereign debt is very heterogeneous, comprising traditional concessional debt from 
multilateral financial institutions, semi concessional debt from official bilateral and multilateral 
lenders, and commercial debt which includes both borrowing from banks and sovereign bond 
issues. 
As  the  recent  dispute  between  the  Argentine  Government  and  vulture  funds  which  had 
purchased  Argentine  sovereign  debt  at  a  discount  but  now  demand  repayment  in full,  has 
reminded  us,  the  world  lacks  an  effective  framework  for  ensuring  that,  in  cases  where 
Governments cannot realistically service their debt in full, their sovereign debt can be written 
down in a comprehensive and equitable manner which applies to all creditors. This lack of an 
effective debt restructuring system at the international level encourages free riders such as 
vulture funds to exploit the generosity of other creditors who provide debt relief, which in turn 
reduces the incentives on all creditors to accept a reduction in their claims on the sovereign. 
Because  of  the  growing  diversity  in  the  creditor  base  of  African  sovereign  borrowers, 
coordinating  debt  relief  among  creditors  and  enforcing  compliance  will  become  ever  more 
difficult. 
Mr.  Otieno  discusses  the  two  alternative  approaches  which  have  been  put  forward  to 
restructure  sovereign  debt  in  an  orderly  manner  in  the  event  that  the  debtor  faces  debt 
distress: the Statutory Approach and the Contractual Approach. 
I  concur  with  Mr.  Otieno  that  the  Statutory  Approach,  such  as  the  Sovereign  Debt 
Restructuring  Mechanism  (SDRM)  which  was  proposed  for  the  IMF  in  2001  has  many 
advantages.  The  SFRM  would  have  been  a  form  of  international  bankruptcy  regime.  In 
principle it would meet the needs of developing countries for a comprehensive mechanism 
for  restructuring  their  debt  in  an  orderly  manner  if  the  need  arises.  I  think  the  concerns 
expressed  by  some  opponents  of  the  SDRM,  that  it  will  encourage  moral  hazard  among 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  debtors,  are  overblown.  Sovereign  borrowers  do  not  lightly  seek  debt  relief,  because  they 
understand the consequences for their reputation and thus for future access to, and cost of, 
finance. Moreover, the fact that the terms of any debt relief provided under the SDRM would 
be determined by a Sovereign Debt Dispute Forum comprising reputable and independent 
arbitrators should ensure that debt restructuring is fair to both creditors and debtors. 
Unfortunately,  it  appears  unlikely  that  the  SDRM  or  anything  like  it  which  has  statutory 
authority will ever get off the ground, because it would require changes to the IMF’s Articles 
of Agreement. There is entrenched opposition to such changes from major shareholders of 
the IMF such as the United States. 
The  Contractual  Approach,  such  as  that  embodied  in  collective  action  clauses  (CAC) 
inserted into bond contracts is more practical. It is decentralized and market based and does 
not require political agreement at the international level for statutory changes. As Mr. Otieno 
notes,  bonds  with  collective  action  clauses  have  already  been  issued  by  some  emerging 
markets. CACs can solve the collective action problem for those bonds to which they apply, 
but the mere fact that a bond contains a CAC does not necessarily mean that a majority of 
bondholders will vote to offer sufficient debt relief to ensure that the debtor can return to debt 
sustainability.  
Moreover, the relevance of bonds which include CACs for African sovereign borrowers may 
be rather limited. International sovereign bond issues are still a relatively minor component of 
the  public  debt  of  most  African  countries,  and  many  countries  on  the  country  have  yet  to 
issue any sovereign bonds on international markets. The majority of African sovereign debt is 
still held by multilateral financial institutions. As such the multilateral financial institutions will 
have  to  take  the  lead  in  offering  debt  relief,  but  this  then  gives  the  private  sector  bond 
holders less of an incentive to agree collectively to offer any substantial debt relief. In effect, 
the smaller is the share of sovereign bonds in total public debt, the greater is the incentives 
facing private sector bond holders to free ride on the generosity of the multilateral financial 
institutions which hold the bulk of the debt. 
I  agree,  therefore,  with  Mr.  Otieno  that  the  CACs  cannot  be  seen  as  a  substitute  for  a 
coherent and comprehensive international debt restructuring framework, however distant the 
prospect  of  such  a  framework  is.  One  possible  advance  on  the  CAC  which  maintains  the 
Contractual  Approach  to  the  problem  might  be  to  issue  Contingent  Convertible  debt; 
sometimes called sovereign cocos. These are bonds which include a clause to allow for the 
automatic  rescheduling  of  debt  repayments  in  the  event  that  the  debtor  seeks  official 
assistance  (e.g.  from  the  IMF)  because  of  debt  problems.  The  drawback  with  sovereign 
cocos  is  that  they  would  only  allow  for  a  rescheduling  of  debt  repayments  rather  than  a 
reduction in debt, and so may not provide sufficient debt relief to bring about a permanent 
resolution of the debt problem. 
Mr.  Otieno  concludes  by  asking  the question  “Which Way for  Africa?”.  He  argues that  the 
natural choice for Africa should be the statutory approach, given that multilateral and bilateral 
creditors hold most of Africa’s sovereign debt. I agree that a statutory approach is preferable, 
but as I have already explained, I doubt whether a comprehensive international framework, 
which can cover all classes of creditor and enforce compliance by them all, will ever be put in 
place,  given  the  obstacles  it  would  face  from  major  powers.  The  way  forward  will  thus 
probably  involve  innovations  at  the  global  level  for  coordinating  debt  relief  among  multiple 
types  of  creditors  which  fall  short  of  having  full  statutory  authority  throughout  the  world  
– such as the proposed Sovereign Debt Adjustment Facility in the IMF – combined with the 
more widespread adoption of contractual mechanisms to provide contingent debt relief linked 
to the provision of official assistance.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
