  Tongurai Limpiti: Innovation and growth – finding the right balance 
Speech  by  Ms  Tongurai  Limpiti,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
3rd Thailand Financial Services Summit 2014 “Driving Growth through Innovation”, organized 
by IDC Financial Insights, Bangkok, 9 October 2014. 
 Good  morning.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  IDC 
Financial Insights for inviting me to deliver a keynote address today. The topic I cover today 
is “Innovation and Growth: Finding the Right Balance”, which is currently an interesting issue 
that we have to carefully watch. 
What  do  we  see  when  we  think  about  innovation  and  growth?  We  see  that  the  financial 
sector  nowadays  is  highly  competitive  due  to  the  number  of  players  and  the  approach  of 
regional  economic  integration. We  see that  digital  economy  is  becoming  a  reality;  thus, IT 
investment  is  one  of  the  keys  to  success  as  it  enables  financial  institutions  to  broaden 
business market and strengthen their internal operation. As a central banker, we encourage 
all financial institutions to improve their operational efficiency and capacity through innovation 
and  IT  investments  in  order  to  be  strong  domestically  and  to  be  able  to  compete 
internationally.  Increasing  operational  efficiency  has  been  a  focus  of  Thailand’s  Financial 
Sector Blueprint I and II and IT infrastructure development will play a crucial role in the next 
phase of Financial Blueprint. Regulators will have to be prepared for such a change in order 
to ensure sustainability and economic growth. 
Balance between innovation & growth and security 
1. 
Talking  about  balancing  between  innovation  &  growth  and  security,  in  the  world  of 
digitization,  it  is  a  challenge  to  find  the  right  balance  between  innovation  &  growth  and 
security which lie in our responsibilities. First of all, we have to understand the creation of the 
matters as well as their main drivers. 
Innovation  and  growth  result  from  consumer’s  and  business’s  demands  for  variety,  speed 
and lower cost that come with competitions to develop such technology facilitating financial 
transactions and creating sophisticated banking products. Seeing that, their main drivers are 
users’ demand for financial facilities and technology together with a need for proper uses of 
banking products and services, leading to security concerns, which have occurred in parallel 
with the innovation and growth.  
Security of IT system uses are prioritized as one of the most considerable issues, due to its 
importance and interconnectedness, to accomplish our own goal of financial system stability 
that is at the heart of effective supervision. So, it is our responsibility to prevent such fragility 
before it is too late. 
Regulatory schemes, bank business models and IT platform 
2.  
In  the  world  of  highly  competitive  markets,  in  particular  the  banking  sector,  players  have 
continuously tried to create new banking products to serve the needs of consumers and to 
move forward to penetrate market shares. As a result, sophisticated banking products along 
with adaptive bank business models have emerged. 
Unfortunately, once regulators respond to the changes steps after, financial crisis comes. At 
the  wake  after  2008  global  financial  crisis,  regulators  actively  strengthened  regulatory 
frameworks  by  reforming  agenda  such  as  strengthen  market  infrastructure,  effective 
supervision, resolution and addressing systemic important institutions. 
From the banks’ point of view, the implementation of the new stronger regulations at the time 
of post-crisis has undoubtedly caused burdens to implementation. From the Centre for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Study  of  Financial  Innovation  (CSFI)  survey,  it  indicated  that,  “regulation”  is  the  greatest 
threat to the banking industry (from the survey, it climbed up from no. 6 in 2012 to no. 1 this 
year). As banks have encountered the higher costs to run businesses, some may seek for 
less regulated sectors and some seek for changes in their business models to deal with such 
a  situation.  It  might  be  implied  here  that  regulation  is  the  key  influence  to  changes. 
Therefore, it illustrates the need to find the right balance. As a consequence, regulators have 
to respond to those changes, updating and revising their regulatory frameworks to be more 
advance  to  keep  up  with  the  business  models;  hence,  the  regulatory  schemes  run 
consistently with the shifts of bank business models. 
3.  
The main drivers 
Current innovation and growth of banking sector 
i.  
What is the main driver? I would like to pinpoint here that current innovation and growth of 
banking  sector  is  one  of  the main  drivers.  Even though many  countries  including Thailand 
have been affected by financial crises and regulatory reforms, we are currently in the stage 
of revival with high potential growth among ASEAN countries.  
According  to  the  IDC  Financial  Insights’  observation  on  key  structural  shifts,  trends  of 
financial institution sector are: expansion of banking industry, particularly, in South Asia and 
Southeast Asia due to an escalation of financial inclusion and new-entry of financial players; 
technology  refresh  to  serve  with  more  sophisticated  financial  products  and  services;  and 
regional integration (AEC) and the growth of Asian insurance business. These are paths to 
higher competition among banks, in which, IT innovation is a key to distinguish each brand. 
Undoubtedly, banks and related parties invest more in IT projects to advance their services 
responding to digital era. 
To  be  more  specific,  we  have  to  admit  that  we  live  in  the  world  of  digitization  with  an 
escalation of Internet users and Y generation. Consequently, this group of people becomes a 
new targeted customer group for banks. Interests in higher conveniences of services which 
result  from  high  integral  digital  environment  and  multi-task  lifestyle  of  the  people  prompt 
banks  to  respond  with  “Virtual  Banking  Concept”  –  any  interaction  with  a  bank  happens 
online instead of face-to-face meet up at a branch. To illustrate, the numbers of Internet and 
mobile banking users have grown up recently as well as volume and value of transactions via 
such systems. In Q2 this year, there are around 8.7 and 3.2 million agreements in Internet 
and mobile banking, respectively, of which 43 and 24 million transactions in volume that cost 
approximately 5,000 and 306 billion baths. 
Some banks, therefore, strategically reduce the role of branches, intentionally pay attention 
to  Virtual  Banking  Concept,  to  efficiently  reciprocate  the  target  customers  and  to  facilitate 
international  businesses  that  tend  to  grow  due  to  trends  of  globalization  and  economic 
integrations. 
The  growth  of  IT  investments  and  sophisticated  products  as  well  as  advanced  services  in 
banking industry comes with a concern on “security ”, which is the challenging key to propel 
the sustainability of such a growth. In our role as central bank, we put “security” as our first 
priority align with standard setting to promote advancement of banking services. 
The role of central bank (BOT) 
ii.  
What is our role? We have aimed at setting standards to create domestic and international 
banking  networks  as  well  as  to  promote  banking  and  payment  system  stabilities  by 
developing  access  to  financial  services  including  financial  infrastructure  for  cross-border 
payment and IT systems or other innovations aligned with security.  
In  terms  of  cross-border  innovation,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  in  association  with  the  ASEAN 
central  banks  established  the  Working  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  WC-PSS  in  2010  to  study  payment  and  settlement  system  environments  in  member 
countries  and  to  present  regional  strategic  plans  in  order  to  serve  economic  integration  in 
2015.  WC-PSS  created  cross-border  payment  innovations:  international  stock  markets 
network, electronic payment message standard, and ASEAN retail payment system network. 
In addition, BOT in association with Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) launched a new 
cross-border payment-versus-payment (PvP) link between Hong Kong’s USD CHATS, Hong 
Kong  dollar  Clearing  House  Automated  Transfer  System  (CHATS)  and  Thai  BAHTNET  to 
ensure the simultaneous delivery of US Dollars in Hong Kong and Thai Baht in Thailand in 
order to eliminate or mitigate settlement and counterparty risks. The link operationally started 
since 28 July this year. 
Aligning  with  cross-border  payment  innovations,  growth  of  IT  investment  is  another  matter 
that the Bank of Thailand has promoted and monitored. 
The  widespread  adoption  of  advanced  technology  in  banks’  key  systems  is  to  advance 
efficient  internal  operations  –  Big  Data  Analytics  for  processing  customers’  information  to 
analyze  customers’  behavior  and  Cloud  Computing  for  allocating  IT  resources,  and  to 
provide  products  and  services  through  online  platform  such  as  Mobile  Electronic  Data 
Capture, Net Bank, Virtual Card, Near Field Communication Contactless, and etc. However, 
many people, especially in the baby boom ages, have not experienced  the online banking 
services  yet,  partly  because  they  have  concerns  about  security.  So  it  is  our  job  to  secure 
them. 
BOT  has  continuously  promoted  online  banking  systems  and  are  aware  of  their  risks  and 
impacts at the same time since we believe that no matter what we have in online mode, they 
are all connected. 
As digital banking products thrive, so do the competency of cyber threats. In Banking Banana 
Survey this year indicated that technology risk rose from no. 18 in 2012 survey to no. 4 due 
to a high increase in the frequency and sophistication of cyber-attacks. Financial institutions 
have exposed to all risks of technology security: access risk, accuracy risk, availability risk, 
and agility risk.  
Concerning  the  systemic  risks,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  as  a  regulator  established  the  IT 
principle  called  “SIA”,  which  stands  for  Security,  Integrity  and  Availability  that  covers 
infrastructure protection at the prevention stage of both physical and logical controls: CCTV / 
access control; firewall, IDS / IPS, AntiVirus and password, respectively. In the arrangement 
of contingency plan, all systems will be tested or reviewed regularly. Furthermore, key risk 
indicators  and  risk  tolerance  will  be  closely  monitored,  and  loss  data  collection  will  be 
reported to the board of directors and the Bank of Thailand. Lastly, the Bank of Thailand has 
to correct the IT contingency plan implementation. Additionally, market conduct will serve as 
an alignment to each stage to determine customer protection by sharing correct information 
and suggestions to customers; and by interacting with customers’ complains. 
As a central bank, we wish to support more on inter-operability for both wholesale and retail 
which is a part of standard setting I mentioned earlier: for example, standardized codes for all 
banks and real sector. In Thailand, we already have chip card and OTP token such as the 
rabbit  card  and  SmartPurse,  but  what  we  really  wish  to  see  in  the  very  near  future  is 
something  more  standardized  and  widely  use  like  UK  Oyster  and  Hong  Kong  Octopus. 
Above  all,  incentive  enhancement  for  people  to  use  such  new  banking  products,  services 
and  systems  is  the  most  essential  driver  to  extend  the  business  advancement  and  that 
security is the key challenging solution. 
Conclusion 
4.  
Today’s IT innovations have influenced our ways of living in many fields including banking 
industry  and  we  all  benefit  from  the  new  technologies;  however,  lessons  learnt  from  past 
crises  have  taught  and  reminded  all  of  us  not  to  ignore  what  adverse  effects  might  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  afterward.  As  a  consequence,  maintaining  the  right  balance  between  banking  innovation 
optimization  and  risk  mitigation  is  the  key  in  reciprocating  the  sustainability  of  growth. We 
should  be  more  aware  and  prepared  of  any  challenging IT  innovations  in  order to  prevent 
and  mitigate  such  previous  disasters  we  did  encounter,  and  be  more  proactive  in  making 
policies and designing new models. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  do  believe  that  the  effective  collaboration  between  supervisors 
and  financial  institutions  is  necessary  to  encourage  sustainable  growth  of  Thai  banking 
system  against  evolving  threats.  With  that,  this  summit  is  another  move  for  financial 
institutions and related organizations to share information and ideas; hence, I wish you all a 
productive and fruitful discussion today. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
