  Patrick Honohan: Carelessness or misfortune? Lessons from our 
generation’s two macroeconomic collapses 
Remarks  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  an  event 
marking  the  retirement  of  Professor  John  FitzGerald,  Economic  and  Social  Research 
Institute (ESRI), Dublin, 22 October 2014. 
 Two  deep  national  macroeconomic  crises,  each  following  suddenly  after  a  change  of 
exchange rate regime, have defined the working life of John FitzGerald’s generation of Irish 
macroeconomists. Separated by a decade and a half of growth and rapid recovery, the two 
crises are often spoken of in the same breath, sometimes to say that they were but variants 
of the same problem; sometimes to highlight the differences. 
So which is it: should Ireland, once bitten, have been sufficiently shy to avoid the second, or 
was it really quite different? And even if there are similarities, is there a danger of neglecting 
important  differences that,  if  understood  and  learnt from,  would  help  improve  the  recovery 
process that is still under way and help avoid an early recurrence? 
In  some  important  respects,  it  is  the  similarities  between  the  two  episodes  that  jump  out: 
spending patterns that exceeded the economy’s ability to generate output that could pay for 
what  was  spent;  policy  errors  based  on  exaggerated  reliance  on  bowdlerised  versions  of 
simplistic  paradigms  (a  naïve  caricature  of  Keynesianism  in  the  first  instance,  a  credulous 
adoption  of  intensive  financialisation  in  the  second);  an  almost  reckless  disregard  for  the 
fiscal  consequences  of  policy  decisions.  And  yes,  the  experience  of  the  past  decade  has 
been  yet  another  example  of  the  start-and-stop  pattern  of  the  hare-and-tortoise  metaphor 
used  more  than  a  decade  ago  by  some  other  old-hands  to  describe  the  previous  half-
century. 
But  the  dynamics  of  the  two  crises  differed  a  lot.  The  second  crisis  happened  faster  and 
resulted in a deeper loss of output and of employment, especially of men but with  women 
also affected much more and for longer than in the earlier episode. Public debt jumped to a 
roughly equivalent proportion of GDP, but did so from a much lower base and much faster in 
the recent episode. Asset prices moved sharply in both cases, but were far more important in 
the more recent episode. 
The  boom  before  each  new  crisis  tends  to  display  subtle  differences  from  what  has  gone 
before.  It  is  these  differences  that  can  blind  policy  makers  to  the  vulnerabilities  that  are 
building. In the recent crisis, over-simplified approaches to assessing fiscal vulnerability, and 
a formulaic and credulous approach to bank solvency and bank credit risk, created risks that 
are still being worked through. Although the denouement revealed the source of the problem 
to  be  relatively  obvious,  it  has  been  less  easy  to  pinpoint  the  behavioural  flaws  (in  the 
behaviour  of  lenders,  regulators  and  borrowers)  that  prevented  enough  of  them  from 
foreseeing the risks and mitigating them. 
Some of the differences are attributable to the prevailing international economic environment 
– always crucial for as open an economy as is that of Ireland. Some are due to the degree to 
which the pre-crisis economy had become distorted before the crash. The distortions were 
surely much greater in the recent case because of 
(i) 
the heavy concentration in the boom phase on the construction sector (reflected in 
the sharp fall in male employment); 
the skewed reliance of the public finances on volatile sources of tax revenue (this 
resulted in a sharp and unforeseen loss of tax revenue when the boom ended); and 
the  grossly  imbalanced  private  sector  portfolios,  which  triggered  a  wave  of 
progressive losses of confidence, one of the earliest of which triggered the serious 
(ii) 
(iii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  unforced policy error of enacting an all-embracing blanket banking guarantee, and a 
later  one  ensured  that  the  authorities  had  no  alternative  but  to  seek  funding from 
official sources including the IMF. 
While  the  macroeconomic  adjustment  of  the  economy  in  both  cases  shared  common 
features: re-balancing of the public finances using both tax increases and spending cuts, the 
adjustment  in  the  more  recent  case  began  sooner  and  was  being  accomplished  more 
quickly.  This  may  be  attributed  to  the  loss  of  international  confidence  forcing  the 
Government’s hand in line with the adjustment programme agreed with the official lenders. 
Wage  competitiveness  was  also  a  central  element  in  the  adjustment  process.  This  was 
helped  in  the  1980s  by  the  new  weakness  of  the  currency  regime  relative  to  that  of  the 
largest trading partner (the UK), and by the ability, exercised in 1986, to make a significant 
but one-off devaluation, which was an option that was not available in the euro area. 
An additional feature of the later crisis, less significant in the earlier case, is the impact of the 
boom and bust on wealth and debtor positions. Part of this is widely discussed, namely the 
widespread  presence  of  households  with  negative  housing  equity,  the  financial  and 
operational crippling of the banks, and the assumption by the Government of a large block of 
banking  liabilities.  Another  part  is  less  easy  to  measure  or  even  to  unravel  conceptually, 
namely the sizable consequences of the debt-financed property purchases on spending and 
wealth  accumulation:  I  hope  we  will  soon  be  in  a  position  to  throw  more  light  on  the 
magnitudes involved. 
Causes 
I. 
One  should  always  distinguish  between  proximate  and  underlying  causes  in  considering 
major conjunctural disturbances. 
Proximate causes 
(a) 
For  proximate  causes  we  can  easily  accept  the  important  commonality  and  the  main 
distinction  between  the  two  episodes.  Both  were  caused  by  the  emergence  of  multi-year 
overspending:  the  distinction  lying  in  the  fact  that  the  1980s  followed  a  period  of  mainly 
public  sector  overspending,  whereas  it  was  private  overspending  that  teed-up  the  recent 
crash. 
The government over-spending of the late 1970s is generally and rightly traced back to the 
winning  election  manifesto  of  1977.  This  heralded  a  post-austerity  splurge,  following  the 
sharp  fiscal  contraction  that  had  corrected  emerging  imbalances  in  1975.  The  expansive 
policies of 1977–81 set in place pay rates and spending programmes which were politically 
difficult to dismantle when they proved unaffordable. 
Underlying causes 
(b) 
But why did these policy errors emerge? Here it is useful to recall Keynes’ observation that 
policymakers are often in thrall to some defunct theoretician. In both the 1970s and the early 
2000s, Irish governments were misled by bad ideas falsely distilled from simplistic versions 
of prevailing orthodoxies. 
Thus, in the 1970s it was a bowdlerised deformation of Keynesianism that was used to justify 
a  government  spending-led  growth  spurt  which  was  intended  to  generate  self-sustained 
revenue expansion. The implicit parameterisation of this idea was wildly wrong.1  
                                                
1  See Ó Gráda’s 2012 Whitaker lecture for a vivid table showing how badly the plan for 1977–81 missed its 
unrealistic targets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  the  2000s,  in  contrast,  the  Government  was  lulled  into  complacency  by  an  apparently 
crass belief in untrammelled financialisation. Indeed, Ireland’s experience in this crisis differs 
from  the  experience  of several  other financialised  economies  mainly  in  scale.  Of  course  a 
well-developed financial system is an essential contributor to balanced economic growth. But 
it  was  excessive  reliance  on  financialisation  that  allowed  private  spending  (including  by 
developers  abroad)  to  create  balance  sheet  vulnerabilities  threatening  the  stability  of  the 
state, and deluding it into thinking it was running a sustainable fiscal policy, when in fact it too 
was  building  up  unsustainable  commitments  financed  by  insecure  and  transient  revenue 
sources. 
Contrasts in the evolution of the main macro aggregates 
II. 
Both recessions were extremely deep and protracted. But there are interesting differences in 
timing  and  dynamics.  Take  just  four  indicators:  employment,  unemployment,  asset  prices 
and government debt. 
(a) 
Employment: faster and deeper fall and for both men and women in the 2000s 
Here the interesting contrast is across the gender divide. In the 1980s, the adverse shock to 
employment produced an overall fall of about 7 per cent over 8 years. The decline in female 
employment  was  much  smaller.  The  big  movements  were  in  male  employment,  which  fell 
further and did not fully recover until 1996. 
There  was  a  huge  fall  of  20%  in  male  employment  between  2007  and  2012;  female 
employment also fell sharply in this period (8½% decline peak to trough). These were faster 
and  deeper  falls  than  in  the  1980s.  The  employment  recovery  in  both  male  and  female 
employment started in 2012, but total employment is still about 12½% below the peak at the 
time of writing. 
(b) 
Unemployment: tracking the UK in both periods: but went much higher in the 
1980s 
With migration as an important balancing mechanism, trends in unemployment in Ireland do 
not  always  closely  track  those  in  employment.  One  astonishing  regularity,  which  has 
persisted  through  both  crises,  is  the  close  manner  in  which  the  dynamics  of  Irish 
unemployment has tracked that in the UK (and not that in the euro area). 
The  surge  in  unemployment  rates  was  higher  in  the  1980s,  despite  a  smaller  dip  in 
employment.  Unemployment  had  already  been  high  during  the  1970s,  and  the  late  1970s 
recovery  was  moderate.  Rates  surged  to  record  levels  against  the  background  of  the 
contemporary recession in UK. Indeed, there was a double dip in unemployment rates into 
1992. 
In  contrast,  the  2008  crash  had  been  preceded  by  a  6–7  year  period  of  full  employment 
(measured unemployment rate around 4%). Despite the contemporary global financial crisis 
and the euro area crisis, Irish unemployment rates peaked below 1980s levels and, helped 
by stronger labour market developments in UK, started to turn down from 2012. 
Asset prices: much larger swings in the recent crisis 
(c) 
Here there is a big contrast. The early case did not show huge shifts in asset prices. 1980 
marked the peak of a house price boom; equities also peaked in that year, but these peaks 
were  small  relative  to  what  happened  in  the  2000s.  Real  house  prices  hardly  moved  up 
before  1977  and  then  only  by  about  25%  total.  Likewise  they  didn’t  dip  much  below  the 
1970s median. 
In the 2000s, the house price bubble (even though starting from a much higher plateau in 
real terms than that of the 1970s) was very large and was accompanied by record levels of 
construction.  Interestingly,  five  years  after  the  crash,  house  prices  had  turned  well  before 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reaching the historical average in real terms. (Has the low euro nominal interest rate regime 
permanently lifted equilibrium house prices? Are real costs of construction permanently and 
unavoidably higher? Or are prices still elevated relative to their likely long-term trend? I won’t 
speculate further.) 
Equity  prices  also  fell  sharply  (especially  banking  equities  on  which  some  older  middle-
income people were relying for dividend flow to sustain living standards). The bursting of the 
bubble has had other long term wealth distributional effects. 
Public debt: slow build-up in the 1980s, sudden jump in the 2000s 
(d) 
Here  the  contrast  in  dynamical  sequence  is  quite  interesting.  The  1980s  crisis  was 
characterised by a slow but steady accumulation of debt during the crisis containment phase 
until the political logjam was broken and decisive corrective fiscal action was taken. Indeed, 
debt  had  not  yet  got  seriously  out  of  line  when  the  crisis  began  to  be  tackled,  albeit  too 
tentatively,  in  1981.  It  is  relevant  that  most  debt  was  domestic  and  in  local  currency.  This 
contributed  to  limiting  fears  of  default,2  and  indeed  permitted  successive  governments  to 
defer decisive adjustment until the debt ratio crept up to the vicinity of 120% of GDP. 
In contrast, in the more recent case, public debt was falling until just before the crisis was 
identified and containment began. Then it started growing rapidly (even before the banking 
debt was taken onto the books). The debt at that stage was almost all held by non-residents 
and,  of  course,  none  in  a  “domestic  currency”.  The  sudden  and  belated  international 
awareness  of  the  scale  of  banking  losses  being  crystallised  onto  the  Government’s  debt 
during the third quarter of 2010 contributed strongly to the rapid loss of international market 
confidence in the weeks that followed, leading to the application for financial assistance from 
the IMF and EU. 
Concluding remarks 
III. 
Every  crisis  is  different, and  we  have  shown  that  the  two  boom-and-bust  cycles  that  have 
bookmarked  the  middle  part  of  John  FitzGerald’s  career  as  Ireland’s  pre-eminent 
macroeconomic modeller display, as we have seen, striking differences between them both 
as regards their causes and the dynamic evolution of macroeconomic variables. 
But  after  every  crisis,  home-spun  truths  reassert  themselves.  Living  within  one’s  means, 
exercising prudence, not running before you can walk. In the end, Lady Bracknell would have 
been  justified  in  censuring  Irish  policymakers  as  she  censured  her  prospective  son-in-law 
Ernest. 
Curing  the  current  crisis  has  been  in  some  respects  more  challenging  than  the  last  time, 
given the absence of some previously available tools and because of the greater complexity 
of  resolving  the  indebtedness  problems  that  have  been  much  more  to  the  fore  this  time 
around. 
Policy has been tackling the challenges and they are now evidently beginning to be brought 
under control and subdued. Lessons were learnt from the earlier crisis, as exemplified by the 
more speedy fiscal policy response. The extent to which private debt issues were much more 
important  this  time  was  also  recognised  and  resulted  in  sweeping  legislative  changes  on 
insolvency  and  progressively  more  assertive  regulatory  intervention  to  ensure  more  pro-
active and effective management of the problem by lenders. Thus the public authorities have 
been acting on the basis of lessons learnt from experience. 
                                                
2   The  distinguished  commentator  Rudiger  Dornbusch  was  one  of  the  few  to  suggest  that  a  default  could  be 
needed, but already by the time he was writing (1988) the corner had been turned and growth was beginning 
to take care of debt sustainability concerns. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We are still learning. In particular, for example, the case-by-case resolution of situations of 
chronic  over-indebtedness  has  proved  difficult.  And  a  full  analysis  of  the  distributional 
consequences  remains  elusive3  as  does  a  convincing  assessment  of  the  longer  term 
consequences. 
But what is undoubtedly true is that our national ability to achieve improved policy responses 
now – and in the future – has been greatly enhanced by an improved understanding of the 
macro-economy  to  which  John  FitzGerald’s  tireless  and  immensely  well-informed  research 
has greatly contributed. 
                                                
3  The  evidence  (some  of  which  I  have  reviewed  elsewhere)  is  that  the  impact  of  boom  and  bust  on  the 
distribution of income seems to have differed less as between the two episodes, after account is taken of the 
redistributive effect of fiscal policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
