  David Rule: PRA Solvency II Conference – countdown to implementation 
Speech by Mr David Rule, Executive Director for Prudential Policy of the Bank of England, at 
the PRA Solvency II Conference, London, 17 October 2014. 
 I would also like to extend my welcome and thanks to you for taking the time to attend this 
conference  today.  I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  formally  introduce  myself.  I  was 
appointed Executive Director of Prudential Policy at the Bank of England in June having held 
a variety of different roles across the Bank and FSA, most recently as a supervisor of large 
UK banks. 
This  conference  is  entitled  “countdown  to  implementation”.  We  have  reached  a  level  of 
stability in the policy making process for Solvency II, and the purpose of today is to share our 
thinking  and  provide  clarity  where  possible  on  those  last  remaining  issues  ahead  of 
implementation.  You’ll  be  hearing  from  experts  across  the  technical  areas  and  Victoria 
Saporta, Director of Financial Policy will give you an overview of the policy areas where work 
is still being finalised along with the timeline for completion. 
I would like to take a step back from this and reflect more widely on what Solvency II is about 
for the Bank. 
To echo the Governor’s words from his speech to the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries in 
September  “Insurance  is  at  the  core  of  the  new  Bank  of  England”…we  have  over 
200 supervisors  and  50  actuaries  engaged  in  the  implementation  of  Solvency  II,  not  to 
mention the contribution from numerous dedicated policy experts. In addition, with insurance 
supervision  now  embedded  in  the  Bank,  supervisors  benefit  from  the  support  of  monetary 
policy experts, credit risk analysts and macro-financial analysts. 
The insurance sector plays a key role in the financial system and the economy. It protects 
companies  and  individuals  from  perils  they  could  not  otherwise  shoulder,  managing  and 
spreading risk globally. Insurers are vital to efficient allocation and overall provision of capital, 
they provide alternative sources of funding, increasing the diversity in the system. 
The PRA has two primary statutory objectives: to promote the safety and soundness of all 
banks,  insurers  and  major  investment  firms  and,  a  specific  objective  for  insurers,  of 
contributing to the securing of an appropriate degree of protection for policyholders. 
These  objectives  are  the  guiding  principles  that  ultimately  underpin  our  implementation  of 
Solvency II. The core objective of the new regime is greater policyholder protection. 
Solvency  II  is  a  welcome  modernisation  of  European  regulatory  standards.  You  will  be 
familiar with the UK’s ICAS regime. Solvency II recognises many of the principles that form 
the basis of that regime, and therefore introduces a level playing field with the rest of the EU. 
Risk-based  capital  standards  and  robust  valuation  practices  ensure  resilience  against 
unexpected  losses.  The  enhanced  disclosure  rules  in  turn  aim  to  encourage  the  effective 
exercise  of  market  discipline  through  increased  provision  of  information.  Our  approach  to 
third  country  branches  will  aim  to  ensure  that  they  are  operating  to  standards  that  give 
branch  policyholders  an  equivalent 
to  policyholders  of  an 
EEA-headquartered undertaking.  
The three  pillars  of  Solvency  II  not  only  provide  a  robust foundation to support  the  safety, 
soundness  and  resilience  of  individual  insurers,  but  also  in  turn  support  stability  in  the 
system.  
The financial services sector is more interconnected than ever before. Risks to the financial 
system can affect all firms; we therefore need to ensure that our analysis is rigorous not just 
within  sectors  but  at  a  cross-sectoral  level.  With  a  number  of  mixed  financial  groups 
undertaking  insurance,  banking,  asset  management  and  any  number  of  other  activities  in 
level  of  protection 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  multiple locations across continents, it is vital for firms and regulators alike to understand the 
interconnections and dependencies not only between different firms but within them as well. 
This is just one reason why it is so crucial to get the new regime right. The introduction of 
consolidated  group  supervision  under  Solvency  II  will  ensure  supervisors  and  firms  have 
greater clarity in their overall view of group business, and are able to recognise and therefore 
manage risks that would not otherwise be visible. 
In  particular,  we  will  be  able  to  look  across  groups  to  ensure  that  they  have  adequate 
resources, even if risks are being transferred to group companies located in countries with 
different  regulatory  regimes,  such  as  offshore  centres.  And  we  will  be  alert  to  regulatory 
arbitrage, such as where risk transfer through reinsurance is negated through sliding scale 
commissions. 
The  financial  crisis,  and  the  post-crisis  regulatory  reform  agenda,  have  taught  us  many 
lessons. The business models of insurers and banks are different, but those lessons have 
informed and will continue to inform how we manage the implementation of Solvency II. 
Perhaps  most  salient  for  this  conference,  is  the  difficult  lessons  we  have  learned  from 
experience with insurers and banks when it comes to the use of internal models. Many of you 
in this room will be acutely aware of the demands of the Solvency II model approval process. 
This rigour has a purpose. Use of internal models can be an effective means of harnessing 
the  better  knowledge  a  firm  has  of  its  own  risk  profile  to  set  risk-sensitive  capital 
requirements.  But  there  are  limits  to  our  ability  to  model  capital  requirements.  These  are 
more acute where the event – for example, a credit default or a windstorm – being modelled 
happens infrequently and historical data is therefore scarce, where events cluster rather than 
occur  independently  or  where  the  underlying  process  behind  the  event  –  for  example  the 
structure of the economy or the natural environment – may have changed, so that history is 
an unreliable guide to the future. In such circumstances, significant uncertainty about model 
outputs  may  call  for  a  more  prudent  approach.  And  the  temptation  to  add  additional 
parameters, making models more and more complicated, can often have the perverse effect 
of  weakening  model  performance.  This  is  why,  in  addition  to  scrutinising  the  technical 
components  of  models,  we  also  look  at  the  way  they  are  used  within  firms.  Only  a  good 
model can play an important role in a firms’ system of governance. Our expectations of their 
quality  are  high  as  Solvency  II  specifies  that  they  become  an  embedded  part  of  the  risk 
management system of a firm. It is therefore not only important for us to rigorously assess 
them but that senior management have ownership of these models and continuously do the 
same.  The  Bank  of  England  takes  model  approval  very  seriously  indeed  and  we  will  not 
hesitate  to  hold  back  approval  for  the  use  of  models  where  there  are  risks  that  cannot 
credibly be modelled or data are insufficient.  
Throughout the implementation of Solvency II, we have worked hard to ensure that progress 
in the regulatory agenda is not synonymous with unnecessary impediments on your ability to 
grow and evolve your businesses. At all times, though, insurers must be capitalised to deliver 
policyholder protection, and this must be commensurate with the risks they take. 
A priority in this area is the revitalisation of robust securitisation markets in Europe, many of 
which  have  yet  to  recover from the  crisis. We  have  been  working  with  the  ECB  and  other 
European authorities with the goal of encouraging securitisation as a means for lenders to 
diversify  funding  and  reduce  concentrations  –  but  not  to  arbitrage  capital  regulations.  A 
growth  in  “real  money”  investors,  such  as  insurers,  will  increase  the  diversity  of  funding 
providers  to  the  real  economy,  avoiding  the  pre-crisis  reliance  on  an  unstable,  leveraged 
investor  base.  A  key  goal  is  to  improve  transparency,  simplicity  and  consistency  so  that 
investors  can  understand  the  risks  associated  with  securitisations.  For  simple,  transparent 
and  consistent  securitisations,  we  are  prepared  to  review  whether  post-crisis  regulatory 
requirements for investors and originators are too onerous. 
That includes Solvency II, where we welcome a recalibration of capital requirements for such 
simple,  transparent  and  consistent  securitisations,  particularly  at  longer  maturities.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ongoing participation of insurers – a major source of long-term finance – in this debate will be 
key to achieving results.  
We have got to a stage now where the path to Solvency II is clear. We have come a long 
way from the uncertainty that has seemingly dominated the past few years. But we need to 
remain conscious of the new challenges and opportunities that are on our horizon. 
Alongside the European process the wheels have been turning in the international space. A 
common set of global standards for systemically important insurers are being worked on as 
we speak. 
Throughout the development of these standards, the Bank of England will continue with its 
strong  history  of  international  engagement.  We  have  made  great  strides  in  Europe  with 
Solvency  II  and  we  aim  to  ensure  the  complementarity  of  upcoming  global  standards  with 
what we have achieved with Solvency II. 
Continued interaction with the industry is an essential part of good policy making so I’d like to 
again thank you for your participation today. I hope that we can continue to work together 
towards achieving a policy outcome at all levels that fulfils our objectives and in turn ensures 
the stability, resilience and ultimately the prosperity of the insurance sector in the UK. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
