  Jens Weidmann: Banking union and regulatory reforms – mission 
accomplished? 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
24th Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very pleased and honoured to speak here today before such a distinguished audience. 
So thank you for the invitation. 
Since  I  am  speaking  ahead  of  a  panel  discussion  entitled  “Banking  Union  and  Regulatory 
Reforms: Mission Accomplished?”, I would, if I may, like to present a central banker’s view of 
the respective issues. 
The  history  of  banking  regulation  is  almost  as  old  as  the  history  of  banking  itself.  One 
instance of very tough regulation was reported by the Spanish economist Huerta de Soto: in 
the year 1300, a detailed set of regulations to control banking were established in Catalonia.1 
Bankers who went bankrupt were forced to live on a strict diet of bread and water until their 
depositors had been fully reimbursed. 
One  would  imagine  that  this  regulation  was  an  effective  way  of  preventing  bankers  from 
engaging  in  overly  risky  behaviour.  Apparently,  it  was  not.  In  1321,  Catalonian  banking 
regulation  was  tightened:  henceforth,  any  banker  who  failed  to  meet  his  clients’  demands 
faced the threat of being beheaded in front of his bank. 
I would say that under such a rigid regulatory regime, banking really was a risky business. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I can reassure the bankers among you that no regulatory authority 
wants to implement measures from the Middle Ages. 
Contemporary banking and medieval banking have as much in common as a Ferrari and a 
donkey cart. However, both can get into a nasty accident if their drivers navigate the roads 
too quickly and too recklessly. 
Traffic rules are there to protect drivers and their vehicles as well as other road users. You 
could say that the regulatory authorities are the traffic police of the financial system. With one 
important difference, however: Unlike a sports car that careers off the road, the failure of a 
commercial bank can become a systemic event. 
The financial crisis taught us that the rules of the banking system were insufficient. The crisis 
revealed a raft of regulatory weaknesses that needed to be cured: the possibility of excessive 
risk-taking; insufficient loss absorbing capacities; banks that were “too big to fail” – to name 
but a few of the shortcomings that came to light. 
Progress made on regulatory agenda but no question of overregulation 
2. 
During  the  seven  years  that  have  passed  since  the  onset  of  the  US  subprime  crisis, 
significant  progress  has  been  made  on  the  regulatory  agenda.  Unsurprisingly,  there  are 
mixed views on whether or not the implemented regulatory reforms are sufficient. 
                                                
1   J Huerta de Soto (2006), Money, Bank Credit and Economic Cycles, Auburn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the 
fully 
In any case, the way representatives of the banking industry view matters is quite unlike the 
general public’s perception: while the prevailing impression among the public at large is that 
next to nothing has happened, industry representatives are already complaining of a surfeit 
of regulation. In my opinion, neither is true. Regulation has been significantly tightened, but 
there can be no question of overregulation. 
The most important regulatory step was the introduction of stricter capital requirements and 
new liquidity rules under Basel III. The new capital adequacy rules that were implemented 
into European law by CRD IV and CRR with a transition period until 2019 require banks to 
hold better and more capital. 
According  to  the  Basel  Committee’s  latest  Basel  III  monitoring  exercise,  most  large 
internationally  active  banks  already  meet 
implemented  capital  minimum 
requirements. Banks’ loss absorbing capacity is much better than it was before the financial 
crisis. 
Between mid-2011 and end-2013, the average CET1 ratio of large and internationally active 
German  banks,  for  example,  almost  doubled  from  just  5%  to  9.5%.  The  leverage  ratio  of 
those banks improved from 1.7% to 2.6%. 
The introduction of the leverage ratio – which has a target ratio of 3.0% under Basel III – is 
without  doubt  a  sensible  supplementary  measure  to  the  risk-based  capital  requirements. 
Starting in 2015, banks will be required to disclose the leverage ratio, with a view to migrating 
it to a Pillar 1 requirement by 2018 after a final calibration. 
The  leverage  ratio  is  a  useful  complement  as  a  backstop,  all  the  more  so  as  the  Basel 
Committee has identified that risk weights for credit risk vary significantly across banks using 
an internal ratings-based approach. The risk-based approach must, however, remain a key 
element of the capital rules. 
Having a leverage ratio as the single rule would offer banks problematic incentives to take 
greater  risks.  I  therefore  agree  with  my  colleague  Mark  Carney  from  the  Bank  of  England 
who  has  said,  in  this  context,  that  it  is  sometimes  good to  wear  a  belt  and  suspenders to 
prevent your trousers from falling down. 
That being said, the flaws of the risk-based approach need to be addressed. To improve the 
comparability  of  the  methods  used  to  calculate  the  capital  requirements,  the  Basel 
Committee is aiming to curtail banks’ leeway in weighting risk. 
For  example,  it  is  hard  to  assess  the  probability  of  default  for  low-default  portfolios  which 
include  exposures  to  sovereigns,  large  companies  or  banks  because  –  as  the  name 
suggests – the respective credit events are very rare. 
To some extent, the calculation of regulatory parameters for such low-default portfolios falls 
under what is known as the “turkey illusion”: Imagine you are a turkey. Every day you are 
approached by a man who feeds you. What kind of mental model of what happens when he 
appears do you think you’ll build up? However, Thanksgiving is coming… 
Measures  under  consideration  to  reduce  the  leeway  for  banks  using  an  internal-ratings 
based approach include the implementation of floors based on the standardised approach, 
restrictions  on  using  internal  estimates  of  certain  parameters for  risk  calculation  purposes, 
and the exclusion of certain asset types from the model-based approach. 
Efforts are also underway to make the standardised approach more risk-sensitive. However, 
it  should  be  noted  that  using  different  methods  to  calculate  risk-weighted  assets  is  not  a 
problem  per  se. To  some  extent,  deviations  are  acceptable  and  reasonable;  otherwise  we 
would  ultimately  be  calling  into  question  the  very  rationale  of  the  internal  models-based 
approach. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Beyond Basel III 
3. 
When  Basel  III  is  fully  implemented,  regulatory  capital  requirements  will  be  significantly 
higher  and  tougher  than  under  Basel  II,  and  the  financial  system  will  be  more  stable  than 
before.  A  typical  credit  institution  will  have  to  achieve  a  capital  ratio  of  8%  plus  various 
buffers. But will that be enough? 
To  give  a  profound  answer  to  this  question,  we  would  first  need  to  have  an  idea  of  what 
would be an optimal, or at least an adequate, capital ratio. 
Academic  research  on  this  subject  is  not  very  broad.  However,  a  recent  study  by  several 
central  bank  economists  found  that  a  capital  ratio  of  around  11%  would  be  a  reasonable 
figure.2 That number exceeds the Basel III minimum requirement but falls well short of “more 
radical proposals”. 
Of course, there is a trade-off between the benefits and costs of higher capital requirements 
which lies at the heart of the optimisation problem in the study I just mentioned. On the one 
hand, higher capital requirements reduce bank leveraging, the risk of bank failures and the 
implicit  subsidies  given  to  banks  on  account  of deposit  insurance  schemes  backed  by  the 
government  and  ultimately  the  taxpayer.  On  the  other  hand,  excessively  high  capital 
requirements may unduly curtail banks’ ability to provide credit to the economy. 
We should be aware that simulations like this are highly dependent on model specifications, 
so  the  results  of  these  models  need  to  be  taken  with  a  pinch  of  salt  –  and  what  is  more, 
additional  research  is  certainly  needed  in  this  regard.  But  it  might  encourage  banks, 
particularly those which are currently only just managing to meet the Basel III requirements, 
to increase their capital beyond these requirements. 
One of the reasons why the banking industry usually objects to higher capital ratios is that 
equity is considered to be costlier than debt. 
There are good reasons why shareholders are better remunerated than creditors: equity is 
riskier  than  debt  because  debt  is  senior  to  equity  and  not  performance-related.  Moreover, 
equity allows shareholders to have more of a say in a company’s business activities. 
The cost advantage of debt over equity, however, is also explained by differences in the tax 
treatment of various forms of investment. Equity-based financing is placed at a disadvantage 
to debt-based financing. 
Admittedly,  reforming  business  taxation  is  notoriously  difficult  and  would  require  a  strong 
political  commitment.  Also,  efficiency  improvements  in  business  taxation  often  go  hand  in 
hand with revenue shortfalls or acute uncertainty over the fiscal effects of legal changes. 
Of course, financial stability considerations are only of secondary importance in the field of 
business taxation. However, introducing a (more) neutral form of tax treatment for debt and 
equity financing would generally be efficiency-enhancing, besides reducing the attractiveness 
of being highly leveraged. 
Improving the neutrality of business taxation in terms of the source of financing appears to be 
a topic that is well worth considering for the reform agenda. This is not an issue specific to 
banks but one which generally holds true for business taxation. The task of ensuring financial 
institutions’ capital adequacy is, nevertheless, primarily a regulatory one. 
Besides  the  Basel  III  regime,  a  host  of  other  prudential  rules  have  been  tightened  in 
response  to  the  financial  crisis.  The  stricter  overall  regulatory  landscape  has  induced 
regulatory evasion: financial activities are being shifted out of the regulated banking sector 
into the unregulated shadow banking sector. 
                                                
2   L Clerc et al (2014), Capital Regulation in a Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Default, mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  According to the latest FSB Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report, non-bank financial 
intermediation grew by USD 5 trillion in 2013 to reach USD 75 trillion. 
The growing  shadow  banking  sector  is  something  regulators  have  to  watch  closely.  Given 
that shadow banking entities essentially cannot tap central bank liquidity and do not benefit 
from backstops such as deposit insurance schemes, they are latently exposed to the risk of 
runs. 
Shadow  banks  can  thus  become  a  source  of  systemic  risk,  especially  when  they  are 
structured to perform bank-like functions like maturity and liquidity transformation and when 
they are highly interconnected with the regular banking system. 
From  a  financial  stability  perspective  it  is  therefore  important  to  closely  monitor  shadow 
banks’  activities  and  regulate  them  adequately.  The  Bundesbank  therefore  supports  the 
global regulatory initiative on shadow banking under the leadership of the Financial Stability 
Board (FSB). 
European banking union 
4. 
The  recent  establishment  of  a  European  banking  union,  which  comprises  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  is  an 
institutional milestone on the path that leads to greater financial stability in the euro area. 
The  banking  union  eliminates  a  serious  flaw  in  the  institutional  make-up  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. In this regard, former ECB president Wim Duisenberg was already on the 
right track. He suggested back in the days of the Delors Group that a unified monetary policy 
ought to be combined with unified banking supervision. 
In the late 1980s, however, European politicians were not ready to take that decision. Having 
experienced  a  serious  financial  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  this  is  at  least  one  thing  that  has 
changed. 
Less than three weeks ago, the ECB assumed responsibility for the supervision of euro-area 
banks  and  I  would  like  to  congratulate  Danièle  Nouy  and  her  staff  for  accomplishing  the 
Herculean task of establishing a workable European banking supervisory set-up within one 
year  and  successfully  implementing  the  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  largest  banks. 
Needless  to  say,  it  would  have  been  “mission  impossible”  if  national  supervisors  had  not 
acted in concert with the ECB. 
The SSM is expected to reduce regulatory arbitrage and remove home bias from the world of 
banking supervision. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism is a necessary complement to the common supervision 
set-up because it brings liability and control into alignment. To quote the European Systemic 
Risk Board’s scientific advisers: “Without credible cross-border resolution regimes, banks are 
‘global  in  life  [but]  national  in  death’”.3  One  of  the  core  elements  of  the  new  resolution 
framework will be the bail-in regime. It sets out a clear liability cascade for failing banks. In 
future, investors will be first in line to shoulder the costs of bank failures – and rightfully so, 
since they were the ones that assumed the risks and benefited from the returns in the first 
place. 
An essential requirement for the credibility of the bail-in regime is the existence of sufficient 
bail-in-able capital. In this regard, the G20 leaders’ decision to endorse the Financial Stability 
Board’s proposal to introduce a total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) for global systemically 
important banks (G-SIBs) at their meeting in Brisbane a few days ago marks an important 
step forward. 
                                                
3   ESRB (2014), Is Europe Overbanked?, Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee, No 4. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  According to the FSB proposal, the world’s 30 largest banks will be required to hold TLAC in 
a  range  of  16–20%  of  their  risk-weighted  assets  and  6%  of  their  unweighted  assets.  The 
implementation  of  the  TLAC  will  help  to  mitigate  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem,  which  is  a 
particularly relevant topic for G-SIBs. 
The  TLAC  proposal  is  neutral  in  terms  of  banks’  structures.  In  order  to  be  able  to  absorb 
losses in resolution, TLAC instruments need to be subordinated, regardless whether this is 
achieved  via  contractual,  statutory  or  structural  subordination.  Moreover,  comprehensive 
studies  will  be  carried  out  to  analyse  the  potential  impact  of  the  TLAC  proposal,  following 
which the TLAC requirement will be finalised. 
The  euro  area  has  already  introduced  a  minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible 
liabilities (MREL) which applies to all institutions that are covered by the BRRD. But so far, 
these  liabilities  can  be  held  by  other  financial  institutions.  In  order  to  tackle  the  issue  of 
contagion and thus bolster financial stability, this standard should, however, discourage other 
financial institutions from holding these liabilities, eg by setting limits or deductions from own 
funds. 
Therefore, I agree in essence with Goethe University’s Jan-Pieter Krahnen who said in an 
interview with Handelsblatt last week that “bail-in bonds should only be held by institutions 
[…] that are […] able to bear the […] shock of a bank’s insolvency  without suffering a run 
themselves.” 
Assuming the bail-in mechanism works in practice, this will also be an important step towards 
breaking the disastrous sovereign-bank nexus. However, more will need to be done if we are 
to overcome this nexus, which became a vicious cycle during the crisis. 
In  particular,  the  preferential  treatment  afforded  to  sovereign  bonds  under  the  Basel  III 
regime  needs  to  be  reconsidered.  To  quote  Danièle  Nouy:  “sovereigns  are  not  risk-free 
assets. That has been demonstrated, so now we have to react.” 
Putting an end to zero risk weighting and particularly applying a large exposures regime to 
sovereign bonds would trigger substantial repercussions, but these would be manageable if 
they  were  phased  in  over  a  transitional  period  –  which  would  undoubtedly  need  to  be 
granted. 
the 
Conclusion 
interplay  between 
the  various  measures 
5. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  making  a  reference  to the  title  of  the following 
panel discussion: “Banking Union and Regulatory Reforms: Mission Accomplished?” 
Without wishing to pre-empt the panel debate, I would suggest we should be cautious about 
declaring “mission accomplished”. 
Besides discussing individual regulatory measures, however, in my view it would be essential 
to  consider 
that  have  already  been 
implemented. 
Without  doubt,  the  banking  sector  has  needed  to  digest  sizeable  shifts  in  the  regulatory 
environment. This obviously needs to be considered when banks are called upon to extend 
their  loans  to  the  private  sector.  Bearing  in  mind  the  stricter  capital  requirements,  it  is  not 
surprising  that  their  repercussion  on  banks’  activities  make  them  wary  when  it  comes  to 
increasing their lending. 
That being said, the weak credit dynamics in the euro area are also caused by the moderate 
economic recovery and the persistent need to deleverage in the banking sector and the non-
bank  sector.  Hence,  more  than  just  favourable  refinancing  conditions  will  be  needed  to 
stimulate credit growth. 
It  is  far  more  important  to  improve  the  longer-term  revenue  prospects  of  non-financial 
corporations. And it is important to improve sustainably job perspectives. Both can only be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  achieved  through  structural  reforms  which  bolster  competitiveness  and  boost  economies’ 
growth potential. 
A prosperous economy needs healthy banks, but the opposite is just as true: healthy banks 
need a prosperous economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
