  Charles L Evans: Monetary policy normalization – if not now, when? 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
BMO Harris and Lakeland College Economic Briefing, Plymouth, Wisconsin, 8 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  Lakeland  College  for  inviting  me  to  speak  this  morning.  It’s  always 
refreshing  to  reach  directly  into  the  communities  in  our  District  to  gain  valuable  personal 
insights  into  what  is going  on  in  the  economy  and  pick  up  information  that  sometimes get 
missed in dry reports and statistics. Opportunities such as this also give me a chance to talk 
to you about the state of the economy, the progress we have seen in repairing the damage 
from the Great Recession, and how Federal Reserve policy fits into the picture. 
Of course, to gauge progress, we must measure economic performance. It’s natural for us at 
the Federal Reserve to do so against the objectives that Congress has set out for us – what 
are  known  as  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate.  Namely,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  charged  with 
fostering financial conditions consistent with full employment and price stability. 
Needless to say, the past seven years have been very challenging and we have struggled to 
achieve both our employment and inflation objectives. To accomplish our goals, the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) cut its traditional policy tool, the target federal funds rate, 
essentially  to  zero  –  what  economists  refer  to  as  its  zero  lower  bound, or  ZLB.  And  when 
achieving the dual mandate called for additional monetary policy accommodation, the FOMC 
turned to other less conventional approaches, such as large-scale asset purchase programs 
–  what  many  of  you  have  heard  referred to  as “QE,”  or quantitative  easing  –  and forward 
guidance  about  how  long  the  fed  funds  rate  is  likely  to  remain  near  zero.  I  believe  these 
efforts  have  been  very  beneficial  in  helping  the  economy  make  significant  progress  and 
bringing us back closer to our policy goals. 
Today, with economic conditions much improved, many people are asking when Fed policy 
will  return  to  normal.  That  is  an  excellent  question.  So  in  my  remarks  this  morning  I  will 
discuss my outlook for the economy and how that outlook and the risks around it shape my 
views about the appropriate timing and pace of eventual policy normalization. 
In particular, I expect that there will be further improvements in economic activity over the 
next  three  years  and  that  these  will  be  accompanied  by  additional  declines  in  the 
unemployment rate toward more normal levels. At the same time, I expect inflation to rise 
gradually toward the FOMC’s 2 percent target. 
These forecasts are predicated on maintaining a highly accommodative stance of monetary 
policy for a considerable time. Indeed, given our recent experience, I feel that before the Fed 
raises rates, we should have a great deal of confidence that we won’t be forced to backtrack 
on our moves and face another painful period at the ZLB. And once we start, at least initially, 
we should raise rates slowly to make sure the economy can weather less accommodative 
financial  conditions.  In  sum,  we  should  be  exceptionally  patient  in  adjusting  the  stance  of 
U.S. monetary policy – even to the point of allowing a modest overshooting of our inflation 
target to appropriately balance the risks to our policy objectives. 
Before I expand on these thoughts, let me note that the views I express are my own and do 
not  necessarily  represent  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  FOMC  or  within  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Outlook 
 Improving growth but slack remains 
After  many  years  of  false  starts,  the  economy  now  seems  to  be  in  the  midst  of  more 
sustained solid growth. My forecast is that real gross domestic product (GDP) will increase at 
an average rate of about 3 percent over the next year and half. 
The incoming data support this outlook. In the second quarter, consumer spending grew at a 
solid but unspectacular 2-1/2 percent pace, and it appears to have risen at roughly the same 
rate during the third quarter. The news from the business sector generally has been good. 
Reports  from  our  business  contacts  have  been  improving  for  some  months  and  are  now 
almost uniformly positive. Underscoring this more positive sentiment, the data on new orders 
and shipments of machinery and other capital goods have been increasing at a good clip and 
surveys  of  business  purchasing  managers  point  to  growth  in  both  the  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing sectors. 
However,  there  are  still  some  sectors  –  such  as  single-family  housing  markets  –  that 
continue to struggle. Starts of new single family houses are only about half of the way back 
to  where  they  were  even  before  the  housing  boom.  In  part,  the  weakness  here  reflects 
continued fallout from the financial crisis, as it is still the case that mortgage credit is hard to 
come by for those without the most pristine credit ratings. 
So what does this economic outlook mean for the achievement of the Fed’s dual mandate 
objectives? 
Underutilization in the labor market 
Let’s consider labor markets first. 
Output growth is key for producing healthier labor market conditions. Although the economic 
recovery generally has been weak, there has been enough cumulative progress to generate 
considerable  improvement  in  the  labor  market.  So  where  do  we  stand  today?  How  much 
further do we have to go to fulfill our employment mandate? 
We can point to several measures to mark the progress we have made to date. Employment 
has been growing over 200,000 per month for quite some time. With expanding employment, 
the unemployment rate has fallen relatively rapidly. In fact, now standing at 5.9 percent, the 
unemployment rate has fallen about 4 percentage points from its high – and a full percentage 
point  over  the  last  year.  Other  measures  of  labor  market  health  also  suggest  significant 
improvements:  Notably,  layoff  rates  are  low  and  job  opening  rates  are  back  to  their  pre-
recession levels. 
But  we  still  aren’t  back  to  full  labor  market  health.  At  5.9  percent,  the  unemployment  rate 
remains  above  what  most  people  think  of  as  its  long-run  neutral  level.  For  example, 
according to the central tendency in the FOMC’s latest Summary of Economic Projections,1 
the  estimate  of  the  neutral  unemployment  rate  is  between  5-1/4  to  5-1/2  percent,  with  my 
own judgment at the bottom of this range. This leaves a significant gap between our goal and 
current conditions. 
Moreover, the labor force participation rate has dropped a good deal. Most of the decline in 
labor  force  participation  since  2000  is  due  to  demographic  trends,  such  as  baby  boomers 
moving into retirement age, and long-running trends, such as reductions in male and teenage 
labor force participation. These trends are structural in nature, and monetary policy is not the 
appropriate policy tool to address them. Nonetheless, the labor force participation rate has 
fallen somewhat more than what would be expected given these structural trends. And it is 
                                                
1   Federal Open Market Committee (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  also  lower  than  what  would  be  expected  from  its  historical  relationship  with  the 
unemployment  rate.  Other  indicators  –  such  as  long-term  unemployment,  the  rate  of 
involuntary part time work, and the job finding rate – also point to more slack in labor markets 
than that indicated by the unemployment rate alone. 
In addition, it is hard to imagine a robust labor market without solid growth in wages. With 
productivity growth of around 1 to 2 percent and an inflation target of around 2 percent, we 
should be seeing wages and benefits rising at around a 3 to 4 percent rate. But that is clearly 
not  the  case.  Although  some  in-demand  occupations  may  be  experiencing  stronger  wage 
growth, overall compensation growth has been around 2 percent over the past six years.  
Taken  altogether,  these  and  other  measures  lead  me  to  conclude  that  there  remains 
significant underutilization of labor resources – and likely somewhat more slack than what is 
indicated  by  the  unemployment  rate  alone.  So,  while  good  progress  has  been  made,  we 
have yet to achieve our full-employment goal. 
Too-low inflation 
The  other  element  of  our  dual  mandate  is  stable  prices.  The  Fed  defines  its  target  as 
2 percent inflation over the medium term, with inflation being measured as the rate of change 
in  the  Personal  Consumption  Expenditures  (PCE)  Price  Index.  Earlier  in  the  year,  the 
inflation rate had been well below that target, at 1-1/4 percent. It has moved up a little since 
then, but inflation is still only 1-1/2 percent, still leaving a significant gap from our 2 percent 
target. 
Of course, there are alternative measures of inflation, such as the widely reported Consumer 
Price  Index  (CPI).  The  FOMC  has  set  its  inflation  target  in  terms  of  the  PCE  Price  index 
because relative to the CPI it covers a wider range of items that households consume and 
because it better adjusts for changes in the spending patterns of households. CPI inflation is 
currently  around  2  percent.  But  CPI  inflation  generally  runs  three  to  five  tenths  of  a 
percentage  point  higher  than  PCE  inflation,  and  so  the  CPI’s  performance  should  be 
measured  against  a  higher  inflation  objective,  such  as  2-1/2  percent.  So,  an  inflation  gap 
remains for the CPI as well. 
Looking  ahead,  I  am  concerned  about  the  possibility  that  inflation  will  not  return  to  our 
2 percent target within a reasonable period of time. First, recent monthly inflation numbers 
have  been  low,  so  there  is  not  much  upward  momentum.  Second,  as  I  mentioned  earlier, 
wage growth has been relatively low for some time. While wages don’t predict future inflation, 
the two often move together. So the subpar growth in wages we see today is consistent with 
continued subdued inflation. And, third, it does not appear as if inflationary expectations are 
exerting much of an upward pull on actual inflation at the moment. 
That  said,  I  expect  inflation  to  rise  slowly  over  the  next  three  years  toward  the  FOMC’s 
2 percent  target.  And  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  am  expecting  further  improvements  in 
economic activity, with real GDP growing at around 3 percent over the next 18 months and 
the unemployment rate declining further to a little over 5 percent by the end of 2016 – in line 
with what I think is its long-run neutral level. So I do see us getting back close to our policy 
goals over the next two to three years. 
A balanced approach to monetary policy 
It is important for me to say that this forecast is predicated on the assumption that the FOMC 
takes a very patient approach to reducing policy accommodation. Let me elaborate on why I 
think this is appropriate. 
I see two important and divergent ways my forecast could go wrong. One is that I may be 
overestimating  the  underlying  strength  in  the  real  economy,  so  that  a  successful  and 
sustained exit from the ZLB may be more difficult than I currently believe. Guarding against 
this  risk  calls  for  a  more  patient  removal  of  accommodation.  The  second  is  that  I  may  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  wrong about the inflation outlook, and we could be poised for a much larger rise in inflation 
than I am forecasting. This risk calls for more aggressive rate hikes. 
How  do  I  think  policy  should  balance  these  divergent  risks?  How  should  they  affect  the 
FOMC’s strategy of pursuing a balanced approach to achieving our policy goals? 
In my mind, current circumstances and a weighing of alternative risks mean that a balanced 
policy approach calls for being extraordinarily patient in reducing accommodation – that is, 
being  patient  about  when  we  first  increase  the  federal  funds  rate  and  being  patient  about 
setting the pace of rate increases once we have begun to move. 
Proceed cautiously in normalizing policy 
The first factor entering my analysis is that I see a number of downside risks to the growth 
and inflation forecasts. 
For instance, as I look around the globe, I see many economies facing slow growth and low 
inflation.  Europe  and  Japan  are  well-known  cases  among  the  advanced  economies.  Of 
course, slow or stagnant growth in advanced countries has negative spillovers onto emerging 
markets  that  are  highly  dependent  on  exports  for  their  growth.  Indeed,  today  China  is 
confronting slower growth, and the Brazilian economy has fallen into recession. 
For  the  United  States, slower  growth  abroad  reduces  demand for  our  exports  and,  with  it, 
U.S. production. In addition, weakness abroad could translate into a higher exchange value 
for  the  dollar  against  other  currencies,  further  reducing  net  exports.  A  higher  dollar  also 
would result in lower prices for imports, which, in turn would hold down inflation and delay 
progress toward our 2 percent inflation target. 
While the risks to the U.S. outlook emanating from abroad are worthy of notice, they are not 
the biggest thing on my mind. For me, the biggest and costliest downside risk is that in our 
haste  to  get  back  to  “business  as  usual”  monetary  policy,  we  could  stall  progress  and 
backtrack to the economic circumstances of recent years – an economy mired in the ZLB. 
To say the least, conducting monetary policy at the ZLB has been a difficult experience that 
we all want to avoid repeating unnecessarily. In the winter of 2009, with the unemployment 
rate  soaring  to  double  digits,  the  Fed  would  have  very  much  liked  to  lower  the  nominal 
federal  funds  rate  an  additional  300  basis  points;  but  we  couldn’t  because  the  rate  was 
already at zero. 
Faced with a pressing need to provide additional accommodation, we were forced to turn to 
innovative,  but  controversial,  unconventional  monetary  policies.  These  policies  have  been 
extremely helpful. But there is no denying that they were second-best options; the ZLB had 
made lowering the fed funds rate, which is our first-best interest rate tool, infeasible. 
Everyone will welcome a return to more normal times and a reliance on the traditional policy 
framework of adjustments to the federal funds rate. But the decision about when to begin to 
raise  rates  shouldn’t  be  made  prematurely.  Rather,  the  decision  for  policy  liftoff  has  to  be 
made for the right reasons – that is, it should be dictated by economic conditions. 
Like my colleague Minneapolis Fed President Narayana Kocherlakota.2 I think that policy at 
all  times  must  be  goal-oriented.  Our  experiences  since  the  crisis  began  and  current 
economic  conditions  are  highly  unusual.  The  FOMC  should  not  simply  set  its  policy 
instruments  by  mechanically  aligning  them  with  historical  norms  if  those  norms  are  not 
currently relevant for the conditions needed to attain both of our dual mandate goals. Rather, 
our  policy  instruments  should  be  set  to  achieve  our  ultimate  goals  as  efficaciously  as 
                                                
2   See, for example, Kocherlakota (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  possible  given  current  and  prospective  economic  conditions,  all  the  while  with  an  eye  on 
managing against important risks to the outlook. 
I believe that the biggest risk we face today is prematurely engineering restrictive monetary 
conditions.  In  this  scenario,  the  FOMC  could  misjudge  the  presence  and  magnitude  of 
economic  impediments  and  misread  the  recent  progress  we  have  made  as  evidence  of 
sounder  economic  trends.  If  we  were  to  presume  prematurely  that  the  U.S.  economy  has 
returned  to  a  more  business-as-usual  position  and  reduce  monetary  accommodation  too 
soon, we could find ourselves in the very uncomfortable position of falling back into the ZLB 
environment. Such an outcome could be a serious setback to the timely attainment of our 
dual mandate policy objectives. 
This  risk  consideration  means  that  the  decision  to  lift  the  funds  rate  from  zero  should  be 
made only when we have a great deal of confidence that growth has enough momentum to 
reach full employment and that inflation will return to a sustainable 2 percent rate. We should 
also proceed cautiously and keep the path of rate increases relatively shallow for some time 
after we begin to raise rates. This approach will allow us time to assess how the economy is 
performing  under  less  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  reduce  the  odds  of 
overaggressive rate hikes choking off progress toward our policy goals. 
History shows that premature exit is a risk 
Past  experience  with  the  ZLB  also  counsels  patience.  History  has  not  looked  kindly  on 
attempts  to  prematurely  remove  monetary  accommodation  from  economies  that  are  in  or 
near a liquidity trap. Three occasions come readily to mind: the Great Depression (which was 
resolved  only  with  the  massive  fiscal  expansion  of  World  War  II),  Japan  over  the  past 
20 years, and the recent European experience. Indeed, both of the more recent episodes are 
ongoing today, though Japan finally appears to be making important headway toward raising 
inflation and eventually exiting the ZLB. 
The U.S., Japanese and European lessons from monetary history strongly suggest that there 
are great risks to premature liftoff from the ZLB or near-ZLB conditions. Unless the economy 
is fundamentally strong and the previous impediments to growth have receded sufficiently, 
the  odds  remain  high  that  some  unforeseen  shock  could  cause  the  monetary  authority  to 
retreat right back into the ZLB. 
And the costs of being mired in the ZLB are simply very large. The ZLB prevents using our 
very best policy tools to address negative shocks. The ZLB means that interest rates cannot 
fall  low  enough  to  equate  the  supply  of  saving  with  the  demand  for  investment,  which,  of 
course,  significantly  impedes  capital  formation,  future  economic  growth,  and  the  health  of 
labor markets. And the ZLB often comes hand in hand with undesirably low inflation or even 
a  falling  price  level,  carrying  with  it  the  associated  costs  of  debt  deflation  on  the  real 
economy. 
The risk of too-high inflation 
What  about  the  other  risk  to  our  policy  goals  that  I  mentioned  –  the  risk  that  the  U.S. 
economy could face pricing pressures that accelerate rapidly and ultimately leave inflation far 
above our 2 percent target for an unacceptably long period? 
At some point, when the economy has clearly overcome the remaining impediments from the 
largest  economic  and  financial  downturn  since  the  Great  Depression,  the  odds  of  inflation 
rising noticeably above target could become palpable. But such a breakout is just not at all 
very likely today. Indeed, many Fed critics have been voicing this concern since 2009, and it 
hasn’t even come close to happening. 
What if inflation just ran moderately above target for some time? Well, I see the costs of this 
outcome as clearly being much smaller than the costs of falling back into the ZLB. First, I 
believe the U.S. economy could weather the modest increases in interest rates that would be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  needed  to  keep  inflation  in  check.  Such  rate  increases  would  be  manageable  for  the  real 
economy; this is particularly true if industry and labor markets have already made the most 
difficult  reallocations  of  jobs  and  overcome  other  factors  so  that  productive  resources  are 
more  efficiently  and  fully  employed.  Second,  as  I’ve  noted  many  times  in  the  past,  a 
symmetric inflation target means we should be averaging 2 percent inflation over time. We’ve 
averaged well under that 2 percent mark for the past six and a half years. With a symmetric 
inflation  target,  one  could  imagine  moderately  above-target  inflation  for  a  limited  time  as 
simply the flip side of our recent inflation experience – and hardly an event that would impose 
great costs on the economy. 
The murky state of inflation expectations is another factor that enters my risk-management 
considerations. For inflation to take off rapidly, we would have to see a jump in inflationary 
expectations. But inflationary expectations certainly have not taken off. Indeed, we may be 
facing a quite different problem. 
Many forecasters – myself included – assume that stable 2 percent inflation expectations will 
be  an  important  factor  helping  to  pull  actual  inflation  up.  Over  the  past  five  years, 
professional forecasters’ projections for long-run inflation have been at the 2 percent target 
and the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) break-evens generally have been flat. 
Yet actual inflation has only just recently made it back up to 1-1/2 percent. Moreover, we still 
have not seen much at all in the way of higher inflation compensation being built into interest 
rates or wages. So there is cause for concern that expectations might not produce as strong 
a pull on inflation as we hope. This unusual situation has precedent, for example, in Japan, 
where  inflation  expectations  have  remained  stable,  while  inflation  itself  has  lagged  for  a 
prolonged period. Of course, there is a risk, too, that inflation expectations themselves could 
fall–indeed, I would note that longer-dated TIPS break-evens have recently dropped to the 
lower end of their post-crisis range. 
Conclusion 
As I think about the process of normalizing policy, I conclude that today’s risk-management 
calculus  says  we  should  err  on  the  side  of  patience  in  removing  highly  accommodative 
policy.  We  need  to  solidify  our  confidence  that  our  ultimate  exit  from  the  ZLB  will  occur 
smoothly – and that our escape can be sustained. A corollary to this conclusion is that we 
should not shy away from policy prescriptions that imply forecasts of inflation that moderately 
overshoot our 2 percent target for a limited time. 
Such  a  policy  strategy  more  properly  balances  expected  costs  and  benefits.  And  it  would 
leave me with much more confidence that inflation will not stall out below target once we start 
raising rates. 
I agree with Atlanta Fed President Dennis Lockhart in thinking that we ought to be “whites of 
their  eyes”  inflation  fighters.3  The  last  thing  we  want  to  do  is  regress  back  into  the  ZLB. 
Indeed,  such  a  relapse  would  be  a  sign  there  was  something  else  going  on  that  was 
preventing the economy from being as vibrant as we thought possible. 
To summarize, I am very uncomfortable with calls to raise our policy rate sooner than later. I 
favor  delaying  liftoff  until  I  am  more  certain  that  we  have  sufficient  momentum  in  place 
toward our policy goals. And I think we should plan for our path of policy rate increases to be 
shallow in order to be sure that the economy’s momentum is sustainable in the presence of 
less  accommodative  financial  conditions.  I  look  forward  to  the  day  when  we  can  return  to 
business-as-usual monetary policy, but that time has not yet arrived. 
                                                
3   Lockhart (2014). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  2014,  Summary  of  Economic  Projections(external-pdf), 
Washington, DC, September 17. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2013, “A time of testing,” speech, St. Paul Chamber of Commerce, 
St. Paul, MN, November 12. 
Lockhart, Dennis, 2014, “Thoughts on liftoff,” speech, Global Interdependence Center, Sixth 
Annual Rocky Mountain Economic Summit, Jackson Hole, WY, July 11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
