  Grant Spencer: Reserve Bank perspective on payments 
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Payments New Zealand Conference, Auckland, 11 November 2014. 
 Thanks to Payments New Zealand (PNZ) for the invitation to speak this morning. I would like 
to congratulate PNZ for again bringing together such a wide group of people with interest and 
expertise in payments matters. 
The  ability  to  make  payments  conveniently  and  safely  is  vital  to  the  functioning  of  the 
financial system and broader economy. The Reserve Bank therefore has a natural interest in 
the evolution and safety of the New Zealand payment system. The Bank plays three roles 
with respect to payment systems: 
• 
As  a  Central  Bank,  we  are  a  payment  system  user.  Like  any  other  financial 
institution, we use various payment systems to settle a range of transactions. 
The Reserve Bank is also a provider of payment and settlement services. Our role 
as  the  supplier  of  currency  is  widely  known  and  notes  and  coins  are  still  used  to 
make a significant proportion of retail payments. We are also the operators of the 
Exchange  Settlement  Account  System  (ESAS)  and  the  securities  depository  and 
settlement  system,  NZClear.  We  are  currently  undertaking  a  strategic  review  of 
these two systems and will be releasing a progress report this week. But this is not 
my topic today. 
The Bank’s third role, undertaken jointly with the Financial Markets Authority (FMA), 
is  the  regulatory  oversight  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  In  our  broader 
capacity as financial system regulator we are conscious of the crucial role that the 
payment system plays in promoting a sound and efficient financial system. 
  Today I will focus on this regulatory role, which I have responsibility for within the Bank. I will 
discuss recent changes in the payments landscape, some of the opportunities and risks that 
those  changes  present,  and  how  the  industry  is  responding  to  those  risks.  I  will  also  talk 
about the role that I see for the Reserve Bank in influencing payment system developments. 
The fast-changing world of payments 
In retail payments, we are seeing rapid innovation, increasing technological complexity, and 
a  breakdown  of  traditional  boundaries  between  banking,  telecommunications  and  IT 
functions. 
It was just 30 years ago that payments were overwhelmingly made using cash and cheques. 
While these instruments continue to play an important role, most payments these days are 
made using electronic debit, credit and payment cards. 
Figure 1. highlights the steady growth in cards transactions that has continued unabated over 
the past 10 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Figure 1 
Retail transactions in New Zealand (monthly) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 Looking forward, the new growth areas in retail payments are contactless payments, mobile 
phone  based  applications  and  on-line  payments.  These  innovations  reflect  technological 
advances in IT and telecommunications and ever-rising customer expectations. Payers and 
payees  are  demanding  payment  services  that  are  convenient,  reliable  and  secure. 
Increasingly, people also want the funds cleared from their transactions quickly, preferably in 
real time. 
As  significant  change  is  occurring  in  how  we  make  retail  payments,  we  are  also  seeing  a 
number  of  new  players,  including  telecommunications  companies  and  the  likes  of  Apple, 
Google and Paypal – a trend that is likely to continue. Banks, the traditional providers of an 
end-to-end  payment  service,  are  now  facing  competition  from,  and  needing  to  co-operate 
with, other entities. What role will banks play in the future? Will they continue to do what they 
have always done? Or will their role be limited to providing the trusted store of value while 
other technology providers capture the transaction service? These trends imply new sources 
of risk in payment systems and a potential need for refinements to the regulatory regime. 
The  move  towards  increased  digitisation  and  electronic  payment  methods  opens  up  the 
prospect  of  digital  currencies  such  as  Bitcoin  becoming  more  important.  As  the  currency 
issuer, the Reserve Bank does not feel threatened by Bitcoin which seems to behave more 
like a commodity than a currency. However, I do not doubt that future digital currencies will 
become more realistic substitutes for cash. 
Turning  to  wholesale  payment  systems,  here  too  we  are  seeing  innovation  and  growth. 
Wholesale  payments  are  in  large  part  related  to  the  settlement  of  financial  market 
transactions, including foreign exchange, equities, debt securities and financial derivatives. 
Innovations  in  products  and  trading  strategies,  some  driven  by  new  technologies,  have 
contributed to ongoing growth in the turnover of these markets, with hardly a pause for the 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) (Figure 2.) The amounts involved are very large globally. The 
foreign exchange market alone now accounts for over US$5 trillion per day. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  While  New  Zealand  debt  and  equity  securities  transactions  are  generally  settled  on  local 
systems  (NZClear  and  NZCDC),  the  foreign  exchange  and  derivative  markets,  being 
dominated by cross-border flows, have seen the development of sophisticated cross-border 
payment systems such as CLS for foreign exchange and the London Clearing House (LCH) 
for financial derivatives. 
Figure 2 
Global wholesale market turnover 
Source: Bank for International Settlements. 
 More so than in the retail space, a key driver of innovation in the wholesale space has been 
the post-GFC regulatory pressure from the G-20 and major country regulators to reduce risk 
in large payment and settlement systems, widely known as “Financial Market Infrastructures” 
(FMIs). The international regulators have become more concerned because of the growth in 
complexity and volume of payments, and the systemic risks that were made evident in the 
GFC. 
Increasing risk in payment systems 
Increasing risk in payment systems is apparent at both the retail and wholesale levels. And 
there is greater awareness now of some existing systemic risks that had not previously been 
fully appreciated. 
At the retail end, our reliance on electronic payments will continue to grow as we make more 
payments  online  and  use  mobile  phones  for  more  transactions.  This  greater  use  of 
technology is making our lives easier but also brings increased operational risk. Uppermost 
are  concerns  about  the  vulnerability  of  payment  systems  to  cyber-attacks  and  risks 
associated with the involvement of new non-traditional players. 
A recent example of cyber-attack was at JP  Morgan, America’s largest bank, in August of 
this year, where it is reported that 76 million household files were compromised by Russian 
hackers. Perhaps more concerning was the report that the attack was through a third-party 
website and that it took two months to discover the problem. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Such incidents highlight the reliance that we now have on technology and what can happen 
when  that  technology  fails.  With  customers  becoming  more  accustomed  to  high  levels  of 
convenience and rapid settlement, operational lapses have, if anything, become more visible 
to the end-users. 
From the regulator’s perspective, a short-term disruption to customer service is not of major 
concern  if  its  impact  is  contained  locally.  That  is  for  the  provider  to  sort  out  with  its 
customers. However, operational lapses in large and/or highly connected payment systems 
can  disrupt  the  wider  financial  system  and  economy.  The  regulator  has  a  much  stronger 
interest in the safety and efficiency of such systemic FMIs. 
We  experienced  this  in  New  Zealand  on  ANZAC  day  2012,  when  the  exchange  of  retail 
payments between banks via SWIFT1 was disrupted. ESAS continued to function and banks 
were able to invoke contingency arrangements. Nevertheless, there were significant delays 
to the exchange of payments and to the posting of transactions to customer accounts. There 
could  easily  have  been  a  more  widespread  disruption  of retail  payments  and  commerce  if 
there had not been a public holiday that day. 
The recent system outage at the Bank of England that disrupted the operation of the UK’s 
large value payment system, CHAPS, provides a further example of how widely a payment 
system  disruption  can  be felt. The  unavailability  of  CHAPS for  nine  hours  meant that  high 
value  sterling  payments,  including  the  settlement  of  house  purchases,  could  not  proceed, 
causing a gridlock of house settlements. More seriously, the settlement of foreign exchange 
transactions  around  the  world  was  disrupted  because  the  functioning  of  the  CLS  system 
depends  on  the  ability  to  make  and  receive  payments  in  all  currencies  in  CLS,  including 
sterling. 
The greatest potential for systemic damage from payment systems arises in the event of a 
failure  of  one  or  more  major  counterparties  to  financial  transactions,  particularly  derivative 
transactions.  In  physical  foreign  exchange  and  securities  transactions,  the  use  of  Delivery 
versus  Payment  (DVP)  removes  credit  risk  from  the  payments  process.  But  financial 
derivatives involve (sometimes long-dated) future commitments to exchange cash flows that 
vary  with  market  prices.  The  posting  of  collateral  is  used  to  reduce  credit  exposures  as 
derivative contracts go in and out of the money over time but this is an imperfect process, 
particularly in times of market turbulence. 
The  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  AIG  in  2008–09  focused  the  spotlight  on  the  huge 
extent,  and  also  the  opacity,  of  credit  exposures  arising  from  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives2.  The  US  authorities  were  ultimately  able  to  untangle  the  Lehmans  derivative 
book  without  further  major  contagion.  In  the  case  of  AIG,  a  bailout  was  organised  by  the 
US Treasury in order to avoid the further financial fallout that would have ensued if AIG had 
been unable to meet its obligations on its large volume of derivative contracts. 
An additional area where we face growing risk management challenges is the increasingly 
global nature of the infrastructures that provide many wholesale payment services. In New 
Zealand  we  already  rely  on  a  number  of  offshore  FMIs.  These  large  global  financial 
infrastructures provide advantages in terms of economies of scale but also pose legal and 
resolution  risks  for  local  counterparties  in  the  case  of  an  FMI  failure.  The  outcome  for  a 
domestic  bank  would  be  determined  by  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  in  the  FMI’s 
home jurisdiction, over which New Zealand authorities would have little influence. 
                                                
1  SWIFT is the principal global messaging system used in payments systems. 
2  Derivatives bought and sold through banks, rather than exchanges. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Responses to increased risk 
What are the appropriate responses to these increased payment system risks on the part of 
both industry participants and regulators? 
The providers of retail payments services need to closely manage the new operational risks 
arising from the increasing reliance on complex technologies and the internet. This is not just 
about  ensuring  that  business  continuity  arrangements  are  in  place  for  the  day  that  a 
component  of  the  system  fails.  It  is  also  about  cybersecurity  and  protecting  systems  from 
malicious attack. Systems that rely on the Internet are especially vulnerable and appropriate 
safeguards need to be in place. 
There  are  natural  commercial  incentives  for  payment  system  providers  to  ensure  the 
resilience of their systems to such threats. If one provider’s system is corrupted, customers 
will  quickly  move  to  competing  providers.  While  local  operational  risks  can  at  times  have 
broader systemic consequences, the regulatory response in this area has typically been of a 
low key nature -requiring payments providers to have robust governance, risk management 
and BCP structures in place. 
The  international  regulatory  response  has  been  more  substantive  in  the  area  of  systemic 
counterparty  risk.  The  Lehmans  and  AIG  episodes  demonstrated  that  network  contagion 
effects  can  generate  damaging  externalities,  i.e.  potential  systemic  costs  of  counterparty 
failure, that are not taken into account in bilateral derivative contracts. 
In the 1990s similar concerns about foreign exchange settlement risk led to the creation of 
CLS.  In  the  post-GFC  period,  serious  concerns  about  systemic  risk  in  OTC  derivatives 
markets  led  to  a  G20-mandated  restructuring  of  derivatives  clearing  and  settlement.  In 
particular, G20  banks  are  required to  report OTC  derivative  contracts to  trade  repositories 
and to clear those derivatives through central counterparties3. 
More generally, regulators have recognised the need to ensure that large wholesale payment 
systems and other financial market infrastructures giving rise to systemic risk are as robust 
as possible. Much of the work on regulatory frameworks has been done by the Committee on 
Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)4  and  the  International  Organisation  of 
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO).  In  2012,  these  groups  published  updated  international 
standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures  in  the  form  of  Principles  for  financial  market 
infrastructures  (PFMI)5.  These  principles  represent  international  best  practice  guidance  for 
addressing risk and efficiency in FMIs, and many countries have adopted the principles as 
the basis for their oversight regimes. 
Many  national  regulators  have  recently  strengthened  their  regimes  for  the  regulation  and 
oversight  of  FMIs.  Amongst  the  multitude  of  provisions  in  the  US  Dodd-Frank  Act  are 
requirements  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  create  uniform  risk  management  standards  for 
systemically  important  “financial  market  utilities”  and  to  monitor  the  compliance  of  those 
systems.  The  European  equivalent  to  Dodd-Frank  is  the  European  Market  Infrastructure 
Regulation (EMIR), which sets rules for central counterparties and trade repositories. Other 
countries that introduced or plan to introduce strengthened regimes include the UK, Canada 
and Hong Kong. 
A common feature of these regulatory regimes is their risk-based approach. Regulators focus 
their  oversight  activity  on  the  largest  systemic  risks  to  financial  stability.  Typically  this 
involves classifying certain FMIs as systemically important and paying particular attention to 
those systems. 
                                                
3  So far these requirements only apply to OTC interest rate derivatives. 
4  Formerly the Committee on Payment and settlement systems (CPSS). 
5  http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d101.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Reserve Bank’s oversight role 
In the international context, the Reserve Bank’s regulatory framework in the payments area 
is at the non-intrusive end of the spectrum. The Bank and FMA have a relatively low level of 
regulatory  authority  in  this  area.  Under  the  Bank-FMA  designation  regime6,  FMIs  seeking 
designation must have their rules approved by the Bank and FMA. However, this regime is 
voluntary and, for FMIs not choosing to be designated, the Bank must rely on suasion and 
industry engagement to promote its stability and efficiency objectives. 
In promoting the soundness and efficiency of the financial system, and consistent with the 
internationally  agreed  principles  for  FMIs, the  Bank  has four  core  objectives  that  FMIs  are 
encouraged to follow as responsible “NZ Inc. payments citizens”: 
• 
The  first  is  good  governance.  It  is  important  that  FMIs  are  well  managed  by 
appropriately  skilled  people.  Governance  arrangements  should  ensure  that  the 
views of all relevant stakeholders are considered. 
The second is a sound risk management framework, covering legal, credit, liquidity, 
operational and other risks. 
The third is continuity of service. Given their role at the heart of the financial system, 
it is important that FMIs operate continuously. This means that a system should be 
able  to  cope  with  potential  disruptions  like technical  problems  and the failure  of  a 
participant. 
The  fourth  is  fair  and  open  access.  FMIs  should  have  risk-based  and  publicly 
disclosed  criteria  for  participation  that  promote  fair  and  open  access  with  no 
unwarranted barriers to entry. Fair and open access should encourage competition 
between participants and innovation. 
   The Bank promotes these objectives through consultation with the industry and we especially 
value the relationship with Payments NZ in helping to achieve good results. 
We are confident that the requirements for designated FMIs will ensure that they meet the 
four  core  objectives.  However,  we  would  like  to  see  these  requirements  extended  to  all 
systemic  FMIs.  In  this  regard  we  believe  there  is  a  case  for  some  strengthening  of  the 
current regulatory framework. Our concern relates to situations where our objectives for the 
safety and efficiency of systemic FMIs cannot be achieved through suasion alone. 
Another area where we believe there is a need for change is crisis management. When there 
is a crisis, particularly in a systemic FMI, there is a need for prompt and deliberate action to 
restore normal operations and mitigate the flow-on effects of the disruption. In past systemic 
events, for example the ANZAC day disruption, the industry has looked to the Reserve Bank 
for  leadership.  We  are  happy  to  play  such  a  role  but  would  like  to  formalise  crisis 
management roles and responsibilities. 
The  Bank  is  currently  looking  to  establish  an  enhanced  oversight  regime  based  around 
systemically important FMIs with attention given to crisis management powers. Our approach 
will be aligned with international principles and, while remaining near the non-intrusive end of 
the international spectrum, will focus on the core objectives for a sound and efficient payment 
system. 
The Bank does not seek to prescribe the shape of the payment system or the direction of 
innovation. Other national regulators take a range of approaches on such strategic issues. 
Across the Tasman for example, the RBA and Payments System Board can take quite strong 
positions  on  industry  shape  and  direction.  In  our  own  case,  we  often  express  views  on 
                                                
6  Once a payment system is designated, all payments through that system are final and irrevocable. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  industry direction, particularly if there are implications for systemic risk, but we prefer to see 
market-based solutions. 
An example of this is the current discussion about the future of domestic debit, where the 
Bank  has  not  taken  a  position.  We  acknowledge  the  arguments  in  favour  of  preserving  a 
domestic debit product so that competing payment instruments are available. However, we 
also  note  the  popularity  of  scheme  debit  cards  given  their  ability  to  facilitate  on-line  and 
overseas payments. It may be that the cost of re-investing in the domestic product to provide 
comparable functionality is too high. 
In  recent  times,  the  most  significant  change  to  the  payments  landscape  has  been  the 
Settlement Before Interchange (SBI) arrangements for retail payments, introduced in 2012. 
These arrangements have helped to address long-standing concerns about settlement risk 
arising from a retail payments participant failing to settle. SBI has resulted in more frequent 
intra-day settlements and a significant shortening of the lag between retail transactions and 
the final clearing of funds. 
The Bank still has concerns about the length of time taken to settle retail transactions and the 
frequency of interchange. We are working with the industry to address this issue and good 
progress is being made. For example, the proportion of transactions settled after 9pm has 
reduced by about 30 percent in the past twelve months. Our expectation is that, by the end of 
2016, SBI participants will interchange retail payments at least hourly. 
Another area where the Bank has taken an active interest is the establishment of Payments 
New  Zealand  (PNZ)  and  the  opening  up  of  the  system  to  new  players.  Payments  is  a 
business in which the right balance has to be found between competition, co-operation and 
safety.  Innovation  is  usually  spurred  by  competition  but  for  a  payment  vehicle  to  be 
successful it needs to be widely accepted, and that requires co-operation. New players often 
promote competition but there must be risk-based criteria for their participation. 
A positive feature of the New Zealand payment system over the years has been the extent to 
which participants have collaborated in establishing payment networks. The development of 
the  domestic  EFTPOS  system,  with  a  shared  service  provider  switching transactions for  a 
number of banks, is a good example of this. The success of the shared utility model in the 
past probably reflects the earlier industry structure, which was dominated by a small number 
of major banks. With more players entering the market and the increasing pace of innovation, 
collaboration may become less prevalent. The recent partial acceptance of a shared Trusted 
Services Manager for mobile payments reflects this trend. 
But, competition notwithstanding, at the highest industry level it is important that the views of 
all  stakeholders  are  taken  into  account  when  decisions  are  made  about  the  future 
architecture  of  the  payment  system.  The  establishment  of  Payments  NZ  improved 
governance  of  the  payment  system  and  paved  the  way  for  a  more  open  and  competitive 
payments industry. This outcome was welcomed by the Bank and we are watching closely 
the recent moves by PNZ to further open up its membership via a multi-tiered structure. We 
will  continue  to  monitor  the  extent  to  which  the  interests  of  all  stakeholders  are 
accommodated  in  the  committee  structure.  An  example  will  be  the  progress  being  made 
towards  an  account  numbering  system that  accommodates  banks  who  wish  to  move  from 
agency arrangements to direct participation in the retail payments system. The challenge for 
PNZ  is  to  promote  efficiency  and  innovation  by  allowing  wider  participation  in  the  system, 
while at the same time continuing to manage system risks. 
On  the  wholesale  front,  recent  international  regulatory  developments  have  been  impacting 
New Zealand players, irrespective of our own regulatory framework. For example, while not a 
member of the G20, New Zealand financial institutions are affected by the G20 requirements 
relating to OTC derivatives. Many of the derivative counterparties of New Zealand banks are 
required to centrally clear and so New Zealand banks are ensuring that they have the same 
capability.  The  NZ  banks  are  also  being  captured  by  new  reporting  requirements  being 
applied to their parents. We continue to monitor developments in this area and so far have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  not mandated central clearing/reporting. This is a difficult issue for a small country where the 
relevant  FMIs  sit  in  offshore  jurisdictions.  It  underlines  the  increasingly  global  nature  of 
payments, and the need for our payments oversight function to be seen in the global context. 
Conclusion 
The  payments  industry  landscape  is  more  fast-changing  than  ever,  with  customer 
preferences and technology advances driving innovation in the retail space and international 
regulatory  developments  adding  further  impetus  for  change  in  wholesale  FMIs.  Increasing 
complexity  and  use  of  the  internet  are  adding  to  risk  in  retail  systems  which  must  be 
managed carefully by system participants. 
Most major countries have moved since the GFC to strengthen their regulatory oversight of 
payment  systems,  with  an  emphasis  on  large  systemic  infrastructures.  Internationally 
developed  principles  for  FMIs  have  been  widely  adopted,  including  by  New  Zealand.  The 
Bank  is  looking  to  strengthen  its  oversight  regime  in  order  to  fully  apply  the  principles  to 
systemic  FMIs.  At  the  same  time,  New  Zealand’s  oversight  regime  will  remain  at  the  low 
intensity end of the international spectrum. 
The Reserve Bank’s approach to payment system oversight is not to be prescriptive in terms 
of future payments system architecture. Nor does the Bank want to force cooperative “utility” 
solutions on the industry which could inhibit innovation and competition. 
However, it is important that the industry has a high level governance structure that facilitates 
competition and innovation by allowing access to new participants, and gives all participants 
an  input  into  the  strategic  direction  of  the  industry.  Payments  New  Zealand  is  the  key 
governance  body  in  this  regard  and  its  challenge  is  to  find  the  right  balance  between 
openness  and  competition  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  integrity  of  the  system  and  its 
participants  on  the  other.  We  will  continue  to  follow  governance  developments  with  close 
interest. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
