  Ravi Menon: Seeking decent returns in an era of sub-par growth 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
Sovereign Investor Institute Government Funds Roundtable, Singapore, 6 November 2014. 
 Mr Scott Kalb, Executive Director, Sovereign Investor Institute 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
The global conjuncture 
The major economies of the world are at an inflection point. 
In the US, the era of quantitative easing has come to an end. Next year, for the first time in 
eight years, we are likely to see a hike in the Fed funds rate. 
• 
The good news is that monetary policy normalisation will occur in the context of a 
strengthening US economy. 
The bad news is that for financial markets conditioned by persistently easy monetary 
conditions  over  the  last six  years,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  over  the  pace 
and extent of interest rate normalisation. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  done  as  best  as  it  can  in  communicating  its  approach 
through forward guidance. But there is many a slip between cup and lip that could to 
lead to disorderly market adjustments. 
  In  the  Eurozone,  there  is  tension  between  restoring  public  debt  to  a  sustainable  trajectory 
and supporting a faltering economy. 
• 
The ECB has committed to expand the size of its balance sheet by increasing asset 
purchases,  while  an  active  debate  rages  in  Brussels  on  the  appropriate  balance 
between reducing fiscal deficits and supporting growth. 
In Japan, the impact of the first arrow of monetary stimulus is at risk of being blunted by the 
recent consumption tax hike. 
• 
The Bank of Japan has just announced a further expansion in stimulus – an open-
ended asset purchase at a rate of about 15% of GDP a year until the inflation target 
of 2% is met. 
Meanwhile, the third arrow remains largely in its quiver. 
• 
In  China,  the  challenge  is  to  strike  a  delicate  balance  between  implementing  the  reforms 
necessary for long-term sustainability while supporting short-term growth and stabilising the 
property market. 
• 
The  reform  agenda  that  emerged  out  of  the  Third  Plenum  offers  a  credible  and 
comprehensive blueprint for the way forward. 
The leadership is keenly aware of what needs to be done and is committed. 
But significant execution risks remain. 
• 
• 
In  India,  there  is  a  new  government  in  place  committed  to  improving  the  business 
environment  for  investment  and  building  the  infrastructure  necessary  for  a  strong 
manufacturing sector. 
• 
But  India  needs  to  accomplish  this  while  taming  inflation  and  reducing  its  fiscal 
deficit, not to mention recalibrating the dynamic between the centre and the states 
that is critical for reforms to take root. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Reverting to mean or different this time? 
The  weak  and  uneven  global  recovery  post-Crisis  has  raised  concerns  about  the  pace  of 
future  economic  growth  and  what  it  means  for  returns  on  investments.  Despite  ultra-
accommodative  monetary  policy,  most  advanced  economies  have  not  attained  so-called 
escape velocity. 
• 
The  legacies  of  the  financial  crisis  –  in  the  form  of  debt  overhangs  –  continue  to 
exert a drag. 
The structural deficiencies in the major economies, such as under-investment, cast 
a dark cloud on future potential growth. 
 But  one  thing  that  ultra-low  interest  rates  over  the  past  six  years  have  clearly  done  is  to 
depress returns, particularly in fixed income assets. 
• 
US bond returns since 2009 has averaged 2.3% p.a. compared to returns of 5.8% 
p.a. over the past 20 years. 
This  has  contributed  to  a  more  challenging  investing  environment  for  government  funds  – 
namely  pension  funds,  sovereign  wealth  funds,  and  central  banks  –  many  of  which  have 
significant allocations to developed market fixed income instruments. 
Mean reversion is a key tenet of investment theory – the expectation is that as interest rates 
normalise, returns should revert to pre-crisis levels. But the cliché that this time is different 
could well be true. Secular trends weigh on future economic growth, and consequently the 
real return on investment. 
Drivers of future economic growth 
What are the prospects for future economic growth? There are, in my view, four key drivers 
of  long-term  growth:  deleveraging,  demographics,  productivity,  and  energy.  Let  me 
elaborate on each of them. 
First, deleveraging. Global balance sheets need to undergo significant adjustments. This is 
a structural issue that will take time to address. 
• 
For  about  20  years  preceding  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  there  had  been  a 
significant build-up of debt in the advanced economies. 
This  period  –  often  called  the  Great  Moderation  –  could  just  as  well  have  been 
called the Great Leveraging. 
 Household debt grew rapidly in the US and Europe after 2000, driven by low interest rates 
and compression in risk spreads. It has come down a little since the Crisis, more so in the 
US than in Europe, but has still some way to go in both economies. 
But what little private sector deleveraging has occurred has been offset by public sector re-
leveraging.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Crisis,  public  sector  debt  has  ballooned  as  a  result  of 
financial  sector  bailouts  and  the  effects  of  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  as  economic  growth 
decelerated. 
• 
Government gross debt in the US and Eurozone increased from about two-thirds of 
GDP in 2007 to about 100% this year 
At the same time, leverage ratios have risen sharply in some emerging market economies in 
recent years as borrowers took advantage of the abnormally low interest rate environment. 
• 
Total debt in emerging market economies rose from 115% of GDP in 2008 to 150% 
of GDP in 2013. 
Thus, rather than falling, debt-to-GDP at the global level has continued to rise. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Global  total  debt  (excluding  the  financial  sector)  rose  by  38  percentage  points 
between 2008 and last year, to reach some 212% of global GDP. 
Only the financial sector has undergone substantial deleveraging to-date. 
• 
Essentially, the process of deleveraging remains incomplete. The world as a whole has lived 
beyond its means. It must now work off these past excesses. The gradual unwinding of the 
debt build-up in both the private and public sectors will have a dampening effect on economic 
growth in the advanced economies for several years. 
The second driver of growth is demographics. Slowing population growth and rapid ageing 
are the most daunting headwinds buffeting the global economy over the next 10–20 years. In 
fact, demographic trends will negatively impact virtually all of the world’s major economies, 
both advanced and emerging. 
• 
In the US, UK, and France, annualised labour force growth will be barely positive 
over the next two decades. 
In Japan and Germany, the labour force is expected to shrink, subtracting from GDP 
growth. 
The most dramatic decline will be in China. Labour force contribution to GDP growth 
will  swing from  a  positive  1.5  percentage  points  over  the  last  20  years to  virtually 
zero  over  the  next  20  years,  with  much  of  the decline  occurring  in  the  immediate 
future. 
  But  demographic  decline  is  not  universal.  Many  emerging  market  economies  –  India  and 
South-east  Asia,  for  example  –  will  continue  to  have  favourable  demographics  that  will 
support growth. 
Demographics  is  not  destiny.  This  brings  us  to  the  third  driver  of  growth  –  productivity. 
Human  ingenuity  to  coax  higher  production  out  of  scarce  resources  has  overcome  past 
demographic challenges. This can be achieved either through more intensive use of existing 
technology  or  through  breakthroughs  in  new  technology.  But  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty about the prognosis for productivity growth. 
On the pessimistic side of the debate is the notion of technological stasis. 
• 
• 
Robert Gordon has presented the most well-known articulation of this view. 
The thesis is that most of the truly important innovations (such as the steam engine, 
electricity,  and  modern  sanitation)  have  already  been  fully  utilised,  while  newer 
inventions  (for  example,  digital  technology)  do  not  seem  to  have  as  much 
transformative impact. 
It is not that there is a dearth of innovations today – on the contrary, there are many. 
It  is  just  that  they  have  not  had  as  much  impact  on  productivity  as  earlier 
innovations. 
 Techno-optimists, however, believe that we are on the cusp of a new wave of technological 
breakthroughs that will greatly raise the economy’s productive capacity. 
• 
The story of genomics, robotics, artificial intelligence, and 3D printing is only starting 
to unfold. 
Moreover,  the  world  does  not  comprise  of  the  advanced  economies  alone.  Regardless  of 
what happens to technological advances at the  frontier, emerging market economies have 
considerable scope to raise productivity by simply catching up to the existing state of play at 
the frontier. 
Given  their  low  levels  of  productivity  relative  to  the  frontier  (as  represented  by  US 
productivity),  emerging  market  economies  have  enormous  scope  to  raise  productivity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  through  capital  deepening  and  adoption  of  existing  technology  and  modern  production 
methods. 
• 
In  China,  for  instance,  despite  substantial  gains  in  the  last  two  decades,  the 
productivity level is only about 15% that of the US. 
In Indonesia and the Philippines, it is only about 10% that in the US 
With  the  right  policies,  these  economies  can  sustain  good  rates  of  productivity 
growth for a few more decades. 
 A fourth factor impacting long-term economic growth is energy. Some of the world’s largest 
economies – the US, Japan, China, and India – are also among the largest net importers of 
oil. Cheaper and more plentiful energy is akin to a supply-side boost to these economies. 
• 
The shale gas revolution in the US has markedly reduced its dependence on energy 
imports and helped to boost industrial competitiveness as energy costs stabilise at a 
lower level. 
It would be unwise to extrapolate too much from the recent fall in oil prices of over 
25% (between July and October this year). But a gentle secular decline in the real 
price of oil is not an unrealistic assumption that, if true, should be a boon to global 
economic growth. 
 To sum up the impact of the four key drivers of growth, deleveraging and demographics are 
quite unambiguously a dampener while energy appears a benign force. The long term trend 
for  productivity  is  hard  to  predict.  But  even  assuming  a  generally  optimistic  prognosis  for 
productivity, it is quite likely that global growth in the next 20 years is likely to be lower than in 
the last 20. This means that returns from financial investments are also likely to be lower in 
the next 20 than in the last 20. 
Safeguarding long-term returns 
The  modest  outlook  for  long-term  economic  growth  presents  a  major  challenge  for 
government funds to close the widening gap between their financing needs and investment 
returns. 
• 
On  the  liabilities  side,  population  ageing  in  the  advanced  economies  will  increase 
pension claims and place a heavier burden on social services such as healthcare. 
On  the  assets  side,  slowing  global  economic  growth  will  constrain  investment 
returns. 
 There are three ways to narrow this mismatch between trends in assets and liabilities: 
• 
The first is to reduce financing needs by lowering social expenditures or increasing 
fiscal revenues. Both are politically difficult to do. 
The  second  is  to  reach  for  yield  by  taking  on  various  combinations  of  higher 
leverage,  longer  duration,  and  greater  credit  and  liquidity  risks.  But  the  public 
perception and character of government funds limit their scope for aggressive risk-
taking. 
The third way is to expand the investment portfolio to include new asset classes and 
new geographies for consistent and uncorrelated return streams. This option, while 
not easy, probably offers the best way forward. 
  Consider new asset classes. Many government funds are increasing their allocation to non-
traditional assets such as real estate, infrastructure, and even private equity. 
• 
Australian  and  Canadian  pension  funds  have  been  pioneers  in  infrastructure 
investing, from as early as the 1990s. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Norway’s  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  plans  to  increase  its  real  estate 
investments to as much as 5% of its assets, with a corresponding decrease in its 
bond holdings. 
CalPers  has  been  increasing  its  allocation  to  private  equity  and  real  assets, 
including real estate and infrastructure. 
 Next,  new  geographies.  Over  the  last  20  years,  government  funds  have  steadily  reduced 
their home bias in their equity holdings, investing in markets outside their own country. The 
big  shift  in  portfolio  allocation  in  recent  years  has  been  to  emerging  markets.  If  long-term 
growth  prospects  for  emerging  markets  are  superior  to  advanced  economies,  it  seems  to 
make sense to increase the strategic allocation to these markets, beyond what is dictated by 
market capitalisation. 
The challenge is in finding ways to translate the superior growth performance of emerging 
market  economies  into asset  returns, given  the  limited  depth  of their  capital  markets. One 
way  is  to  perhaps  invest  in  advanced  economy  corporates  with  significant  exposure  and 
presence in emerging markets. 
• 
Market  research  shows  that  equity  investments  in  certain  advanced  economy 
companies with significant emerging market exposure can indeed enhance portfolio 
performance. 
Local presence to serve global interests 
Even  so,  there  is  no  substitute  for  direct  investment  in  emerging  market  assets.  But  to 
understand  the  performance  and  risk  characteristics  of  each  market  requires  access  to 
specialist  knowledge  of  political  systems,  macroeconomic  trends,  currency  conditions,  and 
regulatory and legal frameworks in these countries. 
Singapore  offers  a  compelling  value  proposition  for  government  funds  seeking  a  vantage 
point  from  which  to  build  knowledge,  insights,  and  partnerships  in  Emerging  Asia.  As  a 
premier asset management centre, Singapore offers global funds a gateway to investing in 
Asia. 
Asset managers are drawn to Singapore’s strong global and regional links and their growing 
presence  reinforces  these  links  and  at  the  same  time  enhances  the  larger  financial  eco-
system  of  banks,  insurance  companies,  and  the  supporting  networks  of  legal,  accounting, 
and technological expertise. 
The  growth  in  assets  under  management  has  in  turn  helped  to  draw  in  more  sell-side 
products,  including  traditional  and  alternative  assets  like  real  estate  and  private  equity,  as 
well as a wide range of capabilities. 
Several  government  funds  have  set  up  offices  in  Singapore  to  support  their  research  and 
investments in Asia. They include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
ICPRC; 
Norges Bank Investment Management; 
the Swiss National Bank; and 
La Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec. 
Conclusion 
Managing  money  for  the  long-term  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  human  endeavours.  For 
those of us who manage government funds, we also owe a duty of care and responsibility to 
future generations – to sustain decent returns at an acceptable level of risk in an era of sub-
par growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  A wise man once said, “In investing money, the amount of interest you want should depend 
on whether you want to eat well or sleep well.” 
I wish you fruitful discussions over the next two days as you explore how to do both. Thank 
you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
