  Thomas Jordan: Sound money – a fundamental pillar of our society 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Ustertag, Uster, 23 November 2014. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Peter  Kuster  for  his  support  in  preparing  this  speech.  He  is  also  indebted  to 
Patrick Halbeisen, Rita Kobel, Thomas Moser and the SNB Language Services. 
Introduction 
It is a great honour for me to speak to you today from this lofty pulpit. Admittedly, as a central 
banker I cannot contribute a great deal to your spiritual well-being. I will therefore limit myself 
to my true area of competence and talk about money. 
Let me begin by explaining why I am particularly delighted to be addressing you today, as 
your guest speaker. As you know, the Ustertag of 1830 was a major milestone on the long 
road towards the creation of the Swiss federal state. Just 18 years later, modern Switzerland 
was born. And only two years after that, the Swiss franc was introduced as the currency of 
the Confederation – although, in the initial stages, the federal state had to be content with 
coinage  sovereignty  alone.  Not  until  1907  did  a  central  bank  equipped  with  the  exclusive 
right to issue banknotes begin operations. This was the Swiss National Bank (SNB). So you 
see,  important  developments  were  set  in  motion  by  the  Ustertag,  including  changes  that 
would affect our monetary system. Or, expressed in a different way, without the countryside 
uprising in the name of liberal ideas, 184 years ago, we might not have the SNB today. 
In my presentation, I will, for once, devote less attention to current monetary policy. Instead, I 
will  examine  the  Swiss  monetary  system from  a  more  long-term  perspective.  My  aim  is  to 
show you the significance of sound money, and why it is a major pillar of our society. In this 
context, I will also take a critical look at four proposals to reform the monetary system. My 
reason for doing this is that interventions of this kind in an existing monetary order can have 
grave consequences for our country and the entire population. 
Talking  of  reform  proposals:  In  the  “Uster  Memorial”  document  there  is  a  demand  which 
particularly appeals to me as a central banker, that, in the case of property charges such as 
tithes,  it  should  be  possible  to  transform  them  easily  into  mortgage  claims  whose  interest 
level is appropriate. Appropriate interest rates or “appropriate monetary conditions”, as it is 
expressed in central bankers’ jargon – that is what modern monetary policy is all about. So 
you see that the demands made in Uster remain just as valid today. In the “Uster Memorial” 
document,  an  interest  rate  of  4%  was  considered  to  be  appropriate;1  well,  as  you  know, 
Swiss interest rates have been considerably below this level for the past few years – so, in 
this respect, the SNB has fulfilled the requirements set out in Uster in 1830. 
A short journey through monetary history 
I would now like to take you on a short trip through Swiss monetary history. We will start our 
journey  in  the  year  1830,  and  will  make  stop-offs  at  sixty-year  intervals,  i.e.  in  1890  and 
1950, before returning to the present day. Let us assume you wanted to buy a loaf of bread 
in the year of the Ustertag. What money would you have used to pay for it here in Uster? 
My question may appear simple, but the answer is anything but easy. That is because the 
year  1830  falls  within  the  long  multiple  coinage  –  or  multiple  currency  –  period.  In  other 
                                                
1  Carl  Dändliker:  Der  Ustertag  und  die  politische  Bewegung  der  Dreissiger  Jahre  im  Canton  Zürich  (nebst 
Abdruck des “Uster-Memorials” als Beilage). Zur 50-jährigen Erinnerung, Zurich 1881, p. 6 of enclosure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  words, the currencies being used in the canton of Zurich in 1830 included guilders, batzen, 
shillings, thalers, hellers and angsters, just to name a few.2 Over 300 different kinds of coins 
were in circulation in Switzerland, with thousands of different embossed images.3 That made 
conversion  all  the  more  time-consuming,  and  there  were  no  electronic  aids  in  those  days. 
And although the exclusive right of coinage was really a cantonal prerogative, foreign gold 
and silver coins actually constituted the bulk of monetary circulation in terms of value. The 
cantons did not see any reason to mint money which was worth its face value. For everyday 
use  they  preferred  to  produce  representative  coins  whose  metal  content  was  worth  well 
below the nominal value. In this way, the cantons used their exclusive right of coinage as an 
easy source of funds.4 
This  resulted  in  an  over-supply  of  lower-quality  representative  cantonal  coins,  which 
circulated freely between the cantons. Problems relating to the deterioration of coinage were 
a recurring theme in the legislative assembly. The hopeless confusion resulted in mix-ups, 
hampered trade and travel, and meant that capital remained idle.5 
Sixty  years  later,  however,  in  1890,  the  Swiss  multiple  currency  period  was  already  past 
history. Nevertheless, Swiss monetary history had remained eventful. Since 1850, the Swiss 
franc had been defined in terms of silver, in line with the French franc, and after 1860, it was 
also defined in gold.6 At the same time, foreign money was still in use, in the form of coins 
worth their face value. 
Unlike the situation in 1830, banknotes played an important role in payments transactions in 
1890  (if  not,  perhaps  for  buying  bread),  partly  because  coins  are  unpractical  for  larger 
transactions. By now, the Federal Banknote Act of 1881 had come into effect. This legislation 
included provisions requiring the 29 issuing banks to hold at least 40% of their banknotes in 
circulation  in  the  form  of  currency  metal.  In  other  words,  banknotes  were  a  kind  of  cash 
substitute  and  did  not  qualify  as  legal  instruments  of  payment.7  Since  banks  did  not  gear 
their banknote issue to fluctuations in demand, there were regular bottlenecks in supply on 
days when large numbers of bills had to be paid. 
Our next leap in time takes us to the year 1950. By now, only Swiss coins and banknotes 
issued by the SNB were in circulation. The Confederation had transferred the exclusive right 
to issue banknotes to the SNB, which began business operations in 1907. Switzerland had 
been incorporated in the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system created in 1944, which 
was based on the US dollar as the lead currency – but ultimately on gold, since a fine ounce 
of  gold  was  equivalent  to  precisely  USD  35.  However,  for  private  individuals  it  had  been 
impossible to exchange banknotes for gold at the SNB since 1936. 
                                                
2  Paul  Meier:  Der  Währungswirrwarr  von  der  Helvetik  bis  zur  Bundesverfassung,  dissertation,  Berne  1951, 
p. 60. 
3  The  true  scale  of  the  multiple  currency  confusion  only  became  apparent  20  years  later  in  connection  with 
centralisation of the coinage system at federal level. At this point, in 1851 and 1852, following the introduction 
of the Swiss franc, the old types of domestic coins were collected. A list of coins drawn up by the coinage 
commission  featured  320  different  coin  types,  although  estimates  came  to  as  many  as 867.  If  the  different 
embossings are taken into account, there were as many as 6,000 or so. Cf. Meier, p. 72 et seq. 
4  Cf.  for  example,  Meier,  pp.  29–30  and  p.  124,  and  Ernst  Baltensperger:  Der  Schweizer  Franken  –  Eine 
Erfolgsgeschichte. Die Währung der Schweiz im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, Zurich 2012, pp. 49–50. 
5  Meier, pp. 124 et seq. 
6  Following the revision of the Coinage Act of 1860, the value of one Swiss franc was equivalent to 4.5g of silver 
or 0.2903226g of gold. This was in line with its model, the French franc. Cf. Baltensperger, p. 83. 
7  Moreover, in 1890, more coins were in circulation than banknotes, in terms of value. Coin circulation at the 
time  is  estimated  at  CHF 266  million,  while  banknotes  to  the  value  of  CHF 172  million  were  in  circulation. 
Cf. Heiner Ritzmann-Blickenstorfer (ed): Historische Statistik der Schweiz, Zurich 1996, p. 805. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our final leap in time brings us to the present day. Nowadays  we live  with a purely paper 
currency.  Since  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton Woods  system  at  the  beginning  of  the  1970s, 
exchange rates have, in principle, been moving freely in relation to one another. During the 
1960s,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  US  central  bank  had  been  too  expansionary.  Since  the 
currencies  of  many  countries,  including  Switzerland,  were  tied  to  the  US  dollar,  this  had 
resulted  in  high  rates  of  inflation.  Not  until  flexible  exchange  rates  were  introduced  could 
central  banks  manage  monetary  policy  conditions  in  their  own  countries  and  thereby 
effectively combat inflation. The SNB belonged to a group of pioneering central banks in this 
respect, managing to greatly reduce inflation within a very few years. And if we return to our 
loaf  of  bread,  it  is  still  possible  to  pay  for  it  with  Swiss  coins  and  banknotes,  although 
nowadays cashless payment forms – debit and credit cards – are further options. 
Two invariables of a sound monetary order 
By taking you on this short journey in time, my idea was to illustrate the following points for 
you: The monetary order did and does not arise from natural causes; neither is or was it god-
given.  It  is,  rather,  a  –  more  or  less  –  useful  human  invention.  Some  of  the  fundamental 
turning points were the result of an organic learning process. For instance, the centralisation 
of the right of coinage in the hands of the Confederation was a reaction to futile attempts to 
overcome the currency confusion through cantonal agreements, and was a response to the 
novel requirements of an economy that was developing rapidly. At other times, however, it 
was necessary to react to upheavals in the international arena with determination, and under 
time  pressure.  On  example  of  this  was  the  departure  from  fixed  exchange  rates  at  the 
beginning of the 1970s. 
However, these are not the only developments which have the potential to revolutionise our 
monetary order. Another agent of change is technological progress, which has fundamentally 
altered the way we pay for goods and services over the course of time, and will continue to 
do so in future. Moreover, in our direct democracy, sovereign voters make decisions which 
may alter the institutional foundations of the monetary order. Examples of this are the gold 
initiative,  which  we  will  be  voting  on  in  a  week,  and  the  plain  money  initiative,  for  which 
signatures  are  still  being  collected.  Given  this  situation,  you  will  understand  that  I  cannot 
make any predictions about what our monetary order will look like in 60 years’ time. 
In my introduction I stated that sound money is a central pillar of our society. What makes 
money – or a currency – sound? Money is sound when it fulfils its functions as a means of 
payment and store of value as smoothly and reliably as possible in people’s everyday lives. 
A sound currency retains its value and everyone can be sure it will be generally accepted as 
a means of payment. 
In Switzerland, the state has played an important role in the development of the monetary 
order since the foundation of the modern federal state. In this process, the first invariable has 
been very obvious – it is that efforts to ensure sound money in the interests of the population 
as a whole have always been a state responsibility. 
At the present time, the SNB’s most important task remains the requirement to ensure that 
our money remains sound, thereby safeguarding its value. In this context, retention of value 
refers to prices for the goods and services paid by an average consumer in our country. I am 
firmly  convinced  that  price  stability  is,  first,  a  fundamental  basis  for  the  growth  of  an 
economy, thereby contributing to prosperity. Second, it has an important social component 
and  is  part  of  the  glue  that  holds  our  modern  society  together.  Price  stability  protects  the 
purchasing power of pensions and enables citizens with lower incomes to accumulate and 
maintain assets. Retention of value cannot be taken for granted. Over the course of history, 
our neighbour countries have often experienced the pain of a collapsed currency. Money that 
retains its value, backed by sound institutions, therefore makes an important contribution to 
social harmony and material prosperity in our country, particularly in today’s world, with its 
major insecurities and imponderabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  However, sound institutions alone are not enough. Additional prerequisites for sound money 
are widespread fundamental trust by the general public in both our monetary order and the 
SNB, as well as understanding and support of our stability policy. It is only because these 
conditions were and are met in Switzerland – for which I am very grateful – that the SNB has 
been able, and is able, to fulfil its mandate. A second important invariable in our more recent 
monetary  history  is  the  fact  that,  in  this  country,  this  fundamental  trust  and  the  culture  of 
stability are deeply rooted. 
Making money even better? Alternatives to the present monetary order 
Can we make our sound money even better? In order to answer this question, let us begin by 
recalling the basic framework of the current monetary order. As an independent central bank, 
the SNB is required to pursue a monetary policy in the interests of the country as a whole. It 
has a mandate to ensure price stability while taking due account of the development of the 
economy. 
This mandate is the compass that guides all our actions. By guaranteeing price stability in 
word and deed over the years, the SNB, as an independent institution, has been able to build 
up its credibility. Credibility is the anchor needed so that the public at large has confidence in 
our paper currency. This confidence, in its turn, makes it possible for the SNB to react flexibly 
in the short-term to economic disruptions, because the public does not question its policies 
aimed at long-term stability. 
In  view  of  the  major  economic  and  social  importance  of  the  monetary  order,  as  outlined 
previously, it is legitimate and necessary that this order be subjected to repeated review. In 
this sense, we welcome the general growth in interest in the monetary system, following the 
turmoil of the financial crisis, and the fact that discussion on reform ideas is more lively than 
in the past. 
Nevertheless,  we  should  also  be  aware  that  the  monetary  order  is  the  result  of  a  historic 
development.  Since  we  are  not  starting  from  scratch,  even  well-meaning  suggestions  for 
improvement  –  ones  that  might  in  theory  appear  totally  justified  –  may  have  grave 
unintended  consequences  in  the  real  world.  I  will  use  four  radical  reform  proposals  to 
illustrate  what  I  actually  mean  by  this.  The  proposals  in  question  are,  first,  private  money 
instead of state money, second, a return to the gold standard, third, the introduction of plain 
money and, fourth, the adoption of foreign money. 
Private money instead of state money 
What  would  it  be  like  if we  could  pay  with  varying  currencies  offered  by  private  providers, 
instead  of  with  state  currencies?  At  first  glance  this  idea  seems  quite  appealing.  After  all, 
competition between different providers of goods and services is a major principle underlying 
our economic order. We owe much of our progress and, with it, our prosperity to this factor. 
Why should we make an exception when it comes to the currency, or to money? 
When  talking  about  monetary  competition,  I  would  like  to  begin  by  putting  our  banknote 
monopoly  into  perspective.  Since  freedom  of  contract  prevails  in  our  country,  you  are  at 
liberty to agree a currency other than the Swiss franc with your business partner. You may 
purchase your loaf of bread using euros, US dollars, gold, WIR money or even one of the 
new virtual currencies such as bitcoins,8 if the baker is willing to accept them. In other words, 
the Swiss franc already faces competition, not only against the currencies of other countries 
but also against alternative non-governmental currencies. 
                                                
8  For  further  information,  cf.  ‘Bericht  des  Bundesrates  zu  virtuellen  Währungen’  (Federal  Council  report  on 
virtual  currencies,  in  German  only)  of  25  June  2014  (www.news.admin.ch/NSBSubscriber/message/ 
attachments/35361.pdf). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, the key issue is rather different. A modern economy with a well-developed financial 
market requires a statutory means of payment. The Swiss franc is the official unit of currency 
in  our  country;  Confederation  coins  as  well  as  SNB  banknotes  and  sight  deposits  are 
Switzerland’s statutory means of payment. Therefore these instruments must be accepted as 
payment in this country by every individual,  without restriction, unless otherwise agreed. A 
statutory  means  of  payment  creates  legal  certainty  and  efficiency  in  everyday  life. 
Consequently,  the  governmental  Swiss  franc  is  indispensable  in  Switzerland,  even  in  a 
situation of competition with private currencies. Moreover, as long as a central bank fulfils its 
mandate  diligently,  I  do not  consider  it  likely  that  a  private  currency  can  pose  any  serious 
competition to a state currency. 
Return to a gold standard 
The second reform idea, the return to a gold standard, is directly linked to the financial crisis. 
In some circles there are fears of massive inflation in the short or long-term as a result of the 
unprecedented  relaxation  in  monetary  policy  worldwide.  The  solution  that  is  sometimes 
proposed is a return to a gold standard, in other words, pegging the currency to gold. 
I intentionally spoke of “a” gold standard and not of “the” gold standard because this standard 
has taken various different forms over history. Under a pure gold standard, a Swiss franc is 
equivalent to a certain amount of gold, and therefore, vice versa, the gold price is fixed in 
terms  of  Swiss  francs.  The  SNB  would  be  obliged  to  purchase  or  sell  gold  at  this  price, 
without  any  restriction.  In  other  words,  there  would  be  an  obligation  to  redeem  SNB 
banknotes in gold. 
In  my  view,  the  are  two  main  arguments  against  a  return  to  the  gold  standard.  The  first 
argument relates to gold as an anchor of price stability. Our modern economy is diverse and 
complex. Why, then, should we confine it in a monetary corset that takes as its measure the 
scarcity  of  a  precious  metal  that,  for  the  overall  system,  is  relatively  unimportant?  Price 
stability is not guaranteed by the gold standard. As we have most clearly seen in the past few 
years,  there  is  no  direct  connection  between  the  gold  price  and  the  general  price  level  of 
goods and services. 
The second argument is that the gold standard reduces the room for manoeuvre in monetary 
policy.  The  closer  it  comes  to  its  pure  form,  the  greater  the  reduction  in  the  freedom  of 
manoeuvre.  Only  those  who  believe  that  no  monetary  policy  at  all  is  required  to  react  to 
economic  shocks  should  plead  the  case  of  the  gold  standard.  Yet  this  ability  to  react,  in 
particular, is of great importance for our economy, which is heavily dependent on economic 
exchange with other countries. The current paper money system based on an independent 
central  bank  committed  to  long-term  stability  provides  an  alternative,  which  –  overall  – 
achieves far better results than a gold regime could. 
Here, if you will allow me, I would like to return to the present day with a brief digression on 
the gold initiative I mentioned before. Although the advocates of the initiative do not wish to 
return  to  a  gold  standard,  they  do  want  to  increase  the  role  of  gold  within  the  currency 
reserves. They therefore demand that the SNB hold at least 20% of its assets in gold, that it 
sell  no  more  gold  and  that  it  store  all  its  gold  in  Switzerland.  The  initiative  is  both 
unnecessary and dangerous. It is unnecessary because, under the current monetary order, 
there is no link between price stability and the share of gold in the SNB balance sheet. Thus, 
the objective of price stability has been better achieved over the past few years than at times 
when  the  gold  share  was  significantly  higher.  Moreover,  compared  to  other  countries,  the 
SNB still holds high stocks of gold. It definitely values gold, as a part of its currency reserves, 
and  has  no  plans  to  either  purchase  or  sell  gold.  Finally,  we  are  enormously  vigilant  in 
ensuring that our gold is stored safely in every respect, both in Switzerland and abroad. 
The  initiative  is  dangerous  because  it  would  weaken  the  SNB.  The  connection  between  a 
minimum  share  and  a  ban  on  selling  which  it  embraces  would  very  greatly  restrict  our 
monetary policy room for manoeuvre, since the SNB only retains its full capacity to act when 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  it is in a position to adjust its balance sheet to monetary policy requirements – in other words, 
if the SNB can expand or shrink it – without any restrictions. The value of this flexibility in 
reality  has  been  impressively  demonstrated  in  the  past  few  years  by  two  measures  which 
allowed  us  to  avert  substantial  damage  from  our  country.  First,  the  SNB  supported  the 
country’s  biggest  bank  by  establishing  a  stabilisation  fund,  thereby  stabilising  the  Swiss 
financial  system.  Second,  it  combated  the  massive  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc  by 
introducing a minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 to the euro. With the minimum share of 
gold  and  the  selling  ban  demanded  by  the  initiative,  enforcement  of  measures  like  these 
would  have  been  very  much  more  difficult.  Consequently,  the  initiative  would  make  it 
considerably harder for us to intervene with determination in a crisis situation and fulfil our 
stability mandate. For this reason, the gold initiative could result in worse money instead of 
better money, totally in contradiction to the intentions of the originators. 
Introduction of plain money 
A  popular  initiative  is  also  behind  the  third  reform  idea  –  the  introduction  of  plain  money. 
Nowadays, the SNB and the commercial banks together provide the economy with money. 
Through credit creation, the banks are in a position to create book money, only a small part 
of  which  they  are  required  to  cover  with  SNB  sight  deposits.  In  everyday  life,  this  book 
money – for instance deposits in salary accounts – is generally accepted in the same way 
that cash is accepted. A plain money system would mean that banks had to cover 100% of 
their book money with SNB sight deposits. 
The people behind the initiative believe that this would simplify monetary policy because a 
plain  money  system  would  allow  the  SNB  to  manage  the  money  supply  with  utmost 
precision. Moreover, plain money is thought to increase the stability of the financial system 
because  deposits  are  secured  by  SNB  sight  deposits.  In  addition,  profits  from  money 
creation would accrue fully to the SNB and no longer, in part, to the banks. 
Although the idea of plain money may be interesting in certain respects, I am sceptical as to 
whether acceptance of the initiative would result in better money. My reticence is born not 
only  of  considerable  doubts  as  to  the  anticipated  benefits  of  plain  money,  but  far  more 
because the introduction of plain money would constitute an enormous experiment for which 
we lack any experience or comparative figures from the past. Never in monetary history has 
a country introduced plain money based on central bank money. Assumptions which appear 
plausible could therefore prove to be incorrect. 
Foreign money instead of our own money 
The  final  proposal  is  considerably  less  challenging  in  theoretical  terms,  but  is  highly 
explosive  politically.  Is  there  any  reason  why  Switzerland  should  maintain  an  independent 
currency  for  its  relatively  small  territory  and  conduct  its  own  monetary  policy?  Since 
Switzerland  has  close  economic  ties  with  other  currency  areas,  and  the  central  banks  in 
question  also  pursue  stability  policies,  the  idea  of  importing  monetary  policy  from  abroad 
would not be so far-fetched at first glance. After all, there are examples such as Denmark 
and Hong Kong which voluntarily and unilaterally peg their money to foreign currencies, even 
though  they  still  mint  their  own  coins  and  print  their  own  banknotes. They  hand  over  their 
monetary  policy  de  facto  to  a  foreign  central  bank  and  have  often  had  quite  good 
experiences with this approach. 
However, as soon as we look at the situation a little more carefully, surrendering monetary 
policy autonomy appears considerably less favourable from a Swiss point of view. First, our 
country  has  had  good  experience  with  its  independent  monetary  policy,  and  this 
differentiates us from countries where the adoption of foreign monetary policy has brought a 
real gain in terms of stability. Second, structural and economic differences continue between 
the  currency  areas,  irrespective  of  all  the  interrelationships,  and these are  decisive for  the 
effectiveness and apportionment of monetary policy. Equally, the preferences of the general 
public as to how the central bank should react to given challenges vary from one country to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  another.  This  also  speaks  in  favour  of  a  national  monetary  policy  and  against  delegation. 
Consequently, in my opinion, the use of foreign money would not result in better money in 
our country, in the current situation. 
At this stage, you might object that, through the minimum exchange rate against the euro, 
the SNB has already, in point of fact, adopted foreign money and handed over its monetary 
policy  to  a  foreign  central  bank.  Such  a  view  of  affairs  would  be  incorrect.  The  minimum 
exchange rate is a measure which we adopted in order to fulfil our mandate in the interests 
of the country as a whole. The world economy is currently in an extremely difficult situation 
and the minimum exchange rate allows us to maintain appropriate monetary conditions and 
secure our long-term capacity to act. The minimum exchange rate is therefore an expression 
of our national policy sovereignty and the SNB’s lived independence, not a sign that we have 
given up our autonomy. 
The power of monetary policy 
Despite the criticism of these four proposals, I attach importance to making two things clear. 
First, it is absolutely possible and, as history has shown, even probable, that over the course 
of time the situation could change in such a way that the assessment of specific points might 
change. However, whatever these changes might be, the aim of the monetary order should 
remain unchanged – to ensure sound money in the interests of the public at large. Second, 
the reform proposals I have discussed are fundamental questions which, ultimately, cannot 
be decided on by a representative of the SNB but by voting citizens. In our democracy, they 
are  the ones  who  have  the final  word,  either  indirectly  through their  representatives  in  the 
Federal Parliament or directly at the ballot box – for instance next Sunday – and that is how it 
should be. 
And  this  brings  me  to  another  point  which  is  very  dear  to  my  heart.  Although  the  SNB  is 
independent, its power remains limited. Through the Federal Constitution and the National 
Bank Act it is firmly bound into our democracy and our constitutional state. Numerous control 
mechanisms guarantee this, and of these, I would like to make particular mention of the fact 
that,  every  year,  the  SNB  must  render  account  to  the  Federal  Assembly  as  to  how  it  has 
fulfilled its statutory tasks. This accountability report is published, so that the general public is 
also informed about the SNB’s activities. We do not do this merely because we are obliged 
to, but also because we are convinced that rendering account is important. We attach great 
importance to increasing the understanding of the general public in monetary policy matters, 
since  we  are  aware  that  basic  trust  in  the  monetary  order  and  its  institutions  will  only  be 
justified and lasting if we communicate in a candid and comprehensible manner. Otherwise, 
the valuable culture of stability which characterises our country would probably suffer. 
Despite the restrictions, central banks enjoy wide-ranging powers. Those who are in charge 
of monetary policy have strong tools at their disposal. Their responsibility is always heavy, 
due to the fact that their actions or failure to act impact on the entire population. In normal 
times,  however,  the  impact  of  these  strong  tools  is  rather  less  acute,  and  the  effects  of 
monetary  policy  –  both  intended  and  non-intended  –  are  usually  easy  to  foresee.  At  the 
moment,  this  is  more  difficult  because  we  are  obliged  to  use  unusual  instruments. 
Consequently, at times like this the SNB bears a particularly high level of responsibility. We 
are therefore subjecting the impact of the measures we have taken so far to repeated and 
very fundamental review, and are approaching this task with a completely open mind. 
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  presentation  to  you  as  follows.  The  SNB  is  fighting  for  price 
stability  with  total  conviction  and  great  commitment,  while  at  the  same  time  keeping  the 
development of the economy in view. Within the context set by our monetary order, the SNB 
does  its  utmost,  through  its  monetary  policy,  to  ensure  that  our  money  retains  its  value, 
thereby remaining a sound pillar of our society. This is the SNB’s most important contribution 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  to ensuring the long-term attractiveness and competitiveness of the Swiss location, as well 
as the social cohesion of our population. 
By their nature, central banks tend to be conservative institutions. Yet in recent years, the 
central  banks,  including  the  SNB,  have  become  quite  creative  and  innovative  when  faced 
with difficult circumstances. However, two points need to be noted in this respect. On the one 
hand,  central  banks  must  never  lose  sight  of  their  mandates.  There  should  never  be  any 
doubt  about  their  unflinching  adherence  to  their  stability  mandates.  On  the  other,  it  is 
important to recognise that monetary policy cannot be used to solve all economic problems. 
Otherwise we run the danger that, in the long term, monetary policy will no longer achieve its 
intended effects, and our money will deteriorate. 
As far as the Swiss monetary order is concerned, I am confident that the SNB is in a position 
to fulfil its mandate in the interests of the country – now and in the future –because of the 
backing it enjoys among the general public. My optimism is also founded in the history of the 
Swiss currency, which began moving in a positive direction after the memorable Ustertag of 
1830. Admittedly, the efforts to achieve sound money in our country were not immediately 
crowned  with  success  and  it  was  a  gradual  process.  However,  our  monetary  order  and 
institutions have enjoyed broad acceptance and a high level of basic trust for over 100 years 
now.  This  has  made  it  possible,  while  adhering  to  the  basic  foundations  of  the  monetary 
order,  to  carry  out  essential  adjustments  on  repeated  occasions,  while  at  the  same  time 
allowing transient fashion trends to pass and forgoing experiments with uncertain outcomes. 
It appears to me a particular strength of our country and an important part of the Swiss recipe 
for success  that  we  are  able  to  review  new  developments  impartially  and  prudently,  adapt 
them to our own situation if we consider them good, and link them organically to tested and 
tried systems wherever possible. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
