  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Statistical science for a better tomorrow 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  International  Statistical  Institute  Regional  Statistics  Conference 
2014 “Statistical Science for a Better Tomorrow”, Kuala Lumpur, 18 November 2014. 
 takes  place  at  a 
Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this inaugural International Statistical Institute 
Regional  Statistics  Conference.  This  conference 
time  of  major 
transformative change in our region and in the world. The contribution of statistics in this new 
and  rapidly  changing  environment  has  become  of  even  greater  importance.  In  this 
increasingly  complex  world,  the  availability  of  high  quality  statistics  is  vital  in  facilitating 
decision  making  for  both  the  private  and  public  sectors.  The  world  is  also  seeing  greater 
demands  for  higher  levels  of  transparency.  This  has  become  key  for  building  trust  and 
confidence  regardless  of  the  line  and  nature  of  business.  The  statistics  community  has 
responded  to  these  changes.  Immense  progress  has  been  achieved  in  developing  the 
methodology for generating consistent economic and financial statistical systems. In a world 
that  has  also  become  more  globalised,  such  progress  has  brought  great  benefits  to 
businesses  and  policymakers  in  terms  of  the  availability,  comparability,  and  broad 
consistency of economic data across countries. For any economic and financial community, 
detailed and comprehensive data are highly important to understand the implications of the 
developments taking place. This has prompted greater international collaboration across the 
world  to  contribute  towards  a  greater  understanding  of  the  implications  of  this  trend. 
Underpinning  this  is  also  the  high  level  of  professionalism  and  integrity  of  statisticians  at 
national and international agencies. 
It  is  in  this  recent  two  decades,  that  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment  has 
become more interconnected, more complex and more competitive. It has resulted in greater 
economic and financial integration and more intricate interconnectivities. At the same time, 
the  world  has  also  become  more  unstable  and  less  predictable  with  frequent  shocks  and 
crises. This new and more challenging environment has significant implications for business 
and  for  public  policy.  Economic  agents  need  to  have  an  appreciation  of  the  multi-faceted 
shifts in their environment in order to form the appropriate assessments and make informed 
decisions.  For  policy  makers,  it  highlights  the  importance  of  having  reliable,  relevant  and 
high-quality  statistics  to  support  and  pave  the  way  for  sound  policy  decision  making.  For 
statisticians,  the  challenge  is  to  continuously  improve  the  statistical  science  towards 
facilitating the foundation to build a better future. 
My remarks today will be from the perspective of a central banker. Timely and high quality 
statistics  is  one  of  the  important  prerequisites  for  central  banks  to  effectively  achieve  our 
goals of monetary and financial stability, and of fostering the development of a sound and 
progressive  financial  sector.  Based  on  my  experience  as  a  central  banker  for  more  than 
30 years, it requires a deep understanding of the economy and the financial system to make 
the  right  policy  decisions.  Such  policy  formulations  needs  to  be  based  on  rigorous 
assessments that provides the insights that will guide the decision making process. This is 
aided by relevant statistics, and complemented by sound judgement. 
Central banks are therefore not only major consumers of statistics, but also producers and 
disseminators of monetary and financial data. More importantly, central banks, have placed 
much  importance  on  providing  sufficient  analysis  and  assessment  in  conjunction  with  the 
release  of  statistics.  This  aims  to  provide  context,  avoid  misinterpretation  and  reduce 
uncertainty for the economic agents. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Key global trends shaping the universe of statistics 
As the world evolves, two key trends have emerged and in turn, created new and diverse 
demands,  challenges,  and  opportunities  in  the  field  of  statistics.  First,  the  steady 
liberalisation and deregulation of economies and financial markets have resulted in intricate 
interlinkages within domestic financial systems and spanning across borders. While financial 
markets  have  become  more  interconnected  globally,  capital  and  labour  mobility  across 
borders have also intensified while trade and investment barriers have been dismantled. This 
has resulted in closer proximity to growing markets and facilitated the creation of globalised 
supply chains by corporations. 
These  developments  have  had  wide  ranging  benefits,  including  better  risk  diversification, 
improved efficiency and greater economies of scale. However, it has also increased the risks 
for  cross-border  contagion  and  accelerated the transmission  of  external  shocks. The rapid 
transmission of the financial crisis in the major advanced economies in 2008 to other parts of 
the world demonstrates the significance of these contagion effects. 
These increasingly complex global networks have given rise to demand for new sets of data 
to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  interlinkages  and  to  assess  the  implications.  While 
many  global  initiatives  on  enhancing  statistics  were  the  result  of  financial  crises  that 
happened in the 1990s, we now find ourselves recognising that far more needs to be done 
following  the  much  worse  and  devastating  global  financial  crisis  that  has  resulted  in 
significant costs around the world. The recent crisis has tested policymakers to the limit and 
has placed greater demands on the community of statisticians. 
While  the  lack  of  data  was  not  the  root  cause  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  did  reveal 
serious  data  and  information  gaps  in  key  areas  that  might  have  helped  the  authorities  to 
measure, understand and respond better to risks in the international financial system. Even 
for  the  most  advanced  statistical  systems,  such  as  in  the  US  and  Europe,  the  crisis 
highlighted “black holes” in data that now need to be addressed. Closing these information 
gaps involve an important and heavy work agenda for the years to come. More efforts are 
now underway to strengthen cross-country data collection and close these information gaps. 
The BIS international banking statistics is for example being expanded and refined to capture 
the  entire  balance  sheet  of  internationally  active  banks  on  a  consolidated  basis,  and  with 
greater  granularity.  On-going  initiatives  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  to  close  these  information  gaps,  particularly  at  the 
individual bank level for systemically important global banks, are also significant steps in this 
direction. 
Another  key  global  trend  that  has  elevated  statistical  science  to  a  new  level  is  the  rapid 
innovation and advances in information and communication technology. It is staggering that 
90 percent of the world’s data was created in this recent two  years alone1. With the rapid 
expansion  of  data  storage  capacity2,  growing  global  connectivity  which  includes  almost 
3 billion  internet  users  worldwide  and  double-digit  growth  rates  in  the  mobile  broad-band 
market,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  swift  pace  of  technological  developments  has  not  only 
facilitated the rapid collection of new statistics but also led to more effective measurement of 
information. 
Improvements in technology have brought tremendous benefits to most segments of society. 
Amid  the  wider  availability  of  information  on  financial  planning  products,  households  now 
have  the  potential  to  make  better  savings  and  investment  choices.  For  businesses,  the 
                                                
1  Source:  IBM  Watson  Foundations:  http:-01http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/.ibm.com/software/ 
data/bigdata/. 
2  According to IDC, between 2013 to 2020, the “digital universe” which measures all the digital data created, 
replicated, and consumed in a single year, will grow by a factor of 10– from 4.4 trillion gigabytes to 44 trillion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  improved availability of timely and granular information has been a crucial enabling element 
for companies to anticipate new trends, gauge market viability and customise products and 
services to changes in market conditions. 
Innovations in Statistical Science have enhanced social welfare and policy formulation 
From the central bank’s perspective, it is clear that advancements in the statistical field have 
spurred an even more rigorous and scientific approach to surveillance and policy formulation. 
Given that policymakers are often faced with wide-ranging, difficult and significant trade-offs, 
sound  statistical  analysis  has  a  fundamental  role  in  managing  both  short-  and  long-term 
policy challenges. In the current environment, forward-looking macroeconomic and financial 
surveillance is more important than ever to detect potential risks early, so that pre-emptive 
policy  action  can  be  taken.  Of  importance,  is  the  need  to  be  aware  of  rapidly  changing 
information  sets  amid  increasing  financial  innovation  and  greater  global  interlinkages. 
Policymakers have therefore developed tool kits that have not only taken into consideration 
baseline forecasts, but crucially, on other plausible scenarios. In this aspect, larger and more 
diverse data sets that are complemented by more sophisticated analytical tools have allowed 
policymakers  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  macroeconomic  management. Through  more 
rigorous scenario analysis exercises, authorities are better able to identify challenges, and 
form  a  more  complete  view  of  future  conditions.  This  is  well  exemplified  by  the  recent 
emphasis on the need for regular stress testing to understand the effects of shocks on the 
solvency of individual banks, the stability of the entire financial system, the broader economy 
and, more importantly, the feedback effects. The roles of granular statistics and sound stress 
testing methodologies have become vital. 
While the recent global financial crisis has necessitated a substantial policy focus to address 
short-term  challenges,  policymakers  also  need  to  keep  sight  of  the  economy’s  long-term 
vision.  Continuous  structural  reforms  are  needed  to  strengthen  fundamentals  and  improve 
economic  resilience.  This  involves  measures  to  remove  structural  bottlenecks,  improve 
productivity  and  promote  innovation  and  enhance  competitiveness.  Formulating  such 
structural  policies  to  improve  growth  prospects  hinges  on  rigorous  empirical  research  in 
these  areas.  For  Malaysia,  the  economy  is  currently  undergoing  a  transition  towards 
becoming a higher value added economy. This has involved setting clear, time-bound and 
measurable  targets,  to  allow  for  the  policy  approach  to  be  focused.  This  has  depended 
heavily  on  the  availability  of good  data  and  statistics that  capture  developments  across  all 
sectors.  It  also  enables  us  for  the  monitoring  of  the  progress  and  the  effectiveness  of  the 
policies. It is also now widely recognised that economic growth can only be sustainable if it is 
inclusive.  Growth  will  only  slow  as  income  disparities  widen.  It  is  also  recognised  that 
financial  inclusion  is  an  important  contributor  towards  achieving  such  a  more  inclusive 
economic development. Bank Negara Malaysia has therefore over the decades implemented 
initiatives to extend and improve the access of quality financial services to all segments of 
society. 
Advances  in  data  collection  and  computation  methodologies  has  been  a  crucial  enabling 
factor in the progress made on financial inclusion not just in Malaysia, but also in many other 
countries.  Unconventional  information  is  now  often  used  to  assess  a  person’s  credit 
worthiness when there is insufficient traditional information to build a credit score. This can 
range from electronic records of past utilities bill payments and even reputations on social 
media3.  This  has  led  to vast  improvements  in  access  to  credit for  the  previously  excluded 
segment  of  population.  Meanwhile,  the  compilation  and  analyses  of  detailed  data  on  the 
financially underserved is a significant area that underpins international cooperative efforts to 
advance  the  global  financial  inclusion  agenda.  The  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI) 
                                                
3  For example, Lenddo in the Philippines, Mexico and Colombia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  comprising of more than 90 member countries established the need for measurable national 
goals  based  on  a  set  of  quantifiable  and  time  bound  common  indicators  among  its 
membership.  These  results  serve  as  an  objective  basis  for  the  AFI  members  to  share 
experiences on the effectiveness of their policies. 
Statistical enhancements for a better tomorrow 
Great strides in the field of statistics have resulted in significant economic benefits. However, 
as the world further transforms, new challenges emerge and much more needs to be done 
going forward. The increase in availability of data and information is not without risks. While 
the wealth of new data has indeed made markets more efficient and has supported better 
decision  making  by  the  private  and  public  sectors,  it  has  also  brought  about  new  risks  of 
fraud, theft and invasion of privacy. Therefore, existing confidentiality policies, regulation and 
data governance need to be reviewed and updated to account for these new risks, so that 
innovative activities can thrive without threats to individual safety and interests. 
Additionally,  in  managing  the  increase  in  global  interconnectedness,  greater  international 
collaboration  and  coordination  in  the  field  of  statistics  is  needed  to  enhance  cross-country 
data  coverage,  promote  greater  standardisation  of  data  and,  more  importantly,  to  create  a 
shared understanding of cross-border risks and transmission of shocks. The dynamic nature 
of the global economy and financial system implies that the relevant set of data needed is a 
constantly moving target. Therefore, continuous and concerted efforts by both the users and 
compilers of statistics to close data and information gaps are indeed crucial. 
Finally is the need for the continued emphasis on capacity building of human capital. From 
researchers and academicians, to statistical compilers and policymakers, there is an urgent 
need  to  ensure  that  further  enhancements  in  the  field  of  statistical  science  continue  to 
advance. Policymakers and statisticians today need to be at the forefront of the advances in 
statistics to identify new linkages and risks in order to calibrate effective policy responses. In 
a similar vein, economic and market participants must invest in the statistical systems and 
expertise required to generate the wealth of information inherent in their operations to allow 
for  greater  appreciation  and  understanding  of  their  implications  on  the  overall  financial 
system and economy. 
Conclusion 
As we move forward, the changing contours of the global landscape will increase sharply the 
demand  for  higher  quality  and  more  comprehensive  statistics  from  both  the  private  and 
public sectors. This also needs to be accompanied by sound analysis in order to draw the 
implications. From the compilers of statistics, to the developers of statistical applications and 
the users of statistics, there will be many challenges, but also immense opportunities ahead. 
On  this  note,  I  wish  you  a  productive  and  successful  conference.  By  sharing  your  ideas, 
knowledge and insights in statistics, we will together contribute to drive the statistical science 
for a better future. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
