  Jens Weidmann: Towards a more prosperous monetary union 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Asociación de 
Mercados Financieros Annual Financial Convention, Madrid, 24 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to speak here today. 
A popular proverb in Madrid goes as follows: “De Madrid al cielo y un agujerito para verlo.” 
My  pronunciation  is  poor,  but  this  certainly  doesn’t  mean  that  the  saying  doesn’t  resonate 
with  me  –  after  all,  this  is  already  my  second  visit  to  Madrid  in  four  months.  And  on  both 
occasions, I actually had a choice in the matter, which is not always the case. 
In  a  way,  the  proverb  also  captures  nicely  what  I’m  attempting  to  do  today  –  to  come  to 
Madrid in order, well, not to ascend to heaven, but to take a bird’s eye view of the situation 
the  euro  area  is  facing.  In  my  opinion,  taking  a  longer-term  perspective  is  crucial  when 
analysing the problem that looms largest in our monetary union today: the euro area’s weak 
growth prospects. 
To  a  certain  extent,  the  problem  is  one  of  subdued  demand,  owing  mostly  to  the 
macroeconomic adjustments in the countries that have been under stress over the last few 
years. And the subdued demand and inflation outlook are the reasons for an “unprecedented 
degree of monetary accommodation”, as Mario Draghi has put it. 
However,  while  monetary  policy  can  influence  short-term  demand,  it  cannot  permanently 
boost  growth  prospects.  And  the  same  is  true,  unfortunately,  for  fiscal  policy  –  even  if 
additional fiscal space would be available. 
When  we  shift  our  focus  forward,  the  structural  picture  does  not  seem  very  bright:  The 
European Commission estimates1 that the euro-area medium-term growth potential – in other 
words, for the  next  ten years  –  is  only  1%.  And  a  lower  growth  outlook  not  only  means  a 
comparatively lower standard of living, but also tighter future budget constraints. 
What is needed is a sustainable increase in medium-term growth. This will only come about, 
however, if we tackle our structural shortcomings decisively. 
What has been achieved – reforms for reducing macroeconomic imbalances 
At this point, you might argue that a lot of progress has already been made in this regard, 
especially in the countries worst hit by the crisis. 
And  I  would  agree  with  you  on  that.  A  lot  has  indeed  been  done  to  correct  the 
macroeconomic imbalances that are at the root of the struggle the euro area is facing. 
Abstracting from important cross-country differences and taking a bird’s eye perspective, the 
divergence between prices and wages on the one hand and productivity on the other was the 
driving factor behind the external deficits that ultimately proved unsustainable – in addition to 
the precarious levels of public and private debt. 
When  markets  refused  to  finance  the  deficits  any  longer,  the  gap  had  to  be  closed.  The 
financial support provided under the rescue mechanisms and our common monetary policy 
                                                
1   European Commission (2013), “The euro area’s growth prospects over the coming decade”, Quarterly Report 
on the Euro Area 12(4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have  smoothed  the  adjustments  –  without  these  measures,  the  adjustments  would  have 
been far more abrupt. 
Still,  even  in  a  currency  union  with  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  support 
mechanisms, national gaps between prices and productivity had to be closed – sooner rather 
than later. 
The reforms undertaken so far have made these adjustments possible. Wage negotiations, 
for example, have been decentralised and wage indexation has been abolished or reduced – 
Spain  is  a  case  in  point. This makes  it  possible for  wages  to  take  the  specific situation of 
each firm into account. 
Through  this  and  other  measures,  prices  and  wages  have  been  brought  more  in  line  with 
productivity, in a process which erased the external deficits in all crisis countries except for 
Cyprus in 2013. And for 2014, Cyprus is expected to post a current account surplus as well. 
What  is  more,  fiscal  sustainability  has  been  improved  by  adjusting  pensions  more  to 
demographic  realities,  mainly  by  raising  the  eligibility  age.  This  strengthens  the  pension 
system financially, it preserves much needed expertise in the respective firms, and it reduces 
the demographic drop in labour supply to some extent. Germany has moved in this direction 
early on, which makes it all the more unfortunate that it now seems to backtrack somewhat 
on these reforms the rest of the euro area is moving towards. 
As a result of the ongoing restoration of competitiveness, the euro area has now been placed 
on sounder footing. But while competitiveness is necessary for prosperity, it is not sufficient. 
Ultimately,  prosperity  hinges  on  productivity.  This  is  where  we  now  have  to  redouble  our 
efforts. 
Not doing so would mean “taking the pain but missing out on the gain”, as Benoît Cœuré has 
aptly put it. The structural reforms we need now are the ones that unleash innovation and 
propel productivity. We also need them now because these are the reforms that can credibly 
raise expectations of a higher income in the future. And if income is expected to be higher 
tomorrow,  investments will  be  made  today.  Reforms that  increase  supply  will  thus  support 
demand as well. 
In some areas in need of reform, it is the European Commission who is in the driver’s seat. 
Other areas, such as labour markets, remain a national prerogative. But even with initiatives 
on the European level, national governments are on board via the European Council. 
Political science teaches us that it can be an effective strategy in international negotiations to 
proclaim that your hands are tied because of domestic politics and it is either your way or the 
highway.  But  if  everybody  takes  this  “logic  of  two  level  games”,  as  the  American  scholar 
Robert Putnam2 has called it, to the extreme, nothing will get done. In the interest of a more 
prosperous monetary union, at times national sensitivities have to be put aside. 
Which actions are required to brighten the euro area’s growth prospects? I see three areas in 
particular where action is needed: the financial markets, product market regulation and the 
labour markets. 
Financial sector reforms for growth 
Let me start with how financial markets can channel capital into innovative companies more 
efficiently. 
Europe’s  biggest  reform  project,  the  banking  union,  is  first  and  foremost  a  project  about 
financial stability. But it is important to also see its potential ramifications for growth. By lifting 
                                                
2   Putnam,  Robert  (1988).  “Diplomacy  and  Domestic  Politics:  The  Logic  of  Two-Level  Games”.  International 
Organization 42: 427–460. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  veil  of  uncertainty  surrounding  banks’  balance  sheets,  the  comprehensive  assessment 
has  helped  to  make  the  banking  sector  more  stable.  And  I  am  quite  confident  that, 
prospectively, this will improve banks’ ability and willingness to finance the real economy. 
Additionally, a functioning bank resolution regime with a credible bail-in of shareholders and 
creditors strengthens incentives for banks to carefully select and monitor the firms they lend 
money to. This ensures that capital will be put to its most effective use. And studies3 show 
that this is good not only for financial stability but also for growth. The evergreening of loans 
to non-viable firms is not a recipe to reinvigorate growth – this is the lesson of the Japanese 
experience in the 90s. 
However,  history  has  shown  that fear  of  contagion  is  a  strong  deterrent  when  it  comes  to 
actually  resolving  an  important  bank.  And  whether  bailing  in  creditors  would  lead  to 
contagion  naturally  depends  on  who  those  creditors  are  –  if  they  are  other  financial 
institutions, the chances are that regulators will shy away from resolution. 
This is why two weeks ago, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) proposed minimum standards 
for  the  30  global  systemically  important  banks  concerning  both  the  quality  and  quantity  of 
bail-in  debt.  In  particular,  it  was  agreed  that  if  a  bank  were  to  hold  bail-in  debt  issued  by 
another systemically important bank, this would detract from its own bail-in buffer, in order to 
discourage banks from holding critical amounts of bail-in debt issued by other banks. 
The  euro  area  already  has  a  minimum  requirement  for  such  eligible  liabilities.  But  so  far, 
these  liabilities  can  be  held  by  other  institutions without  restriction. In  the  interests  of  both 
financial stability and growth, we should adapt the standard proposed by the FSB as soon as 
possible. 
Channelling credit into the most innovative and efficient companies is a crucial prerequisite 
for growth. But in their infancy, companies are usually not looking for credit, but for equity 
investors. When it comes to providing capital to innovative firms, the EU has much room for 
improvement.  In  the  US,  for  instance,  finding  investors  is  not  much  of  a  problem  for 
innovative  companies.  An  innovative  American  firm  is  able  on  average  to  attract  twice  as 
much capital as an innovative firm in Spain, France, or Germany. 
Investment in a new, innovative firm often takes the form of venture capital. The business 
model of a venture capital fund is based on developing expertise in a certain area and using 
this  expertise  to  make  informed  bets  on  a  number  of  promising  firms  in  the  industry  in 
question. A high number of new firms fail, but the rewards to be reaped if they succeed are 
also  high  –  on  average,  venture  capital  investments  in  the  US  have  delivered  a  return  of 
around 13% since 1990, according calculations by the Economist. 
For the venture capital model to work there has to be a minimum market size in order to be 
able to spread out investments among a large enough number of start-ups. But in Europe, 
the markets for venture capital have been segmented along national borders. This may go 
some way to explaining why in Europe, investments by venture capital funds in technology 
companies are only one-fifth the size of investments in the US. 
The Single Market Act of 2011 set out to harmonise venture capital regulations and to create 
a  more  integrated  market.  But  many  domains  relevant  to  venture  capital  funds,  such  as 
investor protection and insolvency law, remain fragmented. 
In order to make up for the lack of private capital, the EU installed a public venture capital 
fund at the EIB in 1997. Similar vehicles exist at the national level as well. The Economist 
estimates that up to 40% of European venture capital now comes from public sources. But 
the risk-return profiles of the companies targeted by these investments would appear to differ 
                                                
3   Korte, Joseph (2013): Catharsis − The real effects of bank insolvency and resolution. Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper No 21/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  from those funded by US venture capital funds – the average return on venture capital since 
1990 is no more than 2.1%. 
This could suggest that public funds might not be able to make up for the fragmented market 
for venture capital in Europe. Instead, more integration seems to be the most likely way of 
making venture capital pay off, and of providing innovative companies with the funding they 
need. 
A digital single market 
Ladies and gentlemen, more integration is not only needed with regard to the venture capital 
market, but also with regard to the markets their investments operate in. 
When it comes to the market that arguably has the most sweeping consequences for overall 
productivity – I am referring to Information Technologies (IT) – fragmentation still abounds. 
This  applies  in  particular  to  legal  issues  such  as  privacy  and  data  protection,  content  and 
copyright, liability of online intermediaries, e-payments and electronic contracts. The EU still 
comprises 28 individual digital markets rather than one single digital market. 
This  is  holding  back  innovation,  growth  and,  ultimately,  jobs.  Studies4  suggest  that 
establishing a harmonised and well-regulated digital single market holds the same potential 
as the introduction of the original one, and could raise GDP by as much as 4%. In Germany, 
for example, this could imply an additional 420,000 jobs over the period 2015 to 2020. 
A truly integrated digital market also implies higher potential rewards for investing in a digital 
European  start-up.  Together  with  the  reforms  outlined  before,  this  might  create  a  critical 
mass for venture capital in Europe. Bringing the single market into the digital age therefore 
could amount to a “buy one, get one free” scenario. 
Removing barriers to entry 
A bigger market makes it more attractive for any potential entrant to compete on it. And more 
intense  competition  spurs  innovation.  In  the  long  term,  innovation  due  to  increased 
competition is the main reason why market integration raises welfare.5, 6 
But  for  newcomers  to  be  able  to  challenge  incumbents,  they  must  not  trip  over  red  tape. 
Unfortunately, bureaucratic barriers to setting up a business are still high in many European 
countries  –  not  least  in  Germany,  which  ranks  114th  in  the World  Bank’s  Doing  Business 
report in this regard. Spain does comparatively  better, ranking 74th. But this still  implies a 
considerable distance to the frontier of best practice. 
How  large  is  the  impact  of  barriers  to  entry  on  the  overall  economy?  Research  suggests: 
quite  large  indeed.  Increasing  entry  costs  from  very  low  levels  such  as  those  observed  in 
Denmark, for example, to moderate ones like those in Spain can reduce per capita GDP and 
total factor productivity by up to 10%7. And the small differences in the administrative cost of 
                                                
4   Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
5   Badinger, H (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review 
of World Economics 141, 50–78. 
6   Boltho,  Andrea  and  Eichengreen,  Barry  (2008),  “The  Economic 
CEPR Discussion Paper No 6820. 
Impact  of  European 
Integration”, 
7   Barseghyan,  L  (2008),  “Entry  Costs  and  Cross-Country  Differences  in  Productivity  and  Output”,  Journal  of 
Economic Growth, 13(2):145–167. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  entry between Europe and the US seem to explain 10 to 20% of Europe’s lag vis-à-vis the 
US with regard to total factor productivity and the capital-output ratio.8  
Removing  barriers  to  entry  therefore  holds  the  promise  of  substantial  gains  in  productivity 
and  welfare.  But  these  barriers  can  be  tackled  not  only  at  the  national  level,  but  on  the 
European level as well. 
The single market has been very successful in facilitating trade in goods. Hence, competition 
in this area is intense. The mark-ups that firms are able to charge in addition to their costs 
due to market power are low and are comparable to those in the US, for example. 
When  it  comes  to  services,  however,  the  picture  looks  different.  Mark-ups  are  higher,  on 
average, than in the US. It is probably safe to say that the Services Directive has fallen short 
of expectations. This could be changed by finally establishing the “country of origin” principle 
in the services sector, as is already the case in the common market for goods. This principle 
states that a firm should no longer be hampered by regulation in the import country if it has 
already complied with the national regulations in its home country. 
Such a move would make services markets more open to competition. And reducing barriers 
to  entry  to  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  overall  EU  economy  could  provide  a  real  boost  to 
productivity. 
Labour markets and productivity 
Ladies and gentlemen, barriers to market entry can exert a powerful drag on productivity. But 
productivity is not only held back by product market regulations. For productivity to flourish, 
we need resources to flow – to the most innovative and efficient firms. This is why creating a 
working European venture capital market is very important. 
Here, another factor comes into play: On average, bigger firms tend to be more productive 
and  are  better  placed  to  compete  in  export  markets.  Unfortunately,  the  growth  of  small, 
innovative companies is hindered in some European countries by a plethora of regulations 
that kick in at a certain size threshold. 
In  France,  for  instance,  many  regulations  become  binding  when  a  firm  reaches  a  size  of 
50 employees.  This  causes  some  firms  which  would  otherwise  expand  to  stay  below  that 
level. Research9 suggests that this distortion leads to a loss of 4–5% of French GDP. Other 
size-contingent  regulations  exist  in  other  countries  such  as  Portugal  or  Italy,  where  the 
threshold  is  15  employees.  What  these  regulations  all  have  in  common  is  that  they  deter 
firms from expanding. Therefore, they are a drag on growth. 
These  examples  show  that  capital  is  not  the  only  indispensable  input  for  firms.  Labour  is 
equally crucial. Studies10 indicate that, compared to the US, innovative European firms have 
considerably  more  difficulties  in  attracting  the  staff  they  need.  This  lowers  allocative 
efficiency  and,  ultimately,  productivity.  The  reason  for  this  seems  to  be  that  overly  strict 
employment protection exerts a “lock-in” effect: Workers do not move easily from firm to firm. 
This not only hampers productivity, but is of particular concern in a monetary union. After all, 
the theory of optimum currency areas suggests that, in the absence of the exchange rate as 
                                                
8   Markus  Poschke,  2010.  “The  Regulation  of  Entry  and  Aggregate  Productivity,”  Economic  Journal,  Royal 
Economic Society, vol 120(549), pages 1175–1200, December. 
9   Garicano,  Luis,  Claire  Lelarge  and  John  Van  Reenen  (2013),  “Firm  Size  Distortions  and  the  Productivity 
Distribution: Evidence from France”, CEPR Discussion Paper 9495. 
10   Andrews,  D,  C  Criscuolo  (2013),  “Knowledge-based  capital,  innovation  and  resource  allocation”,  OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers No 146. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  an  adjustment  variable,  we  need  the  flexible  movement  of  labour  to  absorb  economic 
shocks. 
How can we improve the situation? Simply slashing worker protection cannot be the answer. 
But  when  exploring  avenues  to  make  labour markets more flexible  and  efficient,  we  might 
heed the advice of the Nobel-winning labour economist Chris Pissarides: “Protect workers, 
not  jobs.”  In  other  words,  less  stringent  employment  protection  coupled  with  adequate 
financial support in the event of a job loss is likely to reduce overall unemployment, while still 
insuring workers against the vagaries of the market. 
The crushingly high unemployment levels – and especially youth unemployment levels – in 
some  countries  such  as  Spain  are  really  a  tragedy.  These  unemployment  levels  are  more 
than enough reasons on their own to improve the workings of the respective labour markets. 
The spectre of a “lost generation” is economically indefensible and morally repulsive. In this 
situation, vested interests have to take a back seat. 
And reforms that improve job prospects for the unemployed would have the additional upshot 
of making it easier for innovative firms to find the skills they need. This will make the overall 
economy more productive. 
Scandinavian countries have led the way with “flexicurity”-type reforms. More recently, Spain 
has  also  taken  some  steps  in  this  direction,  and  we  can  see  that  employment  in  highly 
productive  industries  such  as  manufacturing  and  in  professional,  scientific,  and  technical 
activities is growing. 
Last month, Italy’s senate passed reforms that would go some way towards a single labour 
contract,  advocated  for  example  by  this  year’s  Nobel  Prize  winner  Jean  Tirole11.  Such  a 
contract would improve protection for temporary workers while somewhat lowering protection 
for those with permanent contracts that have been almost impossible to terminate hitherto. 
This  addresses  labour market  duality12 and,  coupled  with  unemployment  insurance reform, 
resembles  the  reforms  I  have  just  outlined.  But  so  far,  the  measures  are  still  awaiting 
confirmation by parliament. 
In any case, the scope for “flexicurity”-type reforms in Europe remains broad. If we want to 
emulate the productivity of the US and bring unemployment down to acceptable levels, we 
need to modernise our labour markets. Crucially, modernisation does not mean every man 
for himself. But it does mean that labour markets have to be more elastic. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me come to a close. The biggest problem besetting the euro area 
today is its dim growth prospects. While weak demand does currently play a role, and this is 
why our monetary policy is more accommodative than ever before, we need to face up to our 
structural shortcomings to unleash innovation and propel productivity. 
A financial sector that channels capital into the most innovative and efficient firms, reforms 
that make it easier for new firms to compete, and flexible labour markets that protect workers 
instead  of  jobs  and  allow  firms  to  attract  the  skilled  employees  they  need  are  the 
cornerstones that, if combined, have the potential to transform the growth outlook. 
The OECD estimates that such measures have the potential to lift growth up to 15% above 
the  current  baseline  level  after  ten  years.  And  some  of  this  would  be  felt  instantly,  as  the 
expectation of higher incomes tomorrow triggers stronger investment today. 
                                                
11   Blanchard,  OJ  and  J  Tirole  (2003),  “Contours  of  Employment  Protection  Reform”,  MIT  Department  of 
Economics Working Paper No 03–35. 
12   Bentolila,  S,  T  Boeri,  and  P  Cahuc  (2010),  “Ending  the  scourge  of  dual  labour  markets  in  Europe”,  Vox, 
12 July 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There is no single reform that will provide a silver bullet – and more needs to be done not 
only with regard to growth, but also in terms of the euro area’s fiscal framework. But I already 
outlined  why  –  from  a  stability  point  of  view  –  it  is  so  important  to  rebalance  liability  and 
control in Europe during my last visit to Madrid. And I do not wish to repeat myself. 
Still,  if  we  embark  on  a  comprehensive  overhaul  in  the  way  I  have  just  described,  I  am 
positive that our monetary union will not only continue to fulfil the promise of price stability, 
but will live up to the promise of prosperity as well. Even that kind of euro area might not be 
heaven, but the view from above would be much nicer than it is today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
