  Barry Whiteside: The importance of credit unions 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
7th Pacific Credit Union Technical Congress, Suva, 7 November 2014. 
 Salutations 
The Chairman of the Oceania Confederation of Credit Union Leagues, 
The President of the Fiji Savings and Credit Union League, 
Members of the Board of the Oceania Confederation of Credit Union Leagues,  
My fellow Governor, Loi Bakani, Bank PNG 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
A very good afternoon to you all! 
Introductory remarks 
At  the  outset  I  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  closing  address  to  your 
Congress. I am truly honoured. 
I guess after four days of meetings, workshops and intense technical deliberations you must 
all be more than ready to let your hair down and just relax! Please allow me a little more of 
your time. 
I  note  from  the  programme,  that  you  have  had  an  opportunity  to  delve  into  some  very 
pertinent and relevant topics. This capacity building forum affirms the important relationship 
between  appropriately  resourcing  your  people  and  the  quality  of  governance  standards.  I 
congratulate  the  organizers  for  combining  an  excellent  agenda  with  distinguished  and 
knowledgeable speakers and I am sure you have much to take away. 
While I understand it has been a long week and I am standing between the Graduation and 
the exciting cultural event, I would like to take just a little of your time to make a few remarks 
as you chart the way forward for development, and growth. 
Reassurance of the Importance of credit unions 
Just  like  Prime  Minister  Bainimarama  stated  when  he  opened  this  Technical  Congress,  I 
echo his sentiments on the critical role that credit unions play. 
As  intermediaries  you  serve  a  broad  base  of  members  from  all  walks  of  life  and  income 
levels. The credit union movement continues to be a catalyst for greater financial inclusion. 
You encourage a savings culture and provide access to financial services and products for 
those who may face a number of barriers when dealing with financial institutions. 
In Fiji, the large credit union membership accounts for approximately 5 percent of our labour 
force and this further confirms your importance in the financial system and economy. 
The key challenge for credit unions – corporate governance failure and absence of 
internal controls 
While  we  all  agree  on  the  importance  of  credit  unions,  tremendous  constraints  and 
challenges  to  your  growth  persist.  These  include  poor  corporate  governance  practices, 
ineffective regulatory oversight, archaic legislation, lack of internal controls and inadequate 
assessment  and  monitoring  of  risks.  Again  the  Prime  Minister  provided  you  with  a  hard-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  hitting message as to what could happen with poor governance, poor controls, and not the 
least, ineffective regulatory oversight. 
I  am  sure  that  you  would  have  deliberated  on  these  subjects  in  your  various  technical 
sessions and fully understand the repercussions for not setting the appropriate platforms. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we live in a time where transactions and products are becoming more 
complex, leaving institutions, both big and small, vulnerable to failure. Therefore, establishing 
proper safety nets is critical. 
I  urge  participants,  as  you  return  to  your  respective  countries,  to  continuously  review  and 
benchmark  your  operations  against  international  principles  and  best  practices.  The  World 
Council  of  Credit  Unions  and  International  Credit  Union  Principles  on  Governance, 
Operations and Safety and Soundness have much guidance to offer in these areas, as do 
your facilitators. 
The importance of innovation 
Let me touch a little on innovation, something which is very important if credit unions are to 
remain relevant and competitive in today’s dynamic environment. I encourage participants to 
put  on  your  innovative  thinking  caps.  Observe  the  products  and  services  offered  by  credit 
unions in other economies and identify those that could be tailored in yours to increase your 
coverage. 
For  instance,  technology  now  drives  the  efficient  and  economical  delivery  of  financial 
services and interaction with customers. Credit unions may wish to explore the use of Digital 
Finance to facilitate transactions with members, particularly those in remote areas. 
Also,  inward  remittances  from  our  families  overseas  are  a  significant  foreign  exchange 
earner; in Fiji remittances are the number two foreign exchange earner after Tourism and we 
received in excess of $339 million last year and are expecting more than $370 million this 
year  –  which  will  be  a  new  record.  You  may  wish  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  creating 
remittance-linked  products  for  your  members  –  as  currently  practiced  in  Kenya  and  Latin 
America, in partnership with the World Council of Credit Unions. 
The Reserve Bank of Fiji’s experience – support for credit unions 
Ladies and gentlemen, I firmly believe that in order for credit unions to compete and grow in 
a progressive and modern financial system, the support and guidance of the central bank is 
critical. Therefore, before I conclude, I wish to share a few of our partnership initiatives in a 
bid to develop this important industry. 
In  March  this  year  we  undertook  a  survey  covering  21  credit  unions  with  assets  totalling 
$125.1 million. This allowed us to understand the structure and coverage of credit unions and 
will help us in developing an appropriate regulatory framework. Ministerial approval has been 
sought for the Reserve Bank to supervise Fiji’s credit unions and we envisage that this will 
develop them into prudentially sound entities. 
We  have  also  sought  technical  assistance from the  International  Monetary  Fund  to  review 
the Fiji Credit Union Act. This will establish the requisite governance and policy framework. 
We are hoping that this engagement will take place soon and we will  work closely with all 
credit union stakeholders in drafting a modern legislation. 
Furthermore, a 10-year Financial Sector Development Plan for Fiji is currently being drafted 
by  the  Reserve  Bank  after  wide  consultation.  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  Plan 
contains  strategies  aimed  at  removing  barriers  to  development  and  growing  non-bank 
financial institutions, which includes credit unions. The Plan will be implemented from 2015. 
In 2015, the Reserve Bank in partnership with the Government and relevant stakeholders will 
formulate a new Financial Inclusion Strategy for Fiji. Credit Unions will be consulted and will 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  play  an  important  role  in  this  agenda  given  your  role  in  providing  access  to  affordable 
financial products and services for Fijians. 
This is an exciting time for the Pacific as we establish closer economic relations and have 
seen  positive  growth  for  consecutive  periods.  The  Reserve  Bank  believes  that  this  is  a 
crucial  time  for  our  financial  sector  stakeholders  to  support  the  real  sector  in  this  journey. 
Therefore,  we  are  committed  to  strengthening  our  collaboration  with  credit  unions  and  we 
encourage our regional counterparts to consider the same. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, I  trust that everyone  has  had  an  enjoyable  and fruitful  Congress. I 
hope that your interaction does not end here and encourage you to forge close domestic and 
regional collaboration amongst yourselves and with government ministries and regulators, to 
accelerate growth. 
I hope those of you who are visiting Fiji have had a wonderful stay and that our hospitality will 
always be something to remember. We may be known as the “Flying Fijians” in the rugby 
arena,  but  we  pride  ourselves  in  being  the  “Friendly  Fijians”  as  well!  In  fact  our  Tourism 
slogan is “Fiji, Where Happiness Finds You!” 
In closing, I wish you all a safe trip back home. I also wish you all the success in your credit 
union developments and hope to see you all back in Fiji in the near future. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
