  Jon Cunliffe: Monetary policy one year on 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
to the Cambridge Society for Economic Pluralism, Cambridge, 28 October 2014. 
 My appointment to the Bank of England was announced in July 2013, at about the same time 
we first had official data in showing the UK economy growing strongly. I joined almost exactly 
a year ago on 1 November, shortly before the inflation data for October came in showing a 
0.5pp drop to 2.2%, the biggest fall in over 18 months. 
But  as  always  in  economic  policy  making  one  has  to  distinguish  between  correlation  and 
causality.  The  latter  is  nearly  always  uncertain.  Indeed,  as  an  economic  policy  maker, 
especially a forward looking monetary policy maker, one must accept one is almost always 
making policy under conditions of considerable uncertainty. Perhaps that is why you so often 
hear from monetary policy makers about puzzles and how “the data are unusually difficult to 
read this month”. 
Our  job  on  the  MPC  is  precisely  to  make  judgments  about  the  future  on  the  basis  of 
imperfect information. To decide when we have enough to act and when it is better to wait. 
And to adapt those judgments as the economy evolves. 
Against  that  background,  and  on  the  occasion  of  my  first  anniversary  at  the  Bank,  I  want 
tonight  to  review  how  the  economy  has  evolved  over  the  last  year  against  what  was 
expected  when  I  joined  the  MPC.  And  to  look  at  the judgments  and  uncertainties  we  now 
face. Needless to say, as always, the “data are difficult to read”. 
When  I  arrived  on  the  MPC,  we  were  seeing  signs  of  a  strong  recovery  –  stronger  than 
anyone had forecast – that had started in the spring of 2013. Over the middle 2 quarters of 
that year, GDP had increased at an annualised rate of over 3%. 
The key drivers of the recovery seemed to be renewed consumer and business confidence 
due in no small part to the de-escalation of the Euro crisis and an easing in credit conditions. 
These in turn released pent up demand in the economy. 
The evidence suggested that this strong growth would continue into 2014. Forward looking 
economic  indicators  were  very  strong.  The  business  surveys  were  pointing  to  continued 
growth at that pace. The squeeze in living standards from higher energy and food prices had 
started to ease. 
But, growth  seemed  to be  almost  entirely  driven  by  consumer  spending  and  the  emerging 
recovery  in  the  housing  market.  That  strength  in  consumer  spending  did  not  come  from 
growth  in  real  incomes  but  from  a  large,  two  percentage  point,  drop  in  the  savings  rate. 
Business investment still appeared to be dragging on activity. So there were real question 
marks about whether this strong growth could be sustained. 
The MPC took an optimistic view. We forecast business investment would increase as the 
surveys suggested and play a bigger role in supporting growth. We forecast also a return to 
productivity  growth  –  a  real  casualty  of  the  recession  –  that  would  drive  higher  pay  and 
hence provide a more sustainable base for consumer spending. And, as a corollary of higher 
productivity  we  thought  the  growth  in  output  would  be  accompanied  by  a  slower  fall  in 
unemployment. 
So overall, our expectation at the time I joined was that the recovery would broaden out in 
2014. But over the year the boost from pent up demand would fade and as a result growth 
would begin to fall back from very strong rates to a pace around its historic averages. 
Three  other  MPC  judgments  from  my  first  meeting  and  Inflation  Report  are  also  worth 
recalling. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
First, we did not think the UK economy would get much help from the rest of the world. A 
combination  of  relatively  weak  growth  in  the  parts  of  the  word  that  mattered  most  for  UK 
exports,  particularly  the  Euro  area,  and  the  disappointing  performance  of  UK  exports  in 
recent  years  led  us  to  believe  that  the  UK’s  net  trade  would  not  provide  a  material 
contribution to growth. 
Second, while we expected productivity growth to pick up in 2014 we did not forecast that 
the UK would recover any of the very substantial amount of productivity growth, 14% relative 
to the pre-crisis trend, that had been “lost” in the five years since the crisis. 
This so called “productivity puzzle” – why the UK’s productivity had fallen so far and had not 
recovered – was a major part of the uncertainty the Committee faced about how fast the UK 
could grow without generating inflation pressure. If some or all of that lost productivity growth 
could  be  recovered,  the  economy  could  grow  faster  and  for  longer  without  putting  the 
inflation  target  in  jeopardy.  But  looking  forward  the  Committee  took  a  cautious  view  and 
based its view of the future on the expectation that productivity growth would recover only 
slowly and that none of the “lost” productivity would be recovered. 
Third, the MPC was operating under the “forward guidance” it had agreed in August last year 
and  to  which  I  had  subscribed  on  joining  the  Committee.  The  underlying  concern  behind 
forward guidance was that the market might react too quickly and too simplistically to strong 
GDP  growth  numbers  and  forget  the  amount  of  spare  capacity  still  in  the  economy.  If  the 
market predicated the Bank’s reaction to strong growth on a pre-crisis basis and, incorrectly, 
began to price in a tightening of policy the recovery could be choked off. 
To head off that risk the Committee had, earlier in the year, made clear its intention, through 
“forward  guidance”  not  to  consider  tightening  policy  at  least  until  there  was  a  substantial 
reduction in spare capacity as evidenced by a fall in the unemployment rate to below 7%. 
So,  over  the  subsequent  year  what  have  we  learned?  Have  the  puzzles  and  uncertainties 
resolved themselves? Have they been transformed into new puzzles and uncertainties? And 
what does it all mean for policy going forward? 
The good news is that the recovery has remained strong. Indeed, after the revisions to the 
past data in this year’s blue book we now know the economy passed its pre-crisis size in the 
third quarter of 2013. We can talk now of an expansion rather than a recovery. 
On  the  latest  data,  growth  in  the  four  quarters  to  September  now  stands  at  3%  –  a  little 
stronger than expected back last November. Growth was particularly strong in the first half of 
the year and the business surveys suggest that may well be revised upwards. 
In the latest quarter of this year, growth is reported to have fallen back to 0.7%. The burst of 
pent  up  demand  that  propelled  the  initial  recovery  was  a  little  stronger  and  lasted  a  little 
longer than we had been expecting last November. But it does now seem to be fading. 
Moreover, growth has become more broadly based due to the marked pick up in business 
investment. The shift of the balance of growth towards business investment that the surveys 
were pointing to last November, has I am pleased to say come through more strongly than 
expected. Business investment now looks to have driven around a third of the increase in 
GDP we have seen over the past year. That has made the recovery more broadly based and 
more sustainable. 
And unemployment has continued to come down at a much faster pace than was expected, 
dropping from 7.6% in the data that came out when I arrived in the Bank last November, to 
6.0% in the latest data – a rate of decline not seen since the late 1980s. Around half a million 
people have been taken out of unemployment. That has to be good news. 
But, as always in economics, there is a cloud to the silver lining. 
Output  has  grown  strongly  over  the  past  year  but  unemployment  has  dropped  faster  than 
output  has  grown.  So  though  the  UK  economy  is  producing  more,  it  is  using  even  more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  people  to  produce  it.  In  other  words,  productivity  growth  has  not  made  even  the  modest 
recovery to 1%, half of its pre-crisis trend, that we forecast last November. It was negative 
over last year and has achieved only 0.5% growth over the past 4-quarters. This is around 
half the pace the MPC had expected, though it picked up a bit in the latest quarter. 
And,  needless  to  say,  the  productivity  puzzle  remains  a  puzzle.  Upward  revisions  to  the 
official data for the immediate post crisis years have reduced the size of the puzzle a bit. But 
the  level  of  UK  productivity  is  14%  down  relative  to  pre-crisis  trend.  So  with  productivity 
recovering very slowly and still growing well below the pre-crisis trend, it is looking less and 
less likely that that “lost” productivity will be recovered any time soon. 
And there is now a new puzzle: why, despite this rapid fall in unemployment to 6%, have we 
seen such weak pay growth in the official data? On the average weekly earnings measure, 
annual private sector pay growth is running at just 1%, still below the rate of inflation. Had the 
MPC  been  told  last  November  that  unemployment  would  fall  to  just  6%,  we  would  have 
expected pay growth to have been very considerably stronger. What has happened to what, 
hitherto in the UK, has been a relatively stable relationship between pay and unemployment? 
Part  of  the  explanation  for  the  weak  growth  in  pay  is  surely  the  very  low  increase  in 
productivity – if workers are producing less output per hour, there is less scope for pay rises. 
But even adjusting for low productivity by looking at pay relative to the output of the average 
employee, we find a very weak picture. Growth in “unit labour costs” has been negative over 
the past year. Not only have we been producing more but with relatively more people and 
hence lower productivity. We are also paying less labour cost per unit of output than we were 
before. 
There are, as always, possible seasonal and one-off factors: some patterns of pay seem to 
have been distorted by the change in income tax rates in April last year, which cloud annual 
comparisons. Even adjusting for that effect though, unit labour costs look broadly flat – much 
below the 2% rate of increase we need to meet the inflation target in the medium term. 
The big surprise, therefore, for the MPC – and it is a positive, if puzzling, development – has 
been  the  extent  to  which  employment  has  been  able  to  grow  without  generating  clear 
inflationary pressure. Understanding why that has happened and how long it will persist is, in 
my view, now key to deciding policy. 
One possible explanation is simply a longer-than-usual lag between falls in unemployment 
and  pay  pressure  emerging.  Once  you  take  into  account  productivity,  the  unexplained 
weakness in wages only really materialised over the last three quarters, a period over which 
unemployment was falling very rapidly. 
Some  survey  measures  suggest  the  pay  of  newly  hired  employees  is  growing  at  a  much 
faster  rate,  of  between  2%  and  6%, rather  than  the  1%  rate  seen  across  employees  as  a 
whole in the official data. On this view, a rapid pick up in average pay levels is in prospect, 
once more and more workers start to shift jobs and as pay of existing employees is adjusted 
in annual pay rounds. The parable of the rock pulled by the elastic band is a very relevant 
one in economic policy making: the rock may not move for a long time, but eventually it will. 
And  the  longer  it  takes  to  move  the  faster  the  move  is  likely  to  be.  On  this  view,  the  UK 
labour  market  may  be  reacting more  slowly,  but  it  is  fundamentally  not  very  different from 
previous recoveries. Inflationary pressure is building in the pipeline. And given the lags in the 
impact of monetary policy, that pressure will be more difficult to curtail if the Bank does not 
act now. 
However  another  possible  explanation  is  that  a  combination  of  factors  has  caused  labour 
supply – the amount of hours of labour available to the economy – to be much stronger than 
in previous recoveries. 
Participation  in  the  labour  force  was  expected  to  continue  to  fall,  in  line  with  its  pre-crisis 
trend,  mainly  as  a  result  of  an  ageing  population.  This  does  not  seem  to  be  happening. 
Participation  in  the  labour  force  for  the  over  60s  has  increased  by  some  1.5  percentage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  points since the crisis. An increase in longevity is causing people to work longer in a number 
of countries so as to maintain the same standard of living over their retirement. 
That  shift  seems  to  happening  in  the  UK  as  well.  It  has  been  reinforced  by  a  structural 
change in policy – the increase in  women’s state pension age from 60 to 65. Indeed, it is 
women in the 60–65 age bracket that have increased their participation rate most – by just 
under 6% since 2010 when the increase in the pension age started to be phased in. 
Alongside this, changes to the incapacity benefits regime may well also have had the effect 
of bringing more workers into the market. The number of people under the age of 65 who are 
inactive because of incapacity is down by around 200,000 since mid-2008. 
For  much  of  the  post-war  period,  there  has  been  in  the  UK  a  steady  decline  in  the  hours 
people have wanted to work. As income grew, the trend was to reduce hours and maintain 
income rather than to maintain hours and increase income. Not surprisingly, the largest fall in 
real  pay  since  records  began  has  reversed  that  trend;  the  evidence  suggests  that,  as  the 
economy  has  recovered,  with  lower  real  pay,  many  have  sought  to  increase  hours  to 
maintain – or recover – income. That of course may well be a temporary effect and as and 
when real pay rises the pre-crisis trend may reassert itself. But it may be that this effect will 
last for some time yet. 
Another explanation for the weakness of pay despite the fall in unemployment might be that 
the pressure to catch up lost income is much weaker post recession than it has been in the 
past.  Based  on  previous  episodes  in  the  UK,  we  might  have  expected  a  reduction  in  real 
incomes to result in increased inflationary pressure from the labour market. 
The  big  lesson from  the  1970s  was  that  weakness  in  real  incomes  and  price  movements, 
which  drive  a  wedge  between  consumer  prices  and  output  prices,  lead  to  pressure  for 
increases  in  pay  to “catch  up”  on  the  lost  income:  or  as  it  is  sometimes  called  “real  wage 
resistance”.  The  end  result 
for  a  given  amount  of 
unemployment.  Put  differently,  to  keep  a  lid  on  inflation,  unemployment  has  to  be  higher 
following periods of pressure on real incomes. 
The current reduction in real incomes has been as big as we’ve seen for nearly a century. 
Real  wages  are  still  almost  9%  below  their  pre-crisis  peak.  That  is  a  fall  of  around  20% 
relative  to  the  pre-crisis  trend.  Following  a  year  of  strong  growth  and  a  very  rapid  fall  in 
unemployment, this would suggest workers would now demand some catch up in pay. 
However, there appears to be little evidence of real wage resistance – the sharpness of the 
recession and the years of austerity that have followed it, appear to have caused a shift in 
the psychology of UK workers. 
There appears, for the present at least, to be an acceptance that pre-crisis pay levels are no 
longer  achievable.  Real  wages  have  proved  to  be  remarkably  flexible  and,  as  a 
consequence, unemployment has been able to drop quickly without inflationary pressure on 
pay emerging. 
To complete the picture, the fall in unemployment has included a high number of long-term 
unemployed,  who  probably  drag  less  on  pay.  Taken  together  with  workers’  apparent 
willingness  to  accept  lower  real  pay  levels,  the  non  inflationary  rate  of  unemployment,  or 
NAIRU, looks to be at a lower level than we might have expected. 
The MPC already built into its August forecasts the possibility of some positive labour supply 
shock. It took the judgement then that, contrary to previous assumptions and the experience 
of  previous  recessions,  the  labour  participation  rate  would  be  less  affected  by  an  ageing 
population. And, having seen little evidence of pay pressure, it took the view that the NAIRU 
had fallen to 5.5% – not far off the 5% rate that prevailed in the UK before the crisis. 
But even relative to last August’s judgement on labour supply, pay growth still  looks weak 
relative to models calibrated on the pre-crisis period. At the same time, unemployment is still 
falling more rapidly than expected. 
inflationary  pressure 
is  more 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The MPC is left with a judgement whether those falls in unemployment presage an imminent 
sharp pick up in pay growth. Or whether the continued weakness in labour costs means we 
can afford to let falls in unemployment continue to run for some time yet. 
As always with economics, it is possible to make a good case on either side. We will know 
more when we see the extent of pay pressures in the big annual settlement rounds in the first 
quarter of next year. But there are grounds to continue to suspect that labour supply may be 
behaving differently to the past, to be cautious about moving to tighten monetary policy on 
the  basis  of  falling  unemployment  alone  and  to  wait  for  clearer  signs  of  strength  in  pay 
growth.  Even  after  adjusting  for  one  off  effects,  pay  growth  is  currently  still  some  2 
percentage points below the pace consistent with achieving the inflation target in the medium 
term.  That  weakness  in  pay  might  go  some  way  in  explaining  why  inflation  has  been 
undershooting the MPC’s predictions of late. 
The instinct to be cautious about tightening monetary policy too early is further reinforced by 
the constraints that come with Bank Rate remaining close to its effective lower bound. We’ve 
now seen evidence of a slowing in UK growth, and prospects for the global economy have 
deteriorated.  With  the  scope  for  tightening  monetary  policy  substantial,  but  the  scope  for 
loosening it much more limited, the risk of a surprising pick-up in inflationary pressure may 
be  more manageable  than  the  risk  of  the expansion  stalling  and  inflation  dropping further. 
The  latter  risk,  of  course,  has  and  will  continue  to  become  less  acute  the  longer  the 
expansion continues. But it remains, for me at least, a concern. 
Uncertainty remains, old puzzles are unresolved and new ones appear. That is the normal 
world of the forward looking monetary policy maker. The question as always is whether the 
risk of not waiting until the picture is clearer is outweighed by the risk of not acting in time. 
To  sum  up,  some  of  what  the  MPC,  at  the  point  I  joined  it,  thought  would  happen  has 
happened. We have gone from recovery to expansion. Growth is slowing to something close 
to its pre-crisis average. Investment has made and is making an increasing contribution to 
growth. But the behaviour of unemployment, productivity and, most recently, pay continue to 
surprise  and  puzzle.  More  “normal”  relationships  between  these  variables  may  reassert 
themselves quickly and the pay rounds next year in particular should illuminate some of the 
picture. But there is also reason to believe that some changes, as in labour supply, may be 
longer lasting. 
When I started at the Bank this time last year, the MPC was half way through the process of 
putting together its latest set of forecasts for inflation and growth. That process is now again 
in  train.  The  softening  in  the  pay  and  inflation  data,  together  with  the  weaker  external 
environment, for me implies that we can afford to maintain the current degree of monetary 
stimulus for a longer period than previously thought. That of course will be a subject for the 
MPC to debate in the coming weeks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
