  Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in the euro area 
Opening keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2014. 
 Summary 
Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, today opened the Frankfurt European 
Banking Congress, with an analysis of the economic situation facing the euro area and of the 
ECB’s monetary policy response. 
The  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  remains  difficult  and  confidence  in  the  overall 
economic prospects is fragile and easily disrupted, feeding into low investment, Mr Draghi 
said.  In  this  context,  the  inflation  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  also  become  increasingly 
challenging. 
The ECB President emphasised the risk that a too prolonged period of low inflation becomes 
embedded  in  inflation  expectations,  and  that  the  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  is 
critical under any circumstances. This is why the Governing Council has communicated its 
expectation that the combination of all the monetary policy measures it has decided on will 
expand  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  towards  the  levels  prevailing  in  early  2012, 
Mr Draghi said. The addition of purchases of covered bonds to ABS purchases will allow us 
to conduct interventions on a scale that will achieve the intended effects in terms of portfolio 
rebalancing and signalling. 
He added the ECB would continue to meet its responsibility: “We will do what we must to 
raise inflation and inflation expectations as fast as possible, as our price stability mandate 
requires of us. If on its current trajectory our policy is not effective enough to achieve this, or 
further risks to the inflation outlook materialise, we would step up the pressure and broaden 
even more the channels through which we intervene, by altering accordingly the size, pace 
and composition of our purchases,” Mr Draghi said. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Last September a significant shift took place in the monetary policy of the ECB. Faced with 
continuously  weak  inflation,  we  reached  the  effective  lower  bound  on  our  policy  interest 
rates, and we resorted to asset purchases as a means to expand further our monetary policy 
stance. 
Today I would like to describe the context in which this shift has taken place, and how the 
new instrument of asset purchases operates. 
The current situation in the euro area 
Two and a half years ago, the euro area faced a very bleak situation. We had a fragmented 
financial  system,  a  banking  sector  that  would  not  lend  and  an  economy  in  recession. 
European economies were on diverging but generally downward paths. 
Since then governments and the ECB have taken several steps to address fragmentation, 
and  the  financial  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  improved  dramatically.  Spreads  on 
government  bonds  have  fallen  on  average  by  3  percentage  points.  Interest  rates  on 
corporate  and  bank  bonds  have  also  converged  substantially.  And  the  fragmentation  of 
financial flows across borders has receded, although it is still higher in some markets than it 
was before the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The process of cleaning up the banking sector has also advanced considerably. In particular, 
our  Comprehensive  Assessment  has  encouraged  banks  to  frontload  their  balance  sheet 
repair  and  recapitalisation  efforts,  as  well  as  identifying  €25bn  in  capital  shortfalls  and 
imposing important prudential requirements. All this increases confidence in the sector and 
puts euro area banks in a better position to restart lending to the real economy. 
Nevertheless, these positive developments in the financial sphere have not transferred fully 
into the economic sphere. The economic situation in the euro area remains difficult. The euro 
area  exited  recession  in  the  second  quarter  of  2013,  but  underlying  growth  momentum 
remains  weak.  Unemployment  is  only  falling  very  slowly.  And  confidence  in  our  overall 
economic prospects is fragile and easily disrupted, feeding into low investment. 
Indeed, the latest flash euro area Purchasing Managers Index released yesterday suggests a 
stronger recovery is unlikely in the coming months, with new orders falling for the first time 
since July 2013. 
In  this  context,  the  inflation  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  also  become  increasingly 
challenging. Headline inflation has fallen significantly over the last year. Last November, it 
still stood at 0.9%. This was low, but it was generally expected to rise safely above 1% by 
now. Instead, the latest reading for headline inflation is 0.4%. 
This  downward  movement  of  inflation  was  primarily  driven  by  declines  in  energy  and  food 
price  inflation,  which  are  two  components  that  tend  to  be  volatile  and  whose  effects  are 
typically  temporary.  So  to  some  extent  the  ECB  could  “look  through”  them.  Indeed,  in  our 
current environment low energy and food prices give valuable support to economic activity by 
raising real disposable incomes. 
But we also see that core inflation is low – the inflation rate that strips out these volatile and 
temporary  components.  The  annual  rate  of  change  in  core  inflation  has  been  consistently 
below 1% over the past year, with the latest reading for October at 0.7%. A low reading for 
core inflation for such a period of time indicates that it is not only temporary factors that are 
operative: underlying demand weakness is also playing a role. 
Indeed, we have clear signs from survey data that weak demand is contributing to low pricing 
power among firms. We also know that with high unemployment in many euro area countries 
workers  have  less  power  to  negotiate  higher  wages,  which  reduces  inflation  pressures. 
Compensation per employee increased by only 1.1% year-on-year in the second quarter of 
this year, the lowest increase in three years. 
We have had low headline inflation in the past driven by energy prices – it was even negative 
in 2009. But at that time, core inflation was already moving upwards as the economy was 
rebounding,  which  provided  us  with  comfort  that  inflation  would  pick  up  over  the  medium-
term. This time around, the overall picture is different. 
So we cannot be complacent – we have to be very watchful that low inflation does not start 
percolating  through  the  economy  in  ways  that  further  worsen  the  economic  situation  and 
inflation outlook. There are several channels through which low inflation can have this effect, 
including  by  complicating  relative  price  adjustment  between  euro  area  countries,  and 
worsening the effects of the debt overhang that prevails in parts of the euro area. 
But a channel I particularly want to focus on is the risk that a too prolonged period of low 
inflation  becomes  embedded  in  inflation  expectations.  The  firm  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations is critical under any circumstances, as it ensures that temporary movements in 
inflation  do  not  feed  into  wages  and  prices  and  hence  become  permanent.  But  it  is  even 
more critical in the circumstances we face today. 
This is because if inflation expectations fall, the real interest rate rises, which is the interest 
rate that matters most for investment decisions. And because nominal short-term rates in the 
euro  area  have  already  reached  the  effective  lower  bound,  they  cannot  be  adjusted 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  downwards further to compensate for this. In other words, any de-anchoring of expectations 
would cause an effective monetary tightening – the exact opposite of what we want to see. 
We are currently seeing some volatility in inflation expectations. Longer-term indicators are 
on  the  whole  within  a  range  that  we  consider  consistent  with  price  stability.  Over  shorter 
horizons, however, indicators have  been declining to levels that I would deem excessively 
low. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations have generally been more stable, but 
the  latest  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  also  indicates  some  decline  –  and  at  all 
horizons. 
If we put this all together, we see that it has been essential that the ECB has acted – and is 
continuing to act – to bring inflation back towards 2% and ensure the firm underpinning of 
inflation expectations. 
The monetary policy response 
So how have we responded? Our response has certainly been unconventional, in the sense 
that our measures are unprecedented – but it is far from unorthodox. We have responded in 
a way that any central bank with a strict price stability objective would do. It has essentially 
involved three overlapping steps. 
The first step, as I said, was to lower overnight interest rates all the way to their  effective 
lower bound – including below zero for the deposit facility. But once we reach this point, and 
if inflation is still too low and more monetary stimulus needed, the central bank has to adopt 
new instruments to fulfil its mandate. 
The  next  logical  step  to  ease  monetary  conditions  is  to  influence  more  directly  the  term 
structure of interest rates, which we did by introducing forward guidance in July of last year. 
We have recently re-affirmed our forward guidance that key policy rates will stay low for an 
extended  period  of  time  in  line  with  the  subdued  outlook  for  inflation. And  in  the Targeted 
Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTRO)  programme  we  have  backed  this  up,  by 
providing term funding over up to four years at a very low fixed rate. 
As a result, the level of the forward interest rate curve in the euro area is currently uniformly 
lower than it has ever been – and also lower for instance than at any point in the US since 
the start of the financial crisis. 
Both  these  steps  have  in  common  that  they  operate  through  steering  current  and  forward 
money market rates. However, once the margin for manoeuvre here becomes exhausted – that 
is,  overnight  and  near-term  money  market  rates  are  both  at  the  lower  bound  –  a  third  step 
becomes necessary. If further monetary stimulus is needed, central banks need to by-pass 
the money market and intervene directly in other asset markets to affect, through prices and 
quantities, the various transmission channels of monetary policy. 
Speaking in Amsterdam earlier this year, I clarified the circumstances under which the ECB 
would  need  to  resort  to  asset  purchases  to  increase  meaningfully  the  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation.  In  what  I  called  the  “third  contingency”,  I  referred  to  a  broad-based 
weakening  of  aggregate  demand  that  would  threaten  our  baseline  scenario  of  recovery 
and/or a loosening in the anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations. 
And this is the point the ECB has reached with the Governing Council’s decision to initiate 
purchases of asset-backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds. 
How asset purchases contribute to the ECB’s objective 
With  our  monetary  policy  decisions  in  June  and  in  particular  in  September,  we  have 
transitioned from a monetary policy framework based predominantly on passive provision of 
liquidity to a more active and controlled management of our balance sheet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  This  means  that  it  is  now  changes  in  the  size  and  composition  of  our  balance  sheet  that 
determine  our  monetary  policy  stance  –  or  to  be  more  specific,  the  markets  in  which  we 
intervene, and the magnitude and pace of our purchases. We expect such interventions to 
affect output and inflation through two main channels. 
Direct pass-through effects 
The first is by addressing impairments in financial markets that have a direct pass-through 
effect to the real economy. And this effect will naturally be stronger in those markets that are 
more important for the transmission of monetary policy. 
With this in mind, we began our shift to actively deploying our balance sheet by focusing on 
the ABS market, as this was a market that was both impaired and that had a tight link with 
bank lending, which is the main transmission mechanism of monetary policy in the euro area. 
This  reinforced  our  overall  aim  to  ensure  there  are  no  barriers  to  credit  supply  as  credit 
demand progressively picks up. 
Purchases  of  ABS  will  push  down  market  spreads  on  senior  tranches,  reduce  volumes 
available for investors in those markets and thereby encourage banks to relieve this scarcity 
by originating more ABS. As they can only do this by creating more loans in the first place, 
this ought to increase the supply of credit and reduce the price at which it is granted. 
The impact of these purchases will be bolstered by the scaling-up in parallel of the TLTROs. 
As  banks  receive  cheap  long-term  funding  on  the  condition  that  they  expand  loans  to 
households and firms, the TLTRO will increase credit supply, which in turn should lead the 
price of credit to fall in a competitive environment. 
And  both  these  measures  will  arrive  in  the  context  of  the  successful  completion  of  the 
Comprehensive Assessment, which puts banks in a much stronger position to transmit our 
new monetary policy impulse. 
Indeed, there is already evidence that in expectation of the roll-out of these measures, banks 
are  lowering  lending  rates  and  increasing  loan  volumes.  Our  latest  Bank  Lending  Survey 
reported a net easing of credit standards on loans to non-financial corporations and, more 
generally, suggests we have passed a turning point in credit growth. 
Portfolio balance effects 
The second channel through which we expect asset purchases to work in the euro area is 
the broad portfolio balance channel. Let me explain how in principle that channel operates. 
As we buy assets, investors are likely to substitute the lower risk assets we buy with riskier 
assets  such  as  longer-term  assets,  equities  and  possibly  real  estate.  This  has  well-known 
effects on interest rates across the curve, on the cost of capital, on wealth – via higher equity 
and real estate prices – and therefore on balance sheets more generally. 
There are certainly question marks as how strong these effects are in the euro area. We do 
not have precedents and therefore empirical data for an economy such as ours, which has a 
different financial structure from the US or Japan. But there is no question as to the sign of 
the effects – it is clearly positive. 
Indeed, given our relatively greater reliance on banks as a source of finance, these balance 
sheet  effects  could  work  particularly  through  the  bank  lending  channel.  On  the  bank  side, 
rising asset prices would free up capital resources for additional lending. While on the side of 
firms and households, an improvement in net worth, combined with a general improvement in 
economic prospects and hence future earnings, can expand their capacity to borrow. 
Substitution of assets can also take place across jurisdictions, which would take the form of 
investors  rebalancing  portfolios  away 
towards  other 
jurisdictions and currencies providing higher yields. 
from  euro-denominated  assets 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  For  example,  there  is  evidence  that  both  the  various  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchase 
programmes of the Fed as well as the Bank of Japan’s Quantitative and Qualitative Easing 
programme  led  to  a  significant  depreciation  of  their  respective  exchange  rates,  even  in  a 
situation in which long-term yields were already very low, as in Japan. 
Finally, through these portfolio balance effects the central bank can also expect to have a 
strong  signalling  effect.  They  signal  that  we  will  use  all  means  available  to  us,  within  our 
mandate, to return inflation towards our objective – and without any undue delay. This in turn 
helps anchor inflation expectations and thereby lower real interest rates, boosting activity and 
inflation. This is also a channel that was operative in the US and Japan. 
Both economic theory and international experience suggest that the magnitude of portfolio 
balance effects is a function of the size of the central bank’s balance sheet. As this effect 
stems  from  the  displacement  of  portfolios,  it  is  logical  that  the  greater  the  purchases,  the 
greater the displacement across asset classes. 
This is why the Governing Council has communicated its expectation that the combination of 
all  the  decided  measures  will  expand  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  towards  the  levels 
prevailing in early 2012. And in this context, the addition of purchases of covered bonds to 
our  ABS  purchases  will  allow  us  to  conduct  interventions  on  a  scale  that  will  achieve  the 
intended effects in terms of portfolio rebalancing and signalling. 
Let me underline however that contingent on outcomes, we are committed to recalibrate the 
size, pace and composition of our purchases as necessary to deliver our mandate. This is 
why the Governing Council has tasked ECB staff and the relevant Eurosystem committees 
with ensuring the timely preparation of further measures to be implemented, if needed. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
For  all  the  reasons  I  have  mentioned,  it  is  essential  to  bring  back  inflation  to  target  and 
without delay. Monetary policy can and will do its part to achieve this. But it is also clear that, 
as monetary policy works on the demand side of the economy, other policies can assist in 
this process – or at least not counteract it. 
This means that the aggregate fiscal stance of the euro area has to be consistent with our 
position in the cycle. And it means that this fiscal stance must be achieved in a confidence-
enhancing way – that is, consistent with the fiscal governance framework – otherwise lack of 
confidence  will  undermine  investment  and  offset  the  positive  effects  of  fiscal  policy  on 
demand. 
And as investment does not only create current demand, but also future supply – by raising 
growth potential – appropriate structural policies are also a key part  of the policy  mix.  We 
need to create a business environment where new investment is attractive. And this in turn 
would also help monetary policy to reap its full effects. 
In short, there is a combination of policies that will work to bring growth and inflation back on 
a sound path, and we all have to meet our responsibilities in achieving that. For our part, we 
will  continue  to  meet  our  responsibility  –  we  will  do  what  we  must  to  raise  inflation  and 
inflation expectations as fast as possible, as our price stability mandate requires of us. 
If on its current trajectory our policy is not effective enough to achieve this, or further risks to 
the inflation outlook materialise, we would step up the pressure and broaden even more the 
channels through which we intervene, by altering accordingly the size, pace and composition 
of our purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
