  Patrick Honohan: The role of the Central Bank in the area of mortgage 
interest rates 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Oireachtas  (National  Parliament)  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and 
Reform, Dublin, 26 November 2014.  
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Central Bank of Ireland’s website. 
There have been quite a few significant developments since I spoke last at this Committee – 
too many to fully summarise in a short introductory statement. So I will be selective. 
The  reduction  of  two  further  steps  in  the  ECB’s  main  policy  interest  rate  has  had  a 
complicated influence on financing conditions in Ireland. 
On balance the positives for Ireland clearly outweigh the negatives, not least to the extent 
that the ECB’s expansionary policy will help boost economic demand in the euro area as a 
whole in the course of bringing inflation back to its target. 
Irish  borrowers  on  tracker  mortgages  have  seen  this  further  interest  rate  reduction  fully 
passed  on  to  them,  continuing  and  reinforcing  an  exceptionally  lengthy  period  of  ultra-low 
interest rates that has helped those borrowers. 
Because  of  the  impact on  trackers, though, the  lower  ECB  interest  rates  have  not  directly 
improved the banks’ profitability, because the average and marginal cost of bank funds does 
not  fall  as  much.  The  banks’  drive  to  restore  their  profitability,  combined  with  the  lack  of 
sufficient  new  competition,  has  meant  that,  far  from  lowering  their  standard  variable  rates 
over  the  past three  years  as  ECB  rates  have fallen,  they  have  (as  is  well  known)  actually 
increased the standard variable rates somewhat. The trends are shown in the attached figure 
which is based on a simple bank-by-bank average of the advertised standard variable rates 
for an 80 per cent loan-to-value mortgage. (Since this trend is not evident from the traditional 
interest  rate  series  published  by  the  Central  Bank  in  line  with  international  standards,  we 
have  been  working  on  the  assembly  on  a  rigorous  basis  of  additional  statistical  series  on 
mortgage interest rates, and expect to publish these as from data for January 2015.) These 
rates  indicate  that  standard  variable  rate  borrowers  are  still  paying  less  than  they  were 
before the crisis, but not by much. A widening of mortgage interest rate spreads over policy 
rates also occurred in the UK and in many euro area countries after the crisis, but spreads 
have  begun  to  narrow  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere.  Until  very  recently  bank  competition  has 
been too weak in Ireland to result in any substantial inroads on rates. 
What  is  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  in  the  area  of  mortgage  interest  rates?  From  the 
prudential point of view, we could have a role in seeking to ensure that banks set rates on 
new business sufficiently high to cover the risks of future default. While the current spreads 
would not have been sufficient to compensate the banks for the risks they actually took in the 
boom, much of which still embedded in the existing stock of mortgages, I think it would be 
hard to argue that mortgage underwriting today was so bad as to require such a high margin 
on  new  business.  Inevitably,  though,  constrained  by  their  inability  to  restore  spreads  on 
trackers, the banks have sought all means to restore their profitability including the widening 
of standard variable rate spreads, which typically apply to old as well as new business. 
As  in  most  advanced  economies,  in  Ireland  it  has  long  been  understood  that  tight 
administrative  control  over  the  rates  charged  by  banks  would  be  counterproductive  in 
ensuring  a  sufficient  flow  of  properly  priced  credit  on  a  lasting  basis.  For  one  thing,  such 
control  would  strongly  discourage  new  entrants. Therefore,  while  interest  rate  spreads  are 
now  high,  since  national  credit  policy  is  crafted  with  the  welfare  of  the  people  as  a  whole 
being the “constant and predominant aim”, I see no sufficient basis for altering this view. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  There  has  been  much  discussion  of  the  Central  Bank’s  consultation  paper  on  macro-
prudential instruments, the limits being proposed on high loan-to-value  and loan-to-income 
mortgages.  The  consultation  period  ends  on  December  8  and  we  hope  to  be  able  to 
announce a finalised set of regulations soon after that date, depending on the complexity of 
the  responses  received.  It  may  be  asked  whether  the  Central  Bank  thinks  that  recent 
property market developments represent a bubble. That is not specifically the driver of these 
proposals.  Instead,  what  we  want  to  achieve  by  these  measures  is  to  have  in  place  a 
standing regime which ensures that a credit-driven bubble does not take hold, and that a new 
generation  does  not  become  over  indebted.  Absent  such  a  regime,  sharp  price  rises  in 
Dublin – and they jumped by 42 per cent in just 18 months – in a thin market, not yet eliciting 
a  sufficient  supply  response,  could  sow  the  seeds  of  trouble  for  the  future.  Our  approach 
seeks to draw on ongoing research being carried out at the Central Bank, on international 
experience,  and  of  course  on  matters  which  may  emerge  in  the  consultation. We  want  to 
shorten the period of uncertainty as much as possible. 
Accordingly, after making any appropriate refinements (for example, in relation to first time 
buyers,  and  to  the  potential  future  use  of  private  mortgage  insurance  as  floated  in  the 
consultation paper), we will move quickly to confirm the parameters of the standing regime. 
Almost all of the discussions that I have participated in at this Committee over the past few 
years  have  naturally  focused  on  the  banks,  but  of  course  this  is  only  one  element  of  the 
Central Bank’s mandate and it is worth reminding that almost 9 out of 10 staff of the Central 
Bank are actually engaged in numerous tasks other than the prudential supervision of banks. 
(There are, of course, other aspects of banking oversight that staff deals with, such as the 
consumer protection and conduct of business aspects of bank regulation). Indeed, the micro-
prudential banking supervisory decision making now largely passes under the control of the 
EU Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which came into operation on November 4. 
The SSM does not, however, mean less work for us, but rather more work, inasmuch as the 
procedures of the SSM require a further expansion of our bank supervisory staff as well as a 
reorganisation of their function. 
Indeed, after three years during which staffing levels have not risen, the Central Bank now 
needs  to  increase staff numbers  again,  not just  because  of  SSM,  but  also  because  of  the 
additional  complexity  of  new  international  regulations  covering  non-bank  financial  services 
(which form the heart of the IFSC), new rules on bank resolution and other new mandates. 
(Much of the costs here are recovered from the industry; indeed all regulatory costs could be 
so recovered, instead of having the effect of eating into the Central Bank’s surplus income to 
be  transferred  to  the  Exchequer;  and  the  Central  Bank  has  suggested  this  to  successive 
Governments.) 
Having  already  absorbed  a  sizable  increase  in  staffing  during  2010–11,  we  are  currently 
engaged  in  an  extensive  review  of  our  internal  organisation  to  ensure  the  conditions  for 
steady  improvements  in  the  effectiveness  of  our  work,  which  relates  to  essential  matters 
which, especially  when they  work well, are not obviously  visible to the general public. The 
review is examining a range of issues including internal structures, career paths and internal 
processes.  I  expect  significant  beneficial  changes  to  both  organisational  structures  and 
practices within the Central Bank as a result of the review. 
Our  effectiveness  will  be  enhanced  by  our  carefully  designed  and  efficient  headquarters 
building at North Wall Quay, the main building contract for which is now out to tender. This 
will  result  in  bringing  together  all  our  (non-currency)  staff  into  a  single  location;  there  are 
strong financial and practical benefits to this move. 
Finally,  I  will  not  here  add  anything  to  the  lengthy  letter  which  I  sent  to  the  Committee  in 
September  providing  commentary  and  responses  to  the  Committee’s  recent  report  on  the 
mortgage  arrears  situation,  a  situation  which  has  continued  to  evolve  in  line  with  the 
indications in that letter. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Committee’s  invitation  indicated  a  wide  range  of  potential  topics  for  discussion  today. 
And there is indeed a wide range of issues which come under the remit of the Central Bank. 
I am happy to take any questions you might have.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
