  Per Jansson: Swedish monetary policy after the financial crisis – myths 
and facts 
Speech  by  Mr  Per  Jansson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  SvD  Bank 
Summit 2014, Stockholm, 3 December 2014. 
 “The  Riksbank  has  in  recent  years  conducted  a  monetary  policy  experiment  where  it  has 
aggressively, using a high repo rate, attempted to prevent household debt from rising. The 
results  have  been  more  or  less  devastating  for  the  Swedish  economy.  Eventually,  the 
Riksbank has realised that its policy was wrong and has made a 180 degree turn.” 
This  is  roughly  how  some  critics  have  described  the  monetary  policy  conducted  in  recent 
years.  This  description  has  received  quite  a  bit  of  attention  and  been  widely  spread,  and 
many who follow the monetary policy debate have probably gained the impression that this is 
actually what has happened. I argue that this description is wrong and I now intend to explain 
why. 
I shall divide the criticism into three different parts, or claims, and discuss them one by one. I 
will present these claims in the form of quotations, but this does not necessarily mean they 
are exact quotations. However, they capture the spirit of the criticism and I believe that those 
who have followed the monetary policy debate will recognise them. 
It is important to meet the criticism, for several reasons 
One question one might begin with, is why it is so important to respond to these claims. It is a 
natural part of the economic debate that the Riksbank is being criticised, isn’t it? Wouldn’t it 
then be better to ignore the criticism and look ahead instead? No, I don’t think so. 
One important reason is that in the wake of the financial crisis there has been a discussion 
on  the  activities  and  tasks  of  central  banks,  what  central  banks  should  do  and  how  they 
should do it. It is, of course, important that our debate on this here in Sweden is anchored in 
reality  and  based  on  how  monetary  policy  has  actually  been  conducted  and  what  it  has 
actually achieved. 
But meeting the criticism is important not just for the discussion here in Sweden. The debate 
on Swedish monetary policy also has an international interest and has been followed abroad, 
not  least  by  other  central  banks.1  The  reason  is  that  a  central  issue  in  the  international 
discussion  has  been  to  what  extent  central  banks’  policy  rates  should  be  used  as  a 
complement to macroprudential policy, to counteract the build-up of financial imbalances, for 
instance, by trying to prevent lending and housing prices from rising too quickly.2 This is what 
is often called a policy of “leaning against the wind”, and I will hereafter use this expression 
for the sake of simplicity. Monetary policy in Sweden has in this context been regarded as 
particularly interesting, as the Riksbank is one of few central banks that, at least this far, has 
been  explicit  about  taking  such  considerations  into  account  in  its  policy-rate  decisions.  It 
would of course be unfortunate for the continued international discussion if the conclusion of 
the  Swedish  experiences  were  that  when  the  policy  of  leaning  against  the  wind  was 
attempted in practice, it led to a very poor, or even catastrophic, result. Because this is not 
the case. 
                                                 
1   See, for example, Visco (2014) and Yellen (2014). 
2   See, for example, Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2013), Borio (2014), Carney (2013), Smets (2013), Stein 
(2013) and Woodford (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Before I continue, I would like to make it clear that my purpose here today is not to justify 
every  single  decision  the  Riksbank  has  made.  It  is  natural  that  different  observers  make 
different  assessments  regarding  economic  developments  and  thus  reach  slightly  different 
conclusions regarding what exact policy should be conducted. With hindsight, it is clear that 
monetary  policy  could  have  been  somewhat  more  expansionary  if  we  had  known  that 
inflation would be as low as it is now. This is a natural and unavoidable consequence of the 
fact that monetary policy has to be based on forecasts, which are uncertain. However, most 
of the recent criticism has gone far beyond discussing this type of difference in assessments. 
Instead,  it  has  claimed  that  the  policy  conducted  by  the  Riksbank  was  wrong  on  a  more 
fundamental level. This is the type of criticism I intend to focus on here. 
“The Riksbank has aggressively, using a high repo rate, tried to prevent household 
debt from rising” 
The first part of the criticism can in turn be divided into different parts. For one thing, it claims 
that  the  Riksbank  has  leaned  against  the  wind  aggressively,  and  for  another  thing  that 
household debt has been the main, if not the only, reason for this policy. I intend to comment 
on these points one by one. 
So how much has the Riksbank in practice leaned against the wind in recent years? My view 
here  is  clear.  The  monetary  policy  conducted  after  the  crisis  has  for  the  most  part  been 
governed  by  traditional  monetary  policy  motives,  that  is,  the  expected  development  of 
economic  activity  and  inflation  over  the  coming  years.  Giving  consideration  to  the  risks 
associated with the developments in household debt and housing prices has been part of our 
assessment, but a relatively minor part. 
The picture painted in the criticism has been quite different. Here the starting point is instead 
that the Riksbank’s concern over developments in household debt was the main motive for 
raising the repo rate after the financial crisis. Much of the criticism even seems to assume 
that  household  debt  was  the  only  motive  for  raising  the  repo  rate.  In  a  so-called 
counterfactual  analysis  that  has  played  a  central  role  in  the  criticism,  the  actual  policy 
conducted is compared with the alternative of not raising the repo rate at all, but leaving it 
unchanged at 0.25 per cent since the crisis.3 The latter is assumed to represent a policy that 
does not lean against the wind. 
The Riksbank and other economic analysts made similar forecasts 
So  what  support  do  I  have  for  my  view  that  concern  over  household  debt  has  only  had  a 
limited influence on the repo-rate decisions? To begin with, one can look at the Riksbank’s 
motives as stated in the press releases following the monetary policy meetings. If one does 
this, it is pretty clear that the focus has been on economic activity and inflation in the coming 
years. Certainly, it is often mentioned at the same time that the policy conducted is expected 
to contribute to less risk of imbalances building up with regard to indebtedness and housing 
prices, but more as a side-effect and not as a main reason. The overall impression is that the 
policy would have been marginally different if this risk had not been addressed – not that it 
would have been completely different. 
One can also look at the discussions that were conducted within the Riksbank. It is a well-
known  fact  that  there  were  differing  opinions  within  the  Riksbank,  but  how  different  were 
they? The situation in July 2011 is an example. The repo rate had then been raised to 2 per 
cent, the highest level it reached before it was reduced again. The minutes of the monetary 
policy meeting show the Executive Board members’ view of the appropriate monetary policy 
in  the  years  ahead.  In  Figure  1,  the  dotted  blue  line  shows  the  future  repo-rate  path 
                                                 
3   See, for example, Svensson (2014). This counterfactual analysis has been presented in a number of essays, 
articles and blog entries.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  advocated by a majority of Executive Board members, while the dotted yellow line shows the 
path  advocated  by  the  two  members  who  argued  that  monetary  policy  should  be  more 
expansionary.  One  of  these,  Lars  Svensson,  is  the  Riksbank’s  most  outspoken  critic  in 
recent times and also the originator of the counterfactual analysis I mentioned earlier. 
It is clear that opinions differed. But it is also clear that the differences concerned at what 
pace the repo rate should be raised and not that any member advocated that the repo rate 
should never have been raised after the crisis, but remained at 0.25 per cent. Of course, it 
would  have  been  difficult  at  that  time  to  advocate  a  large  cut  immediately  or  in  the  near 
future.  But  if  one  really  thought  that  the  repo  rate  should  have  been  0.25  per  cent,  it  is 
difficult to understand why one would advocate a repo-rate path that did not turn down at all 
over  the  coming  three  years,  but  rose  throughout  the  entire  forecast  period  and  reached 
3.8 per cent in the middle of 2014.4 
So what was the view outside of the Riksbank? At around the same time, in June 2011, the 
National Institute of Economic Research forecast that the repo rate would be 3 per cent at 
the end of 2012 and that at the end of 2014 – that is, around now – it would be just over 
4 per cent.5 The NIER’s forecasts are often something of a benchmark for other analysts and 
on  this  occasion,  too,  they  were  a  good  reflection  of  how  most  analysts  perceived  the 
situation. The forecast for the repo rate was also fairly well in line with the Riksbank’s view 
(see Figure 2). This policy was considered compatible with a balanced resource utilisation in 
2014 and a CPIF inflation rate close to 2 per cent in 2013–2015. It is thus obvious that this is 
a picture of a policy that was essentially governed by traditional monetary policy motives and 
where concern over household debt certainly did not play a major role. 
How did international analysts view the Swedish economy at this point in time? The OECD’s 
Economic  Outlook  in  May  2011  expected  the  robust  growth  to  continue,  with  increases  in 
real  GDP  of  on  average  3.3  per  cent  in  2010–2015.  It  was  expected  that  the  policy  rate 
would need to be raised gradually as economic activity improved.6 A similar assessment was 
made by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in July 2011. GDP growth was assumed to 
gradually decline to 3 per cent in 2014, when inflation was expected to amount to 2 per cent 
(measured in terms of the HICP). It was assumed that the interest-rate increases that had 
begun would need to continue.7 
One  conclusion  I  draw  from  this  is  that  many  unexpected  events  have  occurred  in  recent 
years. The situation today is rather different than all analysts – both on the Executive Board 
of the Riksbank and outside the bank – were expecting at this time. I shall return to this later. 
Another  conclusion  is  that  the  general  picture  was  that  the  Riksbank’s  policy  was  on  the 
whole  well-motivated  and  essentially  based  on  traditional  monetary  policy  deliberations. 
Although there were different opinions on exactly how high the repo rate should be, as there 
always are, the policy was thus not perceived as odd or conspicuous. Neither the Riksbank 
nor  any  other  analyst  perceived  the  monetary  policy  conducted  to  be  leaning  against  the 
wind  to  any  large  extent,  and  the  general  impression  was  definitely  not  that  the  repo  rate 
should  have  been  left  at  the  level  to  which  it  was  cut  during  the  financial  crisis,  that  is, 
0.25 per cent. 
                                                 
4 
In the minutes, Lars Svensson presents estimates where the dotted yellow repo-rate path is assumed to give 
an inflation rate of 2 per cent from the beginning of 2013 and onwards and an unemployment rate that would 
reach what he assumed to be an equilibrium level of 5.5 per cent at the beginning of 2014. It may also be 
worth noting that at the ensuing meeting, in September 2011, all of the Executive Board members thought that 
2 per cent was a suitable level for the repo rate, given the economic situation in Sweden. 
5   National Institute of Economic Research (2011). 
6   OECD (2011), pp. 191–192. 
7  
IMF (2011), p. 25 and Table 9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  A strange assumption 
Given this, it is very strange to claim that an evaluation of the Riksbank’s policy should rely 
on the assumption that the alternative of not leaning against the wind would be to hold the 
repo  rate  at  0.25  until  today.  If  no  one  perceived  it  as  such  at  the  time,  it  appears  very 
strange  to  paint  this  picture  retrospectively.  Basing  an  analysis  on  such  an  assumption  is 
therefore not a reasonable way of evaluating the advantages and disadvantages of leaning 
against the wind. One needs to assume not just that the Riksbank has lied about its motives, 
but also that well-known and prominent external economic analysts have said one thing but 
really meant another. 
Nevertheless, this is the starting point for the counterfactual analysis many appear to rely on 
when drawing conclusions about the Riksbank’s monetary policy.8 In Sweden, this analysis 
has been given considerable scope, for instance on Dagens Nyheter newspaper’s editorial 
pages, where the Riksbank’s policy has been described as more or less incomprehensible 
and contrary to the prevailing opinion at that time – an ”interest-rate increasing experiment in 
summer 2010”.9 
One might think it is strange that the claim that the Riksbank’s repo-rate increases were only 
about  leaning  against  the  wind,  and  moreover  that  the  increases  were  made  contrary  to 
prevailing  opinion,  has  become  so  widely  spread.  After  all,  one  does  not  need  to  make  a 
more  in-depth  check  of  the  facts  than  I  have  provided  here  to  see  that  neither  claim  is 
correct.  It  doesn’t  require  very  much  digging  to  be  able  to  conclude  that  not  only  the 
Riksbank  but  also  external  domestic  and  international  economic  analysts  found  it  natural, 
even after the repo rate had been raised to 2 per cent, that the increases would continue – 
and  this  without  any  particular  reference  to  household  debt.  According  to,  for  instance, 
Dagens  Nyheter  newspaper’s  editorial  pages,  the  policy  was  instead  “an  interest-rate 
increasing experiment”, based on the Riksbank governors spreading “misleading pictures of 
the future”.10 The only explanation I can think of for this claim nevertheless being repeated 
and referred to so often and so uncritically, is that people simply assume that it must be true 
because it has been expressed with such emphasis and intensity. 
A hazardous policy 
But  claiming  that  it  has  all  been  about  leaning  against  the  wind  is  not  only  a  misleading 
description of the policy conducted and the motives behind it. There is also good reason to 
wonder  whether  a  policy  whereby  the  repo  rate  had  remained  unchanged  since  the  crisis 
might not have been rather risky, regardless of what one claims it would have represented. 
According  to  the  counterfactual  analysis,  there  were  only  gains  and  no  problems:  inflation 
would have been close to the target and employment would have been higher if the repo rate 
had not been raised. But I also believe that there would have been a major risk of other, less 
pleasant things happening that is disregarded in the analysis, consciously or unconsciously. 
                                                 
8   See, for instance, Visco (2014): “An actual example of the debate on the macro-prudential use of the policy 
rate relates to the tightening of monetary policy by the Sveriges Riksbank that began in July 2010 and peaked 
in July 2011. Deemed a leaning-against-the-wind move out of concern for financial stability, and specifically 
the risk that maintaining a lower repo rate could have increased the already high ratio of household debt to 
disposable  income,  this  policy  stance  has  been  questioned  on  the  basis  of  a  counterfactual  analysis 
emphasising the macroeconomic costs in terms of below-target inflation and higher unemployment.” Another 
example is the Financial Times (2014): “Sweden’s central bank has been lambasted by critics for trying to use 
interest rates to combat signs of a housing bubble. It lifted rates in 2010 and 2011 as it publicly worried about 
what  it  saw  as  high  household  debt  levels.”  A  further  example  here  is  Münchau  (2014),  who  says  that  the 
Riksbank “raised interest rates to rein in a domestic housing bubble.”  
9   Wolodarski (2014). 
10   Wolodarski (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Something that has received considerable attention since the crisis is that a lot of things can 
happen with regard to expectations and risk-taking in an economy where interest rates are 
very  low  for  a  long  period  of  time.  Expectations  regarding,  for  instance,  how  high  interest 
rates will be in the future and how the housing market will develop in the years to come can 
become  distorted,  and  risk-taking  in  the  economy  in  general  could  increase  in  a  way  that 
may  create  problems.11  This  is  something  that  cannot  be  captured  in  a  good  way  in  the 
economic models available today.12 But this should not be an excuse to completely disregard 
such aspects. 
In the alternative path that is assumed to represent a policy that does not lean against the 
wind, the repo rate would have been close to zero since July 2009, that is, for more than five 
years. This in an economy that began to recover from the crisis very quickly and where the 
temperature  on  the  housing  market  cooled  only  temporarily.  We  can  see  today,  when  the 
repo rate has once again been cut to very low levels, that housing prices have begun anew 
to soar (see Figure 3).13 Lending to households increased by almost 10 per cent a year when 
the repo rate increases began in July 2010 (see Figure 4). And lending has begun to rise 
once again as the repo rate has been cut. 
Another important element here is that there was no framework for macroprudential policy for 
most  of  the  time  when  the  repo  rate,  according  to  this  alternative,  should  have  been  at 
0.25 per  cent.  It  was  not  until  August  2013  that  the  allocation  of  responsibility  for 
macroprudential policy was clarified and the Swedish government had set formal guidelines 
for this.14 As yet, it remains to be seen how well this framework will actually work in practice. 
Given  this,  advocating  a  repo  rate  of  0.25  per  cent  for  more  than  five  years  and  entirely 
disregarding the risks of distorted expectations and problems with developments in housing 
prices  is  quite  remarkable.  Had  this  policy  been  implemented,  I  believe  that  the  situation 
today would have been much more worrying than it is – and as we know, the situation today 
is hardly without problems. 
Two relevant questions 
Before I continue I would like to take up two questions it is natural to ask in this context. As I 
have  noted,  the  repo-rate  decisions  have  mainly  been  governed  by  traditional  monetary 
policy motives, and consideration to risks associated with the development of household debt 
and housing prices has played a fairly subordinate role. But what exactly do I mean by “a 
fairly subordinate role”? That is the first question. 
                                                 
11   Summers (2014) writes, for instance: “[A] strategy that relies on interest rates significantly below growth rates 
for long periods of time virtually guarantees the emergence of substantial bubbles and dangerous build-ups in 
leverage.”  For  a  review  of  the  links  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  imbalances,  as  well  as  further 
references to the literature, see Adrian and Lang (2014).  
12   This  is  discussed,  for  instance,  in  Blanchard  (2014).  One  problem  with  counterfactual  estimates  where 
economic policy changes a lot is that they are sensitive to what is known as the Lucas critique. This states that 
it is very difficult to quantify the effects of a completely different policy (for instance, a much lower interest rate 
over a long period of time) in a reliable manner. The reason for this is precisely that the expectations of the 
economic agents change. 
13   Remarkably,  an  excessively  low  repo  rate  was  something  that  Dagens  Nyheter’s  editorial  pages  warned 
against  in  December  2009,  when  Lars  Svensson  entered  a  reservation  against  holding  the  repo  rate  at 
0.25 per cent and advocated cutting it to zero and they commented on his “input to the Executive Board of the 
Riksbank  being  reminiscent  of  a  captain  slavishly  following  his  nautical  chart,  even  when  the  ship  hits  an 
iceberg. It was one thing to cut the repo rate in an acute situation during the crisis to ward off a depression. 
But now that the economy has begun to recover, a zero interest rate would only add fuel to the housing price 
fire.” (See Wolodarski, 2009).  
14   Of  course,  some  measures  were  taken  earlier,  but  the  introduction  of  the  framework  must  nevertheless  be 
regarded as an important condition for being able to conduct macroprudential policy systematically. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Unfortunately, I believe one must accept that this cannot be quantified in a very precise way. 
I can only note for my own part that if I had not found the developments in household debt 
and  on  the  housing  market  problematic,  I  would  have  advocated  a  somewhat  more 
expansionary policy – but definitely not that the repo rate should remain at 0.25 ever since 
the  crisis.  But  it  is  difficult  to  be  more  precise  than  this.  For  example,  it  is  not  possible  to 
argue  at  a  given  monetary  policy  meeting  that  “of  the  25  basis  points  I  feel  the  repo  rate 
should  be  raised,  5  points  are  aimed  at  dampening  risks  linked  to  household  debt  and 
housing prices. The remaining 20 basis points are aimed at stabilising inflation and economic 
activity in the short run”. Monetary policy decision-making just does not work like this. 
Moreover, the Executive Board consists of six individuals. Each of them has very likely had 
his or her own view of what role the risks linked to debt and housing prices have played in 
their  decisions.  It  is  therefore  not  possible  to  respond  to  the  question  of  how  much  the 
Riksbank  has  leaned  against  the  wind  with  a  quantified  measure.  But  what  I  am  quite 
convinced of is that none of those deciding on the repo rate has had as their main reason, 
much less their only reason, that monetary policy must lean against the wind. 
The second question is whether the policy of leaning against the wind has had any tangible 
effect,  given  that  consideration  to  risks  linked  to  the  development  of  household  debt  and 
housing  prices,  as  I  said,  has  played  a  fairly  subordinate  role  in  policy-making.  I  am 
convinced  that  the  policy  has  played  an  important  role,  despite  the  element  of  leaning 
against  the  wind  being  much  more  modest  than  the  critics  claim.  The  Riksbank’s  strategy 
has been to combine a marginally higher repo rate with communication that emphasises the 
fact that we perceive the development of high growth in credit and rising house prices to be 
worrying. The slightly higher repo rate does have some effect in itself, but perhaps its main 
function is as a concrete reminder of the risks, and it has thereby been an important part of 
the  communication.  In my  opinion,  this  has  had  an  impact,  not  least  in  increasing  general 
awareness of the problems. The discussion of these questions now going on underlines that 
this has been the case. 
More extensive problem than just indebtedness 
After thus having responded to the first part of the first claim – that the Riksbank has leaned 
aggressively  against  the  wind  –  I  intend  to  move  on  to  the  second  part,  namely  that  the 
purpose of the policy of leaning against the wind has been to limit household debt. 
As  I  have  pointed  out,  the  element  of  leaning  against  the  wind  has  not  been  particularly 
large, but has been there to some extent. However, it is too easy to say that this has only 
been aimed at getting households to borrow less, or as it is sometimes portrayed, that the 
Riksbank has a target as to how high debt may become in relation to income, for example. 
Even  though  developments  in  household  debts  are  definitely  an  important  part  of  the 
problem, the picture is much more complex. A fairer description is that the Riksbank has tried 
to do its bit to slow down a trend where housing prices and indebtedness have been rising 
rapidly  and  simultaneously  for  quite  a  long  time  now  –  where  there  appears  to  be  some 
slowdown  in  periods  of  weaker  economic  activity,  but  where  the  direction  is  upwards,  no 
matter what the economic situation, and there are few signs that this trend will be dampened. 
The  longer  such  a  trend  continues,  the  greater  the  risk  that  it  will  be  broken  in  the  same 
abrupt  way  as  in  many  countries  in  connection  with  the  financial  crisis  –  that  is,  when 
housing prices and debt finally adjust downwards, it is in a dramatic manner, with substantial 
price  falls  and  drops  in  consumption,  with  large  and  long-lasting  negative  effects  on  the 
economy.15 In general, there is solid empirical support for the idea that the more households 
                                                 
15   Mian and Sufi (2014) describe this sequence of events in the US economy in connection with the crisis. In a 
really  bad  scenario,  problems  may  also  arise  with  regard  to  financial  stability,  see  for  instance  Financial 
Stability Report 2014:1, Sveriges Riksbank.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  and companies borrow during an economic upturn, the greater the risk that this upturn will be 
followed by a deep recession and a very slow recovery.16 
One  can  make  a  few  reflections  here.  One  is  that  the  macroeconomic  instability  resulting 
from  this  type  of  development  could  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  Riksbank  to  stabilise 
economic activity and inflation in a sustainable manner. It is therefore hardly remarkable that 
the Riksbank has tried to counteract it, and it is difficult to see that this is something outside 
of our mandate, as some have claimed. 
Another reflection is that, as the problems with a trend of rising household debt and housing 
prices  affects  many  parts  of  the  economy,  it  is  necessary  for  several  policy  areas  to 
cooperate to be able to achieve a lasting solution. Regardless of what measures are taken, 
neither monetary policy that leans against the wind nor macroprudential policy are sufficient 
on their own – and probably not even these two combined. Other policy areas, and especially 
housing policy, need to be included in the equation. This is something that the Riksbank has 
highlighted and discussed on other occasions and I do not intend to discuss it further here.17 
A third reflection is that when it comes to the risks of a development of this type, the critics 
have not been very clear, in my view. At the same time as they have put a lot of effort into 
criticising the Riksbank’s policy, they have often said very little about how they themselves 
view the potential risks and how they should be managed.18 A common argument has been, 
to simplify somewhat: “Firstly, the risks probably aren’t so great, and if there are risks they 
can always be managed effectively by macroprudential policy.” Here I think one ought to be 
able to demand greater clarity from the critics. 
Do they think that there is no problem with this kind of upward trend? Or will the trend slow 
down on its own before problems arise, and, if so, what mechanisms will achieve this? If it 
slows  down  but  at  a  level  where  debt  and  house  prices  are  elevated,  what  risks  will  this 
entail? Is the fact that housing prices and lending have now begun to  accelerate after the 
Riksbank  cut  the  repo  rate  nothing  to  worry  about?  If  there  are  nevertheless  risks,  how 
should they be managed? If macroprudential policy is so effective, exactly what measures 
should  be  implemented?  And  what  dosage  is  appropriate?  Are  macroprudential  policy 
measures enough, or do other policy areas also need to be involved? These questions are 
very relevant ones and I wish they had been given as much attention in the debate as the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy. 
“The results of the policy have been devastating for the Swedish economy” 
The picture that critics like to paint is of a high repo rate pushing down demand and creating 
a more or less deflationist situation in the Swedish economy. This is something that some 
international  analysts  in  particular  seem  to  have  latched  onto,  interpreting  the  situation  in 
Sweden today to be similar to that in Japan in the 1990s.19 
                                                 
16   See, for instance, Schularick and Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2013). 
17   See, for example, Jansson (2014). 
18   In  some  cases,  the  critics  have  also  had  diametrically  opposed  views.  Paul  Krugman  appears  to  think  that 
Sweden has probably already had a housing bubble for some time, and that as it is too late to do anything 
about it, the Riksbank should not conduct a policy that leans against the wind (see Andrén Meiton, 2014). Lars 
Svensson, on the other hand, appears to think that there is no great risk of a housing bubble building up (see 
Svenska  Dagbladet  newspaper,  2014a)  and  that  a  policy  that  leans  against  the  wind  for  this  reason  is  not 
needed, but is harmful. 
19   See, for instance, Krugman (2014a, 2014b) who as well as likening Sweden to Japan, has also characterised 
monetary policy in Sweden as an example of ”sadomonetarism”. Among Swedish critics it is less common to 
make comparisons with Japan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  It  should  already  be  clear  from  what  I  have  discussed  so  far  that  this  is  a  misleading 
description. As monetary policy has not leaned against the wind to any great extent, this can 
hardly have had any particularly devastating effect on the economy. With what is by now a 
rather worn but at the same time very telling likeness, the Riksbank has not during this period 
hit the repo-rate brake, but rather eased up on the accelerator somewhat. 
No deflationist development driven by a weak real economy 
This  picture  is  confirmed  if  one  examines  how,  for  instance,  GDP  and  employment  have 
developed since the crisis. Figure 5 summarises the percentage change in GDP per capita 
and  the  employment  rate  in  relation  to  the  pre-crisis  figures  in  the  countries  Sweden  is 
normally compared with. 
As can be seen, Sweden is not right at the top, but nor is it very far from it. There are only a 
few countries, according to these statistics only New Zealand and Germany, that have had a 
better development in both GDP and employment, that is, that are above and to the right of 
Sweden in the figure. 
Some claim that the development of unemployment has been less favourable. But here we 
must  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  labour  force  in  Sweden  has  increased  relatively 
substantially  during  the  period.  This  is  essentially  positive,  but  in  the  short  run  it  will  also 
contribute, purely mathematically, to keeping up the unemployment figures. The differences 
in  this  respect  in  relation  to  the  United  States,  for  instance,  are  fairly  striking.  The 
United States has had a more favourable development in unemployment, but quite a lot of 
this  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  labour  force  participation  in  the  States  has  actually 
declined (see Figure 6). 
Of  course,  the  relatively  good  development  is  not  solely  due  to  the  monetary  policy 
conducted by the Riksbank. Economic policy in general plays a large role, as does the fact 
that  Sweden  was  not  hit  so  hard  by  the  crisis,  for  reasons  not  necessarily  related  to  the 
policy conducted. It is also possible to have different views regarding exactly how good one 
thinks developments have been. But at a very minimum, it should be clear that it is difficult to 
find support in actual figures for an overly tight, “aggressive” monetary policy having sent the 
economy into a state of deflation, driven by poor development in the real economy. 
If one looks ahead, then? Could it not be the case that the Swedish economy has managed 
fairly  well  so  far,  but  that  things  will  go  badly  in  the  future,  as  a  result  of  the  policy 
conducted? Of course, one cannot make any guarantees with regard to the future, but one 
can  in  any  case  note  that  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and the Riksbank are all currently forecasting growth of around 2 per cent this year 
and around 3 per cent in 2015–2016. This is hardly the picture of an economy in a state of 
recession or crisis. 
Low inflation difficult to predict – for the Riksbank and others 
But  what  about  inflation?  It  has  become  very  low  and  prices  have  even  fallen  at  times,  at 
least when measured in terms of the CPI. Is this not a sign that the policy has failed and that 
the repo rate should never have been raised? 
It is important to understand two things here. Firstly, it should be clear from what I have just 
described  that  the  low  inflation  is  not  a  result of  an  economy  that  has  been  brought  to  its 
knees. The picture of high interest rates causing a more or less recession-like state that has 
in turn resulted in low inflation, and sometimes deflation, is thus incorrect. 
Secondly,  as  I  have  also  mentioned,  a  lot  has  happened  in  recent  years  that  has  had  an 
effect on inflation. Remember the National Institute of Economic Research’s forecast in the 
middle of 2011, which I mentioned earlier. In this, the repo rate was expected to continue to 
rise, from the 2 per cent level it was at then, to around 4 per cent in 2014. This policy was 
considered compatible with an inflation rate of around 2 per cent in 2013–2015. The reason I 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  am  returning  to  this  forecast  is  that  I  don’t  think  anyone  would  question  that  the  National 
Institute of Economic Research is a serious and competent forecaster – and it can scarcely 
be accused of deliberately spreading “misleading pictures of the future”. And as I said, the 
National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  forecasts  were  not  in  any  way  unique,  but 
reflected well how forecasters in general viewed the situation. 
Anyone  who  claims  to  have  predicted  the  current  low  inflation  back  when  the  repo  rate 
increases began in 2010 must thus have had much greater insight than all of the Swedish 
and international analysts. I would rather argue that this instead is a good illustration of the 
fact that things have happened in the economy, which could not be predicted and which have 
pushed down inflation in an unexpected manner. 
Unexpected international economic slowdown in 2011 and even lower inflation in 
2013–2014 
I  would  like  to  give  examples  of  two  occasions  in  recent  years  when  developments  have 
turned  out  rather  differently  than  expected.  The  first  is  the  slowdown  in  international 
economic  activity  that  became  apparent  during  the  second  half  of  2011.  Global  growth 
prospects  deteriorated  in  connection  with  increased  unease  over  the  sovereign  debt 
problems  in  the  United  States  and  euro  area.  Uncertainty  over  the  future  led  to  increased 
pessimism  among  households  and  companies  and  also  affected  the  financial  markets. 
Towards the end of the year, there were clear signs that growth in the Swedish economy had 
also slowed down, partly due to reduced demand for Swedish exports. Figure 7 shows how 
the  Riksbank  and  other  analysts  revised  down  their  forecasts  for  the  increase  in  Swedish 
exports in 2012 during the second half of 2011. 
The second occasion is when inflation began to fall from already low levels during the latter 
part  of  2013  and  the  beginning  of  2014.  This  happened  in  connection  with  a  sequence  of 
negative  inflation  surprises  indicating  that  the  underlying  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy had fallen. For example, inflation had appeared unusually low for a time in relation 
to the increase in unit labour costs (see Figure 8). Even after that, inflation has been lower 
than expected, most recently in September this year. Figure 9 shows how the forecasts for 
CPIF inflation in 2014 have been revised down from just over 1 per cent to around 0.5 per 
cent. 
It is clear in both of these examples that it is the general picture that has changed, not that 
the Riksbank suddenly realised something that everyone else had known for a long time. The 
fact that inflation has been surprisingly low is by the way not a specific Swedish problem, but 
very much an international phenomenon. 
“Eventually, the Riksbank has realised that its policy was wrong and has made a 
180-degree turn.” 
The last part of the criticism is that the Riksbank rather late in the day realised that it had 
been wrong all the time and therefore made a 180-degree turn. I have indirectly answered 
this in part as well. 
Let  me,  to  be  able  to  make  the  points  I  wish  to  make,  describe  how  I  view  the  way  the 
Riksbank has been conducting monetary policy. In the same way as the conventional flexible 
inflation-targeting framework in some situations needs to find a balance between stabilising 
inflation and stabilising economic activity, one may sometimes also need to take various risks 
into account in the deliberation. The risk that the Riksbank has included to some extent has 
thus been that a rapid and persistent rise in housing prices and debt could cause setbacks 
later  on  and  potentially  lead  to  major  problems  for  the  development  of  the  economy  in 
general and for monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  Leaning against the wind is a question of degrees – not either or 
But it is important to realise that it is a question of achieving a balance. Allowing risks of this 
nature to influence policy-rate decisions does not mean neglecting the traditional monetary 
policy  objectives.  For  one  thing,  the  purpose  of  trying  to  manage  the  risks  is  to  stabilise 
inflation and economic activity in a sustainable manner, by avoiding, or at least alleviating, 
dramatic  downward  adjustments  in  housing  prices  and  indebtedness.  But  inflation  and 
economic activity in the shorter run – during the normal forecast period – also play a major 
role in the decisions. 
A monetary policy that leans against the wind is thus, like most economic policies, a question 
of degrees. It is not the case – as one might sometimes believe from the debate – that one 
either refrains entirely from leaning against the wind or leans against the wind one hundred 
per cent and disregards everything else. It is thus no 0–1 variable. As I have explained, the 
Riksbank’s policy in recent years has been at the same time to support the recovery and get 
inflation to rise towards the target, and to some extent to address the risks that may be a 
threat to sustainability. 
When  things  happen  in  the  economy,  this  balance  is  of  course  affected.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  inflation  has  for some  time  been  lower than  the  Riksbank  and  other  analysts  have 
expected,  and  it  has  now  undershot  the  target  for  a  fairly  long  time.  Moreover,  long-term 
inflation  expectations  have  fallen.  Although  these  are  only  a  few  tenths  of  a  percentage 
below the target of 2 per cent, the trend has been downward for some time (see Figure 10). 
As  the  basis  of  an  inflation-targeting  policy  is  that  long-run  inflation  expectations  are 
anchored around the target, this development has made it even more important to prioritise 
bringing up inflation. In other words, the cost of taking risks into account by holding the repo 
rate a little higher has increased. 
It is in light of this that the Riksbank’s gradual cuts in the repo rate down to zero should be 
regarded. It is thus a question of adapting monetary policy to changed circumstances and not 
of  a  180-degree  turn  as  a  result  of  a  sudden  insight  that  the  policy  conducted  has  been 
wrong from the start. 
Criticism also from other quarters 
However, cutting the repo rate to zero has not only been criticised for being a “last-minute 
conversion”. It has also been criticised from other quarters. There are those who say that the 
Riksbank’s  attempts  to  give  consideration  to  the  risks  linked  to  indebtedness  and  housing 
prices have been well-founded, and that a very low interest rate over a long period of time is 
risky – like “throwing petrol on a fire”.20 
Without  doubt,  the  situation  with  regard  to  the  housing  market  and  household  debt  will 
become  more  problematic  the  lower  the  repo  rate  is  and  the  longer  it  remains  low. 
Nevertheless, I think that the Riksbank has made the right decision and that there has not 
really  been  any  other  alternative.  In  the  end,  a  central  bank’s  main  task  is  to  maintain 
confidence in price stability and when there is a risk that this will fail – when the scale starts 
to tip – there is no other possibility than to give top priority to a faster return to the inflation 
target. Even if the risks linked to debt and housing prices are as large as before,  or have 
even  increased  as  a  result  of  the  repo-rate  cuts,  the  problems  linked to  low  inflation  have 
become  relatively  more  important.  However,  it  is  unavoidably  the  case  that  this  places 
greater  responsibility  on  other  public  authorities  and  policy  areas  with  regard  to  managing 
developments in household debt and housing prices. 
I  consider  it  important  to  note  that  there  has  also  been  criticism  from  this  quarter  –  as  a 
counterweight  to  the  opinion  that  in  principle  everything  the  Riksbank  has  done  in  recent 
                                                 
20   See, for instance, Malmqvist (2014), Svenska Dagbladet (2014b, 2014c) and Mitelman (2014). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  years,  and  in  particular  the  leaning  against  the  wind,  has  been  wrong,  unjustified  and 
harmful. 
My most important messages 
Let me conclude by summarising my main messages. The purpose of my review has been to 
point out the flaws in several notions of how monetary policy in Sweden has been conducted 
in recent years and what the results have been. One thing I hope I have made clear is that it 
is not reasonable to regard the difference between what the repo rate has actually been in 
recent years and a fictitious interest-rate development of 0.25 per cent since July 2009 as a 
measure  of  how  much  the  Riksbank  has  leaned  against  the  wind.  This  is  a  rather  odd 
reconstruction after the event. Nevertheless, much of the criticism has been based on this 
assumption,  for  instance,  the  claim  that  the  Riksbank’s  policy  of  leaning  against  the  wind 
after the crisis has cost 60,000 jobs. As I have shown, the general view among forecasters at 
the time when the repo rate had been raised to 2 per cent was that it would be necessary to 
continue to raise the repo rate – and for traditional monetary policy reasons. The increase 
from  0.25  to  2  per  cent  was  thus  not  perceived  as  particularly  remarkable  or  as  purely 
justified by concern for household debt. 
I also hope I have convinced you that the low inflation rate in Sweden today does not reflect 
an economy that has developed very poorly since the crisis as a result of misguided, tight 
monetary policy. On the contrary, the Swedish economy has developed relatively well and 
has definitely not been in a state of deflation driven by a weak real economy. The main focus 
for the monetary policy conducted after the crisis has been to support the recovery and bring 
inflation back towards the target. Giving consideration to the risks linked to developments in 
household debt and housing prices has been part of the assessment but has not played a 
major role. 
The fact that inflation has been low is to a large degree, as always, a reflection of events 
over  the  course  of  time  that  have  been  difficult  to  predict.  Examples  are  the  slowdown  in 
international economic activity which became evident during the second half of 2011 and the 
fall in inflation at the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014. It is easy to verify that these 
events were difficult to predict – and not merely something that everyone but the Riksbank 
was aware of in advance – by examining how forecasters in general viewed developments at 
the  time.  Thus,  I  think  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  current  low  inflation  is  not  a  logical  and 
predictable consequence of the repo rate not being held at 0.25 per cent after the crisis. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  start,  there  is  an  international  debate  on  to  what  extent  the  central 
banks’ policy rates should be used as a complement to macroprudential measures to try to 
prevent lending and housing prices from rising too quickly, or more generally to counteract 
the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  This  is  an  important  discussion  and  it  would  be  very 
unfortunate  if  the  critics’  alarmist  but  incorrect  conclusions  regarding  the  Swedish 
experiences, which can roughly be summarised as ”don’t try this at home – you may burn 
down your house”, were to be regarded as a truth in the debate. 
It  is  important  that  monetary  policy  is  evaluated.  But  one  condition  for  drawing  the  right 
conclusions  is  that  the  evaluation  is  based  on  a  correct  description  of  what  has  actually 
happened. The recent criticism has, in my opinion, become alienated from actual events. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  References 
Adrian, Tobias and Liang, Nellie (2014), Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial 
Stability. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 690, September 2014. 
Andrén  Meiton,  Louise  (2014),  Krugman  tror  att  Fed  håller  räntan  två  år  till.  (Krugman 
believes  the  Fed  will  hold  its  policy  rate  unchanged  two  more  years)  Svenska  Dagbladet 
newspaper, 24 January. 
Blanchard, Olivier (2014), Where Danger Lurks. Finance and Development 51(3), September 
2014. International Monetary Fund. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2013), Rethinking Macro Policy 
II: Getting Granular. IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/03. International Monetary Fund. 
Borio, Claudio (2014), Central-Banking Post Crisis: What Compass for Uncharted Waters? In 
Goodhart,  Charles,  Gabor,  Daniela,  Vestergaard,  Jakob  and  Ertürk,  Ismail  (eds.),  Central 
Banking at a Crossroads: Europe and Beyond. Anthem Press, London. 
Carney,  Mark  (2013),  Monetary  Policy  After  the  Fall.  Speech  at  the  University  of  Alberta 
1 May 2013. Bank of Canada. 
Financial Times (2014), Sweden slides further into deflation, October 14. 
IMF  (2011),  Sweden:  2011  Article  IV  Consultation.  IMF  Country  Report  No.  11/171,  July 
2011. 
Jansson, Per (2014), How do we stop the trend in household debt? Work on several fronts 
Ekonomisk Debatt no. 3, 2014. 
Jordà,  Oscar,  Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor,  Alan  M.  (2013),  When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(p2). 
National Institute of Economic Research (2011), The Swedish Economy June 2011. 
Krugman,  Paul  (2014a),  Sweden  Turns  Japanese.  The  Opinion  Pages,  The  New  York 
Times, April 20. 
Krugman,  Paul  (2014b),  Apologizing  to  Japan.  The  Opinion  Pages,  The  New  York  Times, 
October 30. 
Malmqvist, Peter (2014), Låg ränta bäddar för överhettning. (Low repo rate paves the way for 
overheating) Svenska Dagbladet Opinion, 19 July. 
Mian, Atif and Sufi, Amir (2014), House of Debt. University of Chicago Press. 
Mitelman, Henrik (2014), Nu blir Ingves börsens bästis. (Now Ingves is the stock market’s 
best friend) Dagens industri newspaper, 29 October. 
Münchau,  Wolfgang  (2014),  What  central  banks  should  do  to  deal  with  bubbles.  Column, 
Financial Times, July 13. 
OECD (2011), OECD Economic Outlook, No. 89, May 2011. 
Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor  Alan  M.  (2012),  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review 102(2). 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  interlinked? 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3. Jubilee issue. 
Stein, Jeremy C. (2013), Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy 
Responses. Speech at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter”,  research  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Summers, Lawrence (2014), Washington Must Not Settle for Secular Stagnation. Financial 
Times, 5 January. 
Svenska Dagbladet (2014a), Krugman har fel om svensk bubbla. (Krugman is wrong about a 
Swedish bubble) Interview with Lars Svensson, SvD Näringsliv (business section of Svenska 
Dagbladet newspaper), 14 January. 
Svenska Dagbladet (2014b), ”Nollränta är som att kasta bensin på en brasa”. (Zero repo rate 
is like throwing petrol on a bonfire) SvD Näringsliv online version, 31 October. 
Svenska  Dagbladet  (2014c),  “Riksbanken  bäddar  för  kris”.  (Riksbank  paves  the  way  for  a 
crisis) Interview with Lars Jonung, SvD Näringsliv (business section of Svenska Dagbladet 
newspaper), 7 November. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  (2014),  Inflation  Targeting  and  “Leaning  against  the  Wind”. 
International Journal of Central Banking 10(2), June 2014. 
Visco,  Ignazio  (2014),  The  challenges  for  central  banks.  Central  Banking  Journal  Volume 
XXV, August. 
Wolodarski,  Peter  (2009),  Iskallt  uppdrag.  (Icy  mission)  Signed  editorial,  Dagens  Nyheter, 
27 December. 
Wolodarski,  Peter  (2014),  Noll  rätt  för  Riksbanken  de  senaste  åren.  (Zero  right  for  the 
Riksbank in recent years) Sunday column, Dagens Nyheter, 2 November. 
Woodford, Michael (2012), Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability. NBER Working Paper 
No. 17967. 
Yellen, Janet L. (2014), Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. Speech at The 2014 Michel 
Camdessus Central Banking Lecture. International Monetary Fund, 2 July. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
   14 
 Figure 1 
Repo-rate paths at the monetary policy meeting in July 2011 
Per cent 
 Repo rate
Majority
Alternative path
5
4
3
2
1
0
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
Source: The Riksbank 
5
4
3
2
1
0
 The Riksbank’s and the National Institute of Economic Research’s  
repo-rate paths in summer 2011 
Figure 2 
Per cent 
Repo rate
The Riksbank, PPR July 2011
NIER, June 2011
5
4
3
2
1
0
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
5
4
3
2
1
0
 Note.  The  repo  rate  and  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  refer  to  quarterly 
averages. The National Institute of Economic Research’s forecast refers to 
the repo rate at the end of the year. 
Sources: The National Institute of Economic Research and the Riksbank 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Figure 3 
Price developments for houses and apartments 
Index: January 2005=100 
 Source: Valueguard 
Figure 4 
Lending to Swedish households 
Annual percentage change 
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Note. Refers to the MFIs’ lending to Swedish households including HIOs 
(households non-profit organisations), with a home as collateral, adjusted 
for reclassification and bought and sold loans. 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
   16 
 GDP per capita and employment rate compared with pre-crisis figures 
Change in per cent 2007–2013 and 2008Q1–2014Q2 
Figure 5 
 6
2
-2
-6
-10
-14
-18
-22
e
t
a
r
 
t
n
e
m
y
o
l
p
m
E
GRE
JPN
FRA
EU
SUI
AUT
NZL
SWE
CAN
AUS
USA
GBR
BEL
NED
NOR
FIN
ITA
DEN
POR
IRL
ESP
-23
-18
-13
-8
GDP per capita
-3
2
7
6
GER
2
-2
-6
-10
-14
-18
-22
 Note.  GDP  per  capita,  annual  data,  constant  2005  USD  (adjusted  for 
purchasing  power  parity),  2007–2013;  Employment  rate,  15–64  years,  
2008Q1–2014Q2. Seasonally-adjusted data. 
Sources: The OECD and the World Bank WDI 
Figure 6 
Unemployment and labour force in Sweden and the USA 
Percentage of labour force and percentage of population 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
United States, Unemployment (left scale)
Sweden, Unemployment (left scale)
United States, Labour Force (right scale)
Sweden, Labour Force (right scale)
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
Note. Refers to 15–74 age group. Seasonally-adjusted data. 
Sources: Eurostat and the OECD 
 74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Figure 7 
Forecasts 2011–2012 for export increase 2012 
Annual percentage change, annual average 
Exports, actual outcome 2012
Other analysts
The Riksbank
8
6
4
2
0
-2
jan-11
jul-11
jan-12
jul-12
 8
6
4
2
0
-2
 Sources:  Respective  forecasters  (6  of  them),  Statistics  Sweden  and  the 
Riksbank 
Figure 8 
CPIF and trend in unit labour costs 
Annual percentage change 
Unit labour cost, trend
CPIF
4
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
0
04
00
06
02
 
Note.  The  trend  is  calculated  using  an  HP-filter  (=1600)  on  a  series  extended 
with the Riksbank’s forecast. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
14
08
12
10
0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
   18 
 Figure 9 
Forecasts 2013–2014 for CPIF inflation 2014 
Annual percentage change, annual average 
The Riksbank
Other analysts
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
jan-13
jul-13
jan-14
jul-14
 2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
 Sources:  Respective  forecasters  (8  of  them),  Statistics  Sweden  and  the 
Riksbank 
Figure 10 
Inflation expectations, money market participants 
Annual percentage change 
Source: TNS Sifo Prospera 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
