Norman Chan: Launch of the 90% Fixed Rate Mortgage Scheme 
Speech  by  Mr  Norman  Chan,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and 
Executive  Director  of  the  Hong  Kong  Mortgage  Corporation,  at  the  signing  ceremony  to  launch  the 
90% Fixed Rate Mortgage Scheme, Hong Kong, 19 January 2004. 
 Dr. David Li, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first welcome you all to this signing ceremony to launch a composite product that embraces the 
benefits  of  both  the  HKMC’s  Fixed  Adjustable  Rate  Mortgage  Programme  (“FARM”  Programme  in 
short) and Mortgage Insurance Progromme. 
One  of  the  focuses  of  the  HKMC  in  product  development  has  been  the  promotion  of  fixed  rate 
mortgages.  The  merits  of  this  initiative  are  compelling  as  fixed  rate  mortgage  products  benefit 
homebuyers, banks and the HKMC, and help to promote banking stability. To the homebuyers, fixed 
rate  mortgage  offers  them  an  additional  choice  of  mortgage  financing  that  provides  certainty  in  the 
monthly mortgage repayment amount and, more importantly, insulate them from adverse interest rate 
movements during the fixed rate period. To the originating banks, their partnership with the Mortgage 
Corporation provides an extra source of steady fee income and an effective avenue for marketing their 
banking  products  to  the  mortgage  borrowers.  To  the  Mortgage  Corporation,  the  initiative  helps  to 
diversify its mortgage portfolio to include a good mix of floating and fixed rate mortgages. 
Demand for fixed rate mortgages depends crucially on the level of fixed mortgage rate in relation to 
the prevailing floating mortgage rate as well as the borrowers’ expectations of the likely movements of 
interest  rates.  Conducive  market  conditions  helped  the  HKMC  to  launch  the  FARM  Programme  in 
March 1998 and to acquire HK$1.2 billion of FARM mortgages in that year. 
We are seeing market conditions favourable for promoting fixed rate mortgage products reemerging in 
even stronger magnitude. With interest rate currently at a historical low level and being expected by 
the market to bottom out and gradually stage an upward reversal, many homebuyers are looking for 
fixed  rate  products  that  will  enable  them  to  lock  in  the  current  low  mortgage  rate  for  an  extended 
period. 
The  timing  is  very  opportune  as  the  abundance  of  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  has  enabled  the 
HKMC  to  secure  fixed  rate  funding  at  a  low  cost.  This  has  translated  into  very  attractive  fixed 
mortgage rates to be offered to homebuyers. 
Homebuyers taking up the products offered under this package will also enjoy extra benefits under the 
HKMC’s  Mortgage  Insurance  Programme.  In  terms  of  coverage,  mortgages  relating  to  residential 
properties transacted in both the primary and secondary markets will be eligible. The maximum loan-
to-valuation ratio is set at 90%, same as that under the regular Mortgage Insurance Programme, to 
reduce the downpayment burden of homebuyers. Furthermore, as the homebuyers will be insulated 
from adverse movements in interest rate during the fixed rate period, the insurance premia are set at 
very favourable levels. 
The fixed rate mortgage products that we launch today combine the benefits of the HKMC’s FARM 
Programme and the Mortgage Insurance Programme. These benefits will help make home ownership 
even more affordable to homebuyers. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Bank  of  East  Asia  for  sharing  our  conviction  in 
promoting fixed rate mortgages under the FARM Programme and in working with our colleagues in the 
HKMC in designing the fixed rate mortgage products. I am sure the additional privileges and incentives 
offered by the Bank of East Asia will make the products even more attractive to the homebuyers. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
