Joseph Yam: Asia’s ability to cope with the continuing challenges of 
globalisation 
Statement by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and Alternate 
Governor on the Board of Directors of the Asian Development Bank, at the 37th Asian Development 
Bank Annual Meeting, Jeju Island, Korea, 15-17 May 2004. 
 the  credibility  of 
Mr President, I join other Governors in: first, thanking the Government and the people of the Republic 
of Korea for their warm hospitality in hosting this year’s Annual Meeting; secondly, thanking the Bank’s 
management  and  staff  for  the  excellent  arrangements  made;  and  thirdly,  welcoming  our  two  new 
members - Luxembourg and Palau. 
Mr  President,  on  the  governance  of  the  Bank,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  Bank  for  adopting  a 
number  of  reform  initiatives  in  the  past  year  to  enhance  accountability  and  efficacy  of  operations. 
Greater  transparency  and  accountability  in  all  aspects  of  the  Bank’s  operation  is  to  be  welcomed. 
Measuring,  monitoring  and  managing  development  results  are  essential.  The  creation  of  the 
independent  Operations  Evaluation  Department  will  enhance 
the  Bank’s 
achievements.  These  initiatives  will  put  the  Bank  in  a  stronger  position  in  meeting  the  many  tasks 
ahead. 
On  the  region,  Mr  President,  I  would  like  to  focus  just  on  the  continuing  challenges  arising  from 
globalisation  and  the  ability,  or  rather  the  lack  of  ability,  of  Asia  in  coping  with  them.  The  Asian 
financial turmoil of 1997-98 demonstrated this vehemently. Since then, Asia has also been affected by 
the globalisation of terrorism, geo-political risks and disease. Indeed, this time last year, the mobility of 
people in the region was paralysed by SARS and geo-political risks prevented Governors from having 
an annual meeting for the first time in the Bank’s history. And recently there have been predictions that 
the  large  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  and  the  associated  domestic  monetary  management 
problems are presenting considerable risks to financial stability. 
I do not believe that another Asian financial crisis is in the making. But the fact remains that, by being 
relatively small and open, Asian financial markets are vulnerable to shocks. Just earlier this week, the 
greater realisation that the interest rate upturn in the United States may come sooner and increases 
possibly  larger  than  expected  sent  shock  waves  through  equity  markets  in  the  region.  This  is 
regardless of the comfort offered by the much higher savings rate of economies in the region and the 
generally  low  level  of  indebtedness,  of  households  and  corporations.  This  is  also  regardless  of  the 
increasing inter-dependence within the region, as evidenced by the rapid expansion of intra-regional 
trade, particularly in final products, and correspondingly reduced dependence of the region as a whole 
on import demand from developed economies. 
I have no doubt that Asian financial markets should remain open and, for those less open, continue 
with financial liberalisation, in order to benefit from the greater efficiency in the international allocation 
of  capital  that  comes with  globalisation.  But  there  is  a  need  also  to  reduce  vulnerability  by  building 
bigger, deeper, more robust and diversified capital markets. While the interesting subject of monetary 
integration,  which  would  provide  a  long-term  solution,  has  been  receiving  some  nascent  attention, 
efforts  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation  within  the  region  should  be stepped  up. 
Asia as a whole is one of the largest exporters of capital and, at the same time, also one of the largest 
recipients  of  foreign  direct  investment  and  foreign  portfolio  investment.  The  underlying  process  of 
capital  flows  associated  with  this  roundabout  phenomenon  involves  much  greater  financial  volatility 
and  instability  for  the  region  than  the  situation  where  a  greater  proportion  of  savings  in  the  region 
could more readily find their way into investments in the region. This underscores the importance of 
greater efforts to enhance the efficiency of financial intermediation within the region. 
Indeed, capital market reform is high on the agenda of most Asian economies. There has also been 
considerable  progress  in  the  diversification  of  financial  intermediation  channels,  specifically  in  the 
development of the bond market. At the end of last year, the amount of domestic bonds outstanding in 
eight economies1 that we have surveyed was equivalent to 47 percent of the combined GDP, more 
                                                      
1  Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
BIS Review 30/2004 
 1
than double the 20 percent at the end of 1995. Over that eight-year period, the bond market’s share in 
total financing grew from 11 percent to 19 percent. But these numbers are still low for the bond market 
to play a meaningful role in contributing to financial stability and enhancing the efficiency of financial 
intermediation. 
A  number  of  regional  initiatives  are  currently  underway  to  accelerate  this  development.  Under  the 
APEC forum, Hong Kong, China, joined by Thailand, Korea and the World Bank are leading the APEC 
Initiative on the Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets. The ASEAN+3 forum 
has  initiated  an  array  of  studies  under  the  Asian  Bond  Market  Initiative  (ABMI)  while  the  EMEAP 
Central Banks have already launched Asian Bond Fund I and are now working on Asian Bond Fund II, 
which  aims  at  channelling  a  small  portion  of  the  very  sizeable  official  reserves  held  by  the  Asian 
economies back into the region. 
Mr President, the Bank is uniquely placed to lend support to the region in these efforts, in three ways. 
First,  the  Bank  can  enlarge  its  technical  assistance  programme  on  capital  market  projects.  In  this 
connection, we are pleased to note the assistance the Bank is already providing to the bond market 
initiatives that I have mentioned. Secondly, the Bank can structure its own debt issuance programme 
with this objective in mind, as exemplified by Bank’s current efforts to issue local currency bonds in 
China and Thailand. Thirdly, the Bank can encourage borrowers to issue bonds in conjunction with 
ADB-financed projects through the provision of partial credit guarantees. 
Thank you, Mr President. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2004
