Zhou Xiaochuan: Steadily advancing market-based interest rate reform 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Conference “China: 
Making Financial Markets Work”, jointly sponsored by the Bank of China, Euromoney and Hong Kong 
& Shanghai Banking Cooperation, Beijing, 3 December 2003. 
 It’s my honor to attend Euromoney’s Conference in China. First, I would like to express my thanks to 
the  sponsors  of  this  Conference  including  Bank  of  China,  Euromoney  Group  and  Hong  Kong  & 
Shanghai Banking Corporation. My thanks also go to the other parties that have provided support to 
the Conference. The theme of the Conference is “Making Financial Markets work”, a very important 
topic. In China, one of the major means to promote the efficient operation of financial markets is to 
steadily advance market-based interest rate reform and to gradually establish benchmark yield curve.  
I.  
Progress achieved in China’s market-based interest rate reform and problems 
remained 
The Chinese Communist Party and Government attach great importance to the market-based interest 
rate reform. In 1993, the 3rd Plenum of the 14th CPC National Congress pointed out that “the central 
bank  shall  promptly  adjust  benchmark  interest  rate  according  to  changes  in  market  supply  and 
demand, and allow the commercial banks to flexibly set their own rate on loans and deposits within a 
specified range.” The 5th Plenum of the 15th CPC National Congress in 2000 and the 4th Plenum of 
the 9th National People’s Congress in 2001 called for “steady progress in market-based interest rate 
reform”.  In  2002,  the  16th  CPC  National  Congress  adopted  in  its  report  the  decision  to  “steadily 
advance  market-based  interest  rate  reform  and  optimize  the  allocation  of  financial  resources”.  The 
Decision  on  Issues  concerning  improving  the  Socialist  Market  Economic  System  adopted  by  the 
3rd plenum  of  the  16th  CPC  National  congress  further  pointed  out  that  “market-based  interest  rate 
reform should be steadily advanced to establish and improve the mechanism for determining interest 
rate  based  on  market  supply  and  demand.  The  central  bank  shall  use  monetary  instruments  to 
influence market interest rate.” 
While moving in the general direction of market-based interest rate reform, we need to clarify some 
concepts. Some people think that the objective of market-based interest rate reform is to let all interest 
rates determined by the market. This perception is incorrect. The interest rates that will be determined 
by the market include commercial rates but not the interest rates used by the central bank to conduct 
financial management.  
In  recent  years,  China’s  market-based  interest  rate  reform  has  advanced  steadily,  with  significant 
progress achieved in the deregulation of money market interest rate. First, market has been playing an 
increasingly important role in determining the types of interest rate in the money market, which now 
include  inter-bank  lending  rate,  bond  repurchase  rate,  bill  market  discount  rate,  interest  rate  in  the 
primary and secondary market of government bond and policy financial bond. Second, management of 
interest  rate on  loans  and  deposits  has  been streamlined.  The previous practice  of regulating  most 
types of interest rate has been changed and commercial banks have been given greater flexibility in 
managing the interest rate. Third, the floating band of interest rate on loans to small and medium sized 
enterprises has been widened for three times, leading to improved risk management capability of the 
banks and enabling these enterprises to have easier access to bank credit. Fourth, management of 
interest rate on foreign currency has been relaxed. At present, there are only a few types of foreign 
currency interest rate that are still subject to the central bank management. Fifth, domestic commercial 
banks have introduced large amount time deposit business for domestic insurance companies, with 
the interest rate jointly determined by both sides. 
Despite the above progress, China’s market-based interest rate reform has lagged behind the overall 
economic  reform  and  opening  up.  One  of  the  major  reasons  is  lack  of  proper  understanding  of  the 
reform. For example, when talking about the level of interest rate, some people tend to think it is solely 
determined by the cost of fund, without giving due consideration to market supply and demand. This is 
similar to the improper understanding of the factors determining the price of goods in the early stage of 
reform. In addition, some people have not established the concept of risk premium when considering 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
the level of interest rate. The need for favourable interest rate policy to support the reform of small and 
medium-sized enterprises is also a factor affecting the level of interest rate.  
Measures to push ahead with market-based interest rate reform 
II.  
To steadily advance the market-based interest rate reform is a direction clearly defined by the Party 
and  the  government.  As  to  the  specific  measure,  they  have  been  under  frequent  discussion  by  the 
Monetary Policy Committee and involve the following aspects.  
First, further widening the floating band of lending rate. At present, different lending rate bands around 
the  central  bank’s  benchmark  rate  are  applied  to  loans  extended  by  different  types  of  financial 
institutions and provided to enterprises of different size. The rural credit cooperatives in selected areas 
may  set  their  lending  rate  within  90-200  percent  of  the  central  bank’s  benchmark  rate.  Other  rural 
credit cooperatives may set their lending rate within 90-150 percent of the benchmark rate. For the 
commercial banks, the interest rate they charge on loans to the small and medium-sized enterprises 
shall  be  within  90-130  percent  of  the  benchmark  rate;  that  to  the  large  enterprises  shall  be  within 
90-110  percent  of  the  benchmark  rate;  and  that  to  a  few  key  enterprises  may  not  exceed  the 
benchmark  rate.  The  current  situation  of  supply  and  demand  in  the  credit  market  and  the  risk 
management  requirement  of  the  commercial  banks  call  for  changes  in  the  above  policies.  Such 
policies have also made it difficult for the small and medium-sized enterprises to obtain bank loans in 
the absence of guarantee or collaterals. In the next-stage reform, the floating band on lending rate will 
be further widened. In particular, the range above the benchmark rate will be further expanded to give 
the banks greater flexibility in managing their lending rate.  
As to the range below the benchmark rate, I have mentioned earlier that the lending rate can be as 
low as 90 percent of the benchmark rate. Of course, some enterprises with very good credit standing 
will be able to get even lower rate. Nevertheless, they are encouraged to issue corporate bond, which 
will  help  promote  the  development  of  corporate  bond  market.  The  interest  rate  in  corporate  bond 
market shall be allowed to move in a wider range. We should let the market determine whether an 
enterprise can borrow at a lower rate.  
Second, the interest rate on deposits shall be allowed to move downward against the benchmark rate. 
The practice of allowing a few rural credit cooperatives to set the deposit rate above the benchmark 
rate has its special background, and has raised some controversies.  
In China, the 8% capital adequacy requirement set by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision in 
its 1998 Capital Accord has not been strictly enforced in the regulation of financial institutions, and the 
Prompt Corrective Actions have not been adequately established. Some financial institutions with poor 
performance and inadequate capital and liquidity tend to attract deposits by offering high interest rate. 
The  riskier  a  financial  institution  is,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  offer  high  interest  rate,  resulting  in 
deteriorating financial positions of these institutions.  
Therefore,  in  the  absence  of  strict  enforcement  of  capital  adequacy  requirement  and  effective 
implementation  of  the  Prompt  Corrective  Actions,  we  should  be  cautious  in  allowing  the  financial 
institutions to set deposit rate above the benchmark rate.  
The previously adopted policy of allowing some rural credit cooperatives to set deposit rate above the 
benchmark rate had its special background. At that time, postal savings system attracted large amount 
of  deposits  from  the  rural  area,  but  could  not  use  these  fund  directly  to  serve  the  development  of 
agriculture  and  rural  area  and  the  need  of  farmers.  The  rural  credit  cooperatives  are  in  a 
disadvantageous position in competing for deposits, since the postal savings system not only has its 
own operational advantages but also enjoy favourable policies. To promote the development of rural 
financial services, we introduced the policy of allowing the rural credit cooperatives to set their deposit 
rate above the benchmark rate. Now we face some new issues. First, since August 2003, the interest 
rate  policy  for  the  newly  increased  postal  savings  deposit  has  been  changed,  thus  alleviating  the 
problem of rural deposit competition. Second, the increase in deposit interest rate has narrowed the 
interest spread, resulting in difficult financial situation of some of the rural credit cooperatives. Third, 
some county-level financial institutions that were not given the flexibility to set their deposit rate above 
benchmark rate complained that they were facing unfair competition from the rural credit cooperatives. 
Therefore, the policy of allowing the deposit interest rate to move upward against the benchmark rate 
need to be carefully examined and evaluated.  
2 
 BIS Review 8/2004
In  China,  almost  no  financial  institutions  offer  below-benchmark  interest  rate  on  deposits.  While  in 
other countries, many banks set their deposit rate below the central bank’s benchmark rate. One of the 
main  reasons  is  that  financial  regulation  in  China  has  not  strictly  enforce  the  requirement  in  Basle 
Committee’s Capital Accord, and the excessive expansion of the balance sheet of the deposit-taking 
institutions  has  not  been  effectively  contained.  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission  is  going  to 
introduce  stricter  capital  adequacy  requirement.  After  such  requirement  is  imposed,  the  banks  that 
have  inadequate  capital  and  have  difficulties  in  strengthening  their  capital  base  must  reduce  the 
growth of their risk assets. Without effectively lowering the risk weight of the assets, they will have to 
tighten their balance sheets. So they may offer lower interest rate on the deposits.  
Third, further relaxing the regulation on interest rates. We need to consider whether it is necessary to 
regulate some interest rates or to set narrow floating bands on these interest rates.  
Gradually establishing effective benchmark yield curve 
III.  
Market-based interest rate reform will contribute importantly to the formation of effective benchmark 
yield curve. At present, there are insufficient varieties of debt instruments in the market, the maturity 
structure  is  inappropriate,  and  the  yield  of  debt  instrument  has  not  been  fully  determined  by  the 
market. For example, there are relatively few types of short-term bond in the market, and the long-term 
yield seems to be too low. The measures we will adopt in the next stage include adding more types of 
government bond or replacing some bonds with other alternative debt instruments, so that there are 
sufficient  products  in  the  short-term,  medium-term  and  long-term  bond  markets.  With  reduced 
administrative interventions and deepened market, an effective benchmark yield curve is expected to 
be set up, providing a useful base rate for the operation of the financial institutions and the financial 
market. 
Money market interest rate 
IV.  
We need to pay special attention to the interest rate in the money market. At present, interest rate in 
the money market in China is to a large extent determined by market forces, with active transactions 
conducted  in  the  market.  Major  money  market  transactions,  particularly  inter-bank  lending  and 
government  bond  repurchase,  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  formation  of  interest  rate. 
Participants in the money market need to increase their experience and improve their judgment. For 
example,  some  monetary  policy  instruments  are  mainly  targeted  for  the  short-term  money  market. 
Since last year, the main purpose of the central bank’s operation in the short-term money market to 
absorb  liquidity  with  some  monetary  policy  instruments  is  to  sterilize  the  increase  in  money  supply 
from foreign exchange purchases. However, some market participants have not clearly identified the 
relationship  between  the  RMB  position  resulted  from  foreign  exchange  purchases  and  the  central 
bank’s  open  market  operations.  Of  course,  this  is  partly  due  to  the  insufficient  transparency  of 
information, since only monthly data on changes in foreign exchange are available in the market. For 
years, the increase in money supply from foreign exchange purchases has been an important factor 
affecting the central banks decision as to whether to issue central bank bill and the volume of issue.  
One point worth mentioning is that in China, the issue of stocks is an important factor affecting money 
market.  Actual  fund  is  required  to  purchase  stocks  in  initial  public  offerings.  This  is  a  unique 
requirement in China rarely found in other countries. Large volume or successive issue of stocks will 
affect money market in the short rum, with tightened market liquidity and large volatility in short-term 
interest rate. Nevertheless, China’s money market is stable in general. Better understanding of both 
the money market and interest rate volatility is need.  
The importance of market-based interest rate reform 
V.  
First, market-based interest rate reform is crucial to the allocation of financial recourses. Optimizing 
resource  allocation  is  an  important  function  of  the  market.  In  the  absence  of  sound  allocation  of 
financial resources, even a minor policy error will entail great loss on the overall economic efficiency.  
Second, a special problem facing China is the large employment pressure. In China, about 10 million 
new jobs need to be created every year to absorb the increase in labor force, which include college 
graduates, migrant workers from the rural area, and urban laid-off workers. I believe many foreigners 
will be surprised at the figure of 10 million, which shows the severity of China’s employment problem. 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 3
Recent  years’  statistics  show  that  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  have  made  the  greatest 
contribution to the creation of new jobs. How to better serve these enterprises, in particular, how to 
use interest rate policy to support their development to enable them to obtain loans or financing from 
other sources, depends largely on the progress in market-based interest rate reform.  
Finally, China is expected to open its banking sectors in all areas - including market access, the range 
of  customers  and  RMB  business  -  in  2006.  Due  to  excessive  regulation  on  interest  rate,  China’ 
domestic  financial  institutions  do  not  have  sufficient  capability  in  the  pricing  of  financial  products, 
particularly loan products. They need to accumulate more experience in financial product pricing so as 
to maintain their competitiveness in the international market. 
Above is an overview of China’s market-based interest rate reform. I welcome any comments. Thank 
you. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2004
