Hermann Remsperger: Financing innovation  
Welcome  address  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  6th  Bundesbank  Spring  Conference  “Financing  Innovation”,  Eltville, 
30 April 2004.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I have the pleasure of welcoming you to the 6th Bundesbank Spring Conference. The focus of this 
year’s conference is on financing of innovations.  
The importance of innovation, or in a more broader sense technological progress, for economic growth 
has been recognised early on in the works of Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus or Karl Marx - to name 
the most prominent. Later on the contributions of Schumpeter and the neo-classical growth models 
that  appeared  half  a  century  ago  refocused  the  profession’s  attention  on  innovation  as  one  of  the 
major forces behind economic development.  
The crucial role played by innovation in fostering growth is even more apparent in modern knowledge 
driven economies. The more recent literature on economic growth, which endogenises technological 
progress and also devises more refined methods of measuring technological change, proves that this 
topic is of key concern among macroeconomists today.  
Additionally,  recent  empirical  evidence  underlines  the  significance  of  innovation.  Moreover  on  the 
microeconomic level firms are becoming increasingly aware that knowledge management as well as 
R&D are the driving force for their economic performance. 
Among  the  core  conditions  fostering  innovation  and  thus  sustainable  growth  are  a  competitive 
economic  environment,  intellectual  property  protection,  openness  for  trade  and  investment,  sound 
macro policies and a good educational system.  
The emphasis of this conference is on an important determinant of innovative activities: the availability 
of financing or more generally the role of financial markets.  
Focusing on Germany in particular, the experience of recent years has revealed that there is a link 
between the structural characteristics of a financial system and the funding of innovative activities. A 
mainly bank based system might have drawbacks when it comes to financing highly risky investments 
of start-ups. 
Against this background, I will center my remarks around two issues that are of particular relevance for 
Germany.  
The first issue concerns the ongoing debate about insufficient bank financing in general and especially 
for riskier investments, sometimes culminating in the claim that Germany is suffering a credit crunch. 
The second issue deals with the German venture capital market. 
Although  the  importance  of  market-based  financing  of  innovative  activity  like  private  equity  and 
venture  capital  is  increasing  a  discussion  of  financing  conditions  in  Germany  would  be  incomplete 
without talking about bank loans.  
As you probably know the growth of real loans in Germany has been exceptionally low over the last 
three  years.  On  average  loans  in  real  terms  to  the  private  sector  have  even  fallen  by  about  one 
percent per year.  
This  remarkable  weakness  has  to  be  assessed  against  the  background  of  a  period  of  very  low 
economic growth. Annual real GDP growth was only about ½ percent over the last three years. This of 
course reduced the demand for external finance significantly.  
Additionally, investment decreased sharply which possibly has been the most important factor behind 
low credit growth in Germany. The decline in investment has been drastic in comparison to the level of 
economic activity. Between 2001 and 2003 real investment fell by over 5 percent a year.  
This has driven down the ratio of investment to GDP to about 18 percent. Compared to the last forty 
years we have never seen a period where this ratio has been that low in Germany. On average it was 
almost 23 percent.  
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
The  decline  in  the  investment  ratio  could  possibly  be  attributed  to  two  factors.  First,  constructing 
activities haven fallen constantly since the peak in the middle of the nineties following the reunification 
boom. This has caused a medium-term downward trend in investment.  
Second,  we  have  seen  a  dramatic  decline  in  fixed  investment  recently.  This  could  possibly  be 
explained  by  some  degree  of  “overinvestment”  during  the  new  economy  boom  which  reduced  the 
need and capacities for new investment in the following periods.  
We do not have any indications that this outstanding magnitude of the fall in fixed investment could be 
attributed to a lack of means of finance or even a credit crunch.  
As  a  consequence  of  Germany’s  weak  economic  performance  credit  default  risks  have  increased 
remarkably  during  the  last  three  years.  The  number  of  insolvencies  of  private  households  and 
enterprises has risen to more than 100,000 in 2003 - almost 20 % more than 2002. In order to prevent 
further  losses  from  non-performing  loans  this  has  led  banks  to  increase  the  standards  for  bank 
lending. However, this has not led to a general shortage of loanable funds.  
Additionally, our econometric models confirm that the development of real loans is still well explained 
by  weak  GDP  growth  and  the  downturn  of  investment.  Loan  growth  rates  are  mostly  within  the 
confidence bounds of our empirical benchmarks. This is particularly true for the development of loans 
to enterprises. The decline of loans in Germany was essentially driven by the weak economy and not 
the other way round.  
In  this  connection  I’d  like  to  add  some  remarks  on  Basle  II.  The  rules  of  Basle  II  are  intended  to 
improve  risk  controlling  of  credit  portfolios.  In  this  respect  Basle  II  contributes  to  a  more  efficient 
pricing of risks. Bank loans for high risk projects are becoming more expensive, while the opposite is 
true for low risk loans.  
But does this mean that it will become more difficult for risky projects to get financed by bank loans? 
Not  necessarily!  One  could  rather  expect  the  opposite  effect.  An  increased  level  of  monitoring  and 
pricing of risks could also be beneficial for the financing of innovations. This is because both reduce 
the information asymmetry and lead to a greater allocative efficiency.  
Hence risky innovative projects with a reasonable likeliness of success might pay higher loan premia 
but might also have better chances to find funding. In contrast, a less closer monitoring and pricing to 
risks could rather lead to credit constraints which are likely to be less efficient.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  German  venture  capital  market.  The  main  virtue  of 
venture capitalists is the combination of funding for high-risk projects with management support. As 
the  US  National  Venture  Capital  Association  puts  it,  they  are  “entrepreneurs  first  and  financiers 
second, because they seek to add value through their experience in investing”.  
Venture  capital  only  played  a  minor  role  in  Germany  for  a  long  time.  Promoting  start-up  firms  only 
started  to  develop  about  ten  years  ago.  Over  the  last  ten  years,  the  amount  of  capital  invested  in 
German  venture  firms  has  increased  from  0.15%  to  0.84%  of  GDP,  reaching  about  €18  billion  in 
December 2003.  
Despite this remarkable growth, venture capital is far less significant in Germany than in the US where 
it has become a mainstream asset class, amounting to more than 2% of GDP.  
Before  the  peak  of  the  stock  market  bubble  was  reached,  there  was  a  high  funding  surplus  in  the 
German venture capital market. This suggests that the bottleneck for further market growth was due to 
the structural impediments for an innovation-based production.  
In the last two years, gross investment in venture projects amounted to only €2.4 billion or 0.12% of 
GDP.  Moreover,  after  the  bubble  burst,  there  were  considerable  shifts  from  financing  high-risk  to 
low-risk later stages. These shifts reflect a reduced risk appetite among investment companies.  
The gradual disappearance of the IPO option has discouraged those who had assumed an exit via the 
stock exchange. After stocks had crashed on the “Neuer Markt” divestments became less profitable. 
Today, there are some signs of optimism and new momentum on the German venture capital market.  
I would like to complete my remarks by commenting briefly on the recent emergence of a group of 
venture  capitalists  who  still  consider  the  early  stage  of  venture  capital  as  an  element  of  their 
investment  strategy.  I’m  talking  about  the  so-called  “corporate  venture  capitalists”.  They  have  a 
longer-term  investment  horizon  which  makes  them  less  vulnerable  to  fluctuations  on  the  stock 
exchange.  
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
As  a  subsidiary  of  a  large  industrial  or  financial  enterprise,  a  corporate  venture  capitalist  always 
maintains close financial and business relations with his holding company. This enables him to provide 
his venture firms with more than the support offered by a traditional venture capitalist. The project is 
now  closely  linked  to  the  holding’s  industry  and  the  innovative  ideas  are  considered  to  be  worth 
financing.  
Instead of limiting its investment to short-term financial success, the holding company is interested in 
using the innovative project as an instrument for its own long-term growth strategy.  
In  turn,  sustainable  growth  on  the  part  of  the  venture  project  implies  a  rather  long-term  investment 
horizon.  The  advantages  for  the  funded  firm  lie  in  smooth  financing  over  time,  backed  by  stable 
management support whilst the innovative enterprise comes of age.  
This  new  type  of  investment  company  has  started  to  change  the  venture  capital  landscape  in 
Germany. Whereas only five corporate venture capitalists were associated with the German venture 
capital  association  during  the  stock  market  boom,  their  number  is  now  four  times  as  high.  Today, 
about two-thirds of the DAX companies have corporate venture capitalists as subsidiaries.  
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  emphasising  that,  even  if  we  were  to  see  investor  confidence  in  early 
stages and high-tech sectors fully restored, much still has to be done to create an innovation-friendly 
climate.  On  our  way  to  higher  innovation  rates,  we  need  a  favourable  environment  for  “grass-root” 
activities.  
Whilst the tax exemption of gains from the liquidation of corporate equity holdings was a step towards 
improved asset allocation, further barriers have to be removed. This includes administrative and tax 
considerations  as  well  as  labour  and  product  market  deregulations,  thus  ensuring  a  competitive 
environment.  
Given  the  impressive  list  of  distinguished  speakers  and  participants  I  am  convinced  that  this 
conference  is  making  an  important  contribution  towards  our  understanding  of  the  financing  of 
innovation. It also demonstrates that we consider this topic an important area for our own research 
activities. 
In this context and more generally I would once again like to emphasise that the Bundesbank not only 
recognises but also actively supports the role of economic research for the conduct of monetary policy.  
We definitely regard economic research as essential in order to fulfil our objectives. This assessment 
of  the  role  of  research  has  already  led  to  the  build  up  of  significant  research  capacities  within  the 
Bundesbank.  
It  has  been  realised  by  several  efforts  like  the  founding  of  our  economic  research  center,  the 
appointment of a board of research advisers as well as the creation of research professorships and 
last  but  not  least  an  ongoing  active  participation  of  our  economists  in  the  international  academic 
debate about monetary policy and other economic issues.  
Academic  conferences  like  this  on  financing  innovation  have  almost  become  a  part  of  our  “daily 
business”. (Although I have to admit a very pleasant one!) I wish you thought-provoking discussions 
and a pleasant stay at our conference facilities. Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
