Jaime Caruana: Risk management trends and the supervisory structure 
Remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  31st  General  Assembly  of  the  Geneva  Association,  Madrid, 
27-29 May 2004. 
 Introduction and overview 
I. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Mr  de  Castries,  Mr  Liedtke,  and  the  members  of  the  Geneva  Association  for 
inviting me to participate in your 31st General Assembly. As the chairman of the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision,  I  am  honoured  to  address  another  organisation  that  names  itself  after  a 
distinguished city in Switzerland. It is a special privilege for me to do so here in Madrid, not far from 
the Bank of Spain. 
Our organisations may hail from different Swiss cities and different sectors of the financial services 
industry, yet both organisations monitor trends in risk management and work to encourage advances 
in that discipline. This is a difficult but enormously important duty for all of us. Financial organisations - 
whether  they  are  insurance  companies,  securities  firms,  or  banks  -  compete  on  their  knowledge  of 
their customers. They seek to tailor products and services to each customer’s ever changing needs. 
To  succeed  in  an  environment  where  products  and  services  must  evolve  quickly,  financial  service 
providers  must  understand  thoroughly  the  benefits,  costs  and  risks  of  their  current  activities,  while 
watching  the  horizon  carefully  for  future  changes  that  might  alter  the  balance  between  risks  and 
rewards.  
Supervisors, for our part, must ensure that the regulatory system encourages banks, securities firms, 
and insurance companies to be capable of managing their risks today and ready to respond to new 
challenges  tomorrow.  Risk  management  and  the  supervisory  system  cannot  and  should  not  evolve 
independently of each other. On the contrary, supervisory agencies and financial services providers 
are  currently  working  in  tandem  to  develop  a  “virtuous  circle”  in  risk  management  and  supervision. 
Together,  we  want  to  ensure  that  supervision  reflects  the  best  practices  being  developed  by  the 
industry,  while  at  the  same  encouraging  institutions  to  improve  those  practices  constantly.  This 
morning, I would like to share a financial supervisor’s perspective with you on the “virtuous circle” that 
is emerging to encompass risk management and supervision. 
I’ll begin my remarks with the results of a study that outlines the great advances achieved by leading 
financial  institutions  around  the  world  in  developing  more  rigorous  and  comprehensive  risk 
management approaches.  
At  the  same  time  that  commercial  organisations  made  improvements  to  their  internal  processes, 
supervisors have sought to incorporate those improvements into the supervisory structure, which is my 
second  topic.  We  are  moving  toward  a  more  flexible  and  forward-looking  approach  to  financial 
supervision that seeks to motivate prudent management - and thereby complete the “virtuous circle” - 
by encouraging further advances in risk management. The reforms underway are especially evident in 
the  banking  world  under  the  Basel  Committee’s  “Basel  II”  framework.  I  should  add  that  the 
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  a  fellow  association  of  supervisors  in  the 
insurance area, is now discussing a supervisory framework that would apply to all insurance regulatory 
systems globally.  
Evolution in risk management and the reform of financial supervision should complement and reinforce 
each other, and the progress in each area will be influenced by the work underway globally to revise 
accounting  guidelines.  The  Geneva  Association  has  taken  a  great  interest  in  this  topic,  so  I  will 
conclude my remarks with some brief thoughts from my perspective on the convergence of accounting 
standards, advances in risk management, and supervision.  
Trends across financial services sector 
II. 
Allow  me  to  begin  with  an  overview  of  recent  trends  in  risk  management.  Last  year,  a  body 
representing major financial supervisory agencies conducted a study of 31 banks, securities firms, and 
insurance  companies  in  12  jurisdictions.  This  body  -  called  the  “Joint  Forum”  -  consists  of  expert 
supervisors  from  member  agencies  of  the  Basel  Committee,  the  International  Organisation  of 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 1
Securities  Commissioners  (IOSCO),  and  the  IAIS.  The  Joint  Forum  seeks  to  identify  best  practices 
and develop guidance for activities across the financial services sector. 
In its report, which was published in August 2003, the Joint Forum identified two important and recent 
trends among  large, complex  firms  engaged  in  banking, securities,  or  insurance, or  in some  mix  of 
these activities. 
Integration of the risk management function. 
A. 
One of the most notable advances in risk management across all three financial services sectors is the 
growing emphasis on developing a firm-wide assessment of risk. This constitutes the first trend in the 
Joint Forum’s report. 
Improvements in technology and telecommunications have made it easier for firms to gather, collect, 
and  analyse  large  amounts  of  data  on  their  exposures  and  business  activities  efficiently  and 
increasingly  in  near  “real  time.”  To  make  the  best  use  of  firm-wide  data,  some  organisations  have 
established  a  dedicated  risk  management  function  to  foster  more  highly  integrated  and  systematic 
approaches to risk measurement and management. The risk management function typically promotes 
the use of common risk measures across business lines. It can then report the firm-wide risk data to 
senior  management.  Reports  may  range  from  daily  updates  on  “value-at-risk”  trading  positions  to 
regular, if less frequent, compilations of the results of stress testing.  
The  broader  use  of  shared  definitions  to  guide  the  comprehensive  reporting  of  risk  across  the  firm 
enables  the  integrated  risk  management  function  to  identify  concentrations  of  risk.  Concentrations 
matter particularly when various business lines within the firm have different kinds of exposures to the 
same counterparty. Comprehensive and consistent reporting helps, moreover, to ensure that the firm 
is aware of the wide range of risks to which it is exposed; that it understands the relative importance of 
various risks and how they may interact; and that the firm is less likely to ignore material sources of 
risk. 
The Joint Forum’s study suggests that no single model for organising an integrated risk management 
function  has  become  dominant.  In  some  financial  organisations,  the  function  may  exercise  a 
considerable  degree  of  control  over  individual  businesses.  In  others  -  and  especially  in  insurance 
companies - local business units continue to operate autonomously to a great degree.  
Yet nearly all firms that establish integrated risk management units are highly dependent on the quality 
of their information technology to collect, analyse, and report firm-wide data efficiently and effectively. 
Some  participants  have  found  that  the  greatest  challenge  in  developing  a  centralised  risk 
management structure lies in constructing compatible and efficient management information systems 
across all of their businesses. As a result, they devote substantial resources in terms of personnel and 
expenditures to the maintenance and enhancement of their management information systems. 
B. 
Collecting  risk  data  across  many  business  lines  has  catalysed  further  efforts  to  aggregate  those 
measures of risk by quantifying them in a rigorous fashion. This is the second major risk management 
trend identified in the Joint Forum report. The quantification of risk is certainly not a new concept in the 
insurance  industry.  Actuaries  have  long  sought  to  estimate  the  likelihood  of  various  events  taking 
place.  In  recent  years,  however,  we  have  seen  financial  risk  managers  and  researchers  apply 
mathematics, statistics, and modelling to many risk exposures that were previously not thought to be 
readily quantifiable.  
In the banking industry, for example, statistical and computational analyses developed for evaluating 
exposures to market risk led, over the past decade or so, to the application of similar techniques to 
credit risk. Indeed, the introduction of increasingly reliable estimates of the drivers of credit risk, such 
as  the  probability  of  default,  led  to  many  of  the  proposals  that  form  the  basis  for  the  Basel  II  bank 
capital framework, as I will discuss in a few minutes.  
The Joint Forum found that the “ultimate expression” of risk aggregation is the summation of many 
types of risk into a single risk measure. This measure, often called “economic capital,” estimates the 
amount of capital a firm requires to protect itself against all risks with a certain degree of confidence.  
But the benefits of developing more aggregated measures of risk across diverse business lines are 
especially appealing to complex financial organisations whose activities span many kinds of activities. 
Risk aggregation into a single measure. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2004
As  a  result,  it  is  not  surprising  that  large,  mixed  financial  conglomerates  have  tended  to  invest  the 
most in the development of economic capital estimates. 
The structure of financial supervision 
III. 
The two trends in the financial services sector to integrate risk management into a dedicated function 
and to aggregate risk measures into a single measure of economic capital form the first part of the 
“virtuous circle.” These trends are influencing much more than the behaviour of individual firms. They 
are  similarly  influencing  the  structure  of  financial  supervision.  This  leads  to  my  second  topic  this 
morning, namely how supervisors will complete the “virtuous circle” by adopting regulations that foster 
continued improvements in the measurement and management of risk. 
In the insurance sector, this movement is visible in the European Union’s “Solvency II” project. The 
IAIS’s  initiative  to  establish  a  new  international  insurance  regulatory  framework  will  likewise  be 
significant to the industry in the new future. But certainly a lot of attention has been paid to the work 
that  the  Basel  Committee  and  other  supervisors  are  undertaking  to  reform  the  international  bank 
capital adequacy framework under Basel II. 
Basel II represents one of the most important reforms in banking supervision. For the past few years, 
central  bankers,  bank  supervisors,  and  the  industry  have  been  discussing  ways  to  revise  the  1988 
Basel  Accord,  which  constitutes  a  cornerstone  of  the  bank  regulatory  framework.  The  1988  Accord 
was  a  landmark  achievement  in  its  own  right.  It  represented  the  first  internationally  accepted 
“yardstick”  for  determining  the  adequacy  of  a  bank’s  capital.  It  was  relatively  simple  to  apply  and, 
perhaps as a result of its simplicity, was adopted by supervisors in over 100 countries. 
But its simplicity may have led in some ways to its gradual decrease in relevance for sophisticated 
banks and systems. Leading banks made substantial improvements in their measures of risk. As the 
Joint  Forum  reported,  industry  leaders  introduced  integrated  risk  management  functions  and  raised 
their standards for quantifying and aggregating various risks. Extraordinary growth in practices such as 
securitisation and in the use of sophisticated derivative products allowed banks to transfer credit risk in 
ways  that  the  1988  Accord  does  not  capture.  In  addition,  some  banks  began  to  manage  their 
exposures  to  operational  risk  separately  and  as  a  comprehensive  practice  comparable  to  the 
management of credit or market risk.  
By the late 1990s, it became increasingly clear to leading banks and their supervisors that the original 
Accord  no  longer  provided  meaningful  measures  of  risk  for  the  most  sophisticated  banking 
organisations.  As  a  result,  the  Basel  Committee  and  others  began  to  discuss  ways  to  revise  the 
existing capital rules to account for these advances.  
Supervisors  sought  more  than  a  simple  revision  of  the  existing  framework.  We  wanted  to  align  our 
capital requirements more closely with the best measures of economic risks that banks actually face. 
We  sought  furthermore  to  fortify  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  so  that  banks  could  continue  to 
serve as a source of credit through good years and bad. In our view, promoting financial stability will 
benefit not just banks, but also other businesses and consumers as well. 
To  incorporate  the  latest  advances  in  risk  management,  and  to  develop  a  more  forward-looking 
approach to supervision, the Committee embraced a “three-pillar” approach to capital requirements. 
Rather  than  simply  setting  out  a  static  minimum  requirement  for  capital  levels,  the  new  capital 
framework will rely on three mutually reinforcing policy approaches. They consist of, first, risk-sensitive 
minimum requirements; second, a more consistent system of supervisory review; and, third, enhanced 
transparency and market discipline. Each of these three pillars offers unique benefits on its own, but 
the real strength of the three pillars stems from their ability to complement each other. 
The first pillar - which specifies the minimum capital requirements - constitutes a very direct approach 
to  supervision.  By  applying  a uniform set  of rules  to  banks,  the first  pillar adds  transparency  to  the 
regulatory  process.  Applying  a  shared  set  of  rules  to  all  banks  makes  it  easier  to  compare 
organisations and get a sense of their relative degrees of solvency.  
On a technical level, the Committee based the measures of risk on the advanced practices that banks 
are adopting. The rules reflect the evolution in credit risk management by allowing qualifying banks to 
rely  partly  on  their  own  estimates  of  the  drivers  of  credit  risk  to  determine  the  amount  of  capital 
required against particular exposures. One such driver of credit risk might be the bank’s own estimate 
of  a  borrower’s  probability  of  default.  Similarly,  the  new  capital  rules  will  reflect  the  advances  in 
operational risk measurement by incorporating an explicit capital charge for such exposures to loss. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 3
So  the  minimum  rules  will  align  capital  charges  more  closely  to  better  measures  of  the  actual 
underlying  economic  risks  that  the  industry  is  developing.    This  is  a  clear  example  of  how  we  are 
harnessing  the  advances  made  by  the  leading  institutions  within  the  industry.    Furthermore,  to 
encourage those institutions which are not at the leading edge in this field to make enhancements in 
their  internal  controls  and  risk  management  processes,  the  New  Accord  will  offer  explicit  economic 
incentives to adopt - over time - more accurate measures of risk and more sophisticated means for 
controlling their exposures to such risks. 
However, the Basel Committee recognised that relying on uniform rules alone would have introduced 
certain  drawbacks.  Rules  tend  to  be  inflexible  and  therefore  might  preclude  or  ignore  innovation. 
Applying uniform rules may also fail to account for a bank’s unusual businesses or risk profiles.  
Consequently,  our  second  pillar,  supervisory  review,  addresses  some  of  those  drawbacks.  It 
introduces judgement into the policy mix. Banks and supervisors will exercise discretion in determining 
capital needs relevant to their particular businesses and risk profiles. That degree of discretion makes 
the supervisory framework more flexible and better able to adapt to change and innovation.  
Finally,  the  third  pillar,  market  discipline,  adds  greater  transparency  to  the  process.  When  a  bank 
discloses information that offers meaningful insight into its risk positions and exposures, marketplace 
participants are better able to assess its financial health. Counterparties, investors, rating agencies, 
and even customers can reward banks that manage their risks properly and penalise those that hold 
unrealistically  low  amounts  of  capital  for  their  risk.  Their  reactions  provide  economic  incentives  for 
banks to strengthen their management of risk and hold at least adequate levels of capital against their 
risks.  
One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. 
Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot. Each is essential to achieving our overall 
objective  of  financial  stability.  I  realise  that  this  analogy  of  the  three  pillars  as  a  portfolio  of  policy 
options  is  an  oversimplification.  But  it  helps  us  to  visualise  why  we  think  that  the  most  “efficient 
frontier” involves a mixture of minimum rules, tempered by supervisory discretion, and supplemented 
by market-based incentives. 
Consistency of accounting standards and a three-pillar system 
IV. 
Of course, our three-pillar supervisory system is highly dependent on a firm’s internal measures of risk 
exposures. “Basel II,” for example, looks at a bank’s own measures of risk in Pillar 1. Supervisors then 
engage  bank  managers  in  a  dialogue  on  their  interpretations  of  those  measures  -  and  the  steps 
managers take in response - in Pillar 2. Finally, Pillar 3 is intended to give the market greater insight 
into those measures of risk exposures and what the bank may do to control them. Because the three 
pillars  are  so  dependent  on  the  internal  measures,  neither  supervisors  nor  bankers  can  ignore  the 
mechanics that define how financial data are recorded and reported. Those mechanics, as you know, 
are governed by national accounting standards, which is the last topic I would like to address. 
Supervisors and global market participants face significant hurdles in exercising discipline on an entity 
whose operations span more than one jurisdiction. Business practices differ between countries. Legal 
systems may be unfamiliar. Deciphering balance sheets prepared under national accounting systems 
can be an extremely taxing undertaking.  
Considering those burdens alone, it is easy to agree that supervisory and market discipline would be 
more effective under more harmonious - if not completely harmonised - accounting rules. But the task 
is formidable. 
In our duty to safeguard and reinforce financial stability, central banks and financial supervisors have a 
legitimate interest in the quality of accounting standards and their effective implementation. We believe 
that in order to help fortify the financial system, accounting standards should support - or at least be 
consistent  with  -  sound  risk  management  and  control  practices  in  use  in  the  industry.  In  addition, 
accounting standards should facilitate market discipline by providing a more transparent “window” into 
an organisation’s financial position and performance and likewise into its measures and management 
of risk exposures. Finally, accounting standards should facilitate the effective supervision of financial 
institutions.  
In the specific case of the insurance industry, I think it’s fair to say that almost all of us believe that, for 
international standards to be complete, we need a single, high quality standard developed to address 
insurance liabilities. The challenge lies in specifying a model that fits together seamlessly with other 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2004
international  accounting  guidelines  and  at  the  same  time  aligns  well  with  sound  insurance  risk 
management  and  supervisory  objectives.  Given  some  of  the  issues  we’ve  faced  in  other  areas  of 
accounting, that seems unlikely to be a quick or easy job. 
That same challenge to align accounting guidelines to sound risk management objectives as well as 
supervisory  objectives  exists  across  the  financial  services  sectors.  It  explains  why  financial 
supervisors, and especially the Basel Committee, attach great importance to playing an active role in 
the  international  debates  on  accounting.  In  the  Basel  Committee’s  case,  we  seek  to  represent  the 
supervisory  perspective  on  key  accounting  issues  relevant  to  banking,  and  we  support  the  work 
underway in the accounting profession towards convergence in accounting standards globally.  
With  regard  to  Basel  II,  the  Committee  worked  closely  with  our  colleagues  in  the  International 
Accounting Standards Board to avoid conflicts between Pillar 3 and the broader accounting standards. 
In fact, the Committee views Pillar 3 as a further refinement of the accounting standards that apply to 
banks’  specific  exposures.  Because  we  recognise  that  we  have  much  to  do  in  this  area,  we  will 
continue  to  monitor  accounting  and  market  developments  in  the  light  of  Pillar  3.  Our  dialogue  with 
accounting standards-setting bodies and the accounting profession will continue to grow in the years 
to come. 
Conclusion 
V. 
This morning, I have shared some of my views on the need for risk management and supervision to 
evolve together and to reinforce each other. All of us recognise that both areas must keep pace with 
changes in accounting practices, and I think you would agree that the work we have to undertake in all 
three areas  -  risk  management,  supervision,  and accounting -  is quite  demanding.  To develop  new 
ways of thinking about risk and about the techniques for measuring it, we will require hard research 
and  significant  resources.  We  must  gather  and  pour  over  large  amounts  of  data  to  sharpen  our 
understanding of various risks and their relationships to each other. We must dedicate our talent, staff, 
and  indeed  funds  to  undertake  this  work.  I  would  argue  that  is  equally  demanding  to  develop  a 
supervisory structure that capitalises on and further encourages those advances, especially when we 
are trying to implement a shared framework across many jurisdictions. 
But the benefits are many. On a microeconomic level, the virtuous circle I have described should help 
individual  firms  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  controls  in  the  short  run  and  strengthen  their 
competitiveness in the long run. Yet supervisors are especially motivated by the benefits we expect at 
the  macro  level.  We  believe  that,  when  all  financial  institutions  have  the  right  incentives  to  pursue 
profits responsibly, the financial services sector becomes better managed, more resilient, and better 
able to serve as a source for sustainable growth for the economy. Attaining that promise of greater 
financial stability is a challenge that is worthy of all of our talent, of our time, and of our hard work.  
With that, I would like to thank you for welcoming me to your conference. I offer my best wishes for 
fruitful and thought-provoking discussions. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 5
