Lee Hsien Loong: Prospering in a rising Asia 
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  opening  dinner  of  the  Conference  Board  Symposium  on  Asian 
Economies and Financial Markets, Singapore, 27 May 2004. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me first welcome all of you to the Conference Board Symposium on Asian Economies and 
Financial Markets, held for the first time here in Singapore. 
Asia’s comeback since the financial crisis 
Asian economies have come a long way since the financial crisis in 1997. For six years they have had 
a  tumultuous  ride,  marked  by  unexpected  shocks  and  painful  adjustments.  The  September  11th 
attacks were followed by the Bali and Marriot bombings in Indonesia, which shook confidence in the 
region and brought the harsh realities of Islamist extremist terrorism closer to home. Last year, the Iraq 
war  and  the  SARS  outbreak  weakened  business  sentiments  and  consumer  spending,  setting  back 
economic recovery yet again. 
Prospects for the region have since brightened considerably, on the strength of a synchronised upturn 
in the G3 economies. The electronics industry, a lynchpin of export-driven Asian economies, is finally 
picking  up  robustly  after  a  prolonged  slump.  Investor  confidence  has  returned,  bond  spreads  have 
narrowed, and stock markets have outperformed the developed countries, until very recently.  
The  Asian  crisis  forced  governments  in  the  region  to  tackle  weaknesses  in  their  financial  and 
corporate  sectors  and  implement  much  needed  structural  reforms.  Weak  banks  have  been 
recapitalised, bad loans reduced, and prudential regulations strengthened. Government finances have 
been  put  on a  firmer  footing,  while  balances  of  payments  have  moved  into  surplus.  The result  is a 
stronger and leaner Asia, more prepared for storms and more ready to seize opportunities.  
A major development in recent years is the emergence of China as an economic powerhouse. China’s 
growth  and  transformation  have  been  phenomenal.  Its  buoyant  exports,  supported  by  low-cost 
manufacturing capabilities, and its huge domestic market, have created strong competition as well as 
immense  opportunities  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  China’s  growth  has  driven  the  rapid  increase  in 
intra-regional trade, and fuelled economic expansion in the region, if not worldwide. China’s economy 
is showing signs of overheating, but its government is mindful of the danger and determined to act 
decisively to rein in credit and investment. This gives them a good chance of achieving a soft landing. 
Beyond this cyclical issue, China is set to continue growing strongly for the next decade or two. 
The other Asian giant, India, is becoming a dynamic and prosperous economy. Liberalisation policies 
and market reforms are freeing up the long moribund Indian economy. State-owned enterprises are 
being privatised. Ports, airports, telecommunications and financial services have been opened up to 
competition and foreign participation. As the dead hand of bureaucracy is withdrawn, growth is taking 
off,  especially  in  the  services  sector.  With  well-trained,  English  speaking,  and  cost-competitive 
professionals,  India  has  created  a  niche  for  itself  as  the  world’s  back-office  as  well  as  a  global 
software centre.  
The BJP coalition’s unexpected defeat in the general elections reflects the unhappiness of rural voters 
who have not benefited from the liberalisation. This may cause the new Congress government to be 
more  circumspect  about  pressing  ahead  with  reforms,  although  optimistic  commentators  argue  that 
the voters are pressing for faster reforms rather than slower. Whether or not that is so, the policy of 
liberalisation commands bipartisan support, and is likely to continue. After all, the new Prime Minister, 
Dr  Manmohan  Singh,  was  the  architect  of  the  initial  economic  reforms  in  the  early  1990s.  He  has 
appointed  as  Finance  Minister  Mr  Chidambaram,  who  is  also  a  reformist  and  a  former  Commerce 
Minister and Finance Minister. I am therefore hopeful that the thrust of liberalisation will continue, and 
India will play increasingly a prominent role like China’s in the regional and global economies.  
Closer  to  home,  the  prospects  for  Southeast  Asian  economies  are  also  looking  better.  The  region 
initially  struggled  as  political  and  security  concerns  deterred  foreign  investments  and  distracted 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
from 
tackling  serious  economic  problems.  But  Southeast  Asia  has  stabilised 
governments 
considerably in recent years. Governments are responding more vigorously to the threat of terrorism 
and restoring order and confidence. The political upheavals that swept across the region have also 
subsided, allowing governments to focus their attention on fostering growth and development.  
The Thai economy has done particularly well. For the past few years it has been the fastest growing 
economy in Southeast Asia. Through a series of bold initiatives, the Thai government has revived the 
rural economy, stimulated domestic demand, and repaid its IMF loans. This has bolstered confidence 
and got business moving again.  
Indonesia’s  economy  has improved  significantly  despite  a  complex  political situation.  Reforms  were 
slow initially, as corruption and an unreliable legal system impeded progress. Nevertheless, Indonesia 
has made significant headway in financial sector reforms. IBRA accelerated the pace of its bank asset 
sales, while non-performing loans ratios fell from nearly 50% in 1998 to just 8% last year. Indonesia 
graduated  from  the  IMF  programme  in  December  2003,  and  has  continued  to  maintain  sound 
macroeconomic  policies.  While 
the  oversubscribed 
US$1 billion  sovereign  bond  sale  in  March  this  year  is  a  vote  of  confidence  from  international 
investors. The challenge over the longer term is to attract enough investments to sustain growth and 
reduce unemployment. 
Overall,  Asia  is  showing  a  new  dynamism,  and  has  put  the  financial  crisis  behind  it.  For  all  the 
difficulties that remain, this is probably the most promising region in the world.  
investments  remain  slow, 
foreign  direct 
Asia’s strategic landscape 
Asia’s economic growth rests on the stability of the strategic environment in the region. Constructive 
and  stable  relations  among  the  major  powers  set  limits  on  rivalries  and  conflicts  in  the  region,  and 
enable trade and investments to flourish.  
The key post Cold War global geopolitical reality is America’s unique pre-eminence. The US will not 
always get its way; for example it is facing serious difficulties in Iraq. However, there is no credible 
challenger for America’s global position. In East Asia a strong US presence has been the cornerstone 
of peace since the end of the Second World War. The US will remain a vital and irreplaceable part of 
the East Asian strategic picture for the foreseeable future.  
Of  course  in  Asia  as  in  other  regions,  many  countries,  including  friends  and  allies  of  the  US,  are 
uncomfortable with the scope of US pre-eminence and some of its policies. But all still want the best 
possible  relationship  they  can  have  with  the  US.  They  know  that  they  cannot  challenge  US  pre 
eminence and that no issue in the region can be resolved without America’s cooperation.  
China is a prime example. China’s fundamental preoccupations are internal. It wants a stable regional 
environment in order to deal with them. Beijing will not compromise on its vital interests, one of which 
is the status of Taiwan. But it knows that it is also in China’s interest to have good relations with the 
US. For its part, the US knows that it needs the cooperation of China in order to deal with terrorism 
and other post Cold War challenges.  
US China relations are the most important bilateral relationship in Asia and soon, perhaps in the world. 
Some  degree  of  competition  between  the  US  and  China  is  inevitable,  but  conflict  is  not.  The 
complexity  and  multidimensional  nature  of  US  China  relations  requires  both  sides  to  balance  and 
reconcile different perspectives to achieve equilibrium. Good US China relations will calm all of Asia. 
The  major  Asian  powers  are  also  striving  to  stabilise  relations  with  one  another,  at  least  in  part  to 
better  deal  with  post  Cold  War  geopolitical  realities.  The  most  fundamental  interest  of  all  Asian 
countries is in development: in growth, trade and investments, not war. 
Three issues could disrupt Asia’s strategic stability. They are the India Pakistan conflict over Kashmir, 
the North Korean issue and Taiwan. All three have a potential nuclear dimension. Let me deal briefly 
with each one.  
The  India  Pakistan  conflict  is  complex,  mired  in  history  and  religion.  It  is  difficult  to  envisage  a 
definitive  solution.  But  the  conflict  can  and  has  been  managed.  In  recent  months,  we  have  seen 
encouraging signs of a thaw. We should not underestimate the importance of these small but positive 
steps, given that only a few years ago India and Pakistan were on the brink of a nuclear war. Both 
countries  know  that  a  conflict  over  Kashmir  would have  disastrous  consequences  that  far outweigh 
any  possible  gains.  It  would  grievously  disrupt  India’s  economic  reforms  and  perhaps  permanently 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
relegate India behind China. For Pakistan, it could mean the end of the state as it presently exists. It is 
therefore  a  good  sign  that  the  new  Indian  Government  has  signalled  that  it  wishes  to  continue 
dialogue and engagement with Pakistan.  
Like Kashmir, it is difficult to see a definitive solution to the North Korean problem. But this too can be 
managed. The six party talks have reduced the risk of accidental war. The key actors are rational and, 
despite their differences, share a common interest in a peaceful resolution of the issue. Kim Jong Il is 
a master of brinkmanship. But he too is rational and must know that war will lead to the outcome that 
he fears most, the disappearance of North Korea as a sovereign state. Therefore, while he may go to 
the very edge, unlike Saddam Hussein, Kim will not deliberately step over it. The North Korean issue 
is a strong incentive for the US and China to cooperate for their common interest.  
The risks of miscalculation are perhaps highest over Taiwan. The issue is extremely delicate because 
it engages the domestic politics of China, US and Taiwan. There is growing tension between economic 
forces that are integrating Taiwan with the Mainland and Taiwan’s desire for a separate identity. No 
PRC  leadership  can  ever tolerate a  bid  for  independence  by  Taiwan.  If  Taiwan  pushes  too  far,  the 
Chinese must react or be exposed as a ‘paper tiger’.  
The  US  stand,  and  perceptions  of  the  US  stand  in  China  and  Taiwan,  are  key  to  the  problem. 
President Bush has said publicly that he does not support Taiwan’s independence. But the US may 
still be drawn into a Cross Straits conflict. If this happens, there will be serious consequences for the 
entire region. But it is encouraging that Chen Shui-bian’s inauguration speech took a more conciliatory 
tone, suggesting that he is aware of the grave dangers, although he still left open the possibility  of 
independence. 
In Southeast Asia, terrorism will be a major preoccupation for many years to come. Another terrorist 
attack  will  shake  confidence  in  Southeast  Asia,  damaging  growth  prospects.  The  Southeast  Asian 
waterways are vital lifelines for Japan, China and South Korea. A maritime terrorist attack that disrupts 
them  will  have  wide  economic  and  political  repercussions.  Unfortunately,  there  is  widespread 
discomfort  among  Muslims  everywhere  with  American  policies  in  the  Middle  East  and  towards  the 
Israel  Palestine  conflict.  Mainstream  Muslims  are  afraid  to  speak  up  against  extremists  for  fear  of 
appearing pro American. This is a serious problem that has not yet been adequately addressed.  
One important question is the role of Islam in Southeast Asian countries. Traditional Southeast Asian 
Islam  is  syncretic  and  tolerant,  but  it  is  increasingly  influenced  by  more  austere  Middle  Eastern 
variants of Islam, especially Wahhabbism. Which way this battle for the soul of Islam goes is a key 
uncertainty that will determine the future of the region. 
In  Malaysia,  Prime  Minister  Abdullah  Badawi  won  a  clear  victory  over  PAS,  the  opposition  Islamist 
Party.  He  did  not  challenge  PAS’  contention  that  Malaysia  should  be  an  Islamic  State,  but  instead 
fought  PAS  on  what  kind  of  Islamic  State  Malaysia  should  be.  His  victory  bolsters  his  vision  of 
progressive Islam and should encourage mainstream Muslims everywhere. But PAS will not give up 
and is girding itself for a long-term struggle. 
In Indonesia, it is significant that all three major Presidential candidates are secular nationalists. But all 
three  have  also  found  it  necessary  to  seek  Vice  Presidential  candidates  with  strong  Muslim 
credentials,  and  support  from  Muslim  parties.  Although  Indonesia  has  a  long  history  of  tolerant, 
syncretic Islam, more so than other Southeast Asian countries, political Islam is now at the centre of 
Indonesian politics and a crucial swing factor. 
In Thailand, Prime Minister Thaksin’s pro business and pro growth economic policies have not found 
resonance in the Muslim south. The recent upsurge of Islamic separatist violence is worrying, though 
there is so far no evidence of international terrorist connections.  
Southeast Asian governments, even those with large Muslim populations, are secular, moderate and 
intent  on  economic  growth.  If  progressive  and  moderate  forces  are  to  win  the  global  battle  for  the 
hearts and minds of the Muslims, Southeast Asia is perhaps the most favourable battleground. 
Riding on Asia’s growth 
This backdrop gives hope that the strategic and security environment in Asia will remain stable. I am 
also  optimistic  that  Asian  countries  will  continue  to  maintain  stable  political  environments,  pursue 
pro-business economic policies, and participate in the global economy. One significant economic issue 
countries must tackle is to strengthen and develop their financial sectors.  
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
Asian  countries  need  a  two-pronged  approach  to  do  this.  First,  they  should  foster  greater  regional 
cooperation in financial markets to leverage on their collective strength. Second, individual countries 
need to press on with unfinished financial reforms and take judicious steps to liberalise the financial 
sector.  
Greater regional cooperation 
On regional cooperation, countries have clearly recognised the benefits of greater trade integration, 
driven by the forces of globalisation. To facilitate the integration process, ASEAN has accelerated the 
timetable  for  the  formation  of  an  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area.  Last  October,  the  leaders  decided  to 
commit to creating an ASEAN Economic Community, giving for the first time a supranational cast to 
ASEAN’s aspirations. The ASEAN+3 process that links ASEAN with China, Japan and South Korea, 
ought eventually to evolve into an East Asian Economic Community that may include Australia and 
New Zealand. ASEAN is also negotiating free trade agreements with key trading partners. In addition 
to  a  Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership  with  Japan,  ASEAN  has  targeted  FTAs  with  China  and 
India by the end of this decade. Meanwhile, individual ASEAN countries are already concluding FTAs 
with China, India and Japan.  
More recently, regional countries have also embarked on various initiatives to deepen capital market 
cooperation  and  integration  in  the  region.  For  example,  the  EMEAP  Group,  comprising  11  central 
banks  and  monetary  authorities  in  the  East  Asia  and  Pacific  region,  has  launched  the  Asian  Bond 
Fund  I.  The  group  is  now  working  towards  launching  the  local  currency-denominated  Asian  Bond 
Fund 2.  The  ASEAN+3  member  countries  have  also  made  significant  progress  to  develop  regional 
bond  markets  under  the  Asian  Bond  Market  Initiative  and  to  establish  a  regional  financing 
arrangement  through  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative.  These  initiatives  are  significant  not  only  for  their 
tangible economic benefits, but also as symbolic demonstrations of the collective interest in regional 
financial cooperation.  
Alliances among Asian exchanges 
Another  area  with  potential  for  regional  financial  collaboration  is  in  the  securities  and  futures 
exchanges market.  
In  US and  especially  in  Europe,  a  wave  of consolidation  among leading  exchanges has resulted  in 
mega-exchanges that have the economies of scale to make investments in advanced infrastructure, 
offer competitive fees, and most importantly provide investors and issuers with the liquidity that they 
seek. Exchanges in Asia have thus far been largely insulated from the trends of consolidation. Asian 
stock markets are generally smaller in size and less liquid than those in more developed countries. To 
remain  relevant  to  international  investors  in  this  changing  landscape,  regional  exchanges  should 
deepen their collaboration with one another.  
The  decision  of  the  recent  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers’  meeting  to  explore  alliances  and  linkages 
among ASEAN securities markets will catalyse and encourage this collaboration. Regional exchanges 
are  already  taking  the  first  steps.  The  Singapore  Exchange,  SGX,  for  instance,  established  a 
co-trading linkage with the Australian Stock Exchange in 2001. It is in discussions with Tokyo Stock 
Exchange  on  a  possible  alliance,  and  has  recently  started  talks  with  Bursa  Malaysia,  formerly  the 
Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, on possible collaborations.  
Pressing on with reforms at the national level 
While pursuing regional initiatives, individual countries need to press on with reforms at the national 
level. Although many Asian countries have significantly strengthened their financial systems, they still 
need to follow through with reforms in the financial and corporate sectors. 
Singapore’s financial system was lucky to emerge from the Asian crisis relatively unscathed. During 
the  crisis,  we  undertook  an  extensive  liberalisation  program  aimed  at  deepening  and  broadening 
capital markets, consolidating and upgrading the local banks, and enhancing Singapore’s position as 
an international financial centre. At the same time, we put in place a new supervisory framework to 
oversee financial institutions, shifting from one-size-fits-all regulation to more risk-based supervision. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
Our efforts have achieved encouraging results. Our debt market has grown three-fold since 1998 to 
reach  S$90  billion  in  2002,  driven  by  growing  demand  in  the  region  for  debt  financing.  Our  wealth 
management industry more than doubled in the same period, with total Assets Under Management 
growing from S$150 billion in 1998 to S$344 billion in 2002. In treasury activities, we have maintained 
our  position  as  the  fourth  largest  FX  centre  in  the  world,  with  an  average  daily  trading  volume  of 
US$119 billion in 2003. The local banks have consolidated from seven into three banks that are larger 
and  stronger,  and  are  building  up  their  regional  footprints.  In  the  recent  Financial  System  Stability 
Assessment of Singapore, the IMF affirmed the robustness of Singapore’s financial system and the 
soundness of our legal, supervisory and institutional framework.  
We are heartened by these outcomes. But we still need to press on with further reforms and policy 
adjustments, because the international financial landscape continues to evolve. In this regard, let me 
highlight two things that MAS is doing.  
Revisions to capital adequacy requirements of locally incorporated banks 
First, MAS will be revising the capital adequacy requirements of locally incorporated banks. 
Singapore banks have since 1992 been required to meet a minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio, or CAR, 
requirement  of  12%.  MAS  has  progressively  adjusted  this  requirement.1  However,  the  current  MAS 
requirement of 12% Total CAR of which 8% must be Tier 1 capital still exceeds those in other major 
financial centres.  
As part of MAS’ efforts to keep our regulatory framework up-to-date with international best practices, 
we started to review the CAR requirements in March last year. I am sure the industry will be pleased to 
know  that  MAS  has  completed  the  review.  MAS  will  announce  the  details  at  a  press  conference 
tomorrow evening. I will touch briefly on the three components of the revisions.  
Minimum CAR 
(i) 
The first change is in the minimum CAR requirements of local banks. MAS will lower this minimum 
CAR  to  10%,  of  which  at  least  7%  should  comprise  Tier  1  capital.  This  is  competitive,  taking  into 
account our small and open economy, and the systemic importance of the three local banks. Some 
other  countries,  including  Switzerland,  similarly  have  a  higher  requirement  than  other  developed 
jurisdictions. 
This reduction in minimum CAR does not necessarily translate into a full 2% lowering of the total CAR 
requirements because in parallel with this, MAS will amend the rules for computing CAR, which is the 
second component of the package of CAR revisions.  
Changes in CAR computation rules  
(ii) 
One noteworthy revision to the computation rules will be a requirement for banks to set aside more 
capital for significant investments, commensurate with the risks associated with such investments. We 
had stated in August last year that this would be done, when we extended by two years the grace 
period for Singapore banks to divest non-financial businesses.2
Another significant revision is to allow banks to include 45% of the revaluation surpluses from banks’ 
holdings of property assets as well as portfolio equity investments as Upper Tier 2 capital. This will 
raise the capital available to banks, but it is unlikely to offset the higher capital that they will have to set 
aside for significant investments. 
In  line  with  the  policy  of  setting  more  transparent  requirements,  MAS  will  publish  these  CAR 
requirements  and  computation  rules.  Local  banks  will  report  their  CAR  based  on  the  revised  rules 
starting from their second quarter financial results.  
                                                      
1   MAS lowered the Tier 1 component from 12% to 10% in November 1998, and again from 10% to 8% in September 2000. 
2  
“Extension of grace period for banks divestment of non-financial businesses”, MAS Press Release, 22 August 2003. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 5
Bank specific supervisory CAR requirements.  
(iii) 
The  third  component  is  supervisory  CAR.  Like  other  supervisors,  MAS  may  impose  additional 
bank-specific supervisory CAR to address risks not adequately covered by the minimum requirement. 
MAS has refined the framework for setting these supervisory CAR add-ons.  
It  takes  advantage  of  MAS’  existing  risk-based  supervisory  approach  and  is  based  on  MAS’  risk 
assessment of individual banks. In line with international practice, these supervisory CAR add-ons will 
be kept confidential.  
Impact of the revisions 
The adjustments in our CAR framework will allow local banks to manage their capital more flexibly. 
Banks which have lower risk profiles and which are better managed will enjoy lower total regulatory 
CAR requirements than before. At the same time, the adjustments will maintain prudential standards 
observed  by  supervisors  in  other  major  financial  centres,  which  tend  to  be  more  stringent  than  the 
minimum standards stipulated under the current Capital Accord.  
Overall, these changes will result in modest but meaningful reductions to the CAR requirements, but 
they may or may not translate into immediate capital reductions for the banks. Leading banks tend to 
maintain capital at levels well above regulatory minimums, and that will undoubtedly prove to be the 
case in Singapore as well. In managing their capital positions, banks will also take into account their 
future expansion plans, as well as the risks they potentially face in their business environment.  
Non-internationalisation of Singapore dolla (S$) policy 
The second policy adjustment concerns the non-internationalisation of Singapore dollar. 
Monetary policy in Singapore is centred on the management of the exchange rate. As an international 
financial  centre  with  open  capital  markets,  we  are exposed  to  large  and  sometimes,  volatile  capital 
flows.  To  facilitate  the  effective  conduct  of  our  monetary  policy  and  to  avoid  large  swings  in  our 
S$ exchange rate, we have a policy of discouraging the internationalisation of the S$. However, we 
recognised  that  the  trade-off  was  a  less  vibrant  capital  market,  particularly  the  debt  market.  So  we 
have progressively relaxed the specific restrictions over the past six years, while maintaining the intent 
of the policy. The results have been positive.  
The non-internationalisation policy is now down to two basic safeguards to discourage speculation in 
the S$ - banks may not lend S$ to non-resident financial institutions in order to speculate on the S$, 
and  non-resident  borrowers  who  raise  S$  through  bank  borrowings  or  on  our  capital  markets  must 
swap  or  convert  these  S$  to  foreign  currencies  before  remitting  them  abroad.  This  stance  remains 
appropriate,  and  continues  to  underpin  the  effective  conduct  of  our  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless, 
there is scope for further fine-tuning. 
We have decided that non-resident, non-financial issuers of S$ bonds and equities will no longer be 
required  to  swap  or  convert  their  S$  proceeds  into  foreign  currencies  before  remitting  abroad. 
Non-resident, financial issuers of bonds and equities will still have to do so. This will give the issuers 
greater flexibility in managing their S$ funds.  
In  addition,  MAS  will  exempt  from  the  restrictions  under  the  policy,  any  extension  of  temporary 
overdrafts  of  S$  vostro  accounts  to  prevent  settlement  failures.  This  will  facilitate  straight-through 
processing and more efficient handling of S$ payments.  
With the progressive relaxation of the S$ restrictions, the current policy essentially limits only lending 
of  S$  to  non-resident  financial  institutions  for  the  purpose  of  speculating  in  the  S$,  and  does  not 
specifically  seek 
label: 
“Non-Internationalisation  of  the  S$”  may  suggest  that  Singapore  restricts  foreign  participation  in 
S$ markets, which we do not do. We have therefore also decided to rename the policy "Lending of S$ 
to non-resident financial institutions".  
the  S$.  The  present 
internationalisation  of 
to  prevent 
the 
Conclusion 
Asia has had a remarkable recovery and can now look forward to a period of renewed growth and 
prosperity. Financial markets will play a major role in this process. Despite some strategic and security 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2004
risks in the region, the political situation is generally stable and positive. There are challenges ahead, 
but  with  greater  regional  collaboration  and  integration,  and  continued  reforms  and  developments  to 
financial  sectors  in  individual  countries,  Asians,  and  investors  in  the  region,  can  look  forward  to  a 
vibrant and dynamic future. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 7
