Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The future prospects of the Islamic financial services industry 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  IFSB  interactive 
session, Bali, 31 March 2004. 
 Our  endeavour  is  to  develop  an  Islamic  financial  system  as  an  intermediation  process  that  will 
contribute to overall wealth creation, growth and development and a greater shared prosperity. As the 
pace  of  globalization  and  liberalization  accelerates,  securing  financial  stability  and  confidence  have 
increased  demands  for  more  robust  and  resilient  financial  systems.  The  challenge  is  therefore  to 
evolve strategies that will promote a competitive, dynamic and sustainable Islamic financial services 
industry. Central to this common vision, to create a comprehensive Islamic financial system that will be 
able to respond to meet the requirements of the domestic economies and also to become an integral 
component of the international financial system. 
Distinguished guests, 
Assalamu’alaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh, 
It is my pleasure to be here today at this conference organised by the Islamic Financial Services Board 
to discuss the future prospects of the Islamic financial services industry.  
Malaysia’s experience in the development of our financial system is outlined in our ten year Financial 
Sector Masterplan. The Masterplan represents the blueprint that provides the strategic direction for the 
development of the sector that looks beyond the near term and takes a long-term perspective into the 
needs of the future. The aim of the plan is to provide clarity of the vision and objectives that are to be 
achieved in the context of a more challenging environment that is driven by rapid change in a world 
that is becoming increasingly more integrated and more technology and knowledge-based. 
In  the  development  of  our  Islamic  financial  system,  a  comprehensive  approach  has  been  adopted. 
Malaysia  has  given  emphasis  to  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  financial  infrastructure  that 
includes the Islamic financial markets, Islamic financial instruments, contract law and law enforcement 
procedures,  Shariah  governance  framework,  Islamic  accounting  practices  and  valuation  standards, 
appropriate  disclosure  requirements  as  well  as  an  efficient  and  secure  payment  and  settlement 
system.  Attention  has  also  been  directed  to  develop  the  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework that underpins the stability of the Islamic financial industry.  
Today,  my  remarks  will  focus  on  three  key  areas  in  which  greater  attention  is  needed  in  order  to 
secure a promising future for the Islamic financial services industry. These areas include accelerating 
the  pace  of  financial  innovation,  strengthening  risk  management  capabilities  and  leveraging  on 
information technology. 
Accelerating the pace of financial innovation 
As we advance forward in the development of Islamic finance, innovation will be key in securing the 
competitive advantage. It will be vital to the future of Islamic finance. While the initial focus has been 
on institutional building and financial infrastructure development, greater attention needs to be given to 
increasing the range of products and services to meet the greater sophistication of consumers and the 
more  complex  requirements  of  today’s  businesses  in  addition  to  enhancing  the  overall  efficiency  at 
which such products and services are provided. 
Several factors are important to provide an enabling environment that would encourage and promote 
innovation.  Firstly,  a  highly  qualified  and  skilled  workforce  in  the  industry  is  indispensable  for 
innovation. Training is a major means for promoting innovation. Personnel development in the industry 
is  therefore  important.  In  addition,  industry  involvement  and  participation  in  university  education 
through course development, teaching and internship will contribute to this process. In Malaysia, an 
industry-owned  research  and  training  institute  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance  known  as  the  Islamic 
Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia  or  IBFIM  has  been  established  to  spearhead  greater 
collaborative efforts with universities to undertake research in areas that are vital for the progressive 
development of the Islamic financial industry. 
Increasing  the  capacity  to  innovate  and  securing  long  term  competitiveness  also  underscores  the 
importance  of  developing  strategic  leaders  for  Islamic  financial  institutions,  leaders  who  are  able  to 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 1
reinvent  themselves  in  this  new  environment.  Recognising  this,  Malaysia  has  established  the 
International Centre for Leadership in Finance (or ICLIF) as part of our commitment to spearhead the 
development of a new generation of world class leaders who can steer the financial services sector to 
high performance and excellence in the industry.  
Secondly,  significant  investment  in  the  infrastructure  that  supports  research  and  development  will 
enhance  the  capacity  for  innovation.  Financial  support  for  advanced  research  at  universities  and 
research institutes will increase research opportunities. In addition, increasing the workforce involved 
in research and development will also increase the potential for innovation.  
Thirdly, extensive education of the consumer and business community would increase the outreach 
resulting  in  increasing  demands  for  new  and  innovative  products  and  approaches.  Malaysia  has 
implemented a ten year structured consumer education programme to increase the level of consumer 
awareness on the unique characteristics of Islamic financial products and the product choices offered 
by  Islamic  financial  providers.  Increased  awareness  will  drive  the  demand  for  a  broader  range  of 
Islamic  products  and  services  customized  to  their  requirements  at  more  competitive  prices  and 
through more convenient channels. The outreach has also been for small businesses on the Islamic 
products and services. This process prompts the financial industry to increase innovation to strengthen 
their competitive position. This can be reinforced by market research to enhance the understanding of 
customers’ distinct financial needs and their risk tolerance and therefore enable the design of Islamic 
financial instruments that offer tangible benefits and value to customers.  
In addition, as there is greater disclosure and transparency in the manner in which Islamic financial 
transactions are being conducted and Islamic financial contracts are being executed as well as on the 
risk and return profiles of Islamic financial products, this will strengthen the role of market discipline in 
driving Islamic financial institutions towards ensuring Shariah compliance in the operations, improving 
operational  efficiency,  strengthening  risk  management  infrastructures  and  instituting  sound  and 
dynamic risk management practices. 
These  developments  will  create  spin-off  effects  to  increase  innovation  in  developing  hedging 
instruments  that  are  Shariah  compliant.  While  innovation  in  conventional  banking  has  led  to  the 
development of a number of derivative instruments to hedge risks, there is still considerable debate 
amongst Islamic scholars about the acceptability of the various forms of derivative products from the 
perspective  of  Islamic  jurisprudence.  Towards  this  end,  there  is  a  need  for  more  investment  in 
intellectual  capital  and  greater  collaborative  efforts  among  Shariah  scholars,  Islamic  financial 
engineers  and  researchers  to  accelerate  innovation  that  can  integrate  Shariah  principles  in  the 
process of designing risk mitigation techniques and products. The Shariah should therefore be viewed 
as an enabler to innovation rather than a constraint. Leveraging on the true potential and wisdom of 
the  Shariah  would  evolve  Islamic  financial  instruments  into  distinct  innovative  and  cutting-edge 
products.  
Fourth,  the  environment  and  the  incentive  structure  are  also  important  in  providing  an  enabling 
environment that promotes innovation. In particular, the regulatory framework and the tax structure are 
important to the innovation process. The regulatory framework should not be so onerous that it forms a 
high cost and a burden to businesses. Intrusive regulatory approaches on new products can become a 
disincentive. Tax structures can also be structured to support the innovation process. Within financial 
institutions,  organisational  structures  can  also  create  an  environment  for  innovation  by  avoiding 
product-oriented  structures  and  aligning  instead  to  the  organization’s  processes  as  well  as 
implementing appropriate performance incentives. 
Fifth,  entering  into  strategic  alliances  with  entities  may  bring  new  approaches,  new  technologies  or 
specialisation in a new product. In addition, collaborative efforts amongst Islamic financial institutions 
would  strengthen  the  ability  to  leverage  on  the  industry’s  expertise.  The  introduction  of  innovative 
Islamic financial products in a specific jurisdiction can be expanded to other jurisdictions, which in turn, 
will  contribute  to  broaden  and  deepen  Islamic  financial  markets  and  thus  strengthen  the  overall 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  To  facilitate  the  achievement  of  this  objective,  the 
sharing of information can be made on the product features and the Shariah methodology adopted in 
ascertaining the permissibility of the products in the various jurisdictions.  
Strengthening risk management capabilities 
While financial liberalization and innovation have expanded the range of opportunities, it has also led 
to heightened uncertainties, greater volatility and increased potential of financial vulnerabilities. These 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2004
developments  require  financial  institutions  to  move  to  a  higher  standard  of  risk  awareness  and 
management.  Regulatory  emphasis  has  shifted  towards  a  more  risk  sensitive  regulatory  capital 
framework and the assessment of risk management systems and processes in financial institutions. 
Extensive investment has been made by the industry to adopt a comprehensive and robust internal 
risk management infrastructure.  
In  Islamic  banking,  the  requirement  to  manage  risks  becomes  more  important  due  to  the  special 
nature  of  the  financial  intermediation  process  that  is  guided  by  the  Shariah.  Islamic  financial 
institutions have a multi-facet role. On the asset side, Islamic financial institutions enter into diverse 
modes of Islamic financial contracts, each with its own peculiar risk characteristics. Basel II, has to a 
certain  extent,  incorporated  the  identification  of  credit,  market  and  operational  risks  that  can  be 
assimilated by Islamic financial institutions. However, Islamic financial institutions need to be ahead in 
exploring  other  dimensions  of  risks  in  these  Islamic  financial  contracts.  The  risk  management 
infrastructure in Islamic financial institutions must therefore be in place to identify, unbundle, measure, 
monitor and control all the specific risks in Islamic financial transactions and instruments to provide for 
their effective quantification and management.  
Strong  risk  management  capabilities  become  more  pertinent  in  view  of  the  different  contractual 
arrangements entered into by the Islamic financial institutions with the different classes of depositors. 
Demand  deposits,  under  the  guaranteed  custody  contract  and  investment  deposits,  under  the 
Mudharabah contract, each has its own unique risk and return attributes. Islamic financial institutions 
must  ensure  that  demand  depositors  are  protected  from  the  risks  of  Islamic  banking  business.  In 
respect of the Mudharabah depositors, any adverse shock to the financial performance of the asset 
portfolio in the balance sheet will be directly transmitted to the liability side, resulting in an adverse 
impact  on  the  returns  to  the  investment  depositors.  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  a  fiduciary 
accountability  in  ensuring  that  depositors’  funds  are  prudently  managed  and  that  the  risk-adjusted 
returns on investments are maximized. The ability to maximize risk-adjusted returns on investments 
and sustain stable and competitive returns to depositors will contribute to promoting confidence in the 
Islamic financial industry.  
Leveraging on information technology 
As  we  forge  ahead,  successful  financial  institutions  will  be  those  that  are  able  to  exploit  the  full 
potential  and  opportunities  that  arise  from  the  IT  revolution.  In  embracing  new  leading  edge 
technology, the potential for the Islamic financial industry to provide new products and services will be 
enhanced.  It  also  represents  the  potential  to  increase  access  to  financial  products  through  a  wider 
range of new delivery channels. Greater application of IT in the industry can also enhance efficiency 
by driving down costs for consumers and businesses. Other areas include leveraging on IT in making 
strategic  decisions  in  the  alignment  of  business,  in  elevating  institutional  capacity  and  operational 
efficiency and strengthening risk management capabilities. 
The  advent  of  Basel  II  for  conventional  banking  has  compelled  institutions  to  make  strategic 
investments  in  technology  and  risk  management  systems  to  be  equipped  in  making  the  required 
quantification  of  credit,  market  and  operational  risk.  Enhancing  the  IT  infrastructure  has  therefore 
become  indispensable  in  view  of  the  need  to  capture  and  maintain  sufficient  financial  data  and 
information for risk analysis. 
In  Islamic  banking,  IT  applications  in  strengthening  risk  management  capabilities  are  even  more 
demanding in view of the risk intricacies in the different Islamic modes of finance. A financing facility 
for example that is extended to a client based on Murabahah, Ijarah, Istisna’ and Musyarakah will all 
have its own unique risk exposures. The risk exposure is not only different across the different modes 
of finance but also across clients. In addition, different maturities of the Islamic financial contracts will 
have different implications for risk across modes and across clients. Islamic financial institutions need 
to have a robust internal rating system that can map all assets in the balance sheet in accordance with 
the risk characteristics of each asset. Comprehensive IT systems will be needed to capture and store 
long-term historical data so that expected probability of the return can be estimated and a risk weight 
can be quantified and assigned. Indeed, the heterogeneous modes of Islamic finance require an even 
more  rigorous  system  for  expected  return  calculation  as  compared  to  interest-based  credit 
transactions. 
The  complex  and  volatile  financial  environment  requires  enhanced  capacity  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions in dealing with uncertainties and probabilities. This will enable Islamic financial institutions 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 3
forecast 
in  a  dynamic  manner, 
to strengthen tolerance levels to deal with financial vulnerabilities. Towards this end, well-developed 
internal  risk  management  systems  are  required  to  identify  any  potential  deterioration  in  the  asset 
quality of the Islamic banking portfolio. This will allow Islamic financial institutions to be in a position to 
maintain  adequate  provisioning 
future  earnings  and  apply 
Shariah-compliant risk mitigation techniques at an early stage so as to manage the volatility in returns 
to ensure stable and competitive income to depositors.  
Similarly, applications of risk-based models allow Islamic financial institutions to conduct stress testing, 
sensitivity  analysis  and  simulations  based  on  multiple  scenarios  to  take  into  account  all  possible 
potential outcomes that may occur. This will enhance the capacity of Islamic financial institutions to 
better  anticipate  the  possible  impact  of  financial  shocks  on  future  earnings  and  hence  formulate 
contingency plans leading to a more effective and efficient asset and liability management.  
In  addition,  IT-based  risk  management  systems  would  strengthen  the  capacity  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions  to  effectively  manage  the  segregation  of  demand  deposits,  restricted  and  unrestricted 
investment  accounts  and shareholders  funds  in accordance  with  their  distinct  investment objectives 
and risk tolerance. The mapping of financial performance of assets with risk-adjusted returns to these 
specific classes of investors will lead to enhanced accuracy and transparency in the determination of 
returns.  In addition,  as  returns  in  Islamic  banking are uncertain  and can  only  be  ascertained  on  an 
ex-post  basis,  well-developed  IT  systems  can  equip  Islamic  financial  institutions  with  the  ability  to 
make projections on future returns to reduce the degree of uncertainty in the returns to be paid to the 
depositors. This would enhance credibility and strengthen the competitiveness of the Islamic financial 
industry. 
Conclusion 
The future prospects of the Islamic financial services industry will be the result of the combined efforts 
of all the relevant entities in the financial sector - the industry, the regulators, the market participants 
and the international community. These collective efforts need to be galvanized as a coordinated and 
concerted  effort  to  maximize  the  potential  for  the  industry.  Evolving  the  shared  vision  and  common 
goal to be achieved will be an important first step. Of greater importance will be the actions that need 
to be taken to make this happen. It will be our actions and initiatives taken today that will contribute 
towards determining the future that we aspire. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2004
