Jean-Claude Trichet: European priorities - an ECB perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  ECB,  at  the  European  Institute,  Washington, 
23 April 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
The introduction of the single European currency has been a historical landmark. For more than five 
years  now,  we  have  had  a  single  currency  and  a  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem, 
consisting of the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area. The euro 
has  been  firmly  and  credibly  established  as  a  stable  currency.  The  euro  area  has  witnessed  a 
period of moderate inflation rates and low long-term interest rates. Almost all countries have seen their 
lowest market interest rates since the Second World War. Where do we stand now and which are 
the “European priorities” we are currently facing? 
I  would  like  to  concentrate  on  three  key  priorities,  which  I  consider  particularly  challenging  at  the 
current  juncture:  the  historical  enlargement  process  of  Europe,  the  need  for  higher  growth  and 
employment by means of structural reforms and the necessity of implementing an original concept of 
fiscal surveillance in a single currency area. 
The historic enlargement of Europe 
Ten countries in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Mediterranean will join the European 
Union (EU) on 1st May 2004. This upcoming enlargement is profoundly rejoicing. It is an emblematic 
illustration  of  the  victory  of  political  democracies  on  totalitarism.  It  is  a  living  demonstration  of  the 
efficiency of market economy rules. And it gives the funding fathers of the European Union the most 
extraordinary  reward  they  could  have  dreamt  of  fifty  years  ago.  Had  we  told  Jean  MONNET  in  the 
fifties that one day the six would be twenty-five, that we would not only have a single currency for 306 
million people but also a single market for 450 million European producers and consumers and that 
the reconciliation between Germany, France, Italy and the BENELUX countries was only the prelude 
for a future intimate Union between a large part of the East of Europe and the full body of the West of 
your continent, what would have he been likely to say? Perhaps, as is reflected in his memories: It is 
an extraordinary historical achievement but we will be in the future even more surprised: “the historical 
evolution of United Europe is unpredictable because nobody can say which new bold changes will be 
triggered tomorrow by the effects of today's changes”.  
Whatever new achievements are likely in the future, today the ten new Member States together, with 
75 million people, will increase the EU population by about 20%, to more than 450 million people. The 
economic weight of the new Member States is lower. Their total GDP represents, at market exchange 
rates,  around  5%  of  that  of  the  current  EU.  Looking  beyond  these  numbers,  the  largest  ever 
expansion of the Union in terms of new countries will  bring  important  economic  benefits. Both 
new and current Member States alike will be able to enjoy the mutual benefits of a wider Union, 
in  particular  from  the  expanded  internal  market,  as  the  cases  of  past  enlargements  showed.  Trade 
integration has already reached a high level in the acceding countries, where 67% of the total exports 
and 60% of total import stems from the EU.  
Both the current and new Member States have prepared intensively for enlargement. Let me first focus 
on the situation in the new Member States and then in the present Union members. I will concentrate 
on the ultimate objective of enlargement from the monetary standpoint, namely the future adoption of 
the euro by the new EU Member States. 
The acceding countries have made remarkable progress in recent years. They significantly advanced 
macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover, 
former  centrally  planned 
economies have been able to establish functioning market economies. Overall, the progress they have 
made  so  far  is  encouraging.  There  remain,  however,  great  challenges.  The  key  ones  are  to 
advance real convergence while safeguarding and, where necessary, enhancing macroeconomic and 
financial stability. Locking in inflation at low levels, preserving the soundness of the financial sector, 
correcting  of  unsustainable  external  imbalances  in  a  few  cases  and  renewing  efforts  towards  fiscal 
consolidation are all of the utmost importance. Moreover, the gap in per capita income between the 
the 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 1
current  and  most  of  the  new  Member  States  remains  large.  And  in  some  countries,  the  process  of 
catching-up  in  real  incomes  has  been  slower  than  expected  at  the  start  of  transition.  For  acceding 
countries as a whole, per capita income today is less than half of the average of the EU. Given the low 
starting  point  for  most  countries,  increasing  prosperity  and  living  standards  will  be  a  major  policy 
objective  for  quite  some  time.  In  view  of  that  strategic  objective,  one  has  to  underline  that  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies  are  key  to  support  and  facilitate  progress  towards  higher  GDP-per-capita 
levels. 
Accession to the EU is expected to have positive effects on the countries' prospects for convergence. 
The  full  integration  into  the  internal  market  will  increase  growth  prospects  and  thus  foster  the 
catching-up  process,  mainly  through  trade  and  investment  (FDI),  together  with  lower  interest  rates. 
New Member States will have to implement and enforce the “acquis communautaire” of the European 
Union, which they have adopted in the course of recent years (excluding, for the time being, those 
areas where transitional arrangements apply). 
The  EU  has  also  been  preparing  intensively  to  make  enlargement  work.  Within  the  realm  of 
central  banking,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  engaged  since  1999  in  a  constructive  and  ever  more 
intensive dialogue with the central banks of the new Member States. Already since the signing of the 
EU Accession Treaty in 2003, the Governors of the national central banks of acceding countries have 
been  taking  part  as  observers  in  the  General  Council  of  the  ECB.  I  would  also  like  to  recall  the 
unanimous recommendation we submitted on the voting modalities of an enlarged Governing Council, 
which  has  been  accepted  by  the  EU  Council  and  is  about  to  be  ratified  within  these  days  by  all 
Member States. This will allow the ECB to maintain efficiency and timeliness of decision-making in an 
enlarged euro area.  
Eventually,  enlargement  of  the  EU  will  lead  to  the  extension  of  the  euro  area,  as  the  new  Member 
States  are  expected  to  adopt  the  single  currency  at  some  point  in  the  future.  In  fact,  upon  EU 
accession,  they will  be  committed  to  striving  towards  the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro.  The 
main  aim  of  the  Eurosystem  in  the  process  towards  euro  adoption  is  to  ensure  that  the  monetary 
integration  of  each  new  Member  States  proceeds  in  a  smooth  manner  and  in  line  with  Treaty 
provisions. In view of this challenge, at the end of last year the Governing Council of the ECB adopted 
a  policy  position  paper  on  exchange  rate  issues  relating  to  the  acceding  countries.  The  Treaty 
foresees  that  at  some  point  following  accession,  new  Member  States  will  join  the  Exchange  Rate 
Mechanism II (ERM II). To ensure a smooth participation in ERM II, however, it would be necessary 
that major policy adjustments - for example with regard to price liberalisation and fiscal policy - are 
undertaken prior to participation in the mechanism and that a credible fiscal consolidation path is being 
followed. As they differ greatly in terms of economic structure, exchange rate and monetary regimes, 
and in the degree of nominal and real convergence already achieved, no single path towards the 
euro  can  be  identified  or  recommended  to  all  of  them.  Various  strategies  may  be  feasible, 
provided they are based on sound economic reasoning, conform to the existing institutional framework 
and contribute to the high level of sustainable convergence, which is essential when joining the euro 
area.  Progress  towards  the  adoption  of  the  euro  will  thus  need  to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case 
basis. At the same time, the principle of equal treatment will continue to apply throughout the entire 
process of monetary integration. Adopting the euro is an irrevocable decision and it is of the utmost 
importance that countries fulfil the convergence criteria not only nominally but also in a sustainable 
manner  before  they  enter  the  euro  area,  as  required  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  There  will  be  no 
additional criteria, neither will there be a relaxation of the criteria. 
The need for structural reforms 
Let me now discuss the need for structural reforms in Europe which applies to both “new” and present 
Member States. On March 2000 the European Council held a special meeting in Lisbon dedicated to 
employment,  economic  reform  and  social  cohesion.  At  this  meeting,  the  Council  set  the  European 
Union a new strategic goal for the next decade, namely “to become by 2010 the most competitive and 
dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth with more 
and better jobs and greater social cohesion”. 
The ECB very much welcomes and supports the impetus given by the Lisbon European Council to the 
economic  reform  process,  the  so-called  Lisbon  agenda.  We  also  welcome  that  the  Presidency 
Conclusions  of  the  Spring  2004  European  Council  delivered  a  message  of  determination  and 
confidence reinforcing the validity and relevance of he Lisbon process. Four years after the launch 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2004
of the Lisbon agenda, the pace of reforms needs, however, to be significantly stepped up in 
order to meet the ambitious targets defined in Lisbon. 
Let me explain why we need structural reforms and we ask Member States to actively pursue 
their implementation. Structural reforms in participating countries increase employment opportunities 
and  real  income,  and  thus  support  the  sustainability  of  the  social  security  system.  It  is  widely 
recognised that structural reforms in labour, products and capital markets are needed to improve 
the  prospects  of  the  euro  area.  Structural  reforms  permit  a  higher  level  of  sustainable  long-run 
economic  growth  by  increasing  the  supply  of  production  factors  and  improving  the  efficiency  with 
which  they  are  used.  They  furthermore  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  cushion 
macroeconomic  shocks.  The  more  flexible  labour,  product  and  financial  markets  are,  the  lower  the 
employment and income losses in response to adverse domestic and global economic developments 
will be. Moreover, given that demographics in the euro area are less dynamic than in other economies, 
including  the  US,  we  need  even  more  improvements  in  terms  of  higher  productivity  growth,  rising 
labour  force  participation  and  declining  structural  unemployment.  The  case  for  decisive  structural 
reforms is therefore pressing. 
Structural  reforms  are  generally  associated  with  changes  in  the  long-term  equilibrium  demand  and 
supply  conditions  of  an  economy  and  changes  in  the  relative  prices  of  goods  and  services.  The 
transition from the pre-reform to the new post-reform equilibrium conditions normally takes time and 
within this period some resistance and uncertainty may occur. For this reason the implementation of 
structural  reforms  requires  a  strong  leadership,  a  great  deal  of  courage  and  a  tireless 
explanation  activity.  It  is  very  important  to  make  it  clear  to  the  public  that,  if  governments, 
Parliaments and social partners deliver those reforms, the benefits will be significant.  
In capital markets, structural reforms should aim at allowing a more effective allocation of savings 
toward the most rewarding investment opportunities. Since the introduction of the euro, the pace of 
capital market reform has been impressive. This includes policy-induced reform, such as the Financial 
Services Action Plan initiated by the European Commission in the spring of 1999 or the development 
of  national  legal  frameworks  governing  the  issuance  of  mortgage  bonds.  Reform  covers  also 
market-led initiatives, such as the development of electronic trading platforms or consolidation in the 
clearing and settlement infrastructure. This was possible due to a cohesive and effective interplay of 
free  competition,  coordinated  action  by  all  market  participants  and  policy  enforcement  by  public 
authorities. The need for continuation and completion remains.  
Much  progress  has  also  been  made  regarding  the  integration  and  level  of  competition  in  product 
markets. Substantial barriers to free competition continue however to exist, particularly preventing the 
integration of services markets and effective competition in network industries. Fostering competition 
in  these  areas  should  also  contribute  to  a  downward  effect  on  prices.  Further  regulatory  reforms 
should be accompanied by a sustained reduction in state aid - particularly if it constitutes economically 
questionable ad hoc and sector-specific measures. This will help to smooth the restructuring process 
in  product  markets  by  promoting  the  entry  of  new  players.  In  the  end,  such  reforms  will  enhance 
innovation and an efficient allocation of resources. And cuts in subsidies will reduce the tax burden. 
These product market reforms will contribute to prosperity across the euro area and they will help to 
address  what  is  the  largest  current  economic  and  social  challenge  in  Europe,  namely  high 
unemployment and insufficient employment rates.  
Thus far, progress with the implementation of labour market reforms has been uneven in the euro 
area. In some countries, significant achievements in terms of lower unemployment are already visible. 
Others  are  lagging  behind  and  uncertainty  prevails  about  future  steps.  In  many  countries,  it  is 
important to enhance the flexibility of labour contracts and wage-setting to enhance employment 
growth in a lasting manner. Over the second half of the 1990s, efforts made by some euro area 
countries to improve the functioning of the labour marked appear to have been fruitful in fostering 
employment growth and promoting a more job-intensive output growth compared to the late 1980s. In 
particular, labour market reforms implemented in the second half of the 1990s seem to have benefited 
those groups facing particular challenges when trying to enter the labour market, such as women, the 
youngest and oldest age groups and the lowest educated. Reforms are also needed that allow wages 
to  reflect  more  strongly  regional  and  sectoral  productivity  differences.  This  will  make  the  whole 
economy more flexible and better able to absorb economic shocks. These measures have to go hand 
in  hand  with  product  market  reforms  and  reforms  of  the  pension  and  health  care  system.  Such 
reforms  are  essential  to  contain  expenditures  on  pensions  and  health  care.  They  will  not  only  be 
needed to reduce non-wage labour costs and increase incentives for job creation but also to ensure 
the sustainability of the social security systems. 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 3
reduces  uncertainty  and  promotes 
The surveillance of fiscal policies 
We have been very bold in Europe in setting up a single currency. I remember all the remarks made 
by American friends during the 90's. They were easy to sum up: “You put the cart before the horse. 
You should have first set up a political federation, with a federal government and a federal budget. 
Then  you  could  have  introduced  a  single  currency.”  Two  main  arguments  were  put  forward.  First, 
without a federal budget of some significance the policy mix would have been very erratic, depending 
on  the  random  behaviour  of  the  different  national  fiscal  policies  of  the  member  countries  of  the 
Monetary Union. And second, without such a federal budget it would be impossible to weather, with 
the  help  of  the  fiscal  channel,  asymmetric  shocks  hitting  one  particular  member  economy  of  the 
Monetary Union. These two economic arguments are perfectly valid and would have been sufficient to 
discourage the creation of the Euro had we not set up a profoundly original concept of national fiscal 
policy surveillance. It is this concept, the Stability and Growth Pact which guarantees the coherence 
and the consistency of the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), namely a single currency 
area without a political federation. On top of these fundamental economic underpinnings a number of 
other considerations are worth mentioning. In particular, a fiscal policy that is set according to rules, 
and is lived up to, adds to macroeconomic stability by providing economic agents with expectations of 
a  predictable  economic  environment.  This 
longer-term 
decision-making, notably investment decisions, and economic growth. In addition, sound fiscal policies 
can  contribute  to  lower  risk  premia  on  long-term  interest  rates  and  thus  support  more  favourable 
financing conditions for the entire economy.  
The fiscal rules set up under the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact provide an 
important framework to ensure the necessary fiscal discipline.  
The  rules  are  useful  at  the  country  level  to  preserve  budgetary  discipline  and  sustainable  public 
finances, which is the best contribution fiscal policy can make to macroeconomic stability and growth. 
In a monetary union like EMU with a single monetary policy and national fiscal policies, there are two 
additional arguments. For small countries, there is an incentive for an expansionary fiscal bias which 
could  threaten  sustainability,  because  the  common  interest  and  exchange  rate  might  adjust  only 
marginally to their fiscal imbalances. For big countries, on the other hand, lack of fiscal discipline may 
have  an  effect  on  the  common  interest  and  exchange  rates,  creating  a  negative  externality  for  the 
other participants. 
Compliance with the fiscal framework of the Treaty and the SGP guarantees the sustainability of public 
finances and the operation of automatic stabilisers, while respecting as much as possible the fiscal 
sovereignty of Member States.  
Could  we  rely  on  financial  markets  to  impose  sufficient  discipline  on  budgetary  policy?  In  principle, 
growing concerns about the sustainability of a country’s debt should be reflected in the risk premia that 
this country would have to pay for its borrowing. However, it would be unrealistic and therefore very 
risky to rely only on financial markets. Experience suggests that financial markets react only with a 
substantial  lag  to  a  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  situation,  but  the  reaction  can  then  be  quite  drastic, 
coming too late for a timely correction, making the crisis more severe and placing a large burden on all 
participants. 
In  view  of  this,  the  Governing  Council  has  expressed  its  regrets  that,  last  November,  the  ECOFIN 
Council  decided  not  to  act  on  the  basis  of  the  European  Commission's  recommendations  in  the 
excessive  deficit  procedure.  We  also  respect  the  Commission's  decision  to  seek  legal  clarity  with 
respect to the excessive deficit procedure. It would surely be wrong to declare the Stability and Growth 
Pact as dead. In fact, it is very much alive. We do not believe that it is advisable to amend the text of 
the  SGP.  We  think  however  that,  without  actually  changing  the  wording  of  the  Pact,  it  would  be 
possible to improve its implementation, in particular by better analysing the structural imbalances as 
well  as  by  strengthening  the  incentives  for  sound  fiscal  policies  during  periods  of  strong  economic 
growth. 
The introduction of such policies will also strengthen economic confidence and support demand in 
the short run. Indeed, confidence among European citizens is vital for a stronger economic recovery 
and sustained growth. The ECB’s Governing Council recognises that the still low level of consumer 
confidence is related in part to the debate about the appropriate path for fiscal policy and structural 
reform in many countries in the euro area. Also for this reason, progress with the implementation of 
the necessary structural reforms and more determined efforts to establish sound fiscal positions over 
the medium term are the key to stronger confidence. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2004
Let  me  underline  as  a  conclusion  that  the  ECB,  its  Governing  Council,  and  the  full  body  of  the 
Eurosystem  are  doing  all  what  they  can  for  Europe  to  cope  with  its  present  challenges.  Our  best 
contribution, in conformity with our mandate, is to ensure price stability and to be credible in so doing 
not  only  on  a  short  to  medium  term  basis  but  also  on  a  medium  to  long  term  basis.  In  fulfilling 
efficiently this role, the ECB brings about today a major contribution to European prosperity, growth 
and job creation: in consolidating a low level of medium and long term market rates for the 306 million 
citizens of the euro area; in preserving the purchasing power of the household which is a necessary 
condition  for  consumption  growth;  and  in  augmenting  the  level  of  confidence  of  economic  agents 
which is so important in the present juncture in Europe. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 5
