Alan Greenspan: Semiannual monetary policy report to the US Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to 
Congress, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 20 July 2004. 
Mr Greenspan presented identical testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, US House 
of Representatives, on 21 July 2004. 
 Mr Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal 
Reserve’s Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
Economic  developments  in  the  United  States  have  generally  been  quite  favorable  in  2004,  lending 
increasing  support  to  the  view  that  the  expansion  is  self-sustaining.  Not  only  has  economic  activity 
quickened,  but  the  expansion  has  become  more  broad-based  and  has  produced  notable  gains  in 
employment.  The  evident  strengthening  in  demand  that  underlies  this  improved  performance 
doubtless has been a factor contributing to the rise in inflation this year. But inflation also seems to 
have been boosted by transitory factors such as the surge in energy prices. Those higher prices, by 
eroding households’ disposable income, have accounted for at least some of the observed softness in 
consumer spending of late, a softness which should prove short-lived. 
When  I  testified  before  this  Committee  in  February,  many  of  the  signs  of  the  step-up  in  economic 
activity were already evident. Capital spending had increased markedly in the second half of last year, 
no  doubt  spurred  by  significantly  improving  profits,  a  low  cost  of  capital,  and  the  investment  tax 
incentives enacted in 2002 and enhanced in 2003. The renewed strength in capital spending carried 
over into the first half of 2004. Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods have been on the 
rise, and backlogs of unfilled orders for new equipment continue to build. 
A  key  element  of  the  expansion  that  was  still  lacking  in  February,  however,  was  evidence  that 
businesses  were  willing  to  ramp  up  hiring  to  meet  the  stepped-up  pace  of  sales  and  production. 
Businesses’ ability to boost output without adding appreciably to their workforces likely resulted from a 
backlog of unexploited capabilities for enhancing productivity with minimal capital investment, which 
was an apparent outgrowth of the capital goods boom of the 1990s. Indeed, over much of the previous 
three  years,  managers  had  seemed  to  pursue  every  avenue  to  avoid  new  hiring  despite  rising 
business  sales.  Their  hesitancy  to  assume  risks  and  expand  employment  was  accentuated  and 
extended by the corporate accounting and governance scandals that surfaced in the aftermath of the 
decline  in  stock  prices  and  also,  of course,  by  the environment of  heightened  geopolitical  tensions. 
Even  now,  following  the  pattern  of  recent  quarters,  corporate  investment  in  fixed  capital  and 
inventories  apparently  continues  to  fall  short  of  cash  flow.  The  protracted  nature  of  this  shortfall  is 
unprecedented over the past three decades. Moreover, the proportion of temporary hires relative to 
total  employment  continues  to  rise,  underscoring  that  business  caution  remains  a  feature  of  the 
economic landscape. 
That said, there have been much clearer indications over recent months that conditions in the labor 
market  are  improving.  Most  notably,  gains  in  private  nonfarm  payroll  employment  have  averaged 
about 200,000 per month over the past six months, up sharply from the pace of roughly 60,000 per 
month registered over the fourth quarter of 2003. 
The  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  will  doubtless  have  important  follow-on  effects  for 
household  spending.  Expanding  employment  should  provide  a  lift  to  personal  disposable  income, 
adding to the support stemming from cuts in personal income taxes over the past year. In addition, the 
low interest rates of recent years have allowed many households to lower the burdens of their financial 
obligations.  Although  mortgage  rates  are  up  from  recent  lows,  they  remain  quite  attractive  from  a 
longer-run perspective and are providing solid support to home sales. Despite the softness of recent 
retail  sales,  the  combination  of  higher  current  and  anticipated  future  income,  strengthened  balance 
sheets, and still-low interest rates bodes well for consumer spending. 
Consumer prices excluding food and energy - so-called core prices - have been rising more rapidly 
this  year  than  in  2003.  For  example,  the  twelve-month  change  in  the  core  personal  consumption 
expenditures price index stood at 0.8 percent in December of last year and climbed to 1.6 percent by 
May of this year. Core inflation, of course, has been elevated by the indirect effects of higher energy 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
prices on business costs and by increases in non-oil import prices that reflect past dollar depreciation 
and the surge in global prices for primary commodities. But the acceleration of core prices has been 
augmented by a marked rise in profit margins, even excluding domestic energy corporations. 
This surge in profits reflects, at least in part, the recent recovery of demand after a couple of years 
during  which  weak  demand  led  to  relatively  heavy  price  discounting  by  businesses.  Profits  of 
nonfinancial corporations as a share of sector output, after falling to 7 percent in the third quarter of 
2001, rebounded to 12 percent in the first quarter of 2004, a pace of advance not experienced since 
1983. Half of this rise in the profit share occurred between the first quarter of 2003 and the first quarter 
of 2004, a period during which business costs were unusually subdued. In fact, consolidated unit costs 
for  the  nonfinancial  corporate  business  sector  actually  declined  during  this  period.  The  increase  in 
output per hour in the nonfinancial corporate business sector of more than 6 percent accounted for 
much of the net decline in unit costs. The remainder was due to the effects of rising output in reducing 
nonlabor fixed costs per unit of output. Hence, at least from an accounting perspective, between the 
first quarter of 2003 and the first quarter of 2004, all of the 1.1 percent increase in the prices of final 
goods and services produced in the nonfinancial corporate sector can be attributed to a rise in profit 
margins rather than rising cost pressures. 
However, businesses are limited in the degree to which they can raise margins by raising prices. An 
increase  in  margins  should  affect  mainly  the  level  of  prices  associated  with  any  given  level  of  unit 
costs but, by itself, should not prompt a sustained pickup in the rate of inflation going forward. In a 
market economy, any tendency for profit margins to continue to rise is countered largely by the entry 
of new competitors willing to undercut prices and by increased labor costs as more firms attempt to 
exploit  the  opportunity  for  outsized  profits  by  expanding  employment  and  output.  That  increase  in 
competitive pressure, as history has amply demonstrated, with time, returns markups to more normal 
levels. 
Over the past three decades, the share of the profits of nonfinancial corporations in the total nominal 
income of that sector has fluctuated around a longer-run average of roughly 10-1/2 percent. The profit 
share  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  at  about  12  percent,  was  well  above  that  level.  The  gap 
suggested that the growth of unit profits would eventually slow relative to increases in unit costs. This 
outlook had accorded with analysts’ expectations for earnings growth over the next year, which are 
substantially below the realized growth of profits in recent quarters. 
Indeed,  some  leveling  or  downward  pressure  on  profit  margins may  already be  in  train,  owing  to  a 
pickup in unit labor costs. Although advances in productivity are continuing at a rate above the long-
term  average,  they  have  slowed  from  the  extraordinary  pace  of  last  summer  and  are  now  running 
below increases in hourly compensation. The available information suggests that hourly compensation 
has been increasing at an annual rate of about 4-1/2 percent in the first half of the year. To be sure, 
the  increases  in  average  hourly  earnings  of  nonsupervisory  workers  have  been  subdued  in  recent 
months  and  barely  budged  in  June.  But  other  compensation  has  accelerated  this  year,  reflecting 
continued sizable increases in health insurance costs, a sharp increase in business contributions to 
pension  funds,  and  an  apparently  more  robust  rate  of  growth  of  hourly  earnings  of  supervisory 
workers.  The  larger  wage  gains  for  supervisory  workers  together  with  anecdotal  reports  of  growing 
skill shortages are consistent with earlier evidence of rising wage premiums for skilled workers relative 
to less-skilled workers. 
For the moment, the modest upward path of unit labor costs does not appear to threaten longer-term 
price stability, especially if current exceptionally high profit margins begin to come under more intense 
competitive pressures at home and from abroad. Although some signs of protectionist sentiment have 
emerged, there is little evidence that the price-containing forces of ever-widening global competition 
have ebbed. In addition, the economy is not yet operating at its productive capacity, which should help 
to contain cost pressures. But we cannot be certain that this benign environment will persist and that 
there  are  not  more  deep-seated  forces  emerging  as  a  consequence  of  prolonged  monetary 
accommodation.  Accordingly,  in  assessing  the  appropriateness  of  the  stance  of  policy,  the  Federal 
Reserve will pay close attention to incoming data, especially on costs and prices. 
What  does  seem  clear  is  that  the  concerns  about  the  remote  possibility  of  deflation  that  had  been 
critical in the deliberations of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) last year can now be safely 
set aside. Those deflationary pressures were largely a consequence of the stock market slump, the 
capital  goods  contraction  that  commenced  in  2000,  and,  as  I  noted  earlier,  the  extreme  business 
caution that followed from these events as well as from terrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and the 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
lead-up to the war in Iraq. Both equity prices and capital goods spending have turned up over the past 
year, and the probability that economic activity might stagnate has receded. 
As  always,  considerable  uncertainties  remain  about  the  pace  of  the  expansion  and  the  path  of 
inflation.  Some  of  those  uncertainties,  especially  ones  associated  with  potential  terrorism  both  here 
and  abroad, are difficult  to  quantify.  Such  possibilities have  threatened  the  balance  of world supply 
and demand in oil markets in recent months, especially as demand has risen with the pace of world 
economic growth. Yet aside from energy, markets exhibit little evidence of heightened perceptions of 
risk.  Credit  spreads  remain  low,  and  market-based  indicators  of  inflation  expectations,  after  rising 
earlier this year, have receded. 
With  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand  looking  more  sustainable  and  with  employment  expanding 
broadly,  the  considerable  monetary  accommodation  put  in  place  starting  in  2001  is  becoming 
increasingly  unnecessary.  In  May,  the  FOMC  believed  that  policy  accommodation  needed  to  be 
removed  and  that  removal  could  be  accomplished  at  a  pace  that  is  likely  to  be  measured.  At  our 
meeting last month, the FOMC raised the target federal funds rate from 1 percent to 1-1/4 percent, 
and the discount rate was raised commensurately. Policymakers reiterated that, based on our current 
outlook, the removal of accommodation would likely proceed at a measured pace. But in light of the 
considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the  anticipated  evolution  of  price  pressures,  the  FOMC 
emphasized that it will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to 
maintain price stability. 
If  economic  developments  are  such  that  monetary  policy  neutrality  can  be  restored  at  a  measured 
pace, a relatively smooth adjustment of businesses and households to a more typical level of interest 
rates seems likely. Even if economic developments dictate that the stance of policy must be adjusted 
in a less gradual manner to ensure price stability, our economy appears to have prepared itself for a 
more dynamic adjustment of interest rates. Of course, considerably more uncertainty and hence risk 
surrounds  the  behavior of  the  economy  with  a  more  rapid  tightening  of  monetary  policy  than  is  the 
case  when  tightening  is  more  measured.  In  either  scenario,  individual  instances  of  financial  strain 
cannot be ruled out. 
The protracted period of low interest rates has facilitated a restructuring of household and business 
balance sheets. Businesses have been able to fund longer-term debt at highly favorable interest rates 
and, by extending the maturity of their liabilities, have rendered net earnings and capital values less 
exposed  to  destabilizing  interest  rate  spikes.  Households  have  made  similar  adjustments.  Between 
mid-2002 and mid-2003, homeowners were able to refinance at lower interest rates almost half of total 
outstanding home mortgage debt and thereby to substantially reduce monthly debt service payments. 
Households  also  substituted  mortgage  debt  for  more-expensive  consumer  credit.  Moreover,  those 
households  and  businesses  that  held  long-term  investment-grade  bonds  in  that  year  accumulated 
realized and unrealized capital gains as long-term rates declined. 
The  FOMC  judged  this  extended  period  of  exceptionally  low  interest  rates  to  have  been  helpful  in 
assisting the economy in recovering from a string of adverse shocks. But in the process of returning 
the stance of policy to a more neutral setting, at least some of the capital gains on debt instruments 
registered in recent years will inevitably be reversed. 
Prices  in  financial  markets  have  already  adjusted  in  anticipation  of  a  significant  amount  of  policy 
tightening,  engendering  additional  alteration  of  balance  sheets  in  recent  months.  An  unwinding  of 
carry trades - that is, market positions premised on low short-term financing costs - seems to be under 
way, at least judging from a pronounced shift in the trading portfolios of primary dealers. In addition, 
investors classified as non-commercial have established net short positions in ten-year Treasury note 
futures  in  recent  months.  Indeed,  the  swing  toward  a  net  short  position  on  ten-year  Treasury  note 
futures  has  been  the  largest  since  the  inception  of  the  contract  in  the  1980s,  likely  offsetting  a 
significant portion of the interest rate exposure of previously established carry trade positions. 
Moreover, the recent increase in market interest rates has slowed the pace of mortgage refinancing 
and  reportedly  has  precipitated  some  winding  down  of  leveraged  positions  among  major  mortgage 
market participants. These circumstances are quite different from the situation prevailing at this time 
last summer. Then, record levels of refinancing in the second half of 2002 and the first half of 2003 
had  pushed  the  duration  of  mortgage-backed  securities  (a  measure  of  the  price  sensitivity  of 
fixed-income instruments to changes in interest rates) to exceptionally low levels. As mortgage and 
other  long-term  rates  rebounded  last  summer,  a  consequence  of  rapidly  improving  economic 
conditions and the fading of deflationary concerns, refinancing fell sharply, removing most downward 
pressure on duration. Holders of mortgage-backed securities endeavoring to hedge the resulting shifts 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
in  interest  rate  gaps  moved  rapidly  to  shed  Treasuries  and  receive-fixed  interest-rate  swaps,  and 
these actions magnified last summer’s upturn in long-term interest rates. In the current environment, 
by contrast, it appears that the scope for such mortgage hedging effects to greatly amplify an increase 
in long-term rates is much diminished given the decline in the pace of refinancing and the associated 
increase in mortgage durations that have already occurred. 
Lastly, very large fractions of the total outstanding obligations of businesses and households are long-
term,  fixed-rate  debt.  As  a  result,  rising  market  interest  rates  will  not  have  much  immediate  direct 
effect on business and household debt service burdens. Indeed, from early 1999 through early 2000, a 
period when interest rates on new home mortgage originations rose more than 150 basis points, the 
average  interest  rate  on  the  total  of  home  mortgage  debt  outstanding  barely  moved.  Nonetheless, 
despite  the  lock-in  of  low  interest  rate  costs  on  a  substantial  share  of  household  and  business 
liabilities, recent higher market interest rates will, in time, show through into increased charges against 
household  and  business  income.  To  be  sure,  financial  intermediaries  and  other  creditors  that 
extended loans or purchased securities in recent years at relatively low long-term interest rates will 
sustain  capital  losses  as  rates  rise.  In  general,  however,  financial  intermediaries  are  profitable  and 
well-capitalized and appear to be well positioned to manage in a rising rate environment. 
In  short,  financial  markets  along  with  households  and  businesses  seem  to  be  reasonably  well 
prepared to cope with a transition to a more neutral stance of monetary policy. Some risks necessarily 
attend this transition, but they are outweighed in our judgment by those that would be associated with 
maintaining  the  existing  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  in  the  current  environment. 
Although many factors may affect inflation in the short-run, inflation in the long-run, it is important to 
remind ourselves, is a monetary phenomenon. 
As  we  attempt  to  assess  and  manage  these  risks,  we  need,  as  always,  to  be  prepared  for  the 
unexpected and to respond promptly and flexibly as situations warrant. But although our actions need 
to  be  flexible,  our  objectives  are  not.  For  twenty-five  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  to 
reestablish  price  stability  on  a  sustained  basis.  An  environment  of  price  stability  allows  households 
and businesses to make decisions that best promote the longer-term growth of our economy and with 
it our nation’s continuing prosperity. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2004
