I J Macfarlane: The world economy and its implications for Australia 
Inaugural Di Yerbury Economic and Financial Studies Lecture by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 14 April 2004. 
 It is a great honour to be invited by Macquarie University to deliver the Inaugural Di Yerbury Economic 
and Financial Studies Lecture tonight. I also note that this is the 40th anniversary of the establishment 
of Macquarie University. For fourteen of those years Professor Yerbury has been Vice-Chancellor - a 
remarkable achievement by any standard. Our paths first crossed in the late 1960s - although neither 
of us has much recollection of it - when Di was a lecturer and I was a tutor in the Economics Faculty at 
Monash University. Since then, of course, Professor Yerbury has gone on to an illustrious career in 
academia, government and university administration.  
The world economy 
I  will  speak  tonight  about  recent  developments  in  the  world  economy  and  their  implications  for 
Australia. It is about 18 months since I spoke about the world economy, and a number of things have 
changed in that time, mainly for the better. Despite various hesitations and temporary setbacks, the 
recovery  from  the world recession  that  beset  G7 countries  in 2001 has consolidated.  For  the  world 
economy as a whole, GDP growth picked up in 2002, again in 2003, and is forecast to be higher again 
at  a  relatively  robust  4.4  per  cent  in  2004  (Graph  1).  Over  the  past  four  quarters,  both  the  United 
States and Japan have reported growth in excess of 4 per cent, and in non-Japan Asia it has been a 
lot higher. 
Graph 1 
 At the same time, inflation in almost all countries has remained low. At the level of final goods prices, 
as  shown  by  consumer  price  indices,  inflation  is  low  almost  everywhere,  and  few  countries  report 
upward pressure. 
Not surprisingly, this reassuring macro-economic picture has led to a return of confidence to financial 
markets. Share markets around the world have risen appreciably from their troughs in early 2003, and 
in  many  markets  price  earnings  ratios  are  well  above  medium-term  averages.  A  similar  return  of 
confidence has occurred in debt markets, where spreads have narrowed to historic lows. Borrowers in 
emerging  market  economies  can  obtain  finance  on  very  advantageous  terms  as  investors  chase 
yields.  A  similar  process  is  at  work  for  sub-prime  and  even  sub-investment  grade  borrowers  in 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
developed economies. Such a compression of spreads means that providers of capital perceive risks 
to have been greatly reduced and therefore do not need to be enticed with high premia to compensate 
for those risks.  
While the performance of the world economy has improved and the downward risks abated, this has 
not  been  reflected  to  any  great  extent  in  economic  policies.  With  few  exceptions,  the  stances  of 
monetary and fiscal policies are still at the expansionary settings to which they were moved in order to 
offset the fall in asset prices and associated recessions in 2001. In fact, for the three major economies 
- the United States, the Euro area and Japan - monetary policy, as indicated by interest rates, is, if 
anything, more expansionary now than it was in 2001. If we construct a measure of the average short-
term interest rates for the world, the present level is the lowest since the Second World War (Graph 2). 
Of  course,  nominal  interest  rates  are  not  necessarily  the  best  indicator  of  the  stance  of  monetary 
policy1, but when they are as low as they are at present, they must be telling us something. 
Graph 2 
A similar picture applies to fiscal policy. The fiscal deficit among G7 countries has increased noticeably 
in  the  past  three  years  and  is  now  at  least  as  large  as  any  experienced  since  the  early  1960s  
(Graph 3).  
                                                       
1  Other measures, such as the yield curve, also suggest very expansionary monetary policy settings. The evidence from quantitative 
data is harder to read because of its volatility but, in both the United States and Europe, credit growth has picked up from the lows 
reached a couple of years ago. Over the past year, credit has grown by 8 per cent in the United States and 6 per cent in Europe. In 
China, credit has grown by around 20 per cent, but in Japan it is still declining. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
Graph 3 
 I have not spent a great deal of time on outlining these developments, but I think we can agree that 
there does appear to be a contrast between, on the one hand, a reasonably buoyant world economy 
and  confident  financial  markets,  and  on  the  other  hand,  an  exceptionally  expansionary  setting  of 
macro-economic policies. I would now like to spend some time on the questions of why is it so, and 
how will it be resolved? 
The main reason that the average level of world interest rates is so low at present is that interest rates 
in key countries - particularly the United States - are at historical lows. And in the case of the United 
States,  it  is  the  absence  of  domestic  inflationary  pressure  that  explains  why  there  has  been  no 
inclination on the part of the Fed to move to a less expansionary stance of monetary policy. 
The United States makes its monetary policy for its own domestic needs: no-one could expect it (or 
any other country) to do otherwise. The problem is that a number of other countries, which fix their 
exchange  rates  to  the  US  dollar,  effectively  also  match  US  monetary  policy.  Another  group  of 
countries, even though they have no desire to match US monetary policy, are nevertheless limited in 
the extent to which they can depart from it by exchange rate considerations. The net effect of all this is 
that,  to  some  extent,  the  United  States  sets  the  world’s  monetary  policy  -  a  partial  return  to  the 
situation that prevailed under the Bretton Woods system. 
This  may  or may  not  be  a  bad  thing,  depending  on  where  you  view  it  from.  For  some  parts  of  the 
world,  where  economic  activity  is  subdued  and  domestic  inflationary  pressures  non-existent,  an 
extremely low interest rate structure like that in the United States may be suitable. But for other parts 
of the world, it could lead to the build-up of imbalances. For the world as a whole, we do not yet know 
whether  the  maintenance  of  an  extremely  low  average  interest  rate  is  helpful  or  harmful  to  its 
longer-term interests. 
On the one hand, the after-effects of the bursting of asset price bubbles are still exerting downward 
pressure on goods and services prices in the United States and Europe, and in Japan (where it has 
been  going  on  for  a  decade  or  more).  More  importantly,  the  downward  pressure  on  goods  prices  
- particularly internationally traded manufactured goods prices - caused by the massive expansion in 
Chinese capacity continues apace. This is a structural phenomenon which has been with us for some 
time now and can be expected to remain important for the foreseeable future, particularly with India 
joining in. It is what economists call a positive supply shock, and among many of its effects, the one 
most relevant to the current discussion is that it has made the maintenance of low CPI inflation easier 
than it formerly was. 
While these influences are important, we should not forget that the international business cycle is also 
alive and well, and can be expected to have an influence as we go forward. Good economic growth 
and  expansionary  policies  are  now  starting  to  make  their  presence  felt  in  a  range  of  international 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 3
markets. Commodity prices (as shown in the CRB Index, Graph 4) have risen over the past two years 
and are now at their highest level since 1989. The biggest rises so far have been among base metals, 
where the prices of nickel, lead and copper have more than doubled over the past year. Others such 
as zinc and aluminium have also risen sharply. The prices of bulk commodities such as iron ore and 
steaming and coking coal have also shown large increases in the recent contract re-negotiations. This 
demand  has  spilled  down  into  the  supply  chain  so  we  see  increasing  prices  for  such  things  as 
transporting goods (as shown by the Baltic Dry Index, Graph 5), and for wrapping them, as shown by 
the cost of new and recycled cardboard.  
Graph 4 
 Graph 5 
  As yet, this price pressure at the raw material and wholesale level has not fed into consumer prices, 
except in Asia where there is some evidence of this occurring, particularly in China. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2004
On  asset  prices,  however,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  action  as  investors  have  pushed  up  prices  of 
equities,  again  particularly  in  Asia  (Graph  6)  Lenders  have  also  been  prepared  to  lend  at  relatively 
small spreads to borrowers who until recently were regarded as not credit-worthy. This offers some 
support  for  the  view  that  assets  are  being  over-priced  and  risk  under-priced.  The  so-called  ‘carry 
trade’, where intermediaries borrow very cheaply in the United States, Japan or the Euro area and on-
lend to other countries, particularly emerging markets, has regained much of the attractiveness it had 
immediately prior to the Asian crisis. This is, by definition, a highly-leveraged and hence risky activity. 
Graph 6 
I  do  not  want  to  give  you  the  impression  that  the  present  easy  stance  of  global  monetary  policy  is 
already causing the world economy to overheat and financial markets to disregard risk. We have not 
reached  that  stage  yet,  but  the  longer  monetary  policy  remains  at  this  setting,  the  greater  is  the 
likelihood of these results. I have no doubt that this is understood by central banks around the world 
and in time the degree of monetary expansion will be reduced. In the meantime, it has made things 
more difficult in some ways for those countries where domestic demand has remained buoyant and 
domestic costs and prices have not been under downward pressure. 
 The Australian economy 
Where  does  this  leave  Australia?  My  previous  sentence  may  have  given  you  the  impression  that  it 
made life difficult for us. In one respect (which I will come to in a moment), this has been the case, but 
overall, developments in the world economy have worked to our advantage. 
Certainly, a recovery in world economic activity is good for all countries, including Australia. The fact 
that the area of strongest growth is again in Asia means we benefit more than most other countries 
because we do so much of our trade with this region. The fact that commodity prices are rising is also 
of  great  benefit  to  us  in  that  it  contributes  to  a  rise  in  our  terms  of  trade  (Graph  7).  We  are 
simultaneously gaining from stronger export prices for a wide range of our exports, and also receiving 
the benefit of falling import prices for the many manufactured goods that we import. This amounts to a 
rise in Australia’s real income.  
BIS Review 21/2004 
 5
Graph 7 
I have made the point on several occasions in the past that the long period when Australia suffered a 
trend  decline  in  its  terms  of  trade  (approximately  from  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century)  probably 
came  to  an  end  in  the  mid  1980s.  Since,  then  the  terms  of  trade  have  fluctuated,  but  around  a 
generally rising trend. We should expect this upward trend will continue in the foreseeable future. The 
Reserve  Bank  Index  of  Commodity  Prices  shows  that  commodity  prices  have  already  risen 
appreciably  over  the  past  couple  of  years  (when  measured  in  a  neutral  numeraire).  When  the 
increases in the prices of steaming and coking coal and iron ore flow through into the index, we will 
soon see a further substantial rise (the blue dot in Graph 8). 
 Graph 8 
To put these things in perspective, the current upswing in the global economy comes after a couple of 
years of significant under-performance, which had a serious impact on Australia’s exports. It will take 
some  time  to  recover  the  lost  ground  on  that  front,  but  the  present  combination  of  buoyant  world 
growth, rising commodity prices and falling manufacturing prices is a favourable one for Australia. It 
 6 
 BIS Review 21/2004
increases  the  chance  of  more  balanced  growth  outcomes  for  the  Australian  economy  in  the  period 
ahead, and therefore of further prolonging the economic expansion. What could go wrong?  
There were two big risks to this generally favourable outlook. The first was the excessive growth of 
overall  credit,  especially  to  the  household  sector  for  housing  purchases,  and  the  consequent  rapid 
increase  in  housing  prices.  The  second  was  that  the  exchange  rate  could  be  pushed  quickly  to  an 
unrealistically high level. Both of these risks now look to be less menacing than they did a few months 
ago, but we cannot be confident that they have gone away completely. 
I will start with the second of these risks because it is the one that directly results from our interaction 
with the rest of the world. We should not have been surprised that the Australian dollar rose over the 
past three years given its extraordinarily low starting point, the rising terms of trade, the fact that the 
US dollar was finally weakening and the associated fact that US interest rates were so low. I think this 
was well understood by the public, including by exporters and manufacturers, even though they saw 
their margins shrinking and competition increasing. 
Apprehension  started  to  increase,  however,  when  in  the  relatively  short  period  between  early 
November and mid February, the rate against the US dollar rose from US70 cents to US80 cents (14 
per  cent)  and  against  the  TWI  from  61  to  66  (9  per  cent).  This  was  an  uncomfortably  fast  rate  of 
increase  and  the  prospect  of  it  continuing  was  clearly  a  consideration  to  be  taken  into  account  in 
formulating monetary policy. If there had been a domestic need to tighten earlier this year, as there 
well could have been, there would have been an extremely difficult decision to make. This is the type 
of conflict that can arise when the world has such an exceptionally low level of interest rates, but some 
countries do not need, or would be positively harmed by sharing, the same low interest rate structure. 
The  other  risk  we  faced  was  that  the  excessive  growth  of  credit  to  the  household  sector  would 
continue, so fuelling further asset price rises, particularly in housing. This risk is diminishing. It now 
seems likely that the peak in credit demand was reached around October 2003 when monthly loan 
approvals  for  housing  (owner-occupation  plus  investment)  reached  over  $15  billion  per  month,  an 
increase of 40 per cent over the year earlier. Since then, we have had four monthly declines in loan 
approvals and they are now running at about $12 billion per month. 
Some may be inclined to think that a decline of this magnitude - 20 per cent - represents a sharp fall in 
the  provision  of  housing  finance.  But  $12  billion  per  month  is  still  a  rapid  rate  of  lending  and,  if 
continued, would be consistent with the stock of housing credit growing at a twelve-month-ended rate 
of about 18 per cent by end 2004. Admittedly, this would be well down on its peak of 23.6 per cent, but 
would  still  be  unsustainably  high.  What  we  are  talking  about  here  is  the  difference  between  a  flow 
(loan approvals) and a stock (household credit). The flow would have to fall quite a lot in order to bring 
the growth of the stock back to a sustainable rate.2 
The jury is still out on what is going to happen here. There is no doubt that there are some areas of 
housing - Melbourne and Sydney apartments - where over-supply is pushing down prices, and off-the-
plan purchasers and some developers are feeling the pinch. But elsewhere the slowdown, if any, has 
been more muted. We will naturally be keeping a close eye on these developments to see that the 
return to a more sustainable rate of credit growth continues. 
Last year was a difficult period for monetary policy where, for much of the time, excessive domestic 
credit growth co-existed with a rapidly rising exchange rate. As we have proceeded through 2004, the 
situation  has  been  made  easier  in  that  both  have  eased  back  a  little.  These  are  both  welcome 
developments, but we cannot be sure whether they signal a new trend or are only pauses. Similarly, 
we are still waiting for the durability of the world economic recovery to be sufficiently recognised so 
that the major central banks around the world can start the process of returning interest rates to more 
normal  levels.  When  that  happens,  the  combination  of  a  more  stable  exchange  rate  and  a  more 
restrained pace of credit expansion will become a lot easier to achieve.  
                                                      
2   This estimate is  based on the  average  historical relationship between loan  approvals and the change in the outstanding 
stock  of  credit.  For  a  further  discussion  of  this  relationship,  see  Box  C  from  the  February  2004  Statement  on  Monetary 
Policy. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 7
