Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - an island in Euroland? 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Bank of Greece, Athens, 21 May 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to talk to you today about Swiss monetary policy. Athens is the place to go 
to this summer. For sure, it will soon become, once again, a symbol of sport and peace, competition 
and fairness. 
Switzerland  too  will  follow  the  Games  with  passion.  But  for  many  Swiss,  your  country  is  not  just 
associated with sport, it is part of our culture and part of our history. In fact, Greece and Switzerland 
have enjoyed continuing cultural and economic ties over the centuries. Your great statesman, Ioannis 
Capodistrias, had retired to Geneva when he was elected Head of State of the newly created Greek 
Republic in 1827, and he was named honorary citizen of Lausanne and of Geneva. His friendship with 
the  banker  Eynar  contributed  also  to  the  foundation  of  the  National  Bank  of  Greece.  Later,  the 
relationship  between  Greece  and  Switzerland  strengthened  further  when  both  countries  became 
members of the Latin Monetary Union. The Union, which led to the setting of a fixed exchange rate 
between Greece, Switzerland, Belgium, France, and Italy, was the first attempt in continental Europe 
to create an extended area where gold and silver coins could circulate freely. 
While Greece, with its strategic position between Asia and Central Europe, has long been exposed to 
commerce,  Switzerland,  a  country  without  natural  resources,  has  in  some  sense  been  forced  to 
embrace trade in order to survive. Switzerland has now become a global player. Today, the “cliche” of 
Switzerland as an isolated country with its citizens “entrenched in the Alps, living happily and looking 
after their cows” totally belies the facts. 
We tend to easily forget that exports of goods and services account for more than 40 percent of our 
gross domestic product and that the European market absorbs about two thirds of our exports. The 
presence  of  Swiss  firms  in  European  countries  is  also  very  pronounced,  with  more  jobs  created 
abroad than at home in recent years. In 2002, Swiss direct investments in Europe represented around 
7 billion euros, i.e. 13.5 percent of total investments in Switzerland, and Swiss firms employed close to 
one million people in Europe, equivalent to about one quarter of Swiss employment. Around 9’000 of 
those employees are living in Greece. 
My purpose here is not to brag about the Swiss economy, but to emphasize the fact that Switzerland is 
very open to international trade, investment, and migration, and that our economy is very integrated in 
the global economy and intimately linked to the euro zone. 
Swiss monetary policy 
With  those  facts  in  mind,  you  might  wonder  whether  Switzerland,  a  highly  integrated  country 
surrounded by trading partners sharing the euro, can still follow an autonomous monetary policy. What 
are the consequences of the introduction of the euro on the Swiss franc and on the effectiveness of 
Swiss monetary policy? And what are the effects of this new international monetary order on countries 
outside the dollar-euro block more generally? 
I will try to provide some insights on these questions today. First, I will present the change in monetary 
framework due to the introduction of the euro. Then I will enumerate the main fears that we originally 
had regarding the effects of that transformation, and our experience with the new environment over 
the past 5 years. Finally, I will share some lessons on the influence of the introduction of the euro for 
the international monetary system and for the autonomy of Swiss monetary policy. 
A new international framework 
1. 
January 1, 1999, constituted a true revolution for Europe. Many observers argue that the introduction 
of the euro represents the major postwar stage in European integration. They are right. The Maastricht 
Treaty, by removing national currencies and defining budgetary rules, lead to an important transfer of 
power  from  national  capitals  to  European  institutions.  The  French  franc,  the  Italian  lira,  and  the 
German  mark  were  all  symbols  of  national  identity.  The  euro  is  now  playing  an  integrating  role  in 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 1
people’s  minds.  In  this  regard  too,  the  new  currency  brings  a  revolutionary  dimension.  Is  it  not  the 
case  that  national  currencies  were  almost  always  and  everywhere  brought  about  by  fundamental 
political  changes?  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  Greek  Drachma  was  launched  after  Capodistria’s 
assassination  and  Greece’s  switch  to  a  monarchy,  the  French  franc  was  the  “franc  Germinal”,  the 
Italian  lira  was  created  with  the  Italian  unification,  and  the  Reichsmark  appeared  in  1873  at  the 
foundation of the German empire. These are very strong symbols indeed. 
For  Switzerland  too,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  was  a  kind  of  revolution.  For  the  first  time  in  our 
history,  our  country  was  completely  surrounded  by  a  single  currency  area.  In  terms  of  population, 
Switzerland, with its 7 million inhabitants, could be compared to Missouri in the middle of the United 
States.  Just  try  to  imagine  Missouri  with  its  own  currency!  Although  perhaps  my  good  friends  and 
central  bank colleagues  from  the  Federal Reserve Bank of  St.  Louis would  not  mind  all  that  much! 
Until  1999,  we  had  been  living  amidst  very  diverse  European  currencies.  In  fact,  our  country  had 
always lamented about this situation. Indeed, given our large export sector, we could only dream of a 
stable  monetary  environment  without  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  which  interfere  with  economic 
decisions  and  price  comparisons.  Among  our  earlier  efforts,  I  should  mention  here,  not  only  our 
participation  with  Greece  in  the  Latin  Monetary  Union,  but  also  steps  towards  close  cooperation 
between  Switzerland  and  the  European  Monetary  System  in  the  mid-1970s,  steps  which  remained, 
however, without concrete results. 
A common misrepresentation should be corrected here, that of Switzerland somehow benefiting from 
external monetary disorders. The notion that the welfare of a country boils down to the short-run profits 
of a few foreign exchange dealers is narrow minded. The reality offers a completely different picture. 
Switzerland has always suffered from external monetary turbulences and always wished for a stable 
monetary order. For example, the various crises of the European Monetary System in the 1990s, with 
a dramatic drop of the Italian lira, have led to the complete removal of the traditional textile industry 
from our economic geography. Such structural adjustment could arguably have occurred anyway, but 
the decisive factor at the time was of monetary origin. 
The purpose of the creation of the common currency was not only to concentrate the monetary power 
in the hands of the European Central Bank, but also to promote the conditions for transparency and 
competitiveness  that  would  in  turn  foster  trade,  investment  and  growth  in  the  internal  European 
market.  Price  comparisons  are  indeed  easier  today,  andtrade  and  liquidity  management  are  much 
simplified, although it is still too early to numerically assess the impact of these effects on growth. 
Simplifying trade and investments in the European market not only benefits members of the European 
monetary  zone,  but  it  also  helps  anyone  interested  in  being  active  in  the  European  market. 
Switzerland, with its high degree of integration in the euro zone, reaps large benefits from this stable 
situation. Thus, it is clear that on those aspects, the introduction of the euro was very good news for 
the Swiss economy. 
Potential drawbacks of the new framework on a small open economy 
2. 
But would the introduction of the euro be only good news for the Swiss economy? 
A revolution is always associated with risks and uncertainties, thus it should not surprise you that we 
were concerned about potential negative developments. 
In  the  mid-1990s,  as  the  European  monetary  construction  was  under  way,  we  tried  to  imagine  the 
potential negative effects of the euro introduction on the Swiss economy. Our goal was to be prepared 
to face difficult situations. This is what central bankers are paid for, after all. We had identified three 
main challenges: 
(a) 
First, the major risk was that the introduction of a European currency would destabilize the 
Swiss franc. In the past, the Swiss franc, along with the German mark, played the role of a 
safe  haven  currency  whenever  monetary  crises  occurred.  With  the  disappearance  of  the 
German currency, the Swiss franc would find itself first in line of fire in case of a dollar crisis, 
for example, or even worse, in case of doubts about the stability of the European currency. 
Second,  we  risked  seeing  the  euro  being  increasingly  used  as  a  means  of  payment  in 
Switzerland. As the common currency was about to become the main unit of account for our 
exports,  we  feared  that  domestic  firms  might  adopt  the  euro  as  well,  so  as  tominimize 
exchange  rate  risks.  Some  were  even  imagining  wages  being  paid  in  euros.  If  use  of  the 
franc  were  to  be  crowded  out  by  the  euro,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  would  have  had  little 
(b) 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2004
(c) 
leverage left to influence monetary conditions in our own country. It would become a paper 
tiger! 
Third,  even  short  of  a  “euroization”  of  the  Swiss  economy,  we  feared  the  loss  of  our 
monetary autonomy. Given the importance of the common currency for the Swiss economy, 
what else could the Swiss National Bank do other than follow the European Central Bank’s 
monetary policy and de facto integrate the franc into the euro zone? A gradually shrinking 
interest-rate  differential  between  euro  and  Swiss  franc  investments  as  well  as  a  loss  in 
monetary autonomy would have resulted. 
How does our recent experience relate to these concerns? 
3. 
Our experience as an independent monetary entity 
The euro/Swiss franc relationship 
(a) 
Our fears of a euro destabilizing the Swiss franc did not materialize. Relative to the euro, and since its 
introduction,  the  franc  has  been  fluctuating  in  a  relatively  narrow  band  of  plus  or  minus  5  percent, 
about four times less than against the dollar during the same period. The Swiss franc appears now to 
be less affected by exchange rate shocks and more shielded from speculative movements. In the past, 
the Swiss franc was overreacting to the dollar’s fluctuations, so that the pain of an appreciation of our 
currency relative to the greenback was exacerbated by a simultaneous appreciation of the Swiss franc 
relative to the German mark. This double whammy effect, attributed to the narrowness of the Swiss 
franc market, was highly penalizing for our export sector. 
Since the introduction of the euro however, this pattern is no longer observed. Thus, the evolution of 
the Swiss franc sticks closer to our economic fundamentals. I will address this issue more extensively 
later on and argue that this trend can be generalized to apply to other currencies as well. 
The euro as a means of payment 
(b) 
Those who thought that the euro would make the Swiss franc obsolete as a means of payment were 
also mistaken. True, our ATM machines have been adapted to provide euro banknotes, so that it is 
now possible to pay in euro almost everywhere in Switzerland. Yet, despite these efforts, the demand 
for euro notes is still weak and those notes do not circulate any more extensively than French francs, 
Italian lira and German marks used to. In truth, it may well be that the expenses incurred to transform 
all those ATM machines ended up being a misallocation of resources. In stores and restaurants, prices 
denominated in euros are usually not very attractive. Obviously, small shop and cafe owners are not 
thrilled by the idea of accepting cash payments in euros. Anyway, they cannot offer as good financial 
services as commercial banks or credit card companies! 
Monetary autonomy 
(c) 
The last fear we had was related to the potential loss of monetary autonomy. Could Switzerland, a 
country completely surrounded by the euro zone, possibly hope to implement an interest rate policy 
different  from  the  one  of  the  European  Central  Bank?  With  the  loss  of  its  monetary  identity, 
Switzerland would have seen its interest rates, traditionally below German rates, converge to higher 
European interest rates causing severe pains to the Swiss economy. 
Fortunately, we did not experience this outcome. First, in the months following the introduction of the 
euro, it became apparent that markets were not anticipating a pegging of the franc to the euro. An 
expected peg would have generated a convergence in interest rates, which simply did not happen. 
Second, and as could have been expected, the monetary needs of the Swiss economy differed from 
those of the euro zone: 
• 
As an open economy strongly oriented towards global markets, the Swiss economy felt more 
deeply the slowdown in global trade than the euro zone. 
Furthermore,  the  Swiss  franc  kept  playing  its  role  -  although  to  a  smaller  extent  -  of  safe 
haven in tense international situations. 
Finally,  Swiss  inflation  was  considerably  lower  than  inflation  in  the  euro  zone,  where 
adjustments and catch-up phenomena occurred. 
  BIS Review 32/2004 
 3
Facing this reality, we decided to act independently and lowered interest rates initially in March 2001, 
a  few  months  before  the  European  Central  Bank.  Then,  facing  a  clear  economic  slowdown  and  a 
strengthening of the Swiss franc, we lowered interest rates repeatedly and aggressively. So far, the 
magnitude of our policy loosening has exceeded that of the European Central Bank. We thus kept our 
monetary autonomy intact, and the interest rate differential between the euro and the Swiss franc has 
even slightly increased. 
Swiss monetary policy in the new monetary order 
4. 
What  have  we  learned  about  the  effects  of  the  new  monetary  order  on  the  international  monetary 
system and on the effectiveness of monetary policy? 
The stabilizing role of the euro 
(a) 
Developments in currency markets over the past 5 years have taught us that the introduction of the 
euro  has  fundamentally  modified  and  stabilized  the  international  monetary  system.  In  the  past,  this 
system was dominated by the dollar. Dollar crises were violently affecting economies dependent on 
international trade and capital mobility. The Swiss franc was particularly vulnerable as Switzerland is a 
small open economy with a currency playing the role of safe haven. 
Today, the euro has become the counter-weight of the American currency. When the dollar tumbles, 
the  euro  absorbs  funds  in  quest  for  stability.  Third  party  currencies  are  thus  better  shielded  from 
speculative flows. 
Indeed, the Swiss franc is not the only currency to benefit from this new monetary order. In fact, the 
stabilizing role of the euro is a general phenomenon, allowing third currency exchange rates to stay 
closer  to  their  fundamentals,  as  dollar  fluctuations  often  incorporate  strong  and  persistent 
unexplainable components. 
After  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  January  1999,  the  dollar  first  appreciated  and  later  fell  against 
most  currencies.  As  the  euro  was  the  major  counter-weight  to  those  fluctuations,  most  countries 
experienced offsetting movements of their currencies with respect to dollar and the euro. First, while 
third currencies depreciated against the dollar, they appreciated against the euro. And later, when they 
started to appreciate against the dollar, they fell against the euro. These offsetting movements have 
been observed, among other currencies, for the Swiss franc, the British pound, the Japanese yen, the 
Canadian dollar, and the Norwegian krona. 
By  absorbing  exchange  rates  shocks,  the  euro  thus  contributes  to  stabilizing  external  payments  of 
countries trading with both the EU and the US. 
The autonomy of Swiss monetary policy 
(b) 
Financial  market  developments  over  the  past  5  years  have  also  demonstrated  that  the  monetary 
autonomy of the Swiss National Bank has not disappeared. 
The amplitude with which the SNB has reacted to changes in the economic environment since the end 
of 2000 lies in between the reactions of the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, with 
more  aggressive  interest  rate  cuts  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  a  relatively  modest  reaction  by  the 
European Central Bank. 
The  different  responses  of  those  central  banks  reflect  their  institutional  framework  as  well  as  the 
economic circumstances of the respective countries. On one hand, the SNB has been more flexible 
than the ECB. The ECB is a new institution without historical record. Moreover, the ECB has a strict 
mandate  of  maintaining  low  inflation,  and  there  have  been  upward  inflationary  pressures  in  certain 
European countries due to the convergence process. Those factors induced a less aggressive easing 
of  monetary  policy  in  an  uncertain  environment.  In  contrast,  with  traditionally  low  inflation,  the 
credibility of the SNB is strong, which allows it to react quickly to economic shocks without creating 
turmoil in financial markets. In the past few years we have thus been able to act in a flexible way, with 
our  own  timing,  in  order  to  respond  to  the  global  economic  slowdown  and  pressures  on  the  Swiss 
franc. 
On the other hand, the SNB reacted less strongly than the Federal Reserve to the deterioration of the 
international  economic  environment.  The  United  States  is  a  relatively  closed  economy  where  the 
Federal  Reserve  mandate  is  broader  than  price  stability.  In  contrast,  our  freedom  to  maneuver  is 
limited  by  the  openness  of  our  economy.  In  a  small  and  open  economy,  monetary  activism  cannot 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2004
fine-tune  economic  activity.  Institutional  and  economic  characteristics  of  the  different  countries  and 
central banks have thus implied differentiated monetary policy profiles. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Let  me  conclude  by  first  emphasizing  the  positive  global  influence  that  the  euro  has  had  since  its 
introduction in 1999. Not only does the common currency contribute to the integration of the European 
market, but the appearance of a counter-weight to the US dollar has helped stabilize the international 
monetary  order.  Exchange  rates  around  the  world  can  thus  evolve  closer  to  their  economic 
fundamentals,  and  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  on  capital  flows  and  foreign  trade  are 
dampened. 
Developments  in  the  financial  markets  over  the  past  5  years  have  shown  us  that  although  highly 
integrated in international markets and despite the emergence of a bipolar currency environment, the 
SNB can keep its monetary autonomy and follow an independent monetary policy that is adapted to 
the  needs  of  the  Swiss  economy.  As  a  result  of  our  independent  and  successful  monetary  policy, 
together with the global character of the Swiss economy, the Swiss franc has retained its own profile. 
However,  as  we  have  experienced,  this  particular  profile  is  not  without  risks.  Extreme  volatility  of 
exchange rates cannot be excluded, but our experience with the euro/Swiss franc exchange rate has 
shown  that  currency  markets  are  not  as  irrational  as  some  people  believe.  With  a  relatively  stable 
exchange market, low inflation and lower interest rates than the rest of Europe, the monetary situation 
of Switzerland is relatively comfortable. 
Things would evolve in a completely different way if Switzerland were to set its mind on joining the 
European Union and entering the euro zone. If markets were anticipating such an evolution, spreads 
between  the  Swiss  franc  and  euro  deposits  would  progressively  shrink,  in  the  same  way  spreads 
between  German  marks  and  French  francs  deposits  fell  in  the  1990s  during  the  build-up  of  the 
monetary  union.  Market  pressures  could  then  force  the  SNB  to  shadow  the  monetary  policy  of  the 
European Central Bank. Many observers overlook the fact that, contrary to other countries which have 
gained an interest rate bonus by joining the European monetary union, as they previously had higher 
interest  rates  than  Germany,  Switzerland  would  loose  its  interest  rate  advantage  in  joining  the 
monetary union. 
No tendency of a convergence in interest rates has been observed over the past few years. On the 
contrary, the interest differential has broadened slightly. For the time being, markets are not expecting 
any move from Switzerland towards monetary union, and rightly so, I might add. This does not mean 
that my country will never join the EU. 
As  you  probably  know,  important  decisions  shaping  the  relations  between  the  EU  and  Switzerland 
have been taken in recent years. A first set of bilateral agreements has already come into effect. It 
gives  us  access  to  the  single  market  and  ensures  labor  mobility.  New  agreements  have  now  been 
negotiated  with  the  aim  of  harmonizing  taxation  on  savings  and  integrating  Switzerland  in  the 
Schengen and Dublin frameworks, a further step toward closer cooperation. 
As you see, without being formally an EU member, Switzerland is increasingly part of the European 
reality. As a matter of fact, we become more and more European and the EU looks more and more 
Helvetic!  Indeed,  the  EU  has  almost  caught  up  with  Switzerland  in  many  respects.  We  have 
26 Cantons and you have now 25 Member States! 
But in all seriousness, while the European integration of Switzerland proceeds, I see no reason, now, 
for artificially speeding up monetary adjustments by linking the franc to the euro. We would give up our 
low interest rates without gaining more stability: an unattractive deal in the present circumstances. In 
monetary affairs we remain indeed an island in Euroland! 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 5
