Zhou Xiaochuan: Capital Accord II and regional disparities in financial risks 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Seminar  on  Risk 
Management and Internal Control of the Commercial Banks, Beijing, 8 January 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure to attend and speak at this important seminar. The subject of the seminar is of 
particular relevance at a time when the State council just took the decision to recapalize the two large 
state-owned  commercial  banks.  The  significance  of  the  capital  infusion  lies  not  only  with  the 
strengthening of the capital base of the two banks, but also with the important signals it sends to the 
outside  world,  indicating  banking  reform  will  be  accelerated  with  more  decisive  actions  to  improve 
internal management and corporate governance of the commercial banks. I believe this seminar could 
make an important contribution to promoting internal reform, in particular the internal control and risk 
management of the commercial banks. 
I will focus my speech on one important aspect of risk management, which deals with Basle Capital 
Accord  II  and  the  regional  disparities  in  financial  risks  across  China.  Basle  Capital  Accord  is  an 
important document in terms of banking supervision and the Chinese banking regulatory authority has 
committed to pushing forward its application in the banking sector. While emphasizing the importance 
of capital adequacy in the business operations of the commercial banks, the Capital Accord has also 
set a clear definition for bank capital, leading to the development of such concepts as tier-one capital 
and tier-two capital, and answered the question on how the asset risks could be properly calculated. In 
1988,  the  Basle  Banking  Supervision  Committee  assigned  respective  weightings  to  different 
categories  of  risks  in  its  first  edition  of  the  capital  accord,  which  was  quite  necessary  at  that  time. 
Because  many  banks  back  at  that  time  could  not  rely  adequately  on  themselves  to  identify  and 
measure the risk profiles of different categories of loans. However, it remains disputable as to whether 
such risk weightings should be assigned based on the status of a country in an organization, i.e., as a 
member of the OECD or not. Later on, some progress was made and a new capital accord (Capital 
Accord II) was formed in which more emphasis was put on risk management. Despite different views 
on its application in reality, Capital Accord II marks an important step forward in strengthening prudent 
banking  supervision.  The  Chinese  banks  and  the  regulatory  authority  also  welcome  such  a 
development  and  vow  to  actively  push  for  its  implementation  across  the  banking  sector.  Capital 
Accord  II  particularly  calls  for  strengthened  identification  and  assessment  of  risks  by  the  banks 
themselves, which means each bank should be able to conduct internal risk rating on each category of 
assets  according  to  its  own  historical  or  realistic  data.  This  is  what  we  call  “internal  rating  based 
approach (IRB)”. Such a practice has already been adopted by some Chinese banks. For example, 
some  banks  have  conducted  assessment  of  credit  risks  based  on  classifications  of  the  borrowers. 
Some based their risk rating on the business size of the borrowing enterprises while others referred to 
the ownership structure of the borrowers in deciding the risk profiles. What I would like to stress here 
is  that  classification  of  risk  profiles  by  geographical  regions  also  has  profound  significance. 
Theoretically speaking, in a country where capital freely moves without any restrictions, there might 
not be a visible difference in respect of credit risks across different regions, and we have actually seen 
this situation in many countries. However, in a big country like China, such a regional risk difference is 
relatively distinct since many of China’s provinces are even larger than some of the countries in the 
world.  On  the  other  side,  capital  has  not  been  able  to  move  freely  within  China  in  the  transition 
process  from  the  centralized  planning  system  to  the  market  economic  system,  which  indicates  risk 
differences  across  the  regions  could  not  be  neglected.  Several  years  ago  when  the  regional  risk 
difference was at its high level, the NPL ratio in the regions with worst risk profiles could be 10 times 
higher than that in the regions boasting the best risk performance. 
Some experts have made many studies on the reasons behind such a regional difference in terms of 
financial  risks,  which  could  be  summarized  as  follows.  First,  different  degrees  of  intervention  in 
banking  business  by  the  local  governments  have  contributed  to  regional  financial  risk  difference. 
Second, different performance of the judiciary system and law enforcement across the regions has led 
to different protections for the rights of the creditors and support for the financial institutions. For the 
four asset management companies established in 1999 to speed up the disposal of non-performing 
assets  in  the  commercial  banks,  they  need  support  from  the  judiciary  and  law  enforcement 
departments in each region in the process of asset recovery. However, due to the difference in support 
they received from these departments, the recovery ratio of even the same category of assets posed 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
sharp difference among different regions. Third, commercial culture has developed in different ways 
across  the  regions.  Though  only  a  temporary  phenomenon  by  nature,  cronyism  or  nepotism  once 
heavily penetrated commercial activities in certain regions, contributing to the high stockpile of non-
performing  loans.  Fourth,  before  the  State  Council  called  for  a  stop  in  commercial  activities  by  the 
army and public security forces several years ago, some military units had engaged in such activities 
and even infiltrated into business operations of the financial institutions. This meant some delinquent 
borrowers, protected by such special forces, could turn a blind eye to the regulatory pressures and 
refuse to honor their debt obligations. Although it is no longer the case right now, the associated non-
performing  assets  have  yet  to  be  completely  disposed  of.  Fifth,  in  the  past,  the  commercial  banks 
adopted  a  credit  quota  system  under  which  credit  funds  were  allocated  to  each  province  and 
municipality according to a specified quota. In this case, the commercial banks found it very difficult to 
move  fund  from  one  province  to  another,  for  the  local  governments  would  oppose  to  such  a  fund 
movement.  Therefore,  fund  outflow  was  not  a  concern  for  governments  in  those  areas  with  high 
financial risks. Moreover, China’s banking regulatory architecture in the past was also built along the 
administrative structures, which to some extent has obstructed free fund movement within the country. 
The reasons behind the regional disparities in financial risks that I listed above may not be complete. 
With  the  deepening  of  the  reform,  some  positive  changes  are  taking  place  in  terms  of  the  overall 
financial  environment.  For  example,  internal  control  and  risk  management  of  the  commercial  banks 
are  being  steadily  improved,  some  banks  have  started  to  introduce  the  internal  rating  system  to 
assess their credit risks on a pilot basis, and financial resources are starting to flow from the high-risk 
areas to those areas with low risks. I believe such positive changes will attract the attention of the local 
governments in China. 
As  we  all  know,  quite  a  number  of  commercial  banks  have  their  own  internal  risk  ratings  for  each 
province  and  municipality  in  China,  but  they  are  usually  not  willing  to  disclose  them  to  the  public. 
Some rating agencies and credit information companies are trying to peep into these internal rating 
results. I think such efforts could finally lead to a total or semi transparency of the risk ratings set by 
commercial banks for different regions. This will further create a pressure on those high-risk areas to 
improve their financial environment or their “regional financial ecological environment” as some people 
call  it.  In  order  to  secure  more  financial  resources  from  the  commercial  banks  to  support  regional 
economic  development,  many  local  governments  have  vowed  to  further  improve  their  regional 
financial  environment,  and  some  even  view  the  enhancement  of  local  financial  environment  of  the 
same  importance  as  improving  the  local  investment  environment.  In  one  word,  this  perception  has 
marked a sharp difference from the past. Many people used to hold the view that banking credit was 
actually  confined  to  local  use  and  the  credit  risks  of  the  national  commercial  banks  could  be 
transferred to the government. Now I am pleased to see some positive changes. From the perspective 
of the commercial banks, they are able to move credit fund from the high-risk areas to areas with low 
risks. They can also float the lending rate to reflect the financial risk difference among various regions. 
Form the point of the local governments, they now care about not only the local financial environment, 
but also the quality of the local customers of the financial institutions. That is to say, they stress much 
about the creation of a sound local credit system under which businesses in the region must fulfill their 
fiduciary  and  debt  obligation.  Apart  from  that,  public  listing  companies  in  the  region  are  also 
encouraged to timely disclose reliable and quality information so as to lay a solid reputation for other 
companies in the region seeking public offering. In my view, these are important and positive progress 
which owes much to the efforts of both the local governments and the commercial banks. However, 
we must recognize that these efforts only mark the beginning of a long process, and the remaining 
regional  risk  difference  means  the  internal  risk  rating  will  continue  to  be  applied  in  the  foreseeable 
future. 
As the final note, I would like to point out that, despite the above progress, much remains to be done 
to eliminate the regional financial risk difference in China. Regional segregation and disparity once has 
been a major obstacle to China’s economic reform. But I believe the market forces will finally prevail. 
With  the  implementation  of  the  Basle  Capital  Accord  II  and  the  IRB,  better  microeconomic 
fundamentals will gradually emerge as the local governments strive to improve the regional financial 
ecological  environment  and  the  interactions  between  the  financial  institutions  and  the  local 
governments further strengthen in a positive way. 
I wish the seminar a great success, thank you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2004
