Y V Reddy: Capital account liberalisation and capital controls 
Remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Central Bank Governors’ 
Symposium convened by the Bank of England in London, 25 June 2004. 
 I am thankful to Bank of England for the excellent arrangements and well thought out agenda for the 
2004 Central Bank Governors’ Symposium. 
As desired by Governor Mervyn King, I will give a brief introduction in this session on capital account 
liberalisation and capital controls. 
Professor  Kenneth  Rogoff’s  well-researched  messages  on  effects  of  financial  globalisation  on 
developing countries are appropriate as governing thoughts for this session. There is evidence of a 
threshold  effect  in  the  relationship  between  financial  globalisation  and  economic  growth,  and  the 
heightened risks of volatility in capital flows to developing countries gets reduced only after a particular 
level of integration. In contrast, empirical evidence shows that trade liberalisation has had beneficial 
impact. A review of evidence provides no road map for the optimal pace and sequencing of financial 
integration. Many questions in this regard are best addressed only in the context of country-specific 
circumstances and institutional features.  
In this background, based on the Indian experience, I will present some issues relating to managing 
capital account. 
First, capital account liberalisation is a process and it has to be managed keeping in view elasticities 
in the economy, and vulnerabilities or potential for shocks. These include fiscal, financial, external, and 
even real sector - say, oil prices and monsoon conditions for India. Professor Rogoff’s presentation 
places special emphasis on government borrowings as a vulnerability. 
Second,  caution  is  needed  in  moving  forward  with  each  step  in  capital  account  liberalisation, 
recognising that reversal of any step in liberalisation is very difficult since markets tend to react very 
negatively to reversals, unless there is already a crisis situation. 
Third,  the  capital  account  itself  needs  to  be  managed  during  the  process  of  capital  account 
liberalisation.  There  is  a  hierarchy  in  the  nature  of  different  types  of  capital  flows  in  real  life.  For 
example, foreign direct investment is preferred for stability, and quantum of short-term external debt, 
by residual maturity, should not be excessive. Furthermore, adequate reserves, keeping in view the 
national  balance  sheet  considerations,  which  include  public  and  private  sectors,  provide  comfort. 
Public policy can achieve these desirable conditions only through some sort of management of capital 
account. 
Fourth,  the  management  of  capital  account  will  be  effective  under  enabling  conditions,  such  as, 
reasonable confidence in macro policies, in particular tax regimes, and safeguards against misuse of 
liberalised  current  account  regime  to  effect  capital  transfers.  Sound  management  will  also  avoid 
dollarisation of the domestic economy and internationalisation of domestic currency. 
Fifth, operationally, management of capital account involves a distinction not only between residents 
and  non  residents  or  between  inflows  and  outflows  but  also  between  individuals,  corporates  and 
financial intermediaries. The financial intermediaries are usually a greater source of volatility amongst 
these. If such financial intermediaries operating in the developing countries are owned or controlled by 
foreign entities / investors, there is perhaps greater tendency to volatility in the flows. It is noticed that 
such  foreign  owned  /  controlled  intermediaries  are  often  influenced  by  considerations  other  than 
domestic economy and have less appreciation of local conditions - apart from the issues relating to 
cross-border supervision of financial intermediaries by the host country supervisor. 
Sixth, the prudential regulations over financial intermediaries, especially over banks, in respect of their 
forex exposures and forex transactions must be effective and a dynamic component of management 
of capital account as well as financial supervision. Such prudential regulations should not be treated 
as capital controls. 
Seventh, capital controls should be treated as only one of the components of management of capital 
account. As liberalisation advances, the control-regime would contract, and thus, it is the changing mix 
of controls that charecterises the process of liberalisation in management of capital account. 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
Eighth,  capital  controls  may  be  price  based,  including  tax-regimes,  or  administrative  measures. 
Depending on the legal framework and governance structures, the mix between the two would vary. 
As  liberalisation  advances,  the  administrative  measures  would  get  reduced  and  price-based 
increased, but the freedom to change the mix and reimpose controls should always be demonstrably 
available.  Such  freedom  to  exercise  the  policy  of  controls  adds  comfort  to  the  markets  at  times  of 
grave uncertainity. 
Finally, as mentioned by Professor Kenneth Rogoff, a distinction needs to be made between de jure 
and de facto financial integration in general and hence, in the context of capital account in particular. 
In  practice,  there  are  difficulties  in  measuring  the  degree  of  financial  integration.  However,  the 
institutional structures, both of public policy and markets, need to be evolved to meet the imperatives 
of  liberalised  capital  account.  In  the  final  analysis,  the  basic  issue  in  any  policy  context  is  whether 
capital  controls  lead  to  distortions  in  exchange  rate  or  the  liberalised  capital  flows  that  lead  to 
distortions  in  exchange  rate.  In  respect  of  emerging  economies,  the  conduct  of  market  participants 
shows  that  automatic  self-correcting  mechanisms  do  not  operate  in  the  forex  markets.  Hence,  the 
need to manage capital account - which may or may not include special prudential regulations and 
capital  controls.  There  are  many  subtleties  and  nuances  in  such  a  management  of  capital  account 
which encompasses several macro issues and micro structures. 
Thank you for your patience. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
