John Hurley: Financial Stability Report 2004 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Financial Stability Report 2004, Dublin, 21 September 2004. 
 General introduction 
I would like to welcome you to the publication of the Central Bank’s first annual stand-alone report on 
the stability of the financial system in Ireland. 
The  report  is  published  in  accordance  with  our  mandate  under  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial 
Services Authority of Ireland Act, 2003. Our mandate as a member of the European System of Central 
Banks also requires us, in conjunction with the various national central banks, to contribute to financial 
stability. Financial Stability Reports are an element in the discharge of this mandate. 
This  is  the  fourth  report  that  we  have  published  on  financial  stability  issues  but  up  until  now  the 
analysis  has  been  published  as  a  chapter  in  our  Annual  Report.  The  publication  of  a  stand-alone 
report has allowed us to expand greatly the depth of analysis on financial stability issues. For the first 
time, seven research articles complement this analysis with special attention being paid to the Irish 
housing market and the results of the recent exercise in stress-testing of the banking system which we 
undertook jointly with the Financial Services Regulator. 
What is financial stability? 
Financial  stability  exists  where  the  various  components  of  the  financial  system  (financial  markets, 
payment  and  settlement  systems  and  financial  intermediation)  function  smoothly  and  without 
interruption, with each component resilient to shock. 
If financial institutions run into difficulties then other banks, businesses and consumers could be very 
negatively  affected.  There  have  been  many  examples  of  financial  crises  in  the  past  in  various 
countries that proved to be very costly in terms of economic disruption and lost growth. The primary 
aim of financial stability analysis is to try to identify any factors that might lead to crises in the future. 
This is a major task as each crisis tends to be very different from the previous one. 
Background to the Report 
The publication of this report in itself is a contribution towards the promotion of financial stability. It is 
intended to increase awareness among all the players in the financial system of the various important 
issues  at  stake  to  ensure  the  continued  health  of  that  system.  There  are  two  distinct  approaches 
adopted  in  this  publication;  first,  to  report  on  the  current  health  of  the  Irish  financial  system  and 
second,  to  highlight  the  possible  shocks  which  could  hit  the  system  and  simulate,  to  the  extent 
possible, the likely impact of those shocks. 
The nature of the exercise involved in financial stability analysis is quite distinct from the type required 
for the other economic reports published by the Central Bank, such as our Quarterly Bulletins. We are 
not forecasting that all or any of these shocks will occur, and we are not limiting our analysis to those 
shocks  that  are  most  likely  to  occur,  but  we  are  looking  at  a  broad  range  of  possible  shocks  and 
forming a view on the robustness of the system to withstand these shocks. 
Key issues highlighted in the Report 
In  this  short  address  I  will  confine  my  remarks  mostly  to  four  areas,  namely  property  prices,  credit 
growth, stress-testing and the dimension of global risks. Frank Browne will provide further comments 
in his presentation that will follow. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
Property prices 
From  our  examination  of  financial  stability  issues,  the  risk  of  an  unanticipated  and  sudden  fall  in 
residential property prices, accompanied by an increase in the default rate among mortgage holders, 
is  the  risk  that  poses  the  greatest  threat  to  the  health  of  the  banking  system.  However,  the  shock 
absorption capacity of the banking system is currently adequate. 
Regarding the question of whether or not house prices are overvalued, the analyses in the report give 
quite mixed results. Some measures suggest that there is a significant overvaluation while others do 
not provide evidence of overvaluation. However, what is more certain is that if house prices were to 
continue to increase in double digit figures, the risk of a sharp correction would be more pronounced. 
In this context, the present tentative indications of a gradual slowdown in house price inflation are to 
be  welcomed.  This  development  is  consistent  with  the  large  increase  in  supply  and  the  decline  in 
rental income that has been evident for some time. Of course, it should be noted that, even if there is 
no  significant  overvaluation  in  house  prices,  any  sizeable  deterioration  in  the  fundamental 
determinants  of  the  market  could  still  mean  that  house  prices  could  fall  significantly  and  this  also 
would have adverse implications for financial stability. 
Credit growth to the household sector 
As I said to you in July, credit growth continues to be a concern - especially credit for property-related 
purposes. The continuation of current rates of credit growth to the household sector, well in excess of 
the  corresponding  rates  in  other  countries,  will  inevitably  lead  to  a  more  highly  indebted  household 
sector  in  this  country.  This  underlines the  need  for  both  lenders and  borrowers  to  stress-test  every 
borrower’s ability to repay these debts, not just in the economically favourable circumstances that exist 
today, but also in more challenging circumstances. In the context of credit growth, our focus has to be 
on the medium- to long-term where increasing indebtedness increases the vulnerability of borrowers to 
income and employment shocks in future years. 
In discussing vulnerability, it is important to bear in mind the current low level of interest rates. There is 
a danger that this may be causing some participants in the housing market to associate the adoption 
of the euro with permanently low interest rates. Since most new mortgages have periods in excess of 
twenty years, borrowers must take a long-term view of interest rates. Variable mortgage interest rates 
(which  represent  the  bulk of  outstanding  mortgages)  reflect where  the  euro area  economy is  in  the 
short-term, but are unlikely to reflect where the economy will be in the medium to long term. 
We are continuing to work closely with our colleagues in the Regulatory Authority, both in developing 
our  joint  work  on  stress  testing,  and  in  following-up  on  the  results  of  the  mortgage  lending  study 
undertaken last year. Specifically, the Authority requested a tightening up in relation to client income 
verification  and  the  funding  of  mortgage  loan  balances  in  order  to  ensure  that  loans  are  properly 
secured  and  will  be  repaid  in  full.  They  are  monitoring  lending  practices  on  an  ongoing  basis.  In 
addition, the Authority is, as part of a review of conduct of business rules, consulting with both industry 
and  consumers  on  the  benefit  of  a  measure  requiring  each  lending  institution  to  obtain  from  the 
borrower, in writing, agreement of its assessment of the borrowers’ ability to repay. 
Stress-testing credit institutions 
A stress test of the banking system was completed during the last 12 months. This involved the banks 
simulating the impact on their financial positions of being hit by a severe recession. The outcome of 
the exercise was positive. The financial position of the banking system, and each of the twelve credit 
institution included in the test, proved very resilient to the simulated recession. However, these results 
have to be qualified because the stress-testing techniques used are still being developed and may be 
subject to a number of shortcomings. 
International dimension 
In  any  analysis  of  Irish  financial  stability,  an  assessment  of  international  developments  is  a  critical 
factor.  The  extreme  openness  of  the  Irish  economy  makes  it  exceptionally  vulnerable  to  shocks 
emanating  from  abroad.  Systemically  threatening  shocks  are  more  likely  to  originate  abroad  than 
within the Irish economy. The interaction of such shocks with any vulnerabilities that might be present 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
in the domestic financial system could result in systemic weakness. Unemployment as well as interest 
rates,  both  crucial  factors  in  an  analysis  of  the  financial  health  of  the  Irish  economy,  can  rise  as  a 
result  of  developments  from  outside  the  economy.  Currently,  there  are  several  international 
developments that have implications for the stability of the Irish economy and financial system. The 
most  important  concerns  are  the  large  global  imbalances,  commodity  price  pressures  and 
expectations of monetary tightening globally. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  this  short  address  by  stating  what  we  hope  to  achieve  by  publishing  our  Annual 
Financial  Stability  Report.  First,  we  hope  to  identify  potential  risks  in  the  Irish  financial  system  and 
second  we  will  endeavour  to  raise  the  level  of  awareness  of  these  risks  by  all  economic  agents, 
including households and businesses. Finally, we propose to continue our ongoing dialogue with the 
banks  in  the  context  of  the  findings  of  the  report  with  the  objective  of  arriving  at  a  common 
understanding of any developments that might suggest a risk to financial stability. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
