Jean-Claude Trichet: Joint Eurosystem - Bank of Russia seminar 
Address by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Joint Eurosystem - 
Bank of Russia seminar, Helsinki, 25 May 2004. 
 Governor  Louekoski,  Chairman  Ignatiev,  distinguished  guests,  fellow  central  bankers,  colleagues, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
“Dobry Vietsher, ia otshen rad vstreche s Vami v etot vecher v Khelsinki” - Good evening, I am very 
happy to see you all here in Helsinki. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this first Joint Eurosystem - Bank of Russia Seminar. I 
would  like  to  emphasise  the  word  “joint”,  as  it  demonstrates  that  this  event  represents  a  common 
undertaking by the ECB, the national central banks of the euro area and the Bank of Russia. Let me 
take this opportunity to thank Governor Louekoski and the Bank of Finland for hosting this seminar 
here in the magnificent House of Estates. Finland shares a border of approximately 1,300 km with the 
Russian Federation and it takes less than two hours to fly from Moscow to Helsinki. Helsinki is clearly 
an ideal venue for this event as not only is it in the euro area but it has the Russian Federation as its 
neighbour. 
Our seminar is not only conveniently located but has also come at a very appropriate time, as it is 
being held against the background of two major developments that have shaped the European and 
Russian  economies  over the  past  few years.  In  the  European  Union,  the  euro  has  been  firmly  and 
credibly established as the common currency for more than 300 million citizens. At the same time, the 
Russian  Federation  has  fully  recovered  from  the  1998  financial  crisis  in  terms  of  both  growth  and 
monetary stability. 
The seminar also marks an important step in deepening relations between the Eurosystem and the 
Bank  of  Russia,  the  central  bank  of  a  key  EU  partner.  Given  our  crucial  role  in  macroeconomic 
management  and  in  the  financial  sector,  effective  bilateral  and  multilateral  cooperation  between 
central banks is needed to enhance prosperity and meet global challenges. Indeed, representatives of 
our institutions regularly discuss global economic and financial issues at international meetings and 
fora, such as the IMF, G20 and the BIS. Seminars of this kind add value to this dialogue by providing 
an  excellent platform  to  focus  on  the central banking  dimension of  economic and  financial  linkages 
among  the  partner  countries.  This  relates  to  challenges  we  are  facing  on  a  global,  regional  and 
bilateral level. In this spirit, the ECB has organised, together with several Eurosystem national central 
banks,  high-level  meetings  with  central  bank  governors  of  the  ten  new  EU  Member  States  and 
accession  countries,  and  with  Latin  American,  Mediterranean  and  East  Asian  central  banks.  In 
previous meetings there has always been an extremely fruitful exchange of views, contributing to a 
better understanding of issues of common interest. 
Our discussions at this seminar will reflect three developments that have had a strong impact on our 
bilateral relations over the past decade. There is first the integration of the Russian economy into the 
global economy. Closely related to this is the emergence of a Europe without dividing lines. Finally, 
there have been profound changes in the monetary and financial environment in our economic areas. 
Let me briefly discuss each of them. 
The integration of the Russian economy into the world economy 
More than twelve years ago the Russian Federation embarked on a road that would lead the country 
through  the  difficult  transition  from  a  centralised  system  to  a  market-driven  economy,  from  a  fully 
closed  to  an  open  society.  It  has  been  a  bumpy  road,  but  the  ground  that  has  been  covered  is 
impressive. Indeed, since 1999 the Russian Federation has contributed substantially to global growth 
and  has  become  a  major  holder  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  Russian  Federation’s  share  in 
global  trade  has  been  on  the  rise  since  1998  and  on  international  capital  markets  Russian 
corporations  have  gained  the  status  of  key  borrowers,  benefiting  from  the  country’s  transition  to 
investment grade status. 
Against this background, our institutions are facing the same challenges in relation to developments in 
the  international  monetary  and  financial  system.  Examples  are  the  increasing  degree  of  financial 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 1
globalisation,  including  its  implications  for  reforming  the  international  financial  architecture,  and  the 
conduct  of  policies  in  an  environment  characterised  by  large  global  imbalances.  Chairman  Ignatiev 
and  his  colleagues  have  been  a  pleasure  to  work  with  in  this  respect,  as  they  have  enriched 
discussions in the respective fora by providing their invaluable assessments and perspectives. 
The EU and the Russian Federation 
The  Russian  Federation’s  integration  into  the  world  economy  is  most  evident  when  looking  at  the 
development of economic and financial linkages to the EU. Russia is our largest neighbour, and has 
been brought even closer thanks to enlargement. Since 1999, exports to the Russian Federation have 
grown at double figure rates, and in 2002 it was the EU’s fifth largest trading partner. On the other 
hand, the enlarged EU accounts for more than 50% of total Russian trade. The Russian Federation is 
a major supplier of energy products to the EU and will in future become an even more predominant 
source of these products. 
The  EU  accounts  for  the majority  of  total  accumulated  foreign  investment  in Russia.  In  2003,  more 
than  two-thirds  of  foreign  inflows  into  the  country  originated  from  EU  countries.  Loans,  the  major 
source  of  foreign  capital  flows  to  the  Russian  Federation,  are  predominantly  granted  by  European 
banks. In the third quarter of 2003, BIS reporting banks from the EU accounted for almost 90% of the 
Russian  Federation’s  outstanding  bank  debt.  Finally,  there  are  signs  that  the  euro  is  being  used 
increasingly as an international currency. 
I  firmly  believe  that  we  have  just  begun  to  discover  and  explore  the  mutual  benefits  of  economic 
integration  in  terms  of  trade  and  investment  flows.  Enlargement  will  lead  to  an  acceleration  of  this 
process.  The  EU  is  committed  to  sharing  the  advantages  of  enlargement  with  its  neighbours,  as 
outlined  in  the  Commission’s  communication  on  the  recently  published  “European  Neighbourhood 
Policy”. This applies first and foremost to the Russian Federation. The concept of a common European 
economic space is a clear indication of this. In this respect we welcome the bilateral agreement that 
has been reached with the EU on the accession of the Russian Federation to the WTO. Russia’s WTO 
membership should certainly bring about benefits for world trade, but most of all it would benefit trade 
between two large economic neighbours: the Russian Federation and the EU. 
The Bank of Russia and the Eurosystem 
Against the background of these global and regional developments, the Eurosystem and the Bank of 
Russia have significantly extended cooperation on central banking issues over the past few years. The 
most visible form of this is the Eurosystem’s involvement in the EU TACIS project with the Bank of 
Russia on banking supervision. Its wider objective is to enhance the stability of the Russian banking 
system through capacity-building at the Bank of Russia. Since last November the ECB, nine national 
central  banks  of  the  euro  area  and  three  non-central  bank  supervisory  authorities  of  EU  Member 
States have been jointly implementing an intensive and multifaceted project. I would like to take this 
opportunity  to  thank  everybody  involved  for  their  efforts  and  open  and  constructive  approach  to 
meeting the challenges such a complex programme entails. 
With  this  seminar  we  want  to  strengthen  and  broaden  our  dialogue  on  all  central  banking  issues, 
taking  account  of  developments  not  only  on  a  global  and  bilateral  level,  but  also  in  our  own 
economies. In this context, the Russian Federation’s rebound is - as a recent IMF publication put it - 
remarkable. Indeed, it is worth bearing in mind that when Europe was preparing for the third stage of 
EMU,  Russia  was  hit  by  a  severe  financial  crisis.  Since  then,  the  Russian  Federation  has  not  only 
witnessed  several  years  of  strong  growth  but  also  the  gradual  emergence  of  an  environment 
conducive  to  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Inflation  has  fallen  to  almost  single  digit  levels,  the 
external value of the rouble has stabilised, market interest rates have declined significantly and the 
government budget has just recorded its fourth annual surplus in a row. Furthermore, these positive 
developments have been supported by a high level of oil and gas revenues. But its rebound has not 
only  been  based  on  oil  and  gas.  A  package  of  structural  reforms  has  been  implemented  in  recent 
years, covering such areas as taxation and budgetary systems, the judiciary and land reform. Finally, 
and  most  importantly  from  a  central  banking  perspective,  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies 
have been pursued. 
However,  many  challenges  remain.  They  can  be  found  on  each  policy  level  I  have  touched  upon: 
global, regional and domestic. We will focus on three of them, namely the conduct of monetary policy 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2004
under integrated capital markets, the current state and outlook for the economic integration of the EU 
and the Russian Federation and the development of our domestic banking sectors. Since frank and 
open  discussions  are  the  basis  for  a  better  understanding  of  issues  and  policies,  I  would  like  to 
conclude by encouraging all of us to participate actively in this seminar. I very much look forward to an 
exciting exchange of views. 
Thank you very much. Bolshoie Spassiba Za vnimanie. 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 3
