Axel A Weber: Sixty years of Bretton Woods - back to the future? 
Summarised  address  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Rome, 
23 July 2004. 
 Sixty years after the signing of the Bretton Woods Agreement the purpose of international monetary 
cooperation is as relevant today as it was in the 1940s: maintaining stability. The international financial 
and  monetary  system  has,  however,  changed  tremendously  since  Harry  Dexter  White  and  John 
Maynard Keynes devised the Bretton Woods system. The then agreed system of fixed exchange rates 
ended as early as in the 1970s. In the wake of economic and financial globalisation emerging market 
economies have been integrated into the world economy. Capital account liberalisation and progress 
in information and communication technology propelled the development of new financial instruments. 
Large-scale  securitisation  ultimately  entailed  a  marked  increase  in  international  capital  flows  with  a 
rising share of private capital flows. The ensuing deepening of international financial relations brought 
about  a  host  of  new  opportunities  in  terms  of  economic  development,  investment  and  finance. 
However, opportunities and risks are two sides of one coin.  
The key question, namely how to maintain stability in a financially globalised world, was highlighted by 
a series of international financial crises during the 1980s and 1990s. Each crisis was characterised by 
a very specific and complex set of causes. Macroeconomic policy failure, indebtedness, and financial 
sector  weakness  belong  to  the  major  ingredients of  financial  crises.  An  unsustainable  policy  mix  of 
monetary  policy  failing  to  deliver  price  stability,  unsustainable  fiscal  policy  and  adherence  to  an 
exchange-rate parity that is out of line with the fundamentals will sooner or later put the currency under 
pressure. Overindebtedness, be it in the public or private sector, especially if denominated in foreign 
currency  and  of  short-term  maturity,  fixed  exchange  rates  and  financial  sector  weakness  have 
repeatedly spawned turmoil in the international financial system.  
These  crises  have  proven  to  be  costly  in  terms  of  output  and  welfare  losses.  Consequently,  crisis 
prevention  and  cost-containment  by  orderly  crisis  resolution  arise  as  key  policy  challenges.  The 
Bundesbank  deems  a  market-based  approach  suitable  for  maintaining  stability  in  the  international 
financial  system.  In  this  concept,  government  at  both  the  national  and  the  international  level, 
establishes  an  institutional  framework  that  sets  incentives  for  pursuing  sustainable  policies  and 
prudent risk-taking.  
The  lessons  learnt  from  the  recent  episodes  of  financial  distress  have  considerably  expanded  our 
knowledge of the origin, development and spread of crises. On the basis of this, benchmarks and best 
practices  have  been  described  by  various  bodies.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  assembled 
“12 Key  Standards  for  Sound  Financial  Systems”,  and  the  G-20,  an  informal  amalgamation  of  the 
G-7 countries and large emerging market economies, has conducted extensive research on institution 
building in the financial sector and drawn useful conclusions.  
At the risk of oversimplification, the advice given boils down to sound institutions and sound policies as 
the main tools for preserving stability. Macroeconomic policy must be geared towards stability - price 
stability and sustainable public finances - and be consistent with the chosen exchange-rate system. 
Microeconomic  policy  needs  to  furnish  the  economy  with  a  high  degree  of  flexibility.  Financial 
regulation and supervision are to safeguard the strength of national financial systems. The degree of 
sophistication in financial regulation and supervision determines the prudent degree of capital account 
openness.  The  sequencing  of  capital  account  liberalisation  needs  to  start  with  the  more  stable 
long-term  capital  flows,  such  as  FDI.  Volatile  short-term  capital  flows  are  to  be  deregulated  last.  A 
reliable  legal  system  raises  confidence  while  a  high  degree  of  transparency  allows  rational 
decision-making  by 
investors,  sophisticated  risk 
management is of the essence.  
The implementation of the aforementioned institutions, standards and policies falls predominantly into 
the  realm  of  national  governments.  They  are  subject  to  multilateral  surveillance,  primarily  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) by means of Article IV consultations. Multilateral surveillance has 
been  devised  to  identify  potential  weaknesses  early  on.  The  Bundesbank  appreciates  that  the  IMF 
recently  strengthened  its  surveillance  activity  in  terms  of  quality  by  expanding  vulnerability 
assessments and by focusing more distinctly on conclusions and recommendations in Reports on the 
Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes  and  in  Financial  Sector  Stability  Assessments.  In  terms  of 
investors.  As 
international 
international 
to 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
transparency, the publication of staff reports of Article IV consultations, which is now almost standard 
procedure,  is  to  be  welcomed.  In  terms  of  scope,  an  improvement  has  been  achieved  by  covering 
developments in international capital markets more extensively.  
History suggests that, despite all these efforts in crisis prevention, the international financial system 
will experience rough patches from time to time. A pre-agreed framework for the orderly resolution of 
financial crises is therefore required. Providing ex-ante clarity on the procedure of debt restructuring is 
not the least important part of the crisis prevention exercise. The Bundesbank has long been favouring 
the involvement of the private sector in crisis resolution. Arrangements where the private sector reaps 
the large profits of risky business while being bailed out in the event of a risky investment turning sour 
invite imprudent risk-taking, thereby putting the stability of the international financial system itself at 
risk.  Three  approaches  to  private  sector  involvement  compete  in  the  international  debate  although 
they  are  not  mutually  exclusive  but  may  be  combined:  Collective  Action  Clauses,  a  code  of  good 
conduct  and  a  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism.  The  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring 
Mechanism  was  put  forward  by  the  IMF  but,  despite  certain  modifications,  did  not  appeal  to  the 
international community.  
Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  in  international  bond  issues  ensure  that  an  agreement  on  the 
restructuring  of  sovereign  debt  cannot  be  undermined  by  litigating  minority  investors.  This 
market-based  solution  is  now  almost  standard  in  new  international  bond  issues  after  Mexico  went 
ahead in February 2003. However, CACs can be only part of a solution as they, by their very nature, 
cannot  solve  the  issue  of  coordinating  a  multitude  of  bond  issues  by  one  single  debtor,  as,  for 
example, in the present case of Argentina. To take account of this problem, it may be advisable to go 
back to certain elements of the proposed SDRM such as the aggregation of liabilities. We must be 
aware that the transitional period up to the time when all bonds outstanding contain CACs will span 
almost three decades.  
As a third proposal that was originally forwarded by the Banque de France one and a half years ago, a 
code of conduct is currently being negotiated between the private sector and governments of some 
G-7 and G-20 countries. The purpose of such a code would be to facilitate the introduction of certain 
procedures  and  a  number  of  recognised  principles  for  governing  the  very  complex  debtor-creditor 
relationship in the event of increasing market tension or acute crises. The code could serve both to 
keep crises from coming to a head and to make unavoidable debt restructuring run more smoothly. 
The  code,  which  would  not  be  legally  binding,  would  spell  out  basic  principles  about  both  crisis 
resolution and crisis prevention. The Bundesbank backs the development of such a code and hopes 
that consensus can be found soon, maybe as early as this autumn.  
If  these  efforts  are  to  involve  the  private  sector  in  the  process  of  crisis  resolution  with  a  view  to 
delivering the desired result of greater stability of the international financial system, the international 
financial institutions need to break with their generous lending habits of the recent past. Large-scale 
lending  beyond  regular  access  limits,  long-term  recourse  to  Fund  resources,  and  the  provision  of 
precautionary lending create moral hazard and counteract the original purpose of advancing financial 
stability. Furthermore, they have already left the Fund with a very high risk concentration. As liabilities 
to  the  international  financial  institutions  now  account  for  a  large  share  of  some  debtors’  foreign 
borrowing, conflicts of interest between the borrowers, IMF shareholders and private creditors could 
put the IMF financing mechanism at risk. Ultimately, the entire concept of IMF lending may end up in 
danger of being undermined.  
The Bundesbank therefore welcomes a return to a lending policy more in line with the catalytic role of 
IMF  financing,  a  policy  which  the  IMF  generally  endorsed  last  year.  Establishing  credible  ex-ante 
clarity  about  financial  assistance  is  crucial  in  this  respect.  The  single  most  important  element  in  a 
revised  lending  strategy  would  be  a  restrictive  exceptional  access  policy  stringently  conditioned  on 
acute  needs  and  debt  sustainability.  Exceptional  access  must  be  reserved  for  only  a  few  true 
emergency cases. Lending criteria need to be applied without exception. Care must also be taken to 
ensure  that  prolonged  use  of  Fund  resources  does  not  intrude  upon  the  World  Bank’s  territory  of 
catering to longer-term financing needs for development purposes.  
Over the years the IMF has repeatedly expanded its policy of lending to debtors that are in arrears to 
the  private  sector  (LIA  policy).  The  Bundesbank  advocates  the  establishment  and  application  of 
transparent and operational LIA criteria and recommends that the regular access limits be respected.  
Considerations  to  install  a  new  precautionary  lending  facility  after  the  expiration  of  the  Contingent 
Credit Line should not be pursued any further. Uncapped precautionary lending without acute needs 
would  push  the  IMF  towards  the  role  of  a  general  risk  insurer.  This  would  distort  creditors’  risk 
assessment, ie invite moral hazard and undermine debtors’ incentives to build strong institutions and 
to implement sound policies.  
The international financial architecture will have to be constantly evolved through formal and informal 
international cooperation, with a special view to building strong institutions and to creating incentives 
that propagate stability.  
