Donald L Kohn: Regulatory reform proposals  
Remarks  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, 22 June 2004. 
 Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to 
testify  on  issues  related  to  regulatory  relief.  The  Federal  Reserve  strongly  supports  this  and  other 
efforts to review the federal banking laws periodically to determine whether they may be streamlined 
without  jeopardizing  the  safety  and  soundness  of  this  nation’s  insured  depository  institutions  or 
undermining consumer protection or other important policy principles that Congress has established to 
guide the development of our financial system.  
Earlier this spring, Chairman Shelby and Senator Crapo asked the Federal Reserve Board to identify 
its  top  two  or  three  legislative  priorities  for  regulatory  relief.  In  his  letter  of  April  23,  Chairman 
Greenspan highlighted three proposals that the Board has supported for many years: authorization for 
the  Federal Reserve  to pay  interest on  balances  held  by depository  institutions  in  their accounts at 
Federal Reserve Banks, repeal of the prohibition against the payment of interest on demand deposits 
by  depository  institutions,  and  increased  flexibility  for  the  Federal  Reserve  in  setting  reserve 
requirements.  
As we have previously testified, unnecessary legal restrictions on the payment of interest on demand 
deposits at depository institutions and on balances held at Reserve Banks distort market prices and 
lead to economically wasteful efforts by depository institutions to circumvent these artificial limits. In 
addition, authorization of interest on all types of balances held at Reserve Banks would enhance the 
toolkit available for the continued efficient conduct of monetary policy. And the ability to pay interest on 
a  variety  of  balances,  together  with  increased  authority  to  lower  or  even  eliminate  reserve 
requirements,  could  allow  the  Federal  Reserve  to  reduce  the  regulatory  and  reporting  burden  on 
depository institutions of reserve requirements. Let me explore each of these topics at greater length.  
Interest on reserves and reserve requirement flexibility 
For the purpose of implementing monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is obliged by law to establish 
reserve  requirements  on  certain  deposits  held  at  depository  institutions.  Banks,  thrifts,  and  credit 
unions  may  satisfy  their  reserve  requirements  either  by  holding  cash  in  their  vaults  and  ATM 
machines,  which  they  need  in  any  case  for  normal  business  activities,  or  by  holding  balances  at 
Reserve Banks. Because no interest is paid on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve 
requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their reserve requirements to a minimum. To 
do  so,  they  engage  in  a  variety  of  reserve  avoidance  activities,  including  sweep  arrangements  that 
move funds from deposits that are subject to reserve requirements to those that are not and to money 
market investments. These sweep programs and similar activities absorb real resources and therefore 
diminish  the  efficiency  of  our  banking  institutions.  The  payment  of  interest  on  required  reserve 
balances  would  remove  a  substantial  portion  of  the  incentive  for  depositories  to  engage  in  such 
reserve  avoidance  measures,  and  the  resulting  improvements  in  efficiency  should  eventually  be 
passed through to bank borrowers and depositors.  
Although  paying  interest  on  reserves  would  yield  significant  benefits,  even  greater  efficiencies  and 
regulatory burden reduction might be realized by substantially reducing, or even eliminating, reserve 
requirements.  To  understand  how  elimination  of  reserve  requirements  could  be  consistent  with 
effective  monetary  policy  and  the  other  legislative  changes  that  would  be  necessary  to  realize  this 
greater reduction in regulatory burden, I need to review with you the role of reserve requirements in 
the implementation of monetary policy and alternatives that might be possible.  
The Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) conducts monetary policy by setting 
a target for the overnight federal funds rate - the interest rate on loans between depository institutions 
of balances held at Reserve Banks. While the federal funds rate is a market interest rate, the Federal 
Reserve can strongly influence its level by adjusting the aggregate supply of balances held at Reserve 
Banks.  It  does  so  through  open  market  operations  -  the  purchase  or  sale  of  securities  that  causes 
increases or decreases in such balances. However, in deciding on the appropriate level of balances to 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
supply  in  order  to  achieve  the  targeted  funds  rate,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Open  Market  Desk  must 
estimate the aggregate demand for such balances.  
At  present,  a  depository  institution  may  hold  three  types  of  balances  in  its  account  at  a  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  -  required  reserve  balances,  contractual  clearing  balances,  and  excess  reserve 
balances.  As  noted  above,  required  reserve  balances  are  the  balances  that  a  depository  institution 
must hold to meet reserve requirements. A depository institution holds contractual clearing balances 
when it needs a higher level of balances than its required reserve balances in order to pay checks or 
make wire transfers out of its account at the Federal Reserve without incurring overnight overdrafts. 
Currently,  such  clearing  balances  do  not  earn  explicit  interest,  but  they  do  earn  implicit  interest  for 
depository institutions in the form of credits that may be used to pay for Federal Reserve services, 
such as check clearing. Finally, excess reserve balances, which earn no interest, are funds held by 
depository  institutions  in  their  accounts  at  Reserve  Banks  in  excess  of  their  required  reserve  and 
contractual clearing balances.  
To  conduct  policy  effectively,  it  is  important  that  the  combined  demand  for  these  balances  be 
predictable,  so  that  the  Open  Market  Desk  knows  the  volume  of  reserves  to  supply  to  achieve  the 
FOMC’s target federal funds rate. Required reserve and contractual clearing balances are predictable 
in that depository institutions must maintain these balances over a two-week maintenance period, and 
the  required  amounts  of  both  types  of  balances  are  known  in  advance.  It  is  also  helpful  for  policy 
implementation  that,  when  the  level  of  balances  unexpectedly  deviates  from  the  desk’s  intention, 
banks  engage  in  arbitrage  activities  that  help  to  keep  the  funds  rate  near  its  target.  Depository 
institutions  have  an  incentive  to  engage  in  this  arbitrage  activity  because  required  reserve  and 
contractual clearing balances must be maintained, not day-by-day, but only on an average basis over 
a two-week period. Thus, for example, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, 
some  depository  institutions  could  choose  to  hold  lower  balances  on  that  day,  and  their  reduced 
demand would help to alleviate the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the period, when the 
funds  rate  might  be  lower,  those  institutions  could  choose  to  hold  extra  balances  to  make  up  the 
shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances.  
The averaging feature is only effective in stabilizing markets, however, if the sum of required reserve 
and contractual clearing balances is sufficiently high that banks hold balances, on the margin, as a 
means of hitting their two-week average requirements. If the sum of required reserve and contractual 
clearing balances declined to a very low level so that depositories held balances at Reserve Banks on 
the  margin  only  to  meet  possible  payments  out  of  their  accounts  late  in  the  day,  the  demand  for 
balances would be more variable from day to day and more difficult to predict. While overnight interest 
rates  have  exhibited  little  volatility  in  recent  years,  even  when  the  sum  of  required  and  contractual 
balances was considerably smaller than at present, volatility nevertheless could potentially become a 
problem at some future time if such balances fell to very low levels. Such a development might be 
possible if interest rates were to rise to high levels, which would reduce the demand for required and 
contractual  balances  and  provide  extra  incentives  for  reserve  avoidance.  Paying  interest  on  such 
balances is one way to ensure that they do not drop too low.  
If  increased  flexibility  in  setting  reserve  requirements  were  authorized,  the  Federal  Reserve 
nonetheless  could  consider  substantial  reductions  in  reserve  requirements,  or  even  their  eventual 
removal, as long as balances held at Reserve Banks other than required reserve balances could serve 
the  purpose  of  ensuring  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  To  enable  the  alternative 
types of balances to play a more important policy implementation role, it would be essential for the 
Federal  Reserve  to  be  authorized  to  pay  explicit  interest  on  them.  In  particular,  in  the  absence  of 
reserve  requirements,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  need  to  be  able  to  pay  explicit  interest  on 
contractual  clearing  balances  or  a  similar  type  of  voluntary  instrument  maintained  over  a  two-week 
average period. This could potentially provide a demand for Federal Reserve balances that would be 
high and stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented effectively through existing procedures 
for open market operations, even with lower or zero required reserve balances.  
A  number  of  other  countries,  including  Canada,  Switzerland,  Sweden,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand, 
have found that they are able to implement monetary policy satisfactorily without the aid of reserve 
requirements.  One  method  central  banks  in  some  of  these  countries  employ  to  mitigate  potential 
volatility in overnight interest rates is to attempt to establish a ceiling and floor for such rates through 
the central bank’s own lending and deposit rates. If a central bank lends freely at a penalty interest 
rate,  that  rate  tends  to  act  as  a  ceiling  on  overnight  market  interest  rates.  Last  year,  the  Federal 
Reserve changed its discount window operations to institute a lending facility of this type that should 
help  to  mitigate  large  upward  spikes  in  overnight  interest  rates.  If  the  Federal  Reserve  had  the 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
authority  to  pay  interest  on  excess  reserve  balances,  and  did  so,  that  interest  rate  would  act  as  a 
minimum  for  overnight  interest  rates,  because  banks  would  not  generally  lend  to  other  banks  at  a 
lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at the Federal Reserve. However, our 
depository institutions are much more heterogeneous than those in other countries and it is not entirely 
clear how well a ceiling and floor arrangement would work in the United States. Although the Federal 
Reserve  sees  no  need  to  pay  interest  on  excess  reserves  in  the  near  future,  the  ability  to  do  so 
nevertheless would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve.  
Interest on demand deposits 
The efficiency of our financial sector also would be improved by repealing the prohibition of interest on 
demand  deposits.  This  prohibition  was  enacted  during  the  Great  Depression,  due  to  concerns  that 
large money center banks might have earlier bid deposits away from country banks to make loans to 
stock  market  speculators,  depriving  rural  areas  of  financing.  It  is  doubtful  that  the  rationale  for  this 
prohibition was ever valid, and it is certainly no longer applicable. Today, funds flow freely around the 
country, and among banks of all sizes, to find the most profitable lending opportunities, using a wide 
variety  of  market  mechanisms,  including  the  federal  funds  market.  Moreover,  Congress  authorized 
interest payments on household checking accounts with the approval of nationwide NOW accounts in 
the  early  1980s.  The  absence  of  interest  on  demand  deposits,  which  are  held  predominantly  by 
businesses, is no bar to the movement of funds from depositories with surplus funds - whatever their 
size  or  location  -  to  the  markets  where  the  funding  can  be  profitably  employed.  Moreover,  in  rural 
areas, small firms with extra cash are able to bypass their local banks and invest in money market 
mutual  funds  with  check-writing  and  other  transaction  capabilities.  Indeed,  smaller  banks  have 
complained that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their 
inability to offer interest on demand deposits.  
The  prohibition  of  interest  on  demand  deposits  distorts  the  pricing  of  transaction  deposits  and 
associated bank services. In order to compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks have been 
compelled  to  set  up  complicated  procedures  to  pay  implicit  interest  on  compensating  balance 
accounts. Banks also spend resources - and charge fees - for sweeping the excess demand deposits 
of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. To be sure, the progress of computer 
technology has reduced the cost of such systems over time. However, the expenses are not trivial, 
particularly when substantial efforts are needed to upgrade such automation systems or to integrate 
the diverse systems of merging banks. From the standpoint of the overall economy, such expenses 
are  a  waste  of  resources  and  would  be  unnecessary  if  interest  were  allowed  to  be  paid  on  both 
demand deposits and the reserve balances that must be held against them.  
The prohibition of interest on demand deposits also distorts the pricing of other bank products. Many 
demand  deposits  are  not  compensating  balances,  and  because  banks  cannot  pay  explicit  interest, 
they often try to attract these deposits by pricing other bank services below their actual cost. When 
services are offered below cost, they tend to be overused to the extent that the benefits of consuming 
them are less than the costs to society of producing them.  
Interest on demand deposits would clearly benefit small businesses, which currently earn no interest 
on their checking accounts. But larger firms would also benefit as direct interest payments replaced 
more costly sweep and compensating balance arrangements. For banks, paying interest on demand 
deposits likely would increase costs, at least in the short run. However, to the extent that banks were 
underpricing some services to attract these “free” deposits, those prices would adjust to reflect costs. 
Moreover,  combining  interest  on  demand  deposits  with  interest  on  required  reserve  balances  and 
possibly  a  lower  burden  associated  with  reduced  or  eliminated  reserve  requirements  would  help  to 
offset the rise in costs for some banks. Many banks will benefit from the elimination of unnecessary 
costs associated with sweep programs and other reserve-avoidance procedures.  
Over  time,  these  measures  should  help  the  banking  sector  attract  liquid  funds  in  competition  with 
nonbank institutions and direct market investments by businesses. Small banks in particular should be 
able  to  bid  for  business  demand  deposits  on  a  more  level  playing  field  vis-a-vis  both  nonbank 
competition and large banks that currently use sweep programs for such deposits.  
The  payment  of  interest  on  demand  deposits  would  have  no  direct  effect  on  federal  revenues,  as 
interest  payments  would  be  deductible  for  banks  but  taxable  for  the  firms  that  received  them. 
However, the payment of interest on required reserve balances, or reductions in reserve requirements, 
would  lower  the  revenues  received  by  the  Treasury  from  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  extent  of  the 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
potential  revenue  loss,  however,  has  fallen  over  the  last  decade  as  banks  have  increasingly 
implemented  reserve-avoidance  techniques.  Paying  interest  on  contractual  clearing  balances  would 
primarily  involve  a  switch  to  explicit  interest  from  the  implicit  interest  currently  paid  in  the  form  of 
credits, and therefore would have essentially no net cost to the Treasury.  
Industrial loan companies 
Although the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports repealing the prohibition of interest payments 
on demand deposits, the Board opposes any amendment - such as the one contained in H.R. 1375 - 
that  would  permit  industrial  loan  companies  (ILCs)  to  offer  NOW  accounts  to  businesses.  ILCs  are 
state-chartered FDIC-insured banks that were first established early in the twentieth century to make 
small loans to industrial workers, but over time have been granted by the states many of the powers of 
commercial banks and in some cases now hold billions of dollars of assets. Under a special exemption 
in current law, ILCs that are chartered in certain states are excluded from the definition of “bank,” and 
their parent companies are not considered “bank holding companies” for purposes of the Bank Holding 
Company Act. This special exemption allows any type of company - including a commercial or retail 
company - to own an FDIC-insured bank without complying with either the limitations on activities or 
the  consolidated  supervision  requirements  that  apply  to  bank  holding  companies  under  the  Bank 
Holding Company Act. An amendment that would allow ILCs to offer NOW accounts to businesses 
would permit ILCs to become the functional equivalent of full-service insured banks. These expanded 
powers  are  inconsistent  with  both  the  historical  functions  of  ILCs  and  the  terms  of  their  special 
exemption  in  current  law.  Granting  these  powers  to  ILCs  would  provide  their  owners  a  competitive 
advantage  over  the  owners  of  other  insured  banks.  Moreover,  such  an  amendment  would  raise 
significant questions for the Congress concerning the nation’s policy of maintaining the separation of 
banking  and  commerce  and  the  desirability  of  permitting  large,  diversified  companies  to  control 
insured depository institutions without consolidated supervision.  
H.R. 1375 also included ILCs in a provision removing limitations on de novo interstate branching by 
banks.  The  Federal  Reserve  supports  expanding  the  de  novo  branching  authority  of  depository 
institutions. Current limitations on de novo branching are anti-competitive obstacles to interstate entry 
for banks and also create an unlevel playing field between banks and federal savings associations, 
which  have  long  been  allowed  to  open  new  branches  in  other  states.  But  we  also  believe  that 
Congress should not grant this new branching authority to ILCs unless the corporate owners of these 
institutions are subject to the same type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions as the 
owners of other insured banks. With de novo branching, a large retail company could potentially open 
a branch of an ILC in each of the company’s retail stores nationwide. As mentioned above, allowing a 
commercial or financial firm to operate an insured nationwide bank outside the supervisory framework 
established  by  Congress  for  the  other  owners  of  insured  banks  raises  significant  safety  and 
soundness  concerns,  creates  an  unlevel  competitive  playing  field,  and  undermines  the  policy  of 
separating banking and commerce that Congress reaffirmed in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. 
These important questions should be addressed in a more comprehensive and equitable manner than 
would be possible in the consideration of minor amendments to legislation on demand deposits or de 
novo branching.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports, as its key priorities for regulatory relief, 
legislative  proposals  that  would  authorize  the  payment  of  interest  on  demand  deposits  and  on 
balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, as well as increased flexibility in the setting 
of reserve requirements. We believe these steps would improve the efficiency of our financial sector, 
make  a  wider  variety  of  interest-bearing  accounts  available  to  more  bank  customers,  and  better 
ensure the efficient conduct of monetary policy in the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
