Joseph Yam: Issues in monetary policy 
Luncheon talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong 
Kong  University  Foundation  for  Educational  Development  and  Research  and  Hong  Kong  University 
Faculty of Business and Economics, Hong Kong, 19 January 2004. 
 Introduction 
I feel very honoured to have been invited to speak to my fellow HKU Alumni and friends at this lunch 
organised jointly by the Hong Kong University Foundation for Educational Development and Research 
and  the  HKU  Faculty  of  Business  and  Economics.  You  were  given  to  understand  that  I  would  be 
talking about “Issues and Challenges for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority”. This is one of those very 
general titles that betray the speaker’s indecisiveness on what he should talk about when accepting an 
invitation to speak. I have to confess that this indeed was my state of mind when Richard Wong first 
approached me. But Dr YC Chow came to my rescue by referring to “the latest update and outlook of 
Hong Kong’s monetary policy” in his circular about the occasion. I shall therefore oblige, even though 
monetary policy is only one of the many preoccupations of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority: we can, 
of course, cover any of the other preoccupations, if they are of interest to you, in the Questions and 
Answers session to follow. 
Monetary policy objective 
Monetary policy is an important area of our work, as it is for all central banks in jurisdictions with their 
own  currencies.  Stability  in  the  currency  is  essential  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  economy,  and 
monetary policy aims to achieve that and, realistically, only that, given the limitation in the availability 
of monetary policy tools to either the supply or the price of money. This latter point, concerning the 
singularity of the monetary policy objective, is not always recognised, particularly in a situation where 
the  economy  is  facing  difficulties  and  the  community  is  looking  to  government  for  relief.  But  the 
independence  of  central  banks,  and  hence  their  ability  to  operate  with  relatively  little  political 
interference,  supported  by  a  strong  research  capability  and  a  high  degree  of  transparency,  have 
helped in the greater acceptance of this reality. 
It  is  not  enough  to  specify  the  monetary  policy  objective  simply  as  “currency  stability”.  The  market 
demands  greater  clarity  than  that,  and  rightly  so.  Increasingly,  currency  stability  is  quantitatively 
defined, in most cases by government, and the quantitative target is to be achieved independently by 
the central bank under the intense scrutiny of the market. This arrangement enhances policy credibility 
and therefore the effectiveness with which the monetary policy objective is achieved. 
As you are, no doubt, aware, given the highly externally oriented nature of the Hong Kong economy, 
with external trade in goods and services equivalent to around 300% of GDP, it is considered by the 
Government to be most important that the external value of our currency be stable. Hence currency 
stability  is  defined  by  the  Financial  Secretary  “as  a  stable  exchange  value  of  the  currency  of  Hong 
Kong”, and quantitatively, “in terms of its exchange rate in the foreign exchange market against the US 
dollar, at around HK$7.80 to US$1”. The Financial Secretary further determined “that the structure of 
the  monetary  system  shall  be  characterised  by  Currency  Board  arrangements”.  And  he  defines 
Currency Board arrangements as requiring that “the Hong Kong dollar Monetary Base to be at least 
100 per cent backed by, and changes in it to be 100 per cent matched by corresponding changes in, 
US dollar reserves held in the Exchange Fund at the fixed exchange rate of HK$7.80 to US$1”. This 
clear statement of monetary policy objective is contained in correspondence exchanged between the 
Financial Secretary and the Monetary Authority in June last year. (A copy of the statement is attached 
to  the  printed  version  of  this  speech.)  It  is  an  authoritative,  modern  day  description  of  the  Linked 
Exchange Rate system that has been with us for over twenty years. 
Monetary reform 
There have in fact been considerable modifications made to the system over the years, all with the 
objectives of strengthening it and enhancing its sustainability. Most of these, I am pleased to say, were 
introduced  in  quiet  times  and  were,  in  my  opinion,  instrumental  in  pre-empting  destabilising  crises, 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
although it will not be possible to prove this. One or two of the modifications, regrettably, had to be 
introduced in the context of a crisis, although again it would be doubtful if they could have pre-empted, 
for example, the debilitating currency attacks of 1997-98.  
One example of this is the expanded definition of the Monetary Base to include Exchange Fund Bills 
and Notes, in addition to Certificates of Indebtedness (to back the banknotes in circulation), coins and 
currency notes issued, and the balance of the clearing accounts of banks kept with the HKMA. This 
last component is usually described as the Aggregate Balance. Although traditionally it is one of the 
smaller  components  of  the  Monetary  Base,  it  is  also  the  most  elastic  component:  its  contraction  or 
expansion  is  the  crucial  determinant  in  whether  domestic  interest  rates  respectively  rise  or  fall.  In 
1997-8  the  Aggregate  Balance  was  proving  to  be  so  small  as  to  encourage  volatility  in  interbank 
interest rates and to invite speculation. This was the reason why we added Exchange Fund paper to 
the Monetary Base to provide a cushion against this volatility. Now, once again, but for very different 
reasons,  the  Aggregate  Balance  is  in  the  news.  I  shall  say  more  on  the  subject  of  the  Aggregate 
Balance later on.  
There will always be debate about the architecture and mechanics of our Currency Board system. It is 
healthy that there should be. For the present, I think we have the structure of the system more or less 
right. We have the Monetary Base unambiguously defined and operated transparently in accordance 
with  the  Currency  Board  rule.  We  have  reduced  the  excessive  volatility  of  our  interest  rates  in 
response to the inflow and outflow of funds into and from our currency, and have therefore lowered the 
probability of interest rate shocks, but of course at the cost of committing more of our foreign reserves 
as  backing  for  the  Monetary  Base.  I  do  not  want  to  bore  you  with  all  the  technical  details  that  are 
perhaps only of market or academic interest. But I would like to make one general point here. The fact 
that  the  exchange  rate  remained  stable,  in  both  the  spot  and  forward  markets,  when  the 
unemployment rate was 8.7%, the deflation rate was over 3% and the budget deficit was equivalent to 
6% of GDP, is attributable, at least in part, to the robustness of our monetary system.  
We nevertheless have to be always on the alert to changing circumstances and the possible need for 
further  modifications.  Globalisation  and  the  revolution  of  information  technology  have  made 
international  capital  rather  more  potent  than  before,  and  have  consequently  made  the  task  of 
maintaining monetary stability for a small, open economy a much more onerous one. An amount of 
international capital that might only create ripples in, say, the very large US market, could create tidal 
waves in the smaller markets: we all witnessed these events during the Asian financial crisis of 1997-
98. And when the movement of such international capital could be made freely with a few keystrokes 
on  the  computer,  and  easily  triggered  by  rumours,  there  simply  is  no  scope  for  complacency  in 
monetary management in these small, open markets. 
Market sentiment 
We  have  recently  seen  just  how  fickle  international  capital  can  be.  At  a  time  when  there  has  been 
considerable concern expressed on the sustainability of our Linked Exchange Rate system, in view of 
the potent combination of problems that we face, namely unemployment, deflation and budget deficit, 
the Hong Kong dollar all of a sudden strengthened. This turn in sentiment is of course to be welcomed. 
The  threat  of  an  interest  rate  shock,  arising  from  possible  capital  outflow  if  the  concerns  were 
heightened to the extent of affecting confidence in the currency, regardless of the robustness of the 
monetary system, has quickly subsided. One possible explanation of the sudden turn in sentiment is 
that financial markets are forward-looking and have reacted quickly to the early signs of improvement 
in  the  economy.  But  the  structural  components  of  the  economic  problems  remain  and  difficult 
decisions will need to be taken to resolve them if the long-term stability in the currency is not to be 
undermined. 
Nevertheless,  the  market  or  rather  market  analysts  always  have  interesting  answers  to  market 
behaviour. There is first the recent weakness of the US dollar, which has pulled the Hong Kong dollar 
down against other currencies not fixed to the US dollar. Some felt that this is unjustifiable, forgetting 
the  need,  as  indicated  by  the  high  unemployment  rate,  for  Hong  Kong  further  to  enhance  its 
competitiveness vis-a-vis markets with currencies not fixed to the US dollar. The weakness of the US 
dollar  has  had  the  benign  effect  of  moderating  the  pain  of  structural  adjustment  arising  from  the 
increasing  economic  integration  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong.  It  lessens  the  extent  of 
deflation necessary as part of that structural adjustment. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2004
There is then the political pressure on the RMB to appreciate or for its exchange rate to have greater 
flexibility. Some felt that if there is greater flexibility in the RMB exchange rate, it would appreciate, and 
the Hong Kong dollar would be pulled along with it. Again the argument is flawed. First of all, I do not 
see  the  need  for  an  appreciation  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate.  The  Mainland  is  running  a  current 
account  surplus  that  is  less  than  one  per  cent  of GDP,  and  this  is  shrinking  under  the  influence  of 
WTO, indicating that there is nothing fundamentally wrong with the level of the exchange rate. There is 
nevertheless  considerable  capital  inflow  partly  to  take  advantage  of  direct  investment  opportunities 
there, as the economy continues to boom, and partly to speculate on an exchange rate appreciation. 
This  capital  inflow  is  in  fact  presenting  monetary  management  problems  for  the  authorities. 
Sterilisation of monetary injections resulting from the rapid build up of foreign reserves is proving to be 
quite challenging. This is notwithstanding the creation of a central bank bills programme that had built 
up  to  over  RMB400  billion  outstanding  in  less  than  a  year  and  the  raising  of  the  bank  reserve 
requirement from 6% to 7%. Partly because of this, credit creation has been accelerating and, if the 
November inflation rate of 3% is not a blip, there are inflationary consequences that have to be dealt 
with.  But  there  is  the  policy  response  of  further,  cautious  capital  account  liberalisation  through,  for 
example,  the  approval  of  QDII  schemes,  which  would  have  the  effect  of  reducing  or  stemming  net 
capital inflow. There is no need to mess around with the exchange rate. 
But even in the event that greater flexibility is introduced to the determination of the RMB exchange 
rate  and  there  is  some  appreciation,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  exchange  rate 
should  appreciate  along  with  it.  The  Government  is  firmly  committed  to  the  maintenance  of  a  fixed 
exchange rate and the policy has served Hong Kong very well in the past twenty years. 
In any case, any hypothetical appreciation of the RMB would be unlikely to cause economic difficulties 
to Hong Kong to the extent of bringing into question the appropriateness of our fixed exchange rate. 
On  the  contrary,  with  continuing  economic  integration  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland  -  and 
these are two economies still with considerable differences in factor and non-tradable goods prices - a 
realignment of the exchange rate between the two currencies could arguably be beneficial. It would, 
arguably,  hasten  the  completion  of  the  process  of  structural  adjustment.  As  we  are  all  aware,  that 
process  has  been  going  on  for  five  or  six  years  and  it  has  involved  considerable  dislocation  to  the 
economy and society, and pain for some. Its early completion is of course desirable. But the important 
question  is  whether  a  realignment  of  the  exchange  rate,  brought  about  by  whatever  means  -  an 
appreciation of the RMB or a depreciation of the Hong Kong dollar - would necessarily be a benign 
one.  In  all  probability  it  would  not  be.  The  risks  of  the  exchange  rate  overshooting  to  the  extent  of 
sparking off a financial meltdown are quite real, although I would admit that the risks for Hong Kong 
are  lower  if  the  realignment  is  brought  about  by  an  orderly  appreciation  of  the  RMB  than  by  an 
uncontrollable depreciation of the Hong Kong dollar. At least the Mainland, with exchange controls, is 
in a position to steer the move, avoid overshooting and its destabilising consequences. But there is 
considerable  doubt  in  the  first  place  as  to  whether  the  Mainland  economy  would  benefit  from  an 
appreciation of the RMB, even if an orderly one could be arranged. 
There are other reasons explaining the turn in sentiment on the Hong Kong dollar. The economy is 
indeed recovering nicely, Hong Kong is running a very significant current account balance of payments 
surplus and performance of asset markets, particularly the stock market, has been impressive. And so 
there has been some capital inflow, arising both from greater foreign portfolio investment and possibly 
some  portfolio  shift  by  residents  back  in  favour  of  Hong  Kong  dollar  assets.  The  rumour  of  an 
appreciation in the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate, along with that of the RMB, against the US dollar 
may have been a factor intensifying that inflow. It may also have reduced the extent of capital outflow 
that traditionally mirrors the current account surplus. 
Dynamics of the monetary system 
Whatever the reason for the recent strong tone of the Hong Kong dollar, I consider it a much more 
pleasant problem to deal with than a currency exhibiting a tendency to weaken. As you know, on the 
weak side, currency board arrangements translate any weakness in the exchange rate arising from 
capital outflow into a contraction of the Monetary Base and the foreign reserves backing the currency, 
and higher domestic interest rates. And interest rates can go very high, in fact, as high as it takes to 
stem  and  reverse  capital  outflow.  In  a  deflationary  environment,  and  with  high  unemployment,  the 
ability  of  the  economy  to  absorb  the  painful  effects  of  sharply  higher  interest  rates  is  limited.  The 
possibility  of  those  in  negative  equity  mortgages  being  forced  by  high  interest  rates,  loss  of  job  or 
further falls in residential property prices into bankruptcy, affecting stability of the banking system, had 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 3
been one of our foremost concerns until recently. I am sure that I am not the only one who is very 
happy that this possibility is rapidly diminishing. 
On  the  strong  side,  currency  board  arrangements  translate  currency  strength  arising  from  capital 
inflow  into  an  expansion  of  the  Monetary  Base,  more  foreign  reserves  and  lower  domestic  interest 
rates.  Specifically,  the  classical  currency  board  rule  requires  the  conduct  of  non-discretionary,  non-
sterilised foreign exchange intervention. As US dollars are sold to the Exchange Fund, the Aggregate 
Balance in the Hong Kong dollar clearing accounts of the banks - the crucial element of the Monetary 
Base - correspondingly increases and interest rates in the interbank market fall. As some of you may 
be aware, the Aggregate Balance has already increased to HK$52 billion from its traditional level of 
less than HK$1 billion necessary as engine oil in the very efficient real time inter-bank clearing system. 
Corresponding to that, the Currency Board Account of the Exchange Fund has taken in US$6.7 billion. 
These are, of course, large numbers, but the important point to realise is that there is no limit as to 
how large they can become. There is no limit to the amount of domestic money that can be created if 
the demand is there. As long as banks want to sell US dollars to us, for the Currency Board account of 
the  Exchange  Fund,  at  the  exchange  rate  determined  by  us,  we  have  to  create  those  Hong  Kong 
dollars. There is no limit to the size of the Aggregate Balance. Nor is there any concern on our part 
about its size. We take no view on what its size should be. 
Outlook for monetary conditions 
You may wonder how this episode of Hong Kong dollar strength will play out. It depends mainly on the 
attitude of the banks and also of those holding large idle Hong Kong dollar balances. There are two 
scenarios. The first is for the Aggregate Balance, which is earning no interest, to increase to a size in 
which  the  total  opportunity  cost  for  holding  on  to  it,  relative  to  the  perceived  risk  of  the  alternative, 
becomes too significant for the banking system as a whole. The alternative is, of course, to switch out 
of Hong Kong dollars into foreign assets earning some return: for example, one might switch into US 
dollars  and  earn  a  deposit  interest  of  around  one  per  cent.  The  risk  of  the  alternative  is  a  sudden 
appreciation of the Hong Kong dollar, which, for reasons that I was trying to dispel, is presumably still 
perceived by the market to be significant. 
I do not know what it will take, or for how long it will take, for this perception to change. The banking 
system of Hong Kong traditionally runs a short Hong Kong dollar position, partly because of the lack of 
quality Hong Kong dollar assets and partly because of the desire, for whatever reasons, of some to 
hedge  against  the  so-called  Hong  Kong  risks.  And  when  there  is  sudden  realisation  that  the  Hong 
Kong dollar might strengthen, the short Hong Kong dollar position naturally becomes a concern. The 
banking system might attempt to reduce that short position. There would obviously be reluctance to 
increase that short position, notwithstanding the favourable interest rate differential. 
May be it is necessary for the risk-adjusted opportunity cost to be made bigger. This is the second 
scenario of how this episode will play out. We have the powers to introduce charges on large balances 
maintained  by  banks  in  their  clearing  accounts  held  with  us,  so  that  the  interest  rate  differential 
between holding Hong Kong dollars and holding US dollars becomes a lot higher than the current one 
per  cent.  Outflow  from  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  would  then  be  generated,  the  exchange  rate  would 
weaken, US dollars would be sold at 7.80 and the Aggregate Balance would be returned to a more 
normal level. Hong Kong dollar interest rates would also be more in line with those of the US dollar. 
But some have expressed reservations in this, which amounts to the imposition of negative interest 
rates,  in  view  of  their  unfair  impact  on  the  smaller  depositors  if  the  banks  were  to  pass  them  on. 
Whether banks would do this or not is, of course, a commercial decision for each bank to take. But 
there seems to me no reason why they should. The customer deposit base of a bank is far greater 
than the clearing balance. There is scope for banks to arrange matters in a way that would not affect 
ordinary depositors, for example by passing the charges on only to very large depositors. 
This is, of course, all hypothetical, for we are not currently contemplating taking action that would lead 
to this second scenario developing. Low interest rates are helpful to the economic recovery. They are 
also  helpful  to  those  still  repairing  their  balance  sheets,  including  those  servicing  negative  equity 
mortgages. And there does not seem to be any sign of excessive credit creation. Indeed, the demand 
for credit  remains  rather subdued.  Even  in  the  event  that  the  present  low  interest  rate environment 
proved to be somewhat inflationary, this would just mean the elimination of deflation in Hong Kong, 
which we all would welcome. So, again for the time being, if there is further inflow, you will see us 
buying  US  dollars  and  increasing  the  Aggregate  Balance  passively.  This  is  of  course  a  profitable 
operation. We are earning at least one per cent on the US dollars bought but paying no interest on our 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2004
Hong Kong dollars created. We are buying US dollars at an exchange rate slightly cheaper than 7.80 
but  we  will  not  sell  those  US  dollars  until  the  exchange  rate  moves  back  to  7.80.  And,  most 
importantly, we are determined to keep the exchange rate fixed. In short, the profit is assured. 
However, it may be that the size of the Aggregate Balance, for whatever reason, and the associated 
loose  monetary  conditions  become  a  matter  of  concern.  If  so,  there  is  a  variation  of  the  first 
scenario that may develop, which is something that was envisaged in the introduction of the seven 
technical measures to strengthen the Currency Board system in September 19981. We could take the 
exceptional step of mopping up the large pool of Hong Kong dollars in the Aggregate Balance, or part 
of  it,  through  the  issue  of  more  Exchange  Fund  paper.  Since  the  paper  that  would  replace  the 
Aggregate Balance in this manner would be fully backed by US dollar reserves and would still be part 
of the Monetary Base, the Currency Board rules would continue to be observed. This would in effect 
be a mechanism for preventing or mitigating the emergence of extreme monetary conditions on the 
strong side, and one that would be symmetrical to the cushion afforded on the weak side by the same 
pool of Exchange Fund paper eligible for accessing the Discount Window. We keep an open mind on 
this possibility. 
Strong side convertibility undertaking 
There  is  obviously  a  need  to  monitor  developments  closely.  There  may  be  circumstances  in  which 
some mopping up of inter-bank liquidity through the exceptional issue of Exchange Fund paper would 
be  desirable.  There  may  also  be  circumstances  in  which  negative  interest  rates  could  become 
justifiable, if only for the purpose of underlining the Government’s determination to maintain the Linked 
Exchange Rate system. It may also be that a more formal convertibility undertaking on the strong side 
of  the  Link, mirroring  the  one  that already  exists  on  the  weak  side,  becomes  necessary.  There  are 
pros and cons for retaining some discretion in the determination of the intervention level on the strong 
side. On the one hand, the constructive ambiguity inherent in discretion inhibits speculative shorting of 
the Hong Kong dollar by making it difficult to calculate the downside risk involved. On the other hand, 
the total absence of discretion may enhance further the credibility of the system, to the extent that this 
is  considered  necessary,  although  it  would  also  limit  the  downside  risks  of  and  thus  encourage 
currency speculation. 
There is a further consideration and this is the impact of a two-way convertibility undertaking on the 
jobs of all those employed in the dealing rooms of banks trading the Hong Kong dollar against the US 
dollar.  Depending  on  whether  there  is  a  spread  between  the  strong  side  and  the  weak  side  in  the 
convertibility  undertaking,  market  activity  will  be  diverted  to  us  and  we  would  play  the  role  as  the 
market maker. In the extreme case when there is no spread and we buy and sell both at the level of 
7.80, all buying and selling of Hong Kong dollar against US dollar will be diverted to us. We would be 
the counter-party to every deal and there would be much less a need for dealers that live on market 
volatility. Obviously, this is not something that any of us would wish to see, particularly at a time when 
unemployment is still high, and it is, in fact, a general practice among central banks throughout the 
world not to introduce policies or practices that would inhibit or erode the development of legitimate 
financial  markets.  But  such  a  possibility  could  not  be  entirely  ruled  out:  if,  for  example,  we  faced a 
situation in which a two-way convertibility undertaking with no spread was what was necessary for us 
to  discharge  our  responsibility  in  the  maintenance  of  a  stable  exchange  rate  -  if  the  public  interest 
required it - then it is clear where our duty would lie. 
These are subjects that have been reviewed periodically by the Currency Board Sub-Committee of the 
Exchange  Fund  Advisory  Committee.  No  doubt  the  Sub-Committee  will  continue  to  revisit  these 
subjects in the future. Those interested in monitoring how our thinking on these matters has developed 
should examine the records of the Sub-Committee. 
International finance 
As events unfold in the coming months both in the international and domestic financial markets, there 
will  continue  to  be  questions  and  comments  on  the  appropriateness  of  the  Linked  Exchange  Rate 
                                                      
1  The fifth of these measures was the clear commitment from the HKMA that new Exchange Fund paper would only be issued 
when there was an inflow of funds enabling the additional paper to be fully backed by Foreign Reserves. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 5
system  and  on  the  mechanisms  we  employ  to  operate  it.  And  the  year  ahead  looks  like  one  that 
promises  considerable  volatility  in  world  financial  markets.  There  could  be,  and  arguably  we  are 
already  seeing,  less-than-benign  exchange  rate  adjustments  brought  on  by  heightened  concerns 
about  external  imbalances,  particularly  in  the  United  States.  There  could  be  greater-than-expected 
inflationary pressures developing to the extent of requiring upward adjustments in interest rates that 
are  larger  and  sooner  than  expected.  There  could  be  unexpected  escalation  of  geopolitical  tension 
leading  to  sharp  market  adjustments.  Discussions  about  our  monetary  policy  may,  consequently, 
become lively. 
In  listening  to  these  discussions  and  possibly  contemplating  the  making  of  market  transactions,  for 
example, to adjust your portfolio allocation, I hope you will bear in mind what the Government’s firm 
monetary  policy  objective  is  and  the  ability  of  the  HKMA  in  delivering  that  objective.  There  is 
something else that I would like you also to bear in mind. Financial markets often exhibit the tendency 
of  having  a  life  of  their  own,  relegating  the  original  purposes  of  their  existence  to  secondary 
importance,  if  that.  Globalisation  and  the  revolution  of  information  technology  have  increased  this 
tendency, as international capital roams around the globe with the touch of a few buttons to look for 
opportunities  to  make  quick  profits.  Much  of  it  has  developed  a  predatory  character,  its  operators 
skilfully justifying their destabilising and possibly destructive activities by pointing to policy, market or 
governance weaknesses and handing down what they called “punishments by the free market”. Many 
jurisdictions have fallen prey to these predators, as we saw in the Asian financial turmoil of 1997-98. 
To  be  sure,  policy  and  other  weaknesses  did  feature  prominently,  but  I  think  not  to  the  extent  of 
justifying the severity of the punishment handed down. 
The  long-term  public  interest  of  having  financial  markets  to  facilitate  financial  intermediation  that 
promotes economic growth and development often does not align with the private short-term interests 
of  financial  intermediaries.  This  regrettably  is  a  fact  and  the  financial  history  of  Hong  Kong  is 
punctuated  by  events  brought  on  by  heightened  misalignments  of  those  interests.  In  1987,  for 
example,  the  intermediaries  forced  a  closure  of  the  stock  market  and  a  painful  disruption  in  the 
functioning  of  an  important  channel  of  financial  intermediation.  I  have  no  intention  of  belittling  the 
important role of financial intermediaries, or casting doubt on their integrity, or degrading their expert 
views on financial markets. But it is important for all to be reminded every now and then about one 
thing. The long-term public interest must prevail. 
It may be that there is a need to revisit the role of the domestic currency of small economies, from the 
academic, economic development, market and monetary policy perspectives. As I implied earlier, the 
maintenance  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  a  small,  open  economy  is  proving  to  be  an 
increasingly  onerous  task  under  the  influence  of  globalisation  and  the  revolution  of  information 
technology. This is particularly so for an economy that is highly externally oriented, in the sense that 
the external sector is large and financial markets are dominated by international financial transactions. 
The task is even more onerous if the economy aspires to be an international financial centre, in which 
financial  intermediation  of  an  international  dimension,  possibly  not  involving  either  savings  or 
investments of the domestic economy, takes place in abundance. 
Smallness and  openness are sources of  vulnerability,  and  the  associated risks  have  to  be  properly 
managed  by  the  authorities.  Regrettably,  since  the  Asian  financial  turmoil,  quite  a  number  of  Asian 
economies  have  reduced  their  openness  as  a  defence,  through  for  example  the  introduction  of 
controls  or  restrictions  that  limit  the  availability  of  the  domestic  currency  to  non-residents.  This  is 
understandable, although such controls or restrictions may have the undesirable effect of undermining 
the  efficiency  in  the  allocation  of  international  capital.  Perhaps  attention  should  instead  be  given  to 
addressing the smallness of their markets by enlarging them to such an extent as to enable them to 
absorb  the  volatility  that  may  arise  from  the  free  flow  of  international  capital,  and  not  be constantly 
threatened by monetary and financial instability. Given that these economies share a common interest, 
and there is increasing interdependence among them, as evidenced by the rapid expansion of intra-
regional trade, one way of enlarging their markets is monetary union. But perhaps this is a subject for 
another occasion on another day. 
Thank you for listening to me so patiently. 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2004
