Ishrat Husain: Vision for Pakistan’s financial service industry 
Address by Dr Ishrat Husain, as the chief guest at the ceremony held to announce the joint venture 
partnership between BMA Capital and Abraaj Capita, Karachi, 29 July 2004. 
 I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  present  here  this  evening  on  the  occasion  of  the  signing  of  the  joint 
venture partnership agreement between BMA Capital and Abraaj Capital. This partnership will raise 
the  capital  of  the  company  to  a  level  where  it  can  get  into  new  areas  of  business.  I  would  like  to 
congratulate  the  sponsors,  management  and  staff  of  both  these  companies  on  their  successful 
transaction and hope they will use this expanded platform to launch new products and services which 
will be focus of my remarks this evening. 
Securities and investment banking by its nature is more risky than the traditional retail banking. Large 
firms are protected by the diversity of their income streams and are more able to withstand exogenous 
shocks and unanticipated disturbances than small firms in this field. To that extent this transformation 
of BMA into a large firm provides us, the regulators, a little bit of comfort. 
My  vision  for  Pakistan’s  financial  sector  envisages  a  continuum  on  the  domestic  front  with  well 
functioning capital markets at one end, the banking system in the middle and Microfinance institutions 
at  the  other  end.  I  stress  the  word  ‘continuum’  in  which  all  constituents  are  interlinked  and  a  lot  of 
flexibility exists throughout the value chain rather than vertical silos or compartments which stand in 
isolation with each other. Capital markets cater to the need of well-established, highly reputed, credit 
worthy  large  issuers  of  capital  who  are  trusted  by  both  the  retail  and  institutional  investors  and  to 
whom they are willing to provide their savings at competitive prices. Banks are then left to meet the 
demand of the bulk of the population in the middle market i.e., the whole host of medium and small 
enterprises, firms, farmers, individual businesses, partnerships, unlisted companies on one hand and 
millions of households seeking different kind of consumer financing on the other. They will be fed by 
millions  of  small  and  medium  depositors  who  have  neither  the  inclination  nor  the  appetite  to  do 
anything else with their savings but to entrust them to the vast network of banks with which they are 
quite  familiar  and  comfortable  with.  At  the  other  extreme  of  the  spectrum  are  small  microfinance 
institutions that can be set up even at the district level with very little capital to serve the poor, the 
landless, the small artisans, the semi-skilled who can use small amounts of capital to transform their 
labour into marketable products and earn a decent living.  
Globally, I envision that Pakistan’s financial services industry will be integrated with the international 
financial markets and will remain an active participant in mobilizing and raising resources at highly fine 
prices in adequate volumes for the sovereigns, agencies and corporates. At the same time it is my 
endeavour  that  Pakistan  becomes  an  exporter  of  financial  services  first  to  the  Middle  East,  Central 
Asia and North Africa and then to the rest of the world. 
How can this vision be translated into reality? We have to work together on an action plan to achieve 
both these objectives in a time bound manner with specific milestones and deadlines. 
To achieve the first objective the financial service industry and the Government have to take a number 
of actions:  
(a) 
(b) 
Broaden  retail  investor  base  in  equity  and  debt  markets.  The  present  policy  of  the 
Government to privatize the large public enterprises through IPOs on the stock market has 
done wonders to expand and attract several hundreds of thousands of retail investors. The 
industry  has  to  consolidate  this  trend  and  make  future  private  floatations  on  a  continuing 
basis making it possible to retain the attraction of retail investors.  
The contractual savings institutions in Pakistan are highly segmented, narrowly focused and 
making  sub-optimal  returns  on  the  assets  they  manage.  It  is  the  joint  responsibility  of  the 
Government,  regulators  and  the  industry  to  mobilize  and  manage  these  savings  in  an 
optimal  and  professional  manner.  As  we  develop  and  manage  private  pension  funds, 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
(k) 
(l) 
provident funds and endowment finds the overall domestic savings rate in the country will 
rise.  
There  are  billions  of  rupees  worth  of  distressed  loans  lying  with  the  commercial  banks. 
Investment banks can acquire these loans at a discount, restructure the underlying assets by 
creating sustainable debt capacity and make the units operational. This will help the revival 
of the industry and clean up the balance sheets of the banks. 
A large number of corporations and listed companies in Pakistan are not realizing their full 
potential and unearthing the value for the shareholders. Financial service providers should 
advise them as to how these hidden values can be realized.  
The  economies  of  scale  and  scope  dictate  that  many  corporate  entities  will  improve  their 
financial  performance  if  mergers  and  acquisitions  take  place.  This  is  a  neglected  area  in 
Pakistan which begs the attention of every one of us present here today.  
The  financial  service  industry  has  to  design  and  introduce  long-term  infrastructure  and 
municipal  bonds  to  supplement  Government’s  efforts  in  upgrading  the  basic  infrastructure 
facilities  and  encourage  participation  of  private  sector  and  in  some  cases  public-private 
partnership in these projects.  
High standards and practices of corporate governance should be observed by all players in 
the  industry  so  that  the  confidence  of  small  and  minority  shareholders  is  restored  and 
maintained, integrity and ethics become the hallmark of our financial sector.  
Private equity funds have played an extremely useful role in several developing countries in 
efficiently mobilizing private funds, placing them in undercapitalized companies making them 
highly  profitable  and  either  taking  them  public  or  exiting  from  the  scene  after  reaping 
handsome returns. Pakistan does not have such vehicles which need to be nurtured. I am 
confident  that  Abraaj  being  the  largest  private  entity  firm  in  the  Middle  East  would 
disseminate this experience in Pakistan through their new JV. 
As mortgage loans assume a significant proportions of the banks’ portfolios they will need to 
offload  them  from  their  balance  sheets  to  make  headroom  for  new  originations.  Mortgage 
based  securities  will  be  needed  to  enable  this  to  happen  through  active  assistance  of 
financial service providers.  
We  have  not  seen  many  transactions  so  far  which  involve  structured  finance,  acquisition 
finance,  takeout  finance  and  multilevel  finance.  As  corporate  treasuries  acquire  more 
sophistication there will be demand for such products.  
Derivatives markets are just beginning to take hold but they are integral to risk management 
and  risk  mitigation  strategies  of  the  borrowers.  Banks  will  have  to  play  a  key  role  in 
educating their counter parties in all the intricacies of derivatives.  
Cross selling services have not been popular in Pakistan’s financial industry so far. We seem 
to  have  an  obsession  with  properitory  and  own  managed  and  controlled  products  and 
services. We are losing sight of the enormous synergies which are being missed by pursuing 
the current business model.  
To achieve the second objective i.e., export of financial services from Pakistan there are a number of 
steps we have to take. These are:  
(a) 
(b) 
2 
 Develop,  attract,  retain  and  motivate  high  quality  skills  who  can  carryout  world-class 
professional work  relating  to  technical,  marketing  and  management  of  these  institutions  in 
third countries. 
Acquire  core  competencies  which  are  needed  to  compete  in  an  integrated  and  globalized 
financial market.  
BIS Review 45/2004
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
Focus  on  business  areas  and  niches  which  allow  a  competitive  edge  to  our  exporters  of 
financial services.  
Concentrate  on  innovation,  speed,  responsiveness  and  tailoring  to  meet  the  specific 
customer needs in credit delivery.  
Use technology as an enabler to digitally secure product access and service delivery, reduce 
transaction costs and provide convenience to customers.  
Introduce control mechanism for cost structure and operational efficiency.  
Build  high  quality  research,  market  information  gathering  and  analysis  capacity  to  keep  in 
continuous touch with the changing trends and demand patterns.  
Let me conclude by submitting that the agenda I have sketched out above is quite demanding but 
it is doable and not implausible. The road ahead of us is long and arduous but it seems to me that 
this joint venture that has been established today is the first step in that direction. We all have to 
work hard and long to achieve these goals.  
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
