Jean-Claude Trichet: Euro area statistics and their use for ECB policy-making 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  ECB,  at  the  Second  ECB  Conference  on 
Statistics, Frankfurt, 22-23 April 2004. 
 Colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you most warmly to this the Second ECB Conference on Statistics.  
I  am  particularly  happy  to  see  so  many  participants  from  the  countries  that  will  join  the  European 
Union  (EU)  in  just  a  few  days  time.  This  milestone  in  European  history  marks  the  successful 
completion of intensive preparations in many fields, including statistics. 
The  goal  of  this  conference  is  to  review  the  statistical  requirements  for  central  bank 
policy-making. In addition, it provides the statistical community with an opportunity to bid farewell to 
Eugenio Domingo Solans, the Executive Board member responsible for statistics, who will leave the 
ECB at the end of May 2004.  
Although the emphasis of this conference will obviously be the future of statistics, I would also like to 
take this opportunity to briefly review the current state of euro area statistics that are produced by the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB).  
Let me first, however, underline the importance of euro area statistics for ECB policy-making.  
The importance of euro area statistics 
We should not underestimate the importance of official monetary, financial and other economic 
statistics for the ECB’s monetary policy. As statistics provide the foundation for economic analysis 
and policy-making, the availability of trustworthy and timely statistical time-series is a prerequisite for 
an  effective  and  correct  assessment  of  the  monetary  and  economic  situation  and  future  prospects. 
Moreover,  economic  agents  also  use  these  statistics  for  their  own  decisions,  which  then  drive  the 
developments of financial and other economic markets. 
In this regard, I would like to stress the importance of a single set of statistics that is used by all 
economic and financial policy-makers, market participants and the public at large. The familiar credo 
of  the  media,  “facts  are  sacred,  opinions  are  free”,  should  also  apply  to  statistics  and  the  use  of 
statistics.  An  effective  policy  preparation  process  requires 
that  public  and  private 
decision-makers need not debate about the numbers, whatever the outcomes are. Instead they 
can then focus their deliberations on the best possible policy assessment based on these statistics 
and the forecasts derived from them.  
Of course, this also places a heavy responsibility on the shoulders of those who are responsible for 
the development, compilation and dissemination of the statistics. In this regard, I fully agree with the 
content  of  the  statement  in  the  joint  report  on  euro  area  statistics  and  indicators  adopted  by  the 
ECOFIN  Council  and  the  Commission  and  forwarded  to  the  European  Council  in  spring  2003.  The 
report  states:  “For  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  euro  zone  as  a  monetary  union  working  under  a 
single monetary policy and decentralised but coordinated fiscal policies, macroeconomic statistics of 
impartiality,  reliability,  relevance, 
the  highest  quality  are 
cost-effectiveness, statistical confidentiality and transparency must be fully applied”.  
The increasing importance of euro area statistics means that appropriate priorities should be set and 
the corresponding resources made available for compiling the contributions to these statistics at the 
national level. This may need to coincide with a continued shift in emphasis from simply compiling 
national statistics to delivering a pertinent contribution to European statistics. This focus on the 
euro area has already been largely achieved for statistics that are compiled and disseminated by the 
ESCB,  such  as  monetary  and  financial  statistics,  the  balance  of  payments  and  international 
investment position statistics, and quarterly financial accounts. However, for other economic statistics 
too, reliable euro area aggregates should be published as soon as possible and preferably at 
the same time as the data releases for at least the largest countries. This applies, in particular, to 
the  short-term,  high-frequency  statistics  on  prices  and  costs,  national  accounts,  labour  markets, 
required.  The  principles  of 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 1
business  developments  and  external  trade,  which  are  needed  for  business  cycle  analysis  and  for 
monetary policy preparation. 
This practice of publishing simultaneously area-wide and national data follows the “First for Europe” 
principle.  This  principle  implies  that  the  statistics,  at  least  the  Principal  European  Economic 
Indicators, are published on the same day for the euro area as for the fastest countries. These 
countries should cover a sufficient proportion of the euro area to enable the computation of reliable 
estimates for the area as a whole. In addition, the release calendar of these indicators should take 
account  of  European  policy  needs,  and  revisions  and  seasonal  adjustment  practices  of  these 
indicators  should  be  coordinated.  At  present,  this  situation  has  not  yet  been  reached.  And  as  a 
consequence,  a  number  of  European  and  national  institutions,  market  participants,  forecasters,  etc. 
are all second-guessing, on their own, at what the euro area aggregate will be as soon as the data for 
one or more of the larger Member States have been released. Moreover, even when the euro area 
aggregate has been published, based on sufficient country coverage, it can still be revised every time 
another “larger” Member State publishes this statistic for the same reference period. The volatility of 
the euro area aggregate is clearly a second-best solution both from a monetary policy perspective and 
in terms of the effectiveness and efficiency of the statistics concerned. 
Within  the  statistical  community  of  the  ESCB,  a  shift  in  emphasis  towards  a  truly  European 
team spirit is already taking place. For instance, when the ECB releases its monthly statistics on 
monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  publish  the  results  for 
their  respective  country  shortly  afterwards.  I  am  convinced  that  the  European  Statistical  System 
- comprising  of  Eurostat,  the  Statistical  Office  of  the  European  Communities,  and  the  National 
Statistical Institutes (NSIs) - will want to follow suit.  
The  harmonisation  of  the  methodologies  used  by  the  various  countries  for  the  collection  and 
production of statistics lies at the heart of a monetary union: it enables us, for example, to compile 
meaningful  area-wide  aggregates.  At  the  same  time,  the  fruitful  and  fairly  detailed  statistical 
harmonisation achieved in the euro area may inspire the further development of worldwide statistical 
standards. Given that cross-country comparability of official statistics is key to their usefulness 
and  credibility,  all  countries  across  the  globe  should  then  want  to  implement  such  worldwide 
standards  in  their  official  economic  and  financial  statistics.  Of  course,  this  applies  a  fortiori  to 
external  statistics,  such  as  the  trade  balance,  the  balance  of  payments  and  the  international 
investment position, where we still have a lot of progress to make. Partner countries will only be able 
to  share  a  common  analysis  of  their  bilateral  economic  and  financial  relationships  if  their  mutual 
external statistics mirror each other. In turn, this is only feasible if these statistics are compiled using 
the  same  concepts  and  definitions,  and  similar  methodologies.  In  view  of  their  importance  for 
policy-making,  it  may  be  worthwhile  embarking  on  more  intensive  coordination  among  the 
statisticians involved, particularly those within the euro area and in the other major economic blocs 
of the world, to minimise the present “asymmetries” in external statistics. 
Besides  monetary  policy,  which  is  certainly  the  main  user  of  our  statistics,  the  central  bank’s 
statistical department should provide services to other central bank functions (financial stability, 
payment  systems,  operations,  etc.)  and,  of  course,  to  users  outside  the  central  bank  (market 
players, researchers and the general public). The different tasks of a central bank are clearly related, 
and  statistical  information  required  for  policy  actions  in  these  different  areas  has  related  or  even 
shared sources, it requires similar methodological treatments, and it benefits from being embedded in 
an integrated statistical framework.  
Going beyond the use of ECB statistics by the ECB itself, these statistics may also be able to play 
a role as a neutral and trustworthy benchmark for market participants and the public at large. In 
this context, I would like to give three examples.  
• 
First, the European Financial Markets Association (ACI) recently published the final report on 
the “Short-term Paper (STEP) Market in Europe - Recommendations for the development of 
a pan-European market”. This report recommends, among other things, that the ECB, as a 
neutral party, should publish statistics on volumes and prices covering the STEP market.  
Second,  since  last  November,  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs  have  released  every  month 
harmonised  euro  area  and  national  statistics  on  interest  rates  on  deposits  and  loans  by 
households and corporations. These and other ECB statistics are also suitable for assessing 
progress in financial integration in the euro area.  
BIS Review 23/2004
 2 
  Third,  the  ECB,  together  with  colleagues  from  NCBs  and  other  experts,  is  developing  a 
European standard classification of financial instruments which may eventually be of use to 
market participants as well. 
As a last example of the importance of euro area statistics, I would like to mention the indicator that 
lies at the heart of the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability, namely the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area. This index is compiled and disseminated every 
month by Eurostat, in close cooperation with the national statistical institutes. It is made available with 
a reasonable degree of detail and timeliness. In addition, a very timely “flash estimate” is published at 
the end of the reference month.  
However, for some time now, survey results have indicated that a number of euro area citizens have 
the impression that the inflation is higher than the moderate levels that are evidenced by the 
HICP development.  
• 
A first explanation of this phenomenon may be the lasting memory of some (or a few) price 
increases, mainly for personal services, that occurred when the euro was introduced. These 
increases  had  no  lasting  impact  on  inflation  because  fortunately  there  were  not  many  of 
them. But, in certain cases, they may have left a psychological mark.  
A  second  reason  may  be  the  need  for  some  consumers  to  adapt  to  the  euro  as  the  new 
yardstick for price tags. This effort may be associated with some suspicion about actual price 
developments. 
A  third  cause  for  the  discrepancy  between  the  inflation  “feeling”  of  some  people  and  the 
actual inflation is the fact that the prices of products that are bought “out of pocket” and 
at a high frequency have tended to rise faster than the average. By contrast, the prices 
of  several  products  that  are  bought  only  occasionally,  such  as  household  appliances  or 
package  holidays,  or  the  prices  of  services  that  are  paid  by  giro  transfers,  for  example 
telephone  subscriptions,  have  typically  increased  much  less  or  have  even  decreased. 
Understandably,  if  you  are  confronted daily  by  somewhat  higher  prices  for  relatively  small 
purchases  and  you  only  benefit  occasionally  from  more  substantial  price  advantages  for 
some expensive products, you may well perceive inflation to be higher than it actually is. 
  Taking all this into account, I can assure you of the quality of the HICP estimate and I have invited 
the consumers in the euro area to fully trust the figures which show that inflation is moderate. 
Households and all other economic agents can be assured that the ECB will preserve the purchasing 
power of the euro and that future price stability will continue to be ensured in line with our definition. 
Some achievements of euro area statistics 
When looking at the current state of euro area statistics, it is worth recalling that less than a decade 
ago, we had not even established the statistical requirements for Monetary Union, let alone that 
euro area statistics existed. As the ECB’s former Director-General of Statistics, Peter Bull, describes 
in his record of the euro area’s statistical history, the approval of the statistical requirements in July 
1996 was a landmark in the statistical preparations for Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). A lot 
has been achieved since then, which may perhaps be best illustrated by the fact that in 2003 the ECB 
issued 48 statistical press releases and Eurostat many more. The ECB now publishes every month, 
among other things:  
• 
• 
the most recent monetary aggregates, their components and counterparts;  
the balance sheets of all banks and similar institutions in the euro area, and a list of all the 
Monetary Financial Institutions;  
a full balance of payments, including the Eurosystem’s international reserves;  
the effective exchange rates of the euro (which are updated daily); 
new issues, redemptions and outstanding amounts of almost all debt securities and quoted 
shares in the euro area;  
average interest rates paid  and received  by  households and corporations  on  all kinds of 
loans and deposits (including loans for house purchases and for consumption). 
  BIS Review 23/2004 
 3
In addition, quarterly press releases are published on investment fund statistics, specified by the 
investment  policy  of  the  fund  concerned,  and  on  the  financing  and  financial  investment  of 
households,  non-financial  corporations,  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds,  and  the 
government. Finally, the ECB regularly disseminates the international investment position of the euro 
area,  various  financial  soundness  indicators,  a  range  of  government  finance  statistics,  a  variety  of 
financial market statistics, a residential property price index, statistics on payments and statistics on 
the international role of the euro. Only five years ago, most of these statistics did not even exist at the 
euro area level. 
Of course, all these statistics, the methodologies applied, the release calendars, etc. are available on 
the ECB’s website. In addition, they are published in the euro area statistics section of our Monthly 
Bulletin and in our monthly Statistics Pocketbook. The Pocketbook was launched in August 2003 
and aims to provide euro area citizens, the media and other institutions with relevant, up-to-date euro 
area  economic  and  financial  statistics  and  publishable  indicators  in  a  user-friendly  format.  It  also 
contains several tables comparing the euro area with other main economic regions, such as the United 
States and Japan, and it contains various national statistics.  
These  achievements  have  only  been  possible  because  of  intensive  and  fruitful  cooperation 
between the statistical departments of the NCBs and the ECB, as coordinated by the Statistics 
Committee. In addition, the division of tasks between Eurostat and the ECB’s Directorate-General 
Statistics has been laid down in an update of their Memorandum of Understanding. This update was 
signed in March 2003 and has recently been re-examined in certain areas, such as the compilation 
of euro yield curves and annual financial accounts. In those and other areas of statistics, the ECB also 
stands ready to serve the needs of the European Commission and other users.  
At  the  national  level,  the  distribution  of  statistical  tasks  between  a  country’s  central  bank  and  its 
statistical institute is not the same across Europe. Solving the coordination issues at the European 
level  is  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  the  Committee  on  Monetary,  Financial  and  Balance  of 
Payments statistics (CMFB), which brings together the senior managers responsible for statistics at 
Eurostat, the ECB, and the NSIs and NCBs of the EU Member States. This Committee not only has a 
pivotal coordination function for European statistics, but also must play a key role in one of the most 
sensitive  and  crucial  areas  of  statistics  in  Europe,  that  is,  the  statistics  as  part  of  the  Excessive 
Deficit Procedure (EDP). These statistics should be compiled in strict conformity with the European 
Regulation for compiling national accounts, the European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95), and the 
related Manual on Government Deficit and Debt.  
The Code of best practice on the compilation and reporting of these data, which was endorsed by the 
ECOFIN Council in February 2003, states that the actual data of the ESA 95 government accounts 
must be compiled by the National Statistical Institutes, and where applicable by the national 
central banks. The NSIs must act in full scientific independence and the government must ensure 
that  accurate  basic  data  and  other  information  needed  for  compiling  reliable  ESA 95  accounts  are 
made available to the compiling authorities in time and with sufficient detail. All current and new EU 
Member States are encouraged to fully implement these statements in the Code of best practice and 
to build up the statistical capability in both the NSIs and NCBs that is needed for an adequate 
fulfilment  of  these  tasks.  The  Code  of  best  practice  also  refers  to  the  procedure  for  resolving 
methodological  issues  and  states  that  Eurostat  must  consult  the  CMFB  in  cases  which  are  not 
adequately  covered  by  the  ESA 95,  or  cases  that  are  particularly  complex  or  of  general  interest. 
Eurostat  must,  as  a  general  rule,  publish  its  decision  together  with  the  CMFB  opinion.  Clearly,  the 
CMFB should then form its opinion strictly in the framework of the ESA 95 Regulation and solely on 
the basis of its professional expertise in national accounts, in line with a transparent procedure, which 
is  available  on  the  CMFB  website  (www.cmfb.org).  Obviously,  this  procedure  requires  all  CMFB 
members to contribute a high level of professional expertise in national accounts. Improving the 
credibility of fiscal figures and the effectiveness of the monitoring and auditing process is still 
needed and can be done without altering the current fiscal framework. 
As  far  as  other  areas  of  euro  area  statistics  are  concerned,  the  Action  Plan  on  EMU  Statistical 
Requirements,  which  was  endorsed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  in  September  2000,  has  stimulated 
substantial  improvements  in  the  timeliness  and  availability  of  crucial  economic  indicators.  Major 
progress  has  been  made  in,  for  example,  main  aggregates  derived  from  the  quarterly  national 
accounts,  the  HICP,  quarterly  government  finance  statistics,  several  short-term  business  indicators 
and foreign trade statistics. By contrast, the situation is not yet fully satisfactory for the quarterly 
national accounts for institutional sectors and labour market statistics. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2004
Future priorities for euro area statistics 
Looking ahead now at the future orientation of euro area statistics, our short-term priority should be to 
help the new Member States to fully catch up with the current euro area countries in terms of the 
quality and availability of economic and financial statistics. In this context, I am delighted to announce 
that  the  ECB,  together  with  the  Commission,  will  shortly  publish,  for  the  first  time,  long-term 
interest rates for the acceding countries. At the same time, I am aware that any enlargement of the 
EU and, subsequently, the euro area creates particular statistical challenges for the ECB, Eurostat and 
all  of  the  countries  concerned.  For  example,  adequate  resources  must  be  available  to  re-create  all 
euro  area  time-series  each  time  one  or  more  countries  joins  EMU.  Among  these  statistics,  the 
indicators that will be used to assess the convergence of these Member States towards EMU deserve 
particular attention. 
Currently, the ECB’s Governing Council monitors twice a year the progress of the current pre-ins and 
the  new  Member  States  in  their  statistical  preparations  for  EMU.  Many  countries  have  made  very 
significant progress in a very short space of time, but full compliance with all legal requirements 
has  not  yet  been  reached.  Since  the  compilation  of  statistics  is  an  activity  that  is  typically 
characterised  by  significant  economies  of  scale,  the  situation  in  the  smallest  Member  States, 
particularly those with sizeable financial sectors, deserves specific attention.  
More  generally,  possibilities  for  economies  of  scale  in  the  compilation  of  European statistics 
should be regularly re-assessed and exploited when appropriate. A good example in this context is the 
current creation of a Centralised Securities Database at the ECB, which should become available on 
line to the NCBs as well. Similarly, more comprehensive corporate data for conducting balance 
sheet  analysis  are  widely  considered  as  a  priority  in  the  period  ahead,  but  organising  a  new  data 
collection  for  this  purpose  at  the  national  level  would  be  very  costly  and  would  create  high 
administrative burdens on businesses. The best way forward appears to be to integrate and expand 
the national Central Balance Sheet Offices (CBSO) that already exist within various NCBs and to set 
up  a  more  comprehensive  European  CBSO.  A  last  example  of  possible  economies  of  scale  at  the 
European  level  refers  to  more  international  concentration  of  the  data  collection  from 
multinationals.  Obviously,  progress  in  this  area  also  depends  on  the  interest  expressed  by  the 
European multinationals themselves. 
Among  the  other  important  new  statistics  that  are  in  the  pipeline,  I  would  like  to  single  out  the 
forthcoming  geographical  breakdown  of  counterparties  in  the  euro  area  balance  of  payments 
and international investment position. The ECB intends to launch these statistics within the next 
12 months, and it is hoped that they may give some important new insights into the external economic 
relations of the euro area. Also over the next year, the frequency of the statistics on the international 
investment  position  will  be  increased  from  annual  to  quarterly.  These  statistics  provide  an  overall 
picture  of  the  euro  area’s  claims  on  and  liabilities  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  the  near  future,  the 
monetary  presentation  of  the  balance  of  payments  will  also  be  published  monthly  instead  of 
quarterly, while work is already under way to update the trade weights of the ECB’s effective exchange 
rate statistics. In that way, the analysis of the euro area’s competitiveness remains up to date. Finally, 
the  investment  funds  statistics  will  be  enhanced  by  separating  the  changes  in  the  outstanding 
amounts into two: the changes due to transactions on the one hand, and those due to valuation and 
other changes on the other. 
All these statistics will become available on a much enhanced, easily accessible statistics section of 
the ECB’s website. Also, a statistical information service has been set up to answer specific queries 
from both external and internal users. 
The priorities for ECB statistics in the medium term are very well reflected in the themes of this 
conference:  
1. 
A full system of euro area quarterly accounts for institutional sectors, integrating both 
financial  and  non-financial  accounts,  would  provide  an  integrated  statistical  basis  for  the 
ECB’s monetary and economic analysis. 
More  comprehensive  statistics  for the  monitoring  and  analysis  of  financial  stability, 
with  explicit  links  to  the  statistics  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  would  make  it  possible  to 
deliver a more thorough analysis of interactions between these policy goals. 
Further  development  of  external  statistics  (e.g.  on  the  international  role  of  the  euro  or 
concerning  the  details  of  the  international  investment  position)  would  enable  better 
monitoring of the continually increasing, global economic intertwining. 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 5
4. 
5. 
Better  interplay  between  business  accountants  and  statisticians  would  enable 
cross-fertilisation  of  the  considerable  expertise  in  these  adjacent  fields.  This  has  an 
enormous  potential  for  decreasing  the  administrative  burden  for  businesses,  while  at  the 
same time improving the quality of statistics. 
An  increasing  focus  on  the  various  quality  dimensions  of  European  statistics  as 
reflected, for instance, in the ECB’s intention to regularly publish quantitative output quality 
indicators  (on  revisions,  consistency,  etc.)  and  more  comprehensive  quality  reports  on  its 
statistics. 
At the same time, the ECB attaches great importance to improving further the availability, timeliness 
and other qualities of the Principal European Economic Indicators and to receiving more elaborate 
and  consistent  euro  area  statistics  for  assessing  and  analysing  productivity  changes,  for  service 
activities  and  for  housing,  including  house  prices.  Moreover,  incorporating  price  developments  of 
owner-occupied  housing  in  the  HICP  would  be  an  important  achievement.  In  any  case,  Member 
States may want to consider giving more prominence to national HICPs and less to their specific 
national  Consumer  Price  Indices  (CPI).  By  way  of  a  supplementary  measure,  the  analysis  of  any 
inflationary pressures would be served by the regular availability of an HICP-variant that excludes the 
direct effects of tax changes and, possibly, other administrative measures.  
However, implementing the necessary improvements to European statistics can only be achieved if 
sufficient  resources  are  made  available.  It  may  therefore  also  be  useful  to  regularly  review  the 
need for existing statistics that were agreed upon many years ago.  
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, let me say that I wish to reflect today the importance that the ECB attaches to timely 
and reliable euro area statistics as a basis for policy-making. Statistics are like the glasses through 
which  policy-makers  and  all  other  economic  agents  view  macroeconomic  reality.  If  the  glasses  are 
totally reliable, well polished and easy to handle, we may hardly notice that we are wearing them and 
we do not realise how vital they are for our clear view of reality. Surely, we only start to complain when 
the glasses are out of focus and we want to have a new pair when glass-making technology proceeds. 
This conference may be a good opportunity to put our glassmakers into the limelight, for a change, 
and to tell them, at the same time, how we would like our glasses to be even better polished in the 
future. 
In any case, it is clear that producing euro area statistics is all about teamwork: time and time again, 
from the preparatory stage to publication. Over the past six years, Eugenio Domingo Solans has ably 
steered  the  statisticians  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks:  both  quietly  and  persistently, 
directly  and  indirectly  -  but  always  in  the  right  direction.  I  am  convinced  that the  ground has  now 
been  laid  for  further  excellent  work  to  complete  the  provision  of  euro  area  statistics  in  the 
future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I wish you all very fruitful discussions. It gives me great pleasure to declare the conference open. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2004
