T T Mboweni: The foundation has been laid1  
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  BMF  Corporate 
Update Gala Dinner, Gallagher Estate, 18 June 2004. 
 One  of  the  institutional  arrangements  arising  out  of  the  political  negotiations  process  at  the  World 
Trade Centre in Kempton Park was the creation of the Transitional Executive Council (TEC), a sort of 
“provisional government”. The TEC as many will recall, established a number of sub-councils. I served 
on the sub-council on finance. Effectively, the then government could not take any major economic 
decisions without the concurrence of the TEC sub-council on finance. Those were nice days when we 
had power without the stress of responsibility! 
One of the problems/constraints facing the economy at that time, was that the country only had foreign 
reserves to cover for plus/minus three weeks of imports. This was indeed a crisis for an economy as 
big  as  ours.  At  that  time,  South  Africa’s  gross  domestic  product  at  market  prices  was  around 
R480 billion.  For  the  sake  of  perspective,  today’s  GDP  at  market  prices  is  R1.2  trillion.  The  then 
Minister of Finance, Mr Derick Keys, approached the TEC to negotiate an agreement with us for a joint 
approach to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for assistance. This was a difficult request since 
there were so many strategic and tactical questions to consider. An example in this regard was the 
question of whether the apartheid government was trying to lock us into an IMF structural adjustment 
programme via the back door, thereby tying the hands of the future democratic government. 
The end result was that we agreed to that request by the then government to approach the IMF for the 
required balance of payments support called the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility 
(CCFF). There were no conditionalities attached since this was a soft loan as  it were. However, we 
had  to  provide  the  IMF  with  a  “Statement  on  Economic  Policy”.  The  statement  was  fairly  simple: 
assure  the  IMF  that  the  future  government  will  pursue  prudent  macroeconomic  policies.  This  was 
something that the ANC in particular had adopted as an approach as early as 1992 in a document 
entitled - Ready to Govern. We did not sell out! 
However,  this  “Statement  on  Economic  Policy”  has  been  described  by  some  as  the  beginning  of 
neo-liberal  economic  policies  that  were  to  be  pursued  by  the  future  government.  Recently,  Prof 
Sampie  Terreblanche,  of  the  University  of  Stellenbosch  has  said  in  a  book  entitled:  A  history  of 
lnequality in South Africa, 1652 - 2002, that “in 1993 the corporate sector and some ANC leaders 
reached  a  hugely  important  elite  compromise.  This  happened  before  the  Transitional  Executive 
Council (TEC) accepted a secret $850 million loan from the IMF to help tide the country over balance 
of payments difficulties in November 1993” (p96). He continues to say that “before the TEC signed the 
loan agreement, the corporate sector and the NP government on the one hand and ANC leaders on 
the  other  signed  a  secret  protocol  on  economic  policy  …  (they)  agreed  with  the  IMF,  the  TEC 
committed itself to a neo-liberal, export-oriented economic policy and a ‘redistribution through growth’ 
strategy”. 
I  was  one  of  the  people  involved  and  I  can  say  with  confidence  that  Prof  Sampie  Terreblanche  is 
totally  and  completely  wrong.  There  was  no  secret  meeting  of  the  corporate  sector  and  the  core 
leaders of the ANC that I am aware of to agree on a secret document. This was a TEC matter handled 
through  the  sub-council  on  finance.  Naturally,  the  delegates  to  the  subcouncil  consulted  their 
principals.  But  I  emphasize  that  any  careful  reading  of  the  statement  will  find  no  contradiction  with 
Ready to Govern. 
But that is a matter for political economists to sort out in due course. 
It is fair to say that the balance of payments constraint that we grappled with at the TEC was only the 
tip of a large iceberg. Here are some of the indicators of an economic crisis that we went through. The 
pre-1994 period is contrasted below with what has happened in ten years. Firstly, in 1985, on the back 
of the sanctions campaign, the government of the day declared a partial debt standstill. The affected 
debt was $13,6 billion and the total debt was $23,7 billion. From 1985 to 1993, the net financial outflow 
                                                      
1   Adapted from the chapter appearing under my name in a book by the World Economic Forum entitled South Africa: The 
Miracle Continues. June 2004. 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
from South Africa was some R45 billion or 11 per cent of gross domestic fixed investment. That forced 
the authorities at the time to implement stringent policies to generate current account surpluses. The 
cost to the economy was immense. In August 2001 the final repayment was made. The international 
capital  markets  were  opened  to  South  Africa  effectively  in  1995  when  the  first  post-apartheid 
sovereign bond issues of $750 million was launched. 
Secondly,  the  trade  regime  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  was  characterised  by  three  interrelated 
strategies, namely the promotion of domestic industries through import substitution, the development 
of specific industries to attain self-sufficiency and the promotion of mineral beneficiation. South Africa’s 
industries  therefore  became  heavily  protected  by  formulae,  specific  and  ad  valorem  duties  and 
surcharges. High tariff levels were complemented by quotas that limited the quantity of imports. The 
tariff structure was extremely complicated. Overall the strategies pursued by the authorities resulted in 
a complex discretionary regime fraught with corruption and bureaucratic mismanagement. 
As a result changes to the tariff regime became a fundamental imperative for the new government in 
1994. The number of tariff categories was reduced from over 100 to only six and the average weighted 
import  duties  on  manufactured  goods  to  the  total  value  of  manufacturing  imports  decreased  from 
14,0 per  cent  in  1994  to  4,7  per  cent  in  2002.  Several  free  trade  agreements  were  also  signed  to 
dismantle trade barriers and to gain increased market access. The process continues today and many 
global trade doors have been opened. 
In addition to these, measures were undertaken to promote competition, industrial policy was adjusted 
to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  manufacturing  enterprises  in  export  markets.  In  particular  more 
emphasis  was  placed  on  supply-side  measures,  rather  than  demand-side  measures  such  as 
expensive  export  support  programmes.  These  measures  included  investment  incentives  for  large 
investments of a strategic nature and for small and medium enterprise development; training grants to 
firms investing in the promotion of skills; the development of industrial development zones; improved 
access to finance; and support for investments in economic infrastructure. 
A  new Competition  Act  was  passed  in  Parliament  in  1998  to,  among other  things,  create  a  greater 
spread  of  ownership  in  enterprises,  to  expand  opportunities  for  South  African  participation  in  world 
markets and to provide consumers with competitive prices and product choices. 
Thirdly, at the beginning of the 1990s an unsustainable fiscal situation had started to develop, and the 
deficit  before  borrowing  and  debt  repayment  of  the  government  reached  7,3  per  cent  of  gross 
domestic product in the fiscal year 1992/93. The internationally acceptable rule of thumb is that the 
fiscal deficit should ideally not be more that 3% of the GDP. Government expenditure continued to rise 
relative to domestic production, the tax burden increased, the public sector made increasing demands 
on the domestic capital market, the ratio of government’s interest payments to gross domestic product 
rose steeply and government dissaving increased to unacceptably high levels. 
The  post-apartheid  South  African  government  therefore  placed  considerable  emphasis  on  restoring 
fiscal consolidation and stability. The economic strategy at first was to create stable macroeconomic 
conditions as a necessary precondition for economic growth and employment creation. The basic logic 
of  the  approach  followed  was  that  by  improving  fiscal  sustainability,  poverty  reduction  and  income 
redistribution  would  become  attainable  objectives  over  the  medium  term.  The  expenditure  restraint 
applied  by  the  national  and  provincial  governments  reduced  the  fiscal  deficit  before  borrowing  and 
debt  repayment  to  1,5  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  in  fiscal  2001/02.  This  by  any  measure 
represented  a  major  milestone  by  a  government  which  was  suspected  of  being  macroeconomic 
populist. 
This successful fiscal consolidation allowed the government to adopt a more expansionary fiscal policy 
stance from fiscal 2001/02. More emphasis is now placed on infrastructural development and social 
upliftment. The government, however, continues to apply fiscal prudence and despite a decline in the 
growth  of  tax  revenue,  was  able  to  contain  the  main  budget  deficit  to  an  estimated  2,4  per cent  of 
gross domestic product in fiscal 2003/04. 
An  important  aspect  of  the  budget  reform  was  the  adoption  of  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure 
Framework  in  the  fiscal  year  1998/99  and  the  Public  Finance  Management  Act  of  1999.  The 
Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  consists  of  three-year  rolling  expenditure  and  revenue 
projections  for  the  national  and  the  provincial  governments.  This  creates  greater  certainty  and 
transparency  to  the  budgetary  process.  The  Public  Finance  Management  Act  has  enhanced  the 
accountability  of  public  sector  managers  by  emphasising  disciplines  such  as  regular  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
internal  expenditure  controls, 
improved  accounting  standards,  performance 
reporting,  sound 
monitoring and independent audit and supervision systems. 
The government has reduced its net loan debt from a peak of 48,1 per cent of gross domestic product 
in fiscal 1996/97 to 36,8 per cent in 2003/04. This not only contributed to lower interest payments on 
total public debt, but also to generally lower long-term yields in the South African capital market. The 
prudent measures applied by government have brought about a decline in government net dissaving 
from the high level of 7,3 per cent of gross domestic product in 1992 to 1,1 per cent in 2003. This is 
absolutely superb and provides an excellent support pillar for lower inflation. 
Fourthly,  monetary  policy  has  also  seen  many  changes.  The  objectives  of  monetary  policy  at  the 
beginning of the 1990s were to reduce the rate of inflation to the average rate of inflation in trading 
partner  and  competitor  countries;  to  manage  the  money  creation  process  in  such  a  way  that  an 
adequate, but not an excessive amount of new money would be supplied to the system; to maintain 
positive real interest rates; to increase the gold and other foreign reserves to a comfortable level and 
to  develop  a  sound  financial  infrastructure  consisting  of  healthy  financial  institutions  and  financial 
markets. This was a reasonable approach in the circumstances, but the achievement of these goals 
was hampered by the overall political and economic environment. 
In the 1990s the SA Reserve Bank also intervened heavily on its own initiative in the spot and forward 
market  to  influence  supply  and  demand  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  These  operations  were 
undertaken  supposedly  with  the  intention  of  smoothing  out  large  short-term  fluctuations  in  the 
exchange rate. An impression was created that the SA Reserve Bank had some preferred exchange 
rate level. This naturally was an open invitation to speculators. 
Despite this active intervention, large fluctuations occurred in the weighted average external value of 
the rand, particularly during the second half of the 1990s. The monetary policy measures, however, 
achieved considerable success in bringing the rate of inflation down. After inflation in the consumer 
price  index  had  generally  fluctuated  around  a  level  of  about  15  per  cent  in  the  late  1980s  and  the 
beginning of the 1990s it moved below double digits in 1993 and declined to 5,2 per cent in 1999. 
In  February  2000  the  government  announced  that  South  Africa  had  formally  adopted  an 
inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  to  make  monetary  policy  more  transparent  and 
accountable and to promote an ex ante co-ordination of economic policy. 
Fluctuations in the exchange rate of the rand have nevertheless complicated the implementation of 
monetary policy even under inflation targeting. For example in 2002 monetary policy was dominated 
by inflationary pressures arising from the substantial depreciation in the external value of the rand in 
late  2001,  combined with a  sharp  rise  in  international  oil  prices  as  well  as  in  domestic  food  prices. 
These external shocks were responsible for a surge in the twelve-month rate of increase in the CPIX 
from a low of 5,8 per cent in September 2001 to a peak of 11,3 per cent in October 2002. Restrictive 
monetary policy measures undertaken and the subsequent recovery in the exchange rate of the rand 
then brought the rate of increase over twelve months in the CPIX down to 4,4 per cent in April 2004. 
Fifthly, a large forward book was built over the years as the country faced sanctions and could not 
access the international capital markets. The SA Reserve Bank entered into forward forex contracts in 
order to gain access to foreign currency. It was a very expensive exercise. In 1994, the forward book 
stood  at  $26,9  billion.  Unfortunately,  in  the  post-1994  environment,  the  central  bank  continued  to 
intervene heavily in the forex market. In September 1998, the forward book stood at $24,9 billion and 
the Net Open Foreign Currency Position was $23,2 billion. In mid February 2004, the forward book 
was expunged and the foreign reserves position improved impressively. The country now has gross 
gold and foreign reserves of some $26 billion, with plus/minus $10 billion of the international liquidity 
position currently in ‘the bag’. 
Sixthly, clearly, the financial sector suffered tremendously before 1994. Efforts to maintain an effective 
and efficient financial sector were hampered by the lack of co-operation with international regulators 
due  to  the  political  circumstances  at  that  time.  As  a  consequence,  some  regulations  and  practices 
deviated from international best practices. With the reestablishment of normal relations with the rest of 
the world in the 1990s, great efforts were made to bring the rules and regulations on the activities of 
financial institutions in line with international best practices. 
From  1994  South  African  financial  institutions  started  operating  on  an  increasing  scale  in  major 
international financial centres such as London New York and Hong Kong as well as opening branches 
or  subsidiaries  on  the  African  continent.  As  part  of  the  globalisation  process,  five  large  domestic 
companies transferred their primary listings to international bourses. This change gave them greater 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
access  to  capital  at  lower  cost  and  provided  them  with  opportunities  to  become  truly  global  South 
African giants. But more significantly, all these companies maintained their secondary listings on the 
JSE Securities Exchange South Africa, and their market capitalisation on the JSE actually increased 
from R126 billion in 1997 to R471 billion in 2003. So they have kept the home fires burning too! 
Over this same period international financial institutions began to conduct business in South Africa. 
The creation of a level playing field between local and foreign service providers was entirely pursued 
by the authorities. The regulatory authorities also actively encouraged the development of appropriate 
clearing, settlement, ownership-transfer and market information systems and insisted on proper intra-
market  and  cross-market  risk  management  systems,  including  capital  adequacy  requirements  for 
market participants. 
The operations of the financial markets in South Africa were improved considerably to bring them in 
line  with  international  best  practice.  In  1996  bond  trading  was  shifted  from  the  JSE  to  the  Bond 
Exchange of South Africa. This led to a substantial rise in the turnover in the secondary bond market 
from R2 trillion in 1995 to nearly R12 trillion in 2003. Improvements to the JSE included the electronic 
clearing and rolling contractual settlement, the dematerialisation of equity scrip and the implementation 
of an electronic trading system. The value of shares traded on the JSE increased from R62 billion in 
1994 to R752 billion in 2003. 
Seventhly,  the  normalisation  of  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  world  made  it  unnecessary  to  follow 
restrictive fiscal and monetary policies to maintain a surplus on the current account of South Africa’s 
balance  of  payments  and  created  a  leeway  for  the  promotion  of  economic  growth.  In  the  past  ten 
years  a  deficit  was  therefore  recorded  on  the  current  account,  but  this  deficit  as  a  ratio  of  gross 
domestic product remained low and averaged only 1 per cent per year. Over the same period there 
was  a  net  financial  inflow  recorded  from  the  rest  of  the  world  amounting  to  nearly  R204  billion, 
compared with the net financial outflow of about R45 billion from 1985 to 1993. As a result, the level of 
foreign  investment  in  South  Africa  amounted  to  R736  billion  at  the  end  of  2002.  This  is  a  very 
significant post-apartheid dividend for country. 
South Africa’s real economic growth doubled from an average annual rate of 1½ per cent during the 
1980s  to  about  3  per  cent  between  1994  and  2003.  In  addition,  the  average  growth  in  real  gross 
national income per capita, an indicator of living standards, improved from a negative figure of 1,1 per 
cent  per  annum  during  the  1980s  to  a  positive  figure  of  0,8  per  cent  between  1994  and  2003. 
Moreover,  between  2000  and  2003  the  average  growth  in  real  gross  national  income  per  capita 
amounted to about 1,5 per cent. The big challenge is to further increase the growth performance of the 
domestic economy. The foundation has been laid over the past ten years to make this achievable. To 
make life better for all our people. 
So  we  can  indeed  claim,  without  fear  of  contradiction  that  the  post-1994  period  has  seen  some 
remarkable  improvements  in  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  position  of  our  country.  A  good 
foundation has been laid. Greater efforts have now to be directed at micro-economic reforms and job 
creation as the President has directed. 
My  own  personal  journey  has  been  a  momentous  one.  In  1980,  as  a  twenty  one-  year-old  kid,  I 
adventurously and illegally crossed the South Africa/Lesotho border at Ladybrand into Lesotho whilst 
the  border  guarding  soldiers  were  changing  guard.  A  long  story  on  its  own  in  an  autobiography 
perhaps. My parents were utterly shocked when I skipped the country. They could not comprehend it 
at all. My father died whilst I was in exile and I could not attend his funeral. So traumatic. His younger 
brother died last month at the age of sixty-nine (69) and we buried him next to my Dad at our family 
burial grounds. I gave the funeral oration. It was like burying my own father. I cried so badly. I grew up 
in  foreign  lands,  in  exile  I  received  good  university  education  abroad,  learnt  how  to  shoot  using  all 
sorts  of  guns  and  make  bombs,  studied  military  combat  work  (mcw),  learned  how  to  speak  some 
Portuguese and Sesotho sa Moshoeshoe, drafted and edited radical economic policies. And now after 
being a minister of labour between 1994 and 1998, I hold one of the most coverted jobs in the world, 
Governor of a central bank. The greatest honour a country can bestow on any of it’s children, is to 
make  them  Governor  of  their  central  bank.  The  journeys  of  so  many  South  Africans  have  been 
remarkable too. From having no electricity and pipe water, schooling under a tree, to what we have 
today. This country of ours has moved on. So much still needs to be done. So little time. Life is not 
about economic statistics, it is about people. Myself, yourself, all of us, we have made progress. We 
have moved on. 
I suppose that you can call me an exile kid, an international kid born in South Africa, but my home is in 
South Africa, Lesotho, Mozambique, the United Kingdom, Zambia, Angola, Tanzania, Swaziland, the 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2004
USA, Switzerland and everywhere I stayed in my youth. I hate narrow nationalism, cannot stand it. I 
hate xenophobia. But now my country is free and ten years old. Only ten years! Still too young. 
It has been a long walk from the beautiful and dusty village of Bordeaux in Tzaneen. But as President 
Manadela  says  “I  have  walked  that  long  road  to  freedom.  I  have  tried  not  to  falter,  I  have  made 
missteps along the way. But I have discovered the secret that after climbing a great hill, one only finds 
that there are many more hills to climb. I have taken a moment here to rest, to steal a view of the 
glorious vista that surrounds me, to look back on the distance I have come. But I can rest only for a 
moment,  for  with  freedom  come  responsibilities,  and  I  dare  not  linger,  for  my  long  walk  is  not  yet 
ended.” 
I love Freedom!!!!! Even central bank governors love freedom!!!! 
Tonight, I salute our country! I salute our people! Poor as they might be, they have political power in 
their hands. Hold on to that dear people, don’t let that slip away no matter how hard things might be. 
You are my boss, for which I am eternally grateful.  
And  so,  here  is  to  TEN  YEARS  OF  FREEDOM!!!  May  we  have  many,  many  more  years  of 
FREEDOM!!! 
Thank you very much BMF for what you are doing for us all. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 5
