Tarisa Watanagase: What do regulators really want - Thailand’s perspective 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Retail Finance 
Asia-Pacific 2004, Bangkok, 18 March 2004. 
 Good afternoon. I thank the Lafferty Group for inviting me to speak at this Conference - an opportunity 
to engage in a discussion with practitioners in the banking industry. Therefore, it is with great pleasure 
that I accepted the invitation because I believe a gathering like this promotes interactive relationships 
between those in the industry and regulators so that, together, we can move with the industry trend. 
This year’s Retail Finance Asia-Pacific Conference adopts the theme “Innovative Strategies For The 
New Consumer - Winning The Competitive Edge. I trust that you must have learned a great deal from 
yesterday discussions among leading experts on how to address the customers’ needs with a wide 
array of new products and innovation. 
This afternoon, you will hear from me on the same theme but from a different perspective - what might 
be the expectations of regulators on the industry with respect to the retail banking sector. In doing so, I 
would draw upon Thailand’s experience by touching on, first, a quick overview of the retail banking 
sector; second, I will draw the link to its social aspects - focusing on what’s moving and shaking in the 
Thai financial landscape; third, going through supervisory concerns and challenges - our policies to 
promote  retail  banking  sector,  while  preserving  financial  stability,  and  concluding  the  session  by 
attempting  to  answer  “What  do  Regulators  Really  Want?”  -  from  Thailand’s  perspective,  some 
elements of which I hope would be true or applicable to other countries’ experience as well. 
Market developments of the retail banking sector in Thailand 
1. 
The past few years have witnessed a steady increase in the share of retail credits to total credits of the 
Thai banking sector, climbing to 16.6 percent as of September 2003 from just slightly over 10 percent 
in 1998 - right after the Asian crisis. This remarkable trend can be explained by both push and pull 
factors. Laden with excessive liquidity and mired with sizeable unresolved NPL in the corporate sector 
within the banking system, commercial banks are under pressure to extend credit to the retail sector. 
In  addition,  lending  to  retail  sector  imposes  lower  possible  loss  in  case  of  defaults  given  its  much 
smaller average size of credits and greater diversity of portfolio than those of the corporate sector. 
In terms of composition of banking retail credit, housing credit represents almost two-thirds, reflecting 
the  household’s  holding  of  assets  mainly  in  the  form  of  housing  real  estate  -  a  common  feature 
prevalent in Asia. Credit cards and commercial credits take up 7.2 and 6 percent of total retail credit, 
respectively,  while  the  remaining  21  percent  are  credit  for  other  consumption  purposes  such  as 
electrical appliance, education and so on. 
Among  all  types  of  retail  credit,  there  are  three  fast  growing  segments  in  the  past  few  years  that 
deserve  our  attention.  First,  housing  credits  with  accelerating  growth.  Second,  credit  card  advance 
with tapering growths close to 40 percent. And third, automobile hire purchase with record growths of 
well above 50 percent. 
The  booms  in  these  segments  commonly  rest  on  the  strong  economic  recovery,  coupled  with  solid 
performance of the stock exchange - after all the Stock Exchange of Thailand recorded one of the best 
performing bourse in 2003. 
The  government  spending  programs  such  as  the  village  fund  has  fuelled  further  consumption, 
especially at the grass-root level, to ensure firm recovery. 
Moreover, against the backdrop of persistently low interest rate environment, consumers find it easier 
to part with their money acquired from liability assumption. This is particularly relevant for the build-up 
of  debt  in housing  and  automobile segments by  households  that  simply  mirrors an  accumulation  of 
assets on the other side of their balance sheet. 
The tax and transfer fee incentives pertaining to purchase of real estate expired at the end of 2003 
has helped encourage consumers to take up mortgage, adding extra boost to its growth. 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
As  for  the  credit  card  segment,  in  addition  to  the  factors  cited  above,  some  relaxed  subscription 
conditions during the economic slump and early stage of recovery have contributed to high growth of 
credits in this segment. 
Findings from studies on the financial services in the banking sector 
Now, allow me to move on to the assessment of the services provided by the banking sector - what 
our customers have to say about their needs - what our customers really want. The assessments are 
based on the studies and surveys commissioned by the Bank of Thailand as part of the formulation of 
the Financial Sector Master Plan. In order to move forward, we need to have a clear grasp of what is 
needed and missing in the financial sector, and we found that the following issues are key: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
financial service availability; 
consumers’ preference of channel of service distribution; 
expectations on financial services; and  
factors driving them away from using bank financial services.  
Quantitative and qualitative gaps in both credit to personal sector and small enterprise sector 
Quantitative gap: individual customer group 
Allow me to elaborate a little further on these findings. Financing facility is the most dissatisfied aspect 
in  terms  of  financial  services  provided  by  financial  institutions.  This  is  evident  in  the  individual 
customer group, with almost 60 percent having no access to formal channels of credit, 37 percent of 
which are low-income consumers with annual income less than 100,000 baht. Access to deposit for 
the individual customer group is not as grave a problem as access to credit, although about one-eighth 
of this group still has no access to deposit. 
Quantitative gap: corporate customer group 
In terms of quantitative gap, it displays a similar pattern of deficiency in the corporate customer group 
to  that  of  the  previous  group,  but  to  a  much  lesser  extent,  with  less  than  a  quarter  of  corporate 
customers lacking access to credit and a mere half percent to deposit.  
Qualitative gap: the urban low income group and the rural low income group 
The survey reveals qualitative gaps among low-income customers that bear the brunt of inadequate 
financial services. Low-income customers in urban and rural areas face common problem of limited 
access to distribution channels of formal financial service providers, forcing some urban low-income 
customers to resort to loan sharks as the main source of financing. The rural low-income group in both 
agricultural  and  non-agricultural  sectors  also  encounters  the  problem  of  limited  choices  of  financial 
services, while the low-income customers in agricultural sector face additional problem of high funding 
cost. 
Preference of traditional channels of service provision over e-banking 
In terms of service distribution channel, brick banks still have competitive edge over click banks as 
consumers  still  prefer  to  conduct  banking  transaction  with  human  contact  at  bank  branches  or 
sub-branches. E-banking is not yet well-accepted by consumers on account of: 
• 
• 
• 
The use of automated teller machines is quite well-spread while the use of phone banking and Internet 
banking  is  still  limited  to  a  small  fraction  of  customers.  According  to  the  survey,  high-income  retail 
customers tend to make use of phone banking and Internet banking more often than do low income 
customers. Usage of phone banking and Internet banking by corporate customers is still low, though 
uncertainty surrounding accuracy of the services;  
lack of transaction evidence that might be useful in case of dispute settlement; and  
lack of knowledge among some retail customers.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
large and medium corporate tend to use phone banking and Internet banking more often than do small 
corporate. 
Financial service needs expected in the next few years 
Due  to  the  current  low  return  on  savings  with  commercial  banks,  both  individual  and  corporate 
consumers  revealed  preference  towards  alternative  saving  instruments  such  as  saving  bonds  and 
government  bonds.  As  for  financing,  the  needs  expected  by  individual  customers  are  those  for  the 
purposes of working capital, residential, education and business expansion, while those of corporate 
customers remain financing for long-term investment for business expansion and short-term working 
capital requirements. Other financial service needs expected by individual customers to be on the rise 
are  the  use  of  ATM  and  life  assurance,  while  more  uses  of  phone  banking  and  Internet  banking, 
provident fund management and cash management are expected by corporate customers. 
Unattractive aspects of financial institutions that drive customers away from using their 
financial services 
Although  financial  institutions,  especially  banks,  are  still  the  main  financial  service  providers  to 
consumers in Thailand, there are some aspects of their services considered not so user-friendly, such 
as:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
complicated procedures and long period of time for getting credit approved;  
inconvenient access to the services; 
inflexibility in the terms and conditions of repayment; and 
the emphasis of banks on collateral instead of repayment ability.  
Social aspects of retail banking sector 
2. 
As you can see, these findings show that there are some gaps of the underserved to be filled in the 
financial sector, and retail banking is an area of potential growth. Moreover, we regulators believe that 
the  consideration  in  retail  banking  sector  extends  above  and  beyond  profit  making  for  service 
providers and systemic stability because excess in this sector not only exacerbates a boom and bust 
cycle of credit, but also causes financial distress to over-leveraged consumers, triggering more social 
problems.  Therefore,  with  profit-making  comes  responsibility  -  banks  should  be  responsible  for 
consumer  education  programs  as  well,  disclosing  information  such  as  interest  charges  and  fees  of 
financial services. Let me go over quickly these points: 
In  order  to  fulfill  this  inadequate  access  to  financial  services  by  under-served  consumers,  the 
Bank  of  Thailand  initiated  a  pilot  project  on  micro  finance  in  collaboration  with  commercial  banks. 
Against misconception that micro finance is an unprofitable segment, this project aims to demonstrate 
that  the  coexistence  of  profitability  and  satisfied  customers  is  possible  with  a  right  business  model. 
Late  last  year,  we  invited  foreign  speakers  to  share  with  senior  management  of  Thai  commercial 
banks  their  experience  in  successful  conduct  of  retail  business  in  their  countries.  Following  this 
seminar, a number of banks already expressed their interests to participate in this pilot project. 
One social aspect that has clear benefits to all parties concerned is consumer education. It has two 
major dimensions, one on the cultivation of responsible use of credits and the other the introduction of 
new  financial  products  and  channels  of  distribution.  While  the  former  can  improve  the  overall  risk 
profile of financial institutions’ retail portfolio, and thus lower the lending rates, the latter can potentially 
stimulate more demands and lower the cost of service provision. It is therefore the responsibility of 
lending institutions to convey clearly the message of ‘no free lunch’. In other words, prudent lenders 
must ensure that borrowers are fully aware of the financial obligation of their debt burdens and legal 
consequence of default. Failure of either party could tarnish the healthy usage of retail credit. 
Mindful of the importance of consumer protection, the Bank of Thailand already issued a regulation 
requiring  financial  institutions  to  disclose  information,  especially  on  effective  interest  rate  and  fee 
charged, financial position and operating results, so that customers can make well-informed decisions. 
Additionally,  financial  institutions  will  be  required  to  have  in  place  clear  procedures  for  handling 
customer  complaints.  On  a  system-wide  scale,  the  authorities  will  introduce  a  deposit  insurance 
scheme in place of the existing blanket guarantee to ensure protection of retail consumers. 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 3
Supervisory concerns and challenges 
3. 
I have already touched on regulators’ concerns that directly affect consumer benefits. Now allow me to 
go  through  the  concerns  and  challenges  of  retail  banking  from  a  wider  perspective.  First,  we  are 
concerned  for  those  considering  jumping  onto  the  booming  retail  credit  bandwagon  without  having 
sufficient skills and resources to capitalize on the key drivers of this market segment. Second, the risks 
inherent in credit extension, which have to be adequately monitored and managed. Third, the one that 
directly concerns us, regulators, - how to achieve a balanced objective of financial institution stability 
and fostering development, competition and level playing field. 
Drivers of retail banking business 
The  gaps  of  financial  services  provided  by  financial  institutions  in  Thailand  reflect  untapped 
opportunities  in  the  retail  sector  awaiting  those  having  the  capability  to  fill  in  these  gaps.  The 
opportunities  are  open  to  banks  with  the  right  business  models  for  the  identified  niche  markets. 
However, it takes more than that to be successful in this competitive segment - banks must be capable 
of accurately charging the right price commensurate to the risk profiles of customers and their own 
operating cost. To this end, it is important that banks know their pool of customers in this sector, as 
well  as  have  in  place  an  efficient  network  of  service  distribution  and  able  team  of  staff  to  achieve 
extensive outreach and operation efficiency. 
Adequate oversight of various risks 
The profitability of banks hinges on their ability to manage various risks arising from their conduct of 
banking businesses. Retail banking is no exception.  
Therefore,  it  is  the  interest  of  banks  to  have  in  place  effective  tools  and  internal  control  system  to 
manage all types of risks. Stringent credit scoring is the centerpiece of credit risk management in the 
retail sector so as to minimize potential write-offs. The model must be based on analysis of accurate 
data of debtors on their credit exposure and pattern of repayment to gauge their risk profiles properly. 
As part of bank normal course of business, the credit grading process should be regularly reviewed so 
that banks can adjust credit exposure appropriate with the repayment ability of individual debtors. This 
boils  down  to  a  basic  concept  of  ‘know  your  customers’.  The  increasing  use  of  sophisticated 
financial technology to manage portfolio of retail customers with more complex demand at least costs 
can  pose  significant  operational  risk  such  as  internal  and  external  fraud.  This  calls  for  bank 
management to establish adequate security measures, contingent plans and auditing standards within 
their system of internal control that should serve to monitor reputational risk, strategic risk and other 
risks. 
Balanced objective of financial institution stability and the needs for development, competition 
and level playing field 
Recognizing the needs for a salient financial system with sound and strong financial institutions on the 
one hand, and the benefits of competition unleashed by innovation and evolving development on the 
other,  regulators  are  faced  with  the  challenge  to  achieve  the  latter  without  stifling  the  former.  It  is 
therefore  our  duties  to  create  a  regulatory  environment  that  offers  a  level  playing  field  in  which 
innovation is nurtured and financial institutions are encouraged to operate their businesses in a safe 
and sound manner. 
To foster innovation: 
Mindful of the needs to keep up with the development of the market, we regularly communicate with 
market  participants  and  practitioners  -  this  Conference  is  an  example.  In  addition,  at  the  Bank  of 
Thailand, we develop a policy issuance process that is methodological and is a product of consultation 
with all stakeholders. We often seek the view of our fellow regulators to ensure that our policies are in 
line with market and international best practices - in addition to helping us anticipate problems that we 
might  face  during  implementation  phase.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  senior  and  middle 
management regularly exchange views with those from other central banks and regulatory bodies in 
both regional and international forums. Prior to issuing a policy, its final draft is sent out for comments 
from  stakeholders  both  in  and  outside  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  especially  the  industry,  to  avoid  the 
problem  of  impracticality  and  minimize  the  cost  of  compliance  on  the  part  of  financial  institutions. 
Regulation and guidelines are also subject to regular review and revision to make sure that they are 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2004
up  to  date  and  in  tune  with  technological  changes  and  market  developments.  To  ensure  that  our 
supervisors  competently  meet  these  challenges,  we  have  undertaken  steps  to  enhance  their 
supervisory capacity. The School for Examiners was established to provide training programs ranging 
from  basic  concepts  of  bank  supervision  to  how  to  lead  a  team  in  bank  examination  based  on 
risk-based  supervision.  Specifically,  we  are  working  to  enhance  quantitative  skills  necessary  for 
comprehensive  implementation  of  Basel  II  and  financial  engineering  skills  to  keep  pace  with  the 
developments of new financial products and package risks. 
To maintain stability: 
The  prime  concern  shared  by  regulators  of  financial  institutions  is  a  stable  financial  system  that  is 
resilient to shocks and supports efficient allocation of resources in the real economy. One of the pitfalls 
of the retail banking market in Thailand before the Asian crisis was information asymmetry whereby 
creditors  only  had  partial  knowledge  of  their  debtors’  financial  indebtedness,  including  history  of 
repayment. To address this weakness, two credit bureaus were set up so that banks can accurately 
assess the risk profile and repayment ability of a debtor. This in turn enables banks to differentiate 
good debtors from more risky ones, and charge them commensurate to their risk profiles. 
In  view  of  bank  oversight,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  reoriented  its  focus  on  supervisory  framework 
away  from  solo-basis  transaction-testing  analysis,  towards  risk-based  supervision  on  consolidated 
basis.  To  fulfill  this  objective,  we  have  already  issued  guidelines  on  all  key  risk  categories  and 
undertaken  internal  reform  and  capacity  building  to  meet  the  challenge  posed  by  comprehensive 
risk-based supervision. An example in this area is the development of examiners’ manuals that are 
regularly revised to ensure consistently high standards of supervision. 
Going forward 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in the next few years, Thailand anticipates both opportunities and threats in the 
retail banking sector for existing banks in the light of the implementation of the Financial Sector Master 
Plan. As regards the focus of regulators, more attention will be given to watchful monitoring of the use 
of credit cards, monitoring of non-bank credit institutions, and observance of governance by market 
participants. 
The changing landscape of financial system to be brought about by the Financial Sector Master Plan 
will create opportunities for present market participants that have the courage to explore the niche 
and capability to satisfy the specialized needs of this group of customers. They come in the form of a 
new type of bank license - retail bank and other incentives. The tier1 capital requirement of 250 million 
baht  for  retail  banks  will  be  conducive  to  their  specialized  lending  to  retail  customers.  In  order  to 
enhance  delivery  channels  of  retail  banking,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  allow  and  encourage 
commercial banks to use customer contact points other than their own branches and sub-branches by 
means  of  alliance  with  post  office  branches  and  telecom  companies’  service  points,  for  instance. 
Moreover, banks can capitalize on lower capital charge for performing retail loan portfolios if they pass 
both  small  size  test  and  non-concentration  test,  with  risk  weight  of  75  percent  for  loans  to  retail 
customers  or  SMEs  and  only  35  percent  for  fully  collateralized  housing  loans.  These  are  the  risk 
weights proposed by the draft Basel II Accord. 
However, for those who fail to adapt, these forces of change may inflict threats raised by more intense 
competition from non-bank players and existing foreign banks. The competition is particularly intense 
in  consumer  credit  segment  with  mushrooming  non-bank  credit  institutions  that  offer  more  relaxed 
lending conditions for consumer credits, with faster services - some applications are approved within 
half  an  hour.  Moreover,  if  qualified  existing  foreign  bank  branches  or  office  of  international  banking 
facilities choose  to  upgrade  their status  to  subsidiary,  they  will  be  allowed  to have  some  branches, 
inserting more competitive pressure on the existing players. 
Despite low household debt of less than 30 percent of GDP in Thailand, the rapid growths of personal 
credit  and  credit  card  advances,  in  particular,  are  a  potential  source  of  our  concern,  especially  for 
low-income  customers.  Due  to  consumption-orientated  feature  of  this  type  of  credit,  this  group  of 
customers might develop a habit of living beyond their means, causing their debts compounding faster 
than income. Therefore, we will be on a careful watch of this segment of retail banking. Currently, the 
Bank of Thailand, in consultation with the industry, is in the process of issuing additional measures to 
ensure the integrity and soundness of personal credit sector.  
BIS Review 22/2004 
 5
Another  area  that  alerts  our  attention  is  intense  competition  among  non-bank  credit  institutions  for 
credit card advances. Outside the purview of the current supervisory scope of the Bank of Thailand, 
they  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  retail  credit  market.  Their  relaxed  lending  practices  may  attract 
irresponsible  borrowing  by  undisciplined  consumers  who  may  bring  themselves  and  their  family  to 
financial distress. It is in the interest of consumers that these credit institutions are prudently managed 
and sufficiently supervised - the role that will be better served by the Bank of Thailand empowered by 
the new Financial Institutions Businesses Act currently in legislative process. 
It  is  my  belief  that  good  corporate  governance  is  key  to  safe  and  strong  financial  system  because 
prudent and capable bank management that adheres to its professionalism overseen by independent 
and  financial  literate  Board  of  Directors  will  be  responsible  to  not  only  its  shareholders  but  also 
depositors and consumers in all aspects of its business, including retail banking. In order to put such 
belief into a concrete form, the Bank of Thailand has announced guidelines supporting the practice of 
good corporate governance of banks’ Board and management. 
Conclusion 
5. 
The discussion thus far has covered various aspects of the question posed to me - what do regulators 
really want? - By now you will have already known my answers to this question. In essence, it is our 
hope that industry participants will make their best effort to do their job as well as we do ours to meet 
the challenges set out in the Financial Sector Master Plan: 
• 
Providing financial services for all potential users indiscriminately to those in urban and rural 
areas,  whereby  viable  users  with  simple  needs  and  those  with  more  sophisticated  needs 
have  access  to  financial  products  and  services  commensurate  to  their  depth  of  financial 
literacy and risk appetite at reasonable price. 
Developing a competitive, efficient, stable, and balanced financial system 
Fostering  fairness  and  protection  for  customers  whereby  financial  institutions  follow  good 
corporate  governance  principles  and  consumers  receive  adequate  information  and  advice 
from various financial institutions to make informed investment decisions. 
 Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2004
