Eva Srejber: New EU countries - opportunities and risks 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the students of the 
Blekinge Institute of Technology in Karlskrona, Ronneby, 20 September 2004. 
 It is almost six months now since 10 countries became new EU members, eight of which were central 
European  nations  that  once  were  under  the  control  of  communist  dictatorship.  It  is  said  that  when 
Henry  Kissinger  asked  Zhou  Enlai,  Mao’s  right-hand  man,  to  comment  on  the  significance  of  the 
French revolution, he replied “too early to say”. As regards the enlargement of the EU, which is one of 
the biggest events in Europe in our time, it is likely to be many decades before we can take stock of 
the full consequences, even in the limited area I intend to discuss here today - the economic situation.  
Nonetheless there  is  much  to say about  the dynamics  that have  been created  by  the  enlargement, 
changes that were initiated as soon as the EU opened the door to membership in the 1990s and that 
are  now  continuing  following  entry:  In  the  short  term  the  immediate  problem  for  the  new  member 
states is to govern their economic policy in the right way, given their objective of not simply becoming 
members of the EU but also joining the eurozone. In the long term there are the opportunities that the 
free movement of goods, capital and not least people provide for economic growth in both the “old” 
and “new” parts of the EU. Finally, I intend to touch upon how the discussions in the EU have changed 
now that the 10 new member states have joined the debate. 
I  will  deliberately  try  to  avoid  using  the  words  “west”  and  “east”.  Partly  because  it  is  quite  simply 
geographically misleading; we say “eastern Europe” even though Prague and Ljubljana are situated 
west  of  Stockholm, not  to  mention  Vienna or  Athens.  We  forget that  Riga  and  Tallinn  are  closer  to 
Stockholm  than  Gothenburg  is.  But  partly  also  because  it  is  historically  misleading  since  the  new 
member  states  do  not  constitute  a  cultural  or  political  bloc.  Besides  their  fifty  years  of  oppression, 
Hungary,  Latvia  and  Slovenia  have  less  in  common  with  each  other  historically  than  with  Austria, 
Sweden and Italian, respectively, and belong moreover to three completely different language groups. 
I prefer instead “new” and “old” as a way of referring to the situation that the 10 new member states 
find themselves in.  
The short term: the path to EMU 
In connection with the EU enlargement there has been an intense discussion in recent years, both in 
the  old  and  new  EU  countries,  about  what  requirements  should  be  imposed  on  the  new  member 
states’ economic policy. The discussion has not dealt with entry to the EU, for which the key issues 
have  already  been  settled,  but  the  next  step:  the  euro.  Nine  of  the  ten  new  member  states  have 
announced  their  intention  to  introduce  the  euro  as  quickly  as  possible.  For  some  of  them  the 
changeover would  be  entirely  undramatic  and  opportune.  For  example,  Estonia  and  Lithuania  have 
long had currency boards anchored to the euro, whereby the currency is only issued against a certain 
statutorily  established  quantity  of  euro  -  in  practice  a  kind  of  “shadow  euro”.  The  currency  boards 
anchored to the euro are considered to have contributed to falling inflation and a stable investment 
climate. Their economies have been highly flexible in terms of wages and prices and their government 
finances  have  been  in  order,  and  they  have  thereby  been  able  to  manage  situations  where 
developments in the Baltic countries have deviated from those in the euro area. The fact that they now 
also have the opportunity to introduce the euro is expected to provide further advantages for trade and 
price comparisons.  
But  for  some  of  the  other  new  member  states  a  hurried  transition  to  the  euro  could  give  rise  to 
problems. To qualify for participation in the eurozone the countries must meet the convergence criteria 
which lay down various requirements for inflation, interest rates, the exchange rate and government 
finances.  The  Baltic  States  are  very  close  to  meeting  these  criteria  today,  or  have  already  fulfilled 
them. But the largest new member states have bigger difficulties.  
One of the criteria for introducing the euro is that a country keeps its exchange rate stable within the 
bands  set  by  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  ERM2,  which  allows  a  maximum  movement  in  the 
exchange rate of 15 per cent up or down. The largest of the new member states - Poland, the Czech 
Republic and Hungary - today have a floating exchange rate.  
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
In this regard there is a more theoretical and more immediate danger for the countries. The theoretical 
problem  has  to  do  with  the  pressures  that  high  growth  exerts  on  a  country's  economy  and  that, 
according to the Balassa-Samuelsson theorem, either leads to a rise in the exchange rate (nominal 
appreciation) or to a higher inflation rate than in other countries (real appreciation). If the new member 
states peg their exchange rates to the euro and at the same time have higher growth than the euro 
area countries, which they should, then according to the theory they will have higher inflation than the 
euro area. The problem is that one of the convergence criteria for introducing the euro is that inflation 
must  not  be more  than  1.5  percentage  points higher  than  in  the three countries  in  the  EU  with  the 
lowest inflation. This appears to be a potential catch-22 situation. The variation in the exchange rate is 
limited for two years, while inflation cannot rise too much; but that is what will happen if growth in the 
new  member  states  is  considerably  higher  than  in  the  euro  area,  which  is  what  everybody  wants. 
However, I would say that this is mainly a theoretical problem - in practice it has proven possible to 
keep inflation reasonably low despite a fixed exchange rate and high growth; this has been the case in 
the Baltic region, for example, where Lithuania has even experienced deflation and high growth. This 
is  because  inflation  is  also  affected  by  a  number  of  other  variables  (competitive  pressures,  the 
productivity of the domestic services sector, taxes and foreign demand). Countries such as Ireland and 
Spain have shown that inflation can be driven lower ahead of joining the euro despite high economic 
growth, at least during the years when the convergence criteria are to be assessed.  
The other problem is more palpable. A currency peg must be credible at all times if it is to last (unlike, 
for example, a single currency, which is credible since it quite simply cannot be changed). As Sweden 
experienced at the beginning of the 1990s, unhealthy government finances can erode credibility and 
give rise to expectations that the politicians will abandon the currency peg and devalue so as to pull 
through the crisis. Should the expectations be strong enough they can become self-fulfilling, as they 
did in Sweden in 1992. The problem in several central European countries is that their government 
finances  deteriorated  drastically  at  the  beginning  of  this  decade.  Poland,  the  Czech  Republic  and 
Hungary are all, despite spending cuts, still running public deficits over 5 per cent of GDP this year. 
Should they peg their currencies so as to meet the convergence criteria, they could in other words risk 
speculation. In addition, they risk remaining in that precarious situation for a long time before gaining 
approval to introduce the euro; another of the criteria for joining the euro is, as we know, a maximum 
public deficit of 3 per cent. The worst scenario would therefore be if the countries, in their euphoria 
over  EU  entry,  were  to  peg  their  currencies  at  a  high  exchange  rate  in  order  to  quickly  proceed  to 
EMU.  In  such  a  situation,  the  problems  in  the countries’  government  finances  would  put  downward 
pressure on their currencies, while the euro introduction would be postponed further into the future for 
the very reason that the criterion for the government finances was not met as quickly as anticipated. 
It now appears that the risk of such a scenario has been averted. The four largest new member states, 
spearheaded by the Czech Republic, have made clear that their government finances must be in order 
before  the  process  to  enter  the  euro-zone  begins.  New  spending  cuts  have  been  planned  to 
consolidate the government finances so that the countries after a few years can take the next step and 
peg their currencies at the prospect of euro entry. However, this does not allay all concerns on the 
path to the euro. It is not sufficient either, for instance, to simply save so that a deficit during a boom 
exactly  meets  the  criterion  of  3  per  cent  of  GDP.  Firstly,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  contains  a 
requirement to keep budgets at least close to balance over an economic cycle. But most of all there 
must be margins in the budget to cope with situations when developments in a country are weaker 
than in the euro area as a whole (which was pointed out in the Swedish official report before the euro 
referendum,  Stabilisation  Policy  in  the  Monetary  Union  (SOU  2002:16),  and  in  the  Riksbank’s 
statement on this). Otherwise there is a risk that the new member states will end up in Germany’s or 
France’s current situation - saving despite the fact that the slowing economy has needed stimulation. 
For this reason deficits during a boom should be considerably lower than 3 per cent so that a margin 
exists when the economy is put to a harder test during slowdowns. On the whole there is concern that 
the pressure to put government finances in order will lessen when the objective of joining the euro is 
postponed. The future will tell whether the saving plans are really implemented as intended. 
The long term: mobility and prosperity 
Although  much  of  the  debate  necessarily  focuses  on  the  short  term,  the  key  issues  are  those  that 
concern the long run. On the one hand, how can the new member states catch up sustainably on the 
EU average in terms of prosperity and productivity? On the other hand, how can the “old” EU countries 
benefit  from  the  enlarged  EU  in  order  to  boost  growth,  which  in  many  cases  has  left  much  to  be 
desired? 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
Firstly, let me point out where we stand today. According to the EU’s statistical agency, Eurostat, the 
purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita of the eight new eastern and central European member 
states ranges from 77.3 per cent of the EU average in Slovenia to 42.6 per cent in Latvia. The richer 
new member states - Slovenia, the Czech Republic and Hungary - are in terms of purchasing power 
closer to the EU average than Spain and Portugal were when they joined in 1986 (Slovenia is actually 
on a par with Portugal and Greece today). The other countries are all just under the relative level that 
Portugal had in 1986. Sometimes the GDP curves are extended up to the beginning of the 1990s and 
the  fall  in  output  that  followed  the  liberation  from  communism.  These  figures  are  in  many  ways 
misleading, however. Firstly, there was considerable manipulation of statistics under the dictatorship, 
making correct data difficult to reconstruct. Secondly, output in 1989, at the end of the communist era, 
comprised  a  very  large  component  of  heavy  military  material  and  moreover  inferior  equipment  and 
consumption goods that never came close to being sold or valued in a market, the majority of which 
were most likely unsellable in a market economy, and many of which were unusable even in a planned 
economy. The convergence towards the EU average went on during the entire period from 1992-1993 
when we had reliable statistics. GDP has grown faster than in the EU and more rapidly in the poorest 
countries in the group than in the richer ones. This is exactly what we can expect from theories on 
international economics and long-term convergence in productivity and prosperity.  
Behind these figures lies a revolutionary change that makes structural change in EU countries pale by 
comparison. For each component of GDP that has shrank, another component has grown; for each 
day that an old heavy industry has closed its gates, dozens of new small enterprises have started up. 
Allow me to give some examples: In 1991 the private sector constituted 10 per cent of GDP in Estonia; 
today  it  is  over  80  per  cent.  Manufacturing,  which  accounted  for  47  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  Czech 
Republic in 1992, now comprises 38 per cent, while services at the same time have risen from 44 to 
58 per cent.  
Nevertheless, economic growth in the new member states is not high enough. Ireland and the dynamic 
Asian economies grew 9-10 per cent a year during their most intense catch-up phase. But the largest 
of  the  new  member  states  -  Poland,  Hungary  and  the  Czech  Republic  -  are  only  growing  a  few 
percentage points faster than the average for the old countries; an average that furthermore is being 
pulled down by the poor performances of Germany, France and Italy. From this we can come to at 
least  two  conclusions:  Firstly,  Poland,  Hungary  and  the  Czech  Republic,  which  already  have  fairly 
substantial  public  expenditures  for  their  income  level,  should  take  care  not  to  end  up  in  the  same 
situation as Germany, France and Italy, with high expenditures, large deficits and considerable needs 
for reform. Secondly, both new and old countries need a broader injection from the enlargement for 
their economic performance.  
Mobility for goods has been one of the key factors behind the new member states' growth. When the 
process towards EU entry was initiated in the mid-1990s, the majority of the EU’s barriers to trade for 
the future member states were abandoned through the Europe agreements. This resulted in one of the 
most dramatic and least publicised changes in trade in modern time - far more significant for most EU 
countries than, for instance, trade with China today. The future member states, which previously had 
been  among  Europe’s  most  closed  economies,  were  transformed  in  a  few  years  to  the  most  open 
economies in Europe - foreign trade corresponds to more than 130 per cent of GDP in Hungary and 
the Czech Republic, more than countries of an equivalent size in the EU, such as Austria and Sweden. 
The EU became completely dominant in trade, while Russia and the former Soviet republics shrank to 
become  a  relatively  small  trading  partner.  The  countries’  share  of  the  old  EU  countries’  trade  rose 
quickly. For Sweden the eight new member states have been the trading partners that have always 
increased  their  share  steadily  from  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  -  through  the  Asian  crisis  and  the 
bursting of the IT bubble - and that today comprise 5 per cent of Sweden’s foreign trade, i.e. on a par 
with France and more than double China’s share. 
All indications suggest that the trend will both continue and deepen. The proportion of intermediate 
goods  (components)  produced  in  the  new  member  states  on  behalf  of  Western  companies  is 
becoming an increasingly large part of trade, as is the proportion of goods with higher technological 
content from the new member states. 
Mobility for goods has gone hand in hand with mobility for capital. Several studies of the balance of 
earnings  and  costs  associated  with  enlargement  (e.g.  from  the  European  Commission  and  the 
independent institution CEPR) have high-lighted increased investment as one of the most significant 
advantages of EU entry. When a country has received a timetable for EU entry, investors know that, 
despite political and economic upheaval, there is a certain fundamental security in its institutions. They 
know the rules that apply to membership in the shape of democracy, a market economy and the EU's 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
acquis - all the regulations agreed so far that each new member state adopts. This has very much 
been the case with the eight new member states that became free from communism. Between 1993 
and 2003 more than EUR 130 billion (SEK 1150 billion or almost half of Sweden’s current GDP) was 
invested in the eight countries, of which large parts were capital from old EU countries. The investment 
was  mainly  channelled  into  capital  in  industry  and  into  infrastructure  such  as  energy  and 
telecommunications.  
A significant Swedish example is the large-scale investment undertaken by Swedbank and SEB in the 
Baltic  banking  system.  From  1998  both  of  these  Swedish  banks  have  each  acquired  a  part  of  the 
Baltic banking system, comprising a total ownership of almost 90 per cent. The Baltic banking system, 
which  previously  has  been  hit  by  several  banking  crises,  has  since  then  grown  very  fast,  with  an 
annual credit growth of 20-30 per cent, giving increased opportunities for both large and small firms, 
but also mortgages for individuals. A number of new services, including Internet banking, have been 
introduced and become widespread. Competition has been relatively tough, with decreasing margins 
on ordinary financial services and other foreign banks that have gradually tried to gain entry. It is likely 
that  the  banking  system’s  fast  development  has  contributed  to  the  continuous  growth  in  the  entire 
Baltic region during the current decade.  
Investment  flows  can  also  help  strengthen  the  complementariness  between  industrial  structures  in 
different parts of Europe. Outsourcing of labour-intensive stages to low-wage countries has recently 
taken the blame for the weak jobs growth in the United States. In reality the data indicate something 
else:  that  the  integration  with  the  fast-growing  countries  in  Latin  America  and  the  Pacific  Rim  have 
been a crucial factor for the United States’ capacity to raise its productivity and prosperity increasingly 
faster  during  the  1990s  and  the  2000s.  One  study  carried  out  by  independent  researchers  at  the 
institutes NBER in the United States, CEPR in Europe and the IMF show that outsourcing to low-wage 
countries even strengthens employment growth in the long term. The consultancy firm McKinsey has 
estimated that each dollar invested in outsourcing to India gives the United States an economic gain of 
USD  1.12-1.14  and  a  gain  of  USD  0.33  in  India.  In  this  regard  the  enlargement  affords  a  similar 
opportunity for the EU and Europe. There are innumerable examples of how investment in companies 
in  the  new  member  states  results  in  sophisticated  cooperation  with  Western  firms.  Hungary  is  now 
competing with Ireland to attract computer assembly, and Slovakia is on the way to becoming one of 
Europe’s major car manufacturers, while Estonia is a subcontractor of both Swedish clothing firms and 
Ericsson. 
Perhaps the most interesting consequence of EU membership is mobility for people, or, as its known, 
labour. A common premise in that discussion is that labour from the new member states threatens to 
invade the labour markets of the old EU countries and that this will be a problem for the old countries 
even if it benefits the new member states’ inhabitants. I would argue instead that it is quite the reverse: 
Unfortunately not enough people from the new member states will work in the old countries, which is a 
disadvantage for us, but which possibly benefits them.  
Allow  me  to  begin  with  what  the  studies  say  about  the  potential  migration  from  the  new  member 
states.  According  to  a  number  of  studies  by  independent  academics,  the  flow  of  people  to  the  old 
countries if no country had introduced transition rules would not have been larger than after Spain’s 
and Portugal’s entry to the EU, amounting to 40 000-670 000, in other words less than 2 per thousand 
of the population in the old countries. The reasons for the modest forecast is partly that such a move is 
associated with costs, that the same rules apply for immigrants and domestic workers in the labour 
market,  and  last  but  not  least  that  mobility  is  fairly  low  in  the  new  member  states,  for  cultural  and 
housing  reasons  among  others.  A  big  problem  in  countries  with  very  high  regional  unemployment, 
such  as  Poland,  is  that  people  are  not  even  moving  within  the  country,  in  spite  of  vacant  jobs  and 
wage  differentials  of  over  50  per  cent.  Even  though  six  months  is  undeniably  too  short  a  time  for 
assessment, it has been recorded in Swedish media that not a single person from the new member 
states to date has applied for social welfare or other form of benefit for living in Sweden. Looking for 
work  or  applying  for  benefits  in  another  EU  country  is  both  associated  with  more  bureaucracy  and 
rules and is more costly in terms of living and housing than what many people who have never been in 
that situation know.  
This is a problem because the labour in the new member states is needed in the old ones. The old 
countries in the EU have presently a highly unfavourable demographic situation, as previously broad 
age groups are retiring and the base of active people to support them is being reduced. In Sweden 
today,  each  person  in  the  active  population  supports  0.29  people  over  65;  by  2030  this  ratio  is 
estimated  to  have  risen  to  0.42.  The  corresponding  figures  for  Italy  and  Belgium  are  even  more 
alarming.  One  way  to reduce  the dependency  burden  and  increase  the  labour  force  is  to  try  to  get 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
people that are unemployed, sick or in early retirement back to work. Historically, however, the most 
reliable  way  to  steadily  boost  the  labour  force  has  been  immigration,  as  has  been  the  case  in  the 
United States, for example. Experiences and studies also show that people with the most advanced 
qualifications  and  best  training  most  often  have  the  greatest  incentive  to  move,  partly  because  the 
wage  differential  is  bigger  and  partly  because  they  find  linguistic  and  cultural  barriers  easier  to 
overcome.  So  to  consolidate  the  welfare  in  the  old  countries,  an  increase  inflow  of  highly  qualified 
labour  from  the  new  member  states  would  be  desirable.  The  question  is  whether  this  is  not 
correspondingly  a  disadvantage  to  the  new  member  states.  They  have  a  somewhat  different 
demographic  situation,  their  dependency  burden  is  lower  today,  but  will  later  rise  sharply  and  in 
several countries exceed Italy’s or Sweden's in 20-30 years. There is also a risk that it would be the 
best-qualified labour that would emigrate first.  
Meetings in a broader circle 
Having  considered  these  prospects,  I  would  like  to  provide  an  insight  into  how  the  enlargement 
changes the functioning of the EU. The Riksbank participates in a large number of EU committees. I 
myself am a member of the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC), where senior officials from the 
finance ministries and deputy governors of the central banks in the EU discuss economic issues. The 
fact that there are now 25 countries instead of 15 and therefore considerably more at the table implies 
changes, of course. On the one hand, there is less scope for each country - the central banks, for 
example, don’t participate as often in the EFC after the enlargement and the speaking time per person 
places greater demands on concise, brief contributions. On the other hand the discussion has been 
vitalised by the new countries, which in some ways are less bound by tradition and which have new 
angles of approach, sometimes for the simple reason that many leading decision-makers in the new 
member states are much younger than their colleagues in the old countries.  
An important point is that it is not just the new member states that have to learn from the old ones; 
they  can  also  give  the  old  countries  something  to  think  about.  For  example,  several  of  the  former 
planned economies today are in some areas better adapted for EMU than the present EU countries. 
Their wages and prices have been more in line with their economic performance, which could be one 
reason, for example, that the Baltic States have been able to pull through the Russian crisis and the 
breakdown of the Russian market with only a brief loss of growth. The flexibility of their wages and 
prices makes them therefore unusually well-suited to a currency union like EMU. At the same time, 
these countries have not shied away from reforms that many leading EU countries have not yet been 
able  to  bring  about.  Estonia,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Hungary  and  Poland  have,  for  example,  carried  out 
comprehensive  reforms  of  their  pension  systems,  which  now  resemble  the  Swedish  model  with 
savings partly invested in funds. In these areas in particular, it is rather the EU that has something to 
learn from the candidate countries than the other way around.  
It is as Pope John Paul II said, that now finally can “Europe breathe with both lungs”. The new member 
states enrich the EU, not just economically but also intellectually, and of course also culturally and in 
human terms. The enlargement puts the EU in motion; not just the trade and investment, but also the 
institutions and the ideas. 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 5
