David Dodge: Research in financial services and public policy - filling the gaps 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Conference  on  Financial 
Services  and  Public  Policy,  Schulich  School  of  Business  at  York  University,  Toronto,  Ontario, 
22 April 2004.  
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. It gives me great pleasure to open this important conference on 
research  in  financial  services  and  public  policy.  In  his  invitation  to  this  event,  my  former  colleague, 
Fred Gorbet, referred to the need for “highly focused academic research in Canada on the linkages 
between  public  policy  and  financial  services.”  I  certainly  concur  with  this  assessment,  and  so  I  am 
happy to be a participant here today. 
For five years, the research program here at Schulich has helped to support and nurture a Canadian 
academic  community  focused  on  financial  services.  In  doing  so,  the  program  has  encouraged 
researchers to fill the gaps in our knowledge and help policy-makers and regulators to do a better job. 
After five years, it's useful to think back and recall the motivations for establishing this program in the 
first place. 
It goes without saying that the economy works better when a country's financial services sector is as 
sound and as efficient as possible. And the importance of promoting soundness and efficiency was 
certainly  highlighted  by  the  events  of  the  late  1990s.  Five  years  ago,  the  global  economy  was 
emerging  from  the  Asian  and  Russian  financial  crises,  and  the  near-collapse  of  Long-Term  Capital 
Management. During these events, we saw that financial markets are a key channel through which 
crises can spread. And among the countries most affected, we saw that one common element was a 
weak banking system. So one clear lesson to be learned was that the strength of a country's financial 
system is crucial. This is particularly true in times of stress, because a strong financial system gives an 
economy  a  better  chance  of  making  necessary  adjustments,  before  a  stressful  economic  situation 
turns into a full-blown crisis.  
It  may  be  tempting  to  look  at  today's  relatively  benign  economic  and  financial  environment  and 
conclude that the urgent need to strengthen financial systems has passed - tempting, but wrong. Now 
is precisely the time to get the work done, when there is considerable liquidity in the global system, 
and interest rates and spreads around the world are low. Because, at some point down the road, there 
will  be  less  liquidity,  and  interest  rates  and  spreads  will  be  higher.  So  if  we  wait,  the  task  will  only 
become more difficult. It may be a cliché to say that we should fix the roof when the sun is shining, but 
the point is valid. 
During the past five years, other events have also underlined the importance of the research you are 
doing here at Schulich. Following the collapse of Enron, and in the wake of other scandals, we have 
heard a great deal about corporate governance, transparency, and accountability. As businesses and 
policy-makers  address  these  issues,  we  all  need  to  understand  how  current  rules  are  affecting  the 
efficiency and stability of the financial sector, and how any proposed new rules will do so in the future. 
Regulators  must  always  keep  in  mind  that  their  actions  may  have  unintended  consequences,  thus 
making the solution worse than the problem they were trying to correct. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  been  a  source  of  funding  for  the  research  program  at  Schulich  since  its 
inception.  It  is  fair  to  ask  why  the  Bank  cares  so  much  about  financial  services  and  public  policy 
research.  Our  interest  stems  from  our  mandate  to  further  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of 
Canada. There are several ways that we do this, and the work that you do here has relevance for all of 
our roles. 
The  most  high-profile  way  that  we  promote  the  economic  well-being  of  Canadians  is,  of  course, 
through the conduct of monetary policy. We know that the financial sector and financial markets are at 
the heart of the transmission mechanism for monetary policy. And we know that monetary policy is 
more  effective  when  markets  function  well.  So  it  is  absolutely  critical  that  the  Bank  understand  the 
financial sector and the markets as thoroughly as possible.  
We also promote Canada's economic well-being through our role as lender of last resort. We have a 
mandate to oversee those payment, clearing, and settlement systems that have the potential to pose 
systemic risk. And we have a less formal, but still important, role in providing advice to the Department 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 1
of Finance on financial sector policies. In all of these areas, it is clear that we have a strong interest in 
promoting sound institutions, efficient financial markets, and well-functioning systems to support them. 
Of course, financial markets and institutions play a critical role in the economy by serving borrowers 
and savers, and by bringing about the efficient allocation of credit. But the financial sector itself is an 
important  contributor  to  economic  growth.  So  policy-makers  also  have  an  interest  in  providing  a 
framework that will allow our financial institutions and markets to compete in an increasingly globalized 
world. With global standards evolving rapidly, Canada must be at the forefront in terms of efficiency 
and soundness. 
One thing that the Bank can do is to help policy-makers and financial service providers have the best 
available research at their disposal. Indeed, in our most recent medium-term plan, the conduct and 
promotion of leading-edge research was identified as one of the Bank's strategic priorities. Of course, 
the Bank does a significant amount of research in-house. We have established an ambitious research 
program for 2004 and beyond. It includes such topics as how to improve our economic modelling, how 
regulatory  initiatives  and  frameworks  can  help  or  hinder  financial  markets  and  institutions,  and  an 
investigation into the effects of various types of asymmetric information on capital markets. 
We are proud of the work that we do. But we recognize that we can't do it all ourselves. There will 
always be large gaps in our research program. And we recognize that our research, and the research 
that is being carried out in universities, can be mutually strengthened through collaboration. And so we 
promote good research by actively collaborating with academics and seeking out partnerships. Finally, 
we try to inform others of what we are doing by publishing working papers and summarizing our work 
in our semi-annual Financial System Review. And we post a summary of our research program on the 
Bank's Web site annually. 
We also know that good research requires good data. There is a widespread need for better data on 
the Canadian financial system, and the Bank has begun to seek out data sources through its Financial 
System  Database  Project.  We  know  that  pulling  together  more  complete  sources  of  data  about 
financial  institutions,  financial  markets,  and  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  systems,  will  not  be 
simple.  Indeed,  it  will  be  a  complex  and  costly  project,  and  one  where  collaboration  with  external 
partners will be necessary, and enormously helpful. If we co-operate and build the databases properly, 
we can all share in the benefits. This is a priority for the Bank, and I would be happy to hear your 
suggestions on the best way to proceed with this ambitious project. 
That is an explanation of why we care about your work. Now let me take the opportunity - given this 
audience - to expand upon some of the areas where we at the Bank of Canada would like to see more 
research done. I will organize my remarks by talking about the three areas I have already mentioned: 
financial institutions; financial markets; and payment, clearing, and settlement systems. Within each 
area, I will raise a number of questions. What I want to do is to stimulate ideas, in the hope that some 
of you may be inspired to continue to probe into these issues.  
Where research is needed 
Financial Institutions. Over the past 15 years or so, regulators and policy-makers have been working 
hard to improve the soundness of financial institutions. Clearly, this is important and necessary work. 
But in carrying it out, we must always strive for a balance. That balance is between maintaining and 
strengthening  the  key  elements  of  regulation  and  supervision  that  promote  appropriate  risk 
management, and the necessity to promote efficiency by keeping compliance costs to a minimum. 
So  the  question  that  can  be  asked  is,  How  do  regulators  best  encourage  good  risk  management 
without  unduly  discouraging  risk  taking  and  without  stifling  innovation?  Rather  than  putting  the 
emphasis  on  compliance  with  a  vast  number  of  detailed  rules,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  goal  of  the 
regulator should be to encourage financial institutions to identify and measure the true nature of the 
risks being taken, and to see that methods are being developed to mitigate these risks. Policy-makers 
and  regulators  do  not  want  to  discourage  appropriate  risk  taking  to  the  point  where  incentives  are 
created for appropriate risk-taking activities to move outside the regulated financial system. 
Given  the  development  of  a wide  range  of new  financial  instruments and  the  exponential growth  in 
their use, the need to find this regulatory balance is becoming more and more acute. It is certainly true 
that through these instruments, banks have become better able to manage risk by shifting some risks 
to others. But as banks do this, the question arises, Where do these risks ultimately reside? And are 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2004
the bearers of these risks able to manage potential losses in times of economic stress, so that the 
financial system is ultimately more stable?  
The  evolution  in  accounting  standards  also  has  many  implications  for  financial  institutions  and 
markets. Does compliance with some of our accounting rules lead to large swings in reported earnings 
that do not reflect the true economic state of a firm? If we are to use fair-value accounting, how do we 
ensure that both assets and liabilities are correctly and equally marked to market? And we need to 
understand how particular elements of accounting rules can affect the risk-taking behaviour of financial 
institutions and investors. 
The issue of the right regulatory balance can also be looked at in relation to questions about the most 
efficient structure of financial institutions. This relates to the powers of institutions to do business, the 
types  of  business  lines  that  can  be  offered  by  a  single  institution,  and  the  corporate  structures  of 
institutions.  As  we  approach  the  quinquennial  review  of  the  Bank  Act  in  2006,  now  is  the  time  for 
researchers to be making their contributions to these areas. 
Financial Markets. Let me now turn to financial markets. This is one area where considerable research 
has  already  been  done,  particularly  in  equity  markets,  and  we  now  know  more  about  how  markets 
work than we did in the past. However, markets are constantly evolving, driven by technological and 
other forces. Given this, policy-makers and regulators should always be asking a basic question, while 
providing  reasonable  protection  against  inappropriate  conduct  and  minimizing systemic  risk,  are we 
still allowing sufficient incentives for markets to innovate, develop, and become more efficient? 
Let me give you some concrete examples. Are there inefficiencies in the way that our markets provide 
financing for Canadian firms? Specifically, is there something about the structure of our markets that 
leads non-investment-grade issuers to go abroad for their long-term debt financing? Or are our banks 
remarkably  efficient  in  providing  longer-term  capital  through  their  corporate  loan  business?  Or  are 
other instruments, such as income trusts, providing a substitute mechanism? 
To begin to answer those questions, we need to have answers to even more basic questions, such as, 
What determines the cost of capital, and how does the cost of capital in Canada compare with that in 
other  countries?  Exactly  how  do  Canadian  firms  access  capital?  And  are  there  particular  market 
impediments here in Canada that small and medium-sized issuers are facing? Again, we know much 
more than we used to in these areas, but our knowledge is still far from complete.  
One  particular  cost-of-capital  issue  that  we  have  been  investigating  is  related  to  the  so-called 
“Canadian  discount”  -  the  fact  that  firms  listed  only  on  Canadian  exchanges  tend  to  have  lower 
price-to-earnings ratios than comparable U.S. firms or Canadian firms listed on U.S. exchanges. This 
increases  the  cost  of  raising  equity  capital  and  may  interfere  with  the  ability  of  Canadian  financial 
markets to provide the most efficient match between issuers and investors. Whether the source of the 
discount is a matter of perception or something more substantial, we need to understand the forces 
that are causing it. 
If  policy-makers  are  to  find  the  best  ways  to  promote  market  efficiency,  they  need  a  better 
understanding  of  market  microstructure.  They  need  answers  to  questions  such  as,  How  do 
transparency and liquidity affect the cost of capital? How do different structures affect the optimal rules 
for transparency and liquidity in each market? Is the Canadian situation unique? And what lessons can 
be learned from the experiences of other countries? The Bank recently held a workshop on these and 
related  topics,  with  input  from  many  financial  market  participants.  A  summary  of  this  workshop  will 
appear in our next Financial System Review. Market microstructure will continue to be an important 
area of research at the Bank and, I hope, in the Canadian academic community as well. 
Payment,  Clearing,  and  Settlement  Systems.  So  far,  I've  talked  about  issues  related  to  the 
architecture  of  the  financial  system.  But  as  researchers,  it  is  also  important  to  pay  attention  to  the 
plumbing - the critical infrastructure that supports the activities of institutions and markets. So let me 
ask a few questions regarding payment, clearing, and settlement systems. As I mentioned, the Bank of 
Canada is responsible for the oversight of those systems that have the potential to pose systemic risk. 
Of course, financial service providers are major participants in these systems. 
At the Bank, one major research project involves efforts to model payment, clearing, and settlement 
systems so as to better understand how they work. Further research into the best oversight processes 
for these systems is also a priority. 
While the Bank's objective is to see that risks are minimized, we need to do so in ways that do not 
unduly  inhibit  the  development  of  even  more  efficient  systems.  Do  any  current  practices  create 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 3
unnecessary  inefficiencies?  What  issues  are  raised  by  the  current  drive  towards  straight-through 
processing?  How  can  cross-border  clearing  and  settlement  be  improved,  particularly  where  the 
ownership of securities and the posting of collateral are involved?  
Conclusion 
As you can see, there are still many questions that need to be answered. There are still gaps in our 
knowledge, and the need to fill these gaps is pressing. You, as academics and researchers, can do 
your  part  so  that  policy-makers,  supervisors,  and  institutions  are  all  better  informed  and  more 
productive. 
As I said earlier, Canada's economic health depends on a strong financial services sector. So your 
work is crucial, not just for the Bank of Canada, but for all Canadians. I hope that I have been able to 
convince  you  that  there  are  many  research  topics  that  are  not  only  inherently  interesting  for 
academics, but relevant for public policy. I look forward to you filling the gaps in our knowledge. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2004
