Jean-Claude Trichet: The international role of the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  delivered  at  the 
“Schierensee Gespräche”, 14 May 2004. 
 Introduction 
It  is  with  particular  pleasure  I  address  this  distinguished  audience.  Today,  I  will  look  beyond  the 
confines  of  the  single  currency  area.  I  will  even  go  beyond  the  borders  of  the  Baltic  Sea  region  to 
which Minister-President Simonis has just referred, as I would like to share with you some thoughts on 
the international role of the euro.  
When  the  euro  was  launched  on  1  January  1999,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  assumed 
responsibility for monetary policy in the euro area - the second largest economic area in the world after 
the United States. The Eurosystem subsequently became the issuer of the second most widely used 
international currency, after the US dollar and ahead of the Japanese yen. This outcome was mainly a 
reflection of the legacy of the 12 former national currencies which the euro replaced. 
Since the euro came into being, its international role has grown in a gradual but steady way. In that 
vein, I will first review the main developments in more detail, by characterising the key features of the 
use of the euro by non-euro area residents. I will then turn to the role of the euro and the Eurosystem 
in international cooperation on currencies.  
This role is also reflected in our policy position vis-à-vis the internationalisation of the euro. The ECB 
sees the internationalisation of its currency beyond the borders of the euro area as a market-driven 
process. At the same time, the ECB also analyses developments closely, as we are keen to know how 
our currency is used and by whom. This applies in particular to the use of the euro in countries located 
in the immediate vicinity of the euro area, including the new EU Member States. As you know, these 
countries  are  expected  to adopt  the  euro  in  due course  once  they  are  deemed  to have  fulfilled  the 
conditions set out in the EU Treaty, and I will briefly comment on this process in my conclusion.  
The gradual development of the international role of the euro 
Let us consider first the main developments in the international use of the euro since its inception in 
1999. To briefly sketch the main traits, I will follow the standard approach that builds on the functions 
of  money  and  distinguishes  between  the  varied  use  of  the  euro  outside  the  euro  area,  by  public 
authorities on the one hand and private agents on the other. 
Let me start with public authorities. There are about 50 countries with an exchange rate regime linked 
to  the  euro,  including  those  EU  Member  States  that  have  not  yet  joined  the  euro  area.  Non-EU 
countries that use the euro as an anchor currency are mainly located in the EU’s neighbouring regions 
or are countries that have established special institutional arrangements with the EU or some of the 
EU Member States, like the CFA zone in Africa. In most of these countries, the euro is also the main 
or  the  sole  intervention  currency  used  by  the  authorities  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rates  of  their 
respective  currencies.  Additionally,  in  these  countries  euro-denominated  assets  account  for  a 
substantial share of the foreign exchange reserves held by the respective authorities. Globally, at the 
end of 2002, the euro’s share in foreign exchange reserve assets was close to one-fifth. 
Turning  to  private  users,  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  has  been  most  visible  in  global  capital 
markets,  in  particular  when  it  comes  to  the  role  of  the  euro  as  an  international  financing  currency. 
Since the start of Stage Three of EMU, the stock of euro-denominated debt securities issued by non-
euro area residents has risen by around EUR 800 billion. This represents an increase in the share of 
the euro in the stock of international bonds from around 20% in 1999 to more than 30% in 2003, while 
the  share  of  dollar-denominated  bonds  has  remained  stable  at  around  45%.  A  significant  share  of 
euro-denominated securities have been targeted at, and purchased by, euro area investors. In using 
the  euro  as  an  issuance  currency,  financial  institutions  and  corporations,  mainly  from  mature 
economies,  most  notably  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  have  taken  advantage  of  the 
greater size and liquidity provided by the increasingly integrated euro-denominated bond markets. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 1
Besides the international financial markets, there is also evidence that the euro is increasingly being 
used as a settlement or invoicing currency in euro area countries’ trade with non-euro area residents. 
For example, the share of the euro in the settlement and invoicing of Spain’s extra-euro area exports 
rose from 49% in 2000 to close to 58% in 2002. Similar increases were recorded for France and for 
Belgium and Luxembourg. The use of the euro was most pronounced in settling and invoicing trade 
with the so-called “pre-ins” (the United Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark), the new EU Member States, 
and even Japan.  
However, there is also evidence of inertia in some of the facets of the euro’s international role. The 
share  of  the  euro  in  foreign  exchange  transactions  today  has  not  significantly  augmented  in 
comparison with the previous national currencies, accounting for about one-fifth to one-quarter of all 
daily transactions. By way of comparison, the US dollar is used in more than forty percent of foreign 
exchange transactions. 
There  are  several  factors  explaining  why  some  of  the  facets  of  a  currency’s  international  use  are 
characterised by a high degree of stability rather than gradual change. The most prominent ones are 
what economists usually call “dynamic economies of scale” and “network externalities”, which tend to 
freeze existing situations into steady states. Hence, any shift from the use of one currency to another 
currency  would  require  a  significant  and  exogenous  shock.  The  foreign  exchange  market  is  one 
example; the invoicing of raw materials, such as oil, is another. 
The euro and international cooperation on currencies  
To  sum  up,  the  euro  has  been  firmly  and  credibly  established  as  the  world’s  second  international 
currency  during  the  first  five  years  of  Monetary  Union,  and  its  gradually  increased  use  in  several 
market segments highlights the degree of confidence non-euro area residents have in the euro. But 
the advent of the euro did not only involve the development of its international use. It also affected 
global policy cooperation, including cooperation on exchange rate issues. In this regard, it should be 
reiterated that the ECB and the Eurogroup share the responsibility for exchange rate consultation with 
third parties - for example at G7 level - and for communication policy. At the same time, the ECB is 
solely responsible for decisions on foreign exchange operations. In this way we give the euro area a 
single voice in international fora on exchange rate-related issues. In particular, we see the G7 as one 
of  the  major  platforms  for  a  reciprocal  exchange  of  information  and  views  on  macroeconomic  and 
exchange rate developments at global level. Cooperation is important given the interlinkages between 
economic areas in today’s globalised world.  
On the present exchange rates I will only say that the appropriate terms of reference are in the two last 
communiqués  of  the  G7,  in  Boca  Raton  and  Washington,  where  we  reiterated  exactly  the  same 
wording which captured very well our present consensus. 
Against  this  background,  I  would  say  that  the  relationship  between  the  two  most  widely  used 
international currencies, the US dollar and the euro, should not be perceived as a zero-sum game, 
where a gain for one currency means a loss for the other. On the contrary, given the extent to which 
international goods and financial markets are integrated, there are net benefits from the “coexistence” 
of  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro.  International  investors  can  reduce  risk  by  diversifying  their  asset 
portfolio, commodity traders can easily make international contracts using one of these two currencies 
as a numeraire. And all of them can trust the single monetary policy which, through its pursuit of price 
stability, safeguards the purchasing power of the euro. 
The ECB and the international role of the euro  
This  brings  me  to  the  policy  approach  adopted  by  the  Eurosystem  on  the  internationalisation  of  its 
currency.  I  will  start  by  emphasising  a  key  characteristic  of  the  international  use  of  any  currency, 
namely  that  -  contrary  to  its  domestic  use  -  it  has  no  institutional  foundations,  as  there  is  no 
“sovereign”  power  that  can  enforce  its  use.  This  is  why  the  international  use  of  a  currency  is,  in 
essence, a market-driven process. The main economic factors underpinning the internationalisation of 
a currency are well known. The first factor is domestic stability, that is a low inflation rate, making the 
currency attractive as a store of value. The second factor is a high degree of openness to international 
trade and finance. This is a key determinant for the currency’s use as a medium of exchange and a 
unit  of  account.  And  the  third  factor  is  a  developed  financial  system  with  deep  and  liquid  markets 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2004
offering  participants  a  wide  range  of  services  and  products  in  terms  of  borrowing,  investing  and 
hedging.  
Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  takes  a  neutral  stance  on  the  internationalisation  of  its 
currency.  This  means  that  we  neither  hinder  nor actively  promote  the  development  of  this role.  For 
example, with the exception of the concept of ERM II to which I will refer in a moment, decisions taken 
by non-euro area authorities to use the euro as an anchor, reserve or intervention currency have to be 
fully seen as unilateral measures. They do not involve any commitment on the part of the Eurosystem. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Eurosystem  contributes  to  the  international  role  of  the  euro  in  indirect  ways. 
Price stability is a key precondition for the development of the international role of a currency. Thus, 
the stability-oriented monetary policy of the ECB contributes to the euro’s potential for expanding its 
international  role.  In  this  context,  I  would  also  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  the  credibility  of  the 
overall  policy  framework,  including  the  need  for  clear  and  enforceable  fiscal  rules  and  structural 
reforms in labour and goods markets. 
The  Eurosystem  has  also  been  a  strong  supporter  of  financial  market  integration  in  the  EU.  The 
introduction of the euro itself has undoubtedly led to a deeper and more integrated financial market. 
The evidence strongly suggests that this has supported the development of the international role of 
the  euro.  And  when  we  refer  to  the  fact  that  potential  gains  from  monetary  union  will  only  be  fully 
realised when European financial integration is fully achieved, this also applies to the euro’s use as an 
international financing and investment currency. 
Let me stress that by being neutral we are not indifferent to the international role of the euro. Indeed, 
we pay special attention to the international use of our currency and provide regular information to the 
public on related developments in the international financial arena, for example the recent build-up in 
foreign exchange reserves.  
From a monetary policy perspective, the international role of the euro does not provide any specific 
implications or challenges per se. However, we are closely monitoring developments which might have 
an impact on monetary policy. The demand for euro banknotes abroad is an example, even though 
currency  in  circulation  represents  only  6.5%  of  the  monetary  aggregate  M3.  Currently,  there  is 
evidence suggesting that non-euro area residents hold about 10% of the total amount of euro currency 
in circulation. This amount is roughly in line with estimates of the amount of euro legacy currencies 
circulating outside the euro area prior to the cash changeover in 2002. 
The adoption of the euro by non-euro area EU member states 
I have already referred to the fact that the international role of the euro is most prominent in the EU’s 
neighbouring regions. Indeed, it is in these regions where the relationship between the ECB’s pursuit 
of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  and  the  euro’s  international  use  has  been  most  visible.  By 
granting  monetary  stability  to  an  economic  area  that  is  by  far  the  largest  trading  partner  of  our 
neighbours, the euro has helped anchor policies in the region. It has prevented a mismatch between 
trade  and  financial  links  and  provided  clear  guidance  to  one  of  the  most  profound  processes  of 
economic transformation.  
The anchoring effect has been most pronounced with regard to the ten new Member States that joined 
the Union two weeks ago. But let me also mention, en passant, that the EU’s links with the Western 
Balkans, the Mediterranean countries and the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
notably Russia, have strengthened as well. In line with this, we have also observed significant use of 
the euro by public authorities and private agents in these countries.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  ten  new  EU  Member  States.  For  the  moment,  any  use  of  the  euro  by 
authorities and private agents in these countries - as in Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom - 
continues to be an “international” one, as the euro is still being used there by non-euro area residents. 
However, unlike Denmark and the United Kingdom, the ten new Member States have not asked to opt 
out of the single currency. Thus, they will adopt the euro once they have fulfilled the requirements as 
laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community. This entails that, on their road to the 
euro, they will, at some point, join the Exchange Rate Mechanism II. 
ERM II is a multilateral arrangement of fixed, but adjustable, exchange rates with a central rate and a 
standard fluctuation band of (15% against the euro. Thus, under ERM II, the official use of the euro in 
its role as an anchor currency by some non-euro area EU Member States will no longer represent a 
unilateral decision by the respective authorities. Rather, it will be based on a multilateral agreement 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 3
between  the  Member  State  concerned,  the  euro  area  member  countries,  the  ECB  and  the  other 
Member States participating in the mechanism. This is most evident with regard to the decisions on 
central  rates,  as  they  are  taken  by  mutual  agreement  of  the  various  parties  to  ERM II.  Moreover, 
several  exchange  rate  regimes  are  incompatible  with  ERM II  participation,  including  pegs  against 
anchors other than the euro. 
The new Member States differ greatly in terms of their economic structures, current exchange rates 
and monetary regimes, and in the degree of nominal and real convergence already achieved. Thus, 
no  single  path  towards  ERM II  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  can  be  identified  and  recommended. 
Rather, a case-by-case approach - based on the principle of equal treatment - will be followed, in line 
with the stipulations laid down in the Treaty. This includes the criteria concerning the sustainability of 
nominal convergence, better known as the “Maastricht criteria”. There will be no additional criteria but 
there will be no relaxation of the criteria either.  
We are aware that the road to the euro will be demanding, with participation in ERM II being only one 
element  of  the  overall  policy  framework  in  the  process  towards  full  monetary  integration.  In  a 
document published at the end of last year, the Governing Council set out in detail the principles which 
will guide the prospective participation of new Member States in ERM II and later their adoption of the 
euro.  
Once these countries are deemed to have fulfilled the conditions set by the Treaty, they will adopt the 
euro. By definition this will mark the end of the “international” role of the euro in these countries and 
lay the groundwork for a fully fledged “domestic” role of the single currency there. In the years ahead, 
we will work hard to ensure that this process of fully integrating new Member States into our common 
monetary area will unfold smoothly. 
Over the last few years we prepared intensively for enlargement. Now it is time to reap the mutual 
benefits of a wider Union, in particular with the expanded internal market providing new opportunities 
for trade and investment flows. This can have a significantly positive impact on growth in the European 
economy. I am convinced that, with enlargement, prosperity will increase and living standards improve 
across the whole Union.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2004
