Mervyn King: How international cooperation can raise Britain’s economic 
performance 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Panel  on  EU/US 
cooperation at the Advancing Enterprise Conference, London, 26 January 2004. 
 Chancellor, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  this  session  we  shall  examine  how  international  cooperation  can  raise  Britain’s  economic 
performance. Before introducing our speakers this afternoon, I would like to present a few facts about 
productivity in this country, and then pose three questions. You might ask why a central bank governor 
is chairing a panel on enterprise. Well, some believe in prudence for a purpose; we believe in stability 
as a spring-board, a springboard for enterprise. 
Since the start of the Railway Age in the 1830s, output per person has increased ten-fold in Britain; it 
has  increased  twenty-fold  in  the  United  States.  That  is  because  over  that  period output per  person 
rose on average by 1 ½% a year in the UK and by 2% in the US. The result is that the level of output 
per person is now around 25% lower in Britain than the US. In part this reflects shorter working hours, 
but it also reflects a lower level of productivity. 
From around 1980, however, the productivity gap between Britain and United States started to close, 
and for the following 15 years or so labour productivity actually rose significantly faster in the UK than 
the US, at an annual rate of 2.1% compared with 1.4%. But since 1995, the gap has started to widen 
again as ICT investment has boosted productivity growth in the United States. 
The empirical evidence suggests that one of the most successful ways to speed up convergence in 
productivity  is  to  promote  international  trade  and  investment,  and  openness  more  generally.  Within 
manufacturing, the rate at which the productivity gap between Britain and the US closed during the 
1980s and early 1990s was greater in the more open than the less open sectors. 
Against that background, let me suggest three areas for questions:  
First, why is the gap in the level of productivity between the US and the UK so persistent? And what 
are  the  obstacles  that  prevent  the  gap  from  narrowing  -  are  they  in  the  fields  of  trade,  technology 
transfer,  or  flows  of  investment?  What  are  the  respective  roles  of  business  and  government  in 
removing them? 
Second, can the UK benefit as much as the US from the IT revolution? Is it a question of the speed 
with which business adapts? Or is it the need to fund our research-based universities on the scale of 
the best elsewhere in order to exploit our comparative advantage in the English language and regain 
Britain’s  place  at  the  frontiers  of  knowledge?  Or  is  it  a  matter  of  raising  standards  of  education  in 
schools to enable the workforce as a whole to use the new technology? 
Third,  is  the  existence  of  overlapping  jurisdictions  affecting  economic  performance  in  the  UK  and 
elsewhere - in areas such as tax, competition policy, the regulation of mergers, patents, insolvency 
law, and recent changes to corporate governance? And can “economic cooperation” overcome some 
of these problems, and, if so, how? 
With those questions in mind, let me now introduce our four speakers this afternoon. 
First,  Niall  Fitzgerald,  Chairman  and  CEO  of  Unilever,  who  has  been  instrumental  in  the  recent  re-
launch of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue. 
Second,  Donald  Johnston,  the  Secretary-General  of  the  OECD  since  1996,  who  served  in  the 
Canadian Cabinet during the 1990s. The OECD is conducting a study to quantify the potential benefits 
of closer economic cooperation between the EU and US. 
Third,  John  Snow,  the  US  Treasury  Secretary,  who  will  be  joining  us  on  a  video  link  later  in  the 
session. 
Fourth, Gerrit Zalm, the vice Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Finance Minister since 1994. 
So, without further ado, let me turn to Niall Fitzgerald. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
