Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia - encouraging savings in a dynamic economy 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launching of 
the Merdeka Savings Bond, Kuala Lumpur, 2 January 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honour and pleasure to welcome you to the launch ceremony for the Merdeka Savings Bond. 
The  launching  of  this  bond  marks  another  step  forward  in  our  efforts  to  enhance  the  diversity  of 
financial products for Malaysian consumers. 
In this more dynamic environment, the Malaysian economy has continued to expand with per capita 
income rising to exceed levels prior to the Asian financial crisis. This growth has been supported by 
comprehensive  pro-growth  policies  and  the  development  of  a  much  stronger  banking  sector  that  is 
able to better manage new risks and challenges. 
As  a  trade-oriented  economy,  external  developments  will  continue  to  be  important  in  affecting  our 
growth  prospects.  In  order  to  reduce  our  vulnerability  to  adverse  external  developments,  increased 
attention  has  been  given  to  promoting  domestic  demand.  Policy  strategies  have  therefore  been 
directed at promoting domestic consumption and investment. Low interest rates, together with policies 
to increase disposable incomes, have led to higher consumption and a recovery in private investment. 
These trends have been important in sustaining growth.  
As a high savings country, Malaysia has the potential to promote a higher level of consumption without 
undermining  the  prospect  for  financing  of  private  investment  from  domestic  sources.  The  relative 
importance of consumption in the economy has increased from 56% in 1998 to 61% of GDP in 2002. 
The savings rate has, nevertheless, remained high at 35% of GDP, having declined from a peak of 
42.2%  in  1998.  While  household  consumption  and  private  investment  would  continue  to  remain 
important in sustaining domestic demand and economic activity, this needs to be balanced against the 
need to save. While there is potential to increase consumption further, of importance is for households 
to  improve  the  management  and  planning  of  their  finances  over  the  different  stages  of  their  lives. 
Indeed, financial planning is essential to sustain living standards and long-term financial security. With 
the rapid development of the financial system and the broader array of financial products and services 
available  to  consumers,  there  is  an  increasing  need  for  Malaysians  to  make  wise  savings  and 
investment  decisions  that  will  have  lasting  implications  for  their  financial  well-being.  Such  financial 
planning  and  management  will  determine  the  extent  of  consumption  expenditure,  the  indebtedness 
and the savings that is possible at the respective stages of one's life. 
The strengthening of domestic demand in our economy has also been supported by increased lending 
by banks, including to households. For a number of advanced economies, this trend has become a 
source of concern. This is in view of their rising household debt that have exceeded prudent levels in 
the range of 80-100% of GDP. Household indebtedness in Malaysia has, however, remained within 
prudent levels at 60% of GDP. Another important consideration that needs to be taken into account is 
the  ability  of  households  to  service  their  debt.  With  rising  income  levels,  the  household  sector  in 
Malaysia  has  continued  to  accumulate  net  financial  savings  as  reflected  in  higher  accumulation  of 
deposits against accumulation in debts. Household deposits, as a percentage of GDP, remains high at 
67%.  Strong  household  debt  servicing  capacity  is  also  reflected  in  the  continued  improvement  in 
non-performing loans ratio of the household sector, which declined from a peak of 12.2% at end-1998 
to 8.1% at end-November 2003.  
Amidst  low  and  stable  inflation,  the  cost  of  financing  has  been  kept  low  to  promote  sustained 
consumption  and,  of  greater  importance,  to  stimulate  stronger  investment  activities.  The  positive 
effects of increasing bank lending, especially to small businesses, have been an important factor in 
supporting  the  domestic  economy.  As  at  end-November  2003,  bank  lending  to  small  and  medium 
scale  enterprises  expanded  by  9%  year-on-year,  accounting  for  one-third  of  the  share  of  business 
loans.  The  growth  of  the  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises  is  important  in  supporting  a  more 
balanced  economic  structure  that  will  enhance  Malaysia's  potential  for  economic  expansion  and 
employment.  
The  Merdeka  Savings  Bond  will  provide  Malaysians  with  an  additional  avenue  and  incentive  for 
savings.  For  retirees  who  spend  out  of  their  pensions  and  accumulated  savings,  returns  on  their 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 1
savings is an important source of income to support their consumption. The individual responsibility to 
have  in  place  a  sound  long-term  retirement  income  strategy,  that  integrates  private  savings, 
contributions to the Employees Provident Fund and supplementary private pension and annuity plans, 
has therefore become important.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This  is  not  the  first  time  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  issued  such  bonds.  The  second  and  third 
series  of  the  Malaysia  Savings  Bonds,  which  were  issued  in  November  1999  and  February  2002 
respectively,  had  the  same  underlying  objective.  Each  time,  the  features  of  the  bonds  have  been 
enhanced.  
The Merdeka Savings Bond is for retirees who are 55 years old and above, and who do not have a 
full-time job. Armed Forces personnel who opted for mandatory retirement below the age of 55 are 
also eligible to purchase the bonds.  
The Merdeka Savings Bond, which will be based on the Islamic principle of Bai' Al-Inah, has several 
new features. Firstly, the bond will be issued on a regular basis over the next two years. Following the 
first issuance on 4 February 2004, there will be three other issuances on 1st April, 1st July, and 1st 
October  in  2004.  This  will  be  followed  by  similar  quarterly  issuances  in  2005.  It  is  hoped  that  this 
regular  issuance  would  provide  interested  investors,  who  may  have  their  savings  locked  in  other 
assets  with  the  flexibility  in  the  future  to  purchase  the  Merdeka  Savings  Bond.  A  total  issuance  of 
RM 2.25  billion  has  been  planned  for  2004  and  2005,  with  the  first  issuance  amounting  to 
RM 500 million.  
Secondly, in order to make it easier for investors to purchase the bonds, all commercial and Islamic 
banks, as well as Bank Kerjasama Rakyat, have been appointed as agent banks. The public may start 
applying for the bond beginning 5 January until 30 January 2004.  
Thirdly, profits will be paid to investors on a quarterly basis. Through the quarterly payment of profits, 
investors  will  receive  a  steady  stream  of  income  to  support  their  expenditure  needs.  For  the  first 
issuance, the Merdeka Savings Bond offers a profit margin of 5% per annum. At 5% per annum, the 
return  is  higher  than  interest  rates  paid  for  12-month  fixed  deposits  by  the  commercial  banks.  The 
income earned from the bonds will also be exempted from tax.  
The Merdeka Savings Bond also provides investors with the benefit of early redemption without any 
penalty in terms of forgone profits. Investors can redeem the full amount of their initial investments at 
any time after the first profit payment. Profit payments will then be based on the number of days the 
bond is held. This feature gives investors the option and flexibility to withdraw their savings at any time 
to  meet  unanticipated  expenses.  There  will  be  a  dedicated  hotline  and  website  to  attend  to  public 
queries regarding the bonds.  
The  launch  of  the  Merdeka  Savings  Bond  marks  a  further  step  forward  in  creating  new  investment 
instruments  for  a  specific  target  group  of  savers  who  have  retired.  Moving  forward,  further  savings 
products  should  be  developed  by  the  financial  services  industry.  Financial  institutions,  including 
insurance  companies,  unit  trusts,  and  other  non-bank  financial  institutions,  need  to  continue  to 
develop innovative financial products that can meet the needs of savers throughout their life cycle. The 
availability of a wide range of savings instruments for savers is a necessary pre-requisite for effective 
mobilisation  of  the  nation's  savings.  Indeed,  the  ongoing  evolution  of  an  innovative,  dynamic  and 
diversified financial system in Malaysia will not only help Malaysians save, but also invest effectively 
for their future by facilitating the more efficient allocation of personal resources.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2004
