Susan Schmidt Bies: Bank Secrecy Act enforcement  
Testimony by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 
3 June 2004. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  the  Senate  Committee  on  Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs to discuss the Federal Reserve’s participation in efforts to combat money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  federal  financial  institutions 
supervisory agencies play a critical role in these efforts, and the Federal Reserve is actively engaged 
in a number of initiatives to refine and strengthen examination protocols in this area and to effectively 
deploy resources to prevent, identify, and address problems at the banking organizations supervised 
by the Federal Reserve.  
In my remarks today, I will describe for you some of the important steps we are taking to fulfill our 
supervisory mission, to guide the institutions we supervise, and, in cooperation with the other banking 
and  financial  services  regulators  and  the  Treasury  Department,  to  make  every  effort  to  use  our 
supervisory tools to enhance the banking industry’s role in preventing and detecting money laundering 
and  terrorist  financing.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  anti-money  laundering  program  is  multifaceted.  It 
involves work in bank supervision, applications, enforcement, investigations, training, coordination with 
the law enforcement and intelligence communities, and rule writing. This morning, I will touch on some 
of  these  aspects  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  anti-money  laundering  program,  but  will  concentrate  on 
bank supervision efforts and enforcement matters.  
I would like to begin with a few words about the Federal Reserve’s supervisory philosophy in this area. 
The Federal Reserve has long shared Congress’s view that financial institutions and their employees 
are on the frontline of the effort to combat illicit financial activity. The Federal Reserve believes that the 
banking  organizations  it  supervises  must  take  every  reasonable  step  to  identify,  minimize,  and 
manage  any  risks  that  illicit  financial  activity  may  pose  to  individual  financial  institutions  and  the 
banking industry. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has required the financial institutions it supervises 
to  put  in  place  appropriate  controls  and  risk  management  mechanisms,  and  has  also  devoted 
extensive resources to issuing guidance on legislative and regulatory requirements and sound banking 
practices, as well as to coordinating supervisory efforts with other agencies. In addition, the Federal 
Reserve uses its enforcement authority, where necessary, in the event that serious problems or risks 
cannot be satisfactorily addressed in the supervisory process.  
Supervisory strategy and procedures for anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing 
It has been our longstanding policy that Federal Reserve supervisors incorporate a Bank Secrecy Act 
compliance  and  anti-money  laundering  program  component  into  every  safety  and  soundness 
examination  conducted  by  a  Reserve  Bank.  This  means  that  on  a  regular  examination  cycle, 
examiners  seek  to  determine  if  a  banking  organization’s  Bank  Secrecy  Act  (BSA)  and  anti-money 
laundering (AML) compliance programs are satisfactory and are commensurate with the organization’s 
business  activities  and  risk  profiles.  Examinations  are  conducted  at  the  state  member  banks,  bank 
holding  companies,  Edge  Act  corporations,  and  U.S.  branches  and  agencies  of  foreign  banks 
supervised by the Federal Reserve. Every Reserve Bank has BSA/AML specialists and coordinators 
on  its  staff,  and,  since  the  late  1980s,  the  Board  has  had  an  anti-money  laundering  program  in  its 
supervision  division  overseen  by  a  senior  official.  Simply  put,  Bank  Secrecy  Act  and  anti-money 
laundering  compliance  has  for  years  been  an  integral  part  of  the  bank  supervision  process  at  the 
Federal Reserve.  Furthermore,  the  Federal Reserve’s  enforcement  program  has a  strong history of 
addressing both anti-money laundering and safety and soundness problems in formal actions, where 
necessary.  While  the  number  of  actions  may  fluctuate  somewhat  from  year  to  year,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s exercise of its enforcement authority has been consistently strong and timely.  
The Federal Reserve supervision process includes both on-site examinations and off-site surveillance 
and  monitoring.  The  Federal  Reserve  generally  conducts  an  on-site  examination  of  each  bank  it 
supervises  once  every  twelve  to  eighteen  months,  and  at  each  examination  staff  reviews  the 
institution’s  anti-money  laundering  procedures  and  its  compliance  with  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act,  as 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
amended  by  the  USA  Patriot  Act  and  new  Treasury  regulations.  For  large,  complex  banking 
organizations,  the  safety  and  soundness  examination  process  is  continuous,  and  anti-money 
laundering and BSA compliance is incorporated into examinations conducted throughout the year. The 
Federal Reserve always includes BSA/AML examinations in the supervisory strategy for every banking 
organization we supervise.  
A key component of anti-money laundering examinations is the institution’s compliance with the BSA 
compliance program requirement. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have 
compliance program requirements for institutions they supervise. In general, the rules require a bank 
to establish, maintain, and document a program that includes:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance with the BSA,  
independent testing of the bank’s compliance with the BSA,  
training of appropriate bank personnel, and  
the  designation  of  an  individual  responsible  for  coordinating  and  monitoring  day-to-day 
compliance with the BSA.  
The  Federal  Reserve  works  to  ensure  that  the  banking  organizations  we  supervise  understand  the 
importance  of  having  in  place  an  effective  anti-money  laundering  program.  When  a  Reserve  Bank 
conducts a BSA/anti-money laundering examination of a banking organization under its supervision, 
the four components of the program establish the framework for the examination. To properly evaluate 
the effectiveness of a banking organization’s anti-money laundering program, the Federal Reserve has 
developed comprehensive examination procedures and manuals, and regularly provides training for its 
examiners. The BSA/AML examination procedures are currently under revision to reflect newly issued 
regulations under the USA Patriot Act.  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  BSA  examinations  are  risk-focused.  While  a  “core”  BSA  examination  is 
required  of  all  banking  organizations,  risk-focused  procedures  allow  examiners  to  apply  the 
appropriate  level  of  scrutiny  to  higher-risk  business  lines,  where  necessary,  and  alleviate  burden 
where high-risk products or customers are not present. In other words, a small state member bank 
with  a  low-risk  customer  base  receives  a  considerably  different  and  less  burdensome  BSA/AML 
examination than a large, complex banking organization with international operations.  
The examination process  
During  every  safety  and  soundness  examination  of  banking  organizations  under  Federal  Reserve 
supervision,  bank  examiners  specially  trained  in  BSA  requirements  review  the  institution’s  previous 
and current compliance with the BSA. Examiners first determine whether the institution has included 
BSA/AML procedures in all of its operational areas, including retail operations, credit, private banking, 
and trust, and has adequate internal control procedures to detect, deter and report money laundering 
activities, as well as other potential financial crimes. As part of such an examination, bank examiners 
also review an institution’s fraud detection and prevention capabilities, and its policies and procedures 
for  cooperating  with  law  enforcement  (whether  through  responding  to  subpoenas,  acting  on 
information requests under section 314 of the USA Patriot Act, or otherwise).  
Our  supervision  policy  guidance  in  this  area  requires  that  examiners  also  conduct  a  review  of  the 
databases  of  Suspicious  Activity  Reports  (SARs)  and  Currency  Transaction  Reports  (CTRs)  to 
determine if the banking organization that is about to be examined has filed such reports and that they 
appear complete and timely. Examiners are not doing this to count the number of SARs and CTRs, to 
compare their findings against other institutions, or to base any criticisms solely on a numerical count, 
but rather to make sure, for example, that the bank or U.S. branch of a foreign bank understands its 
obligations  in  this  critical  area  and  has  taken  steps  to  fulfill  its  responsibilities  by  filing  timely  and 
accurate reports with law enforcement and bank regulators.  
The  on-site  examination  begins  as  a  review  of  the  institution’s  written  compliance  program  and 
documentation of self-testing and training, as well as a review of the institution’s system for capturing 
and  reporting  certain  transactions  pursuant  to  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act,  including  any  suspicious  or 
unusual transactions possibly associated with money laundering or other financial crimes. Transaction 
testing is generally conducted to verify these systems.  
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
In  those  instances  where  there  are  deficiencies  in  the  BSA/AML  program,  including  failures  to 
adequately document self-testing or training, obvious breakdowns in operating systems, or failures to 
implement  adequate  internal  controls,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  examination  procedures  require 
examiners to conduct a more intensified second-stage examination that would include the review of 
source documents and expanded transaction testing, among other steps.  
There  is  an  important  correlation  between  the  areas  covered  by  a  BSA/AML  examination  and  an 
institution’s overall risk management and internal controls. Thus, bank examiners take into account an 
organization’s  enterprise-wide  corporate  governance  mechanisms  and  how  they  are  applied.  The 
Federal Reserve’s bank examiners are able to apply a broad perspective and depth of organizational 
knowledge to the area of BSA/AML and to coordinate with examination and analytic staff to ensure 
that the safety and soundness and BSA/AML examinations are integrated and comprehensive. The 
Federal  Reserve  has  found  that  there  is  an  important  synergy  gained  by  integrating  the  safety  and 
soundness and BSA/AML supervisory processes.  
Enforcement actions 
The  Federal  Reserve  focuses  significant  resources  on  the  prevention  and  early  resolution  of 
deficiencies within the supervisory framework. When problems are identified at a banking organization, 
they  are  typically  communicated  to  the  management  and  directors  in  a  written  report.  The 
management  and  directors  are  requested  to  address  identified  problems  voluntarily  and  to  take 
measures to ensure that the problems are corrected and will not recur. Most problems are resolved 
promptly after they are brought to the attention of a banking organization’s management and directors.  
In some instances, however, examiners identify problems relating to anti-money laundering measures 
that are pervasive, repeated, unresolved by management, or otherwise of such serious concern that 
use of the Federal Reserve’s enforcement authority is warranted. If the problem does not require a 
formal action, the Reserve Banks have the authority to take informal, non-public supervisory action, 
such as requiring the adoption of an appropriate resolution by an institution’s board of directors or the 
execution of a memorandum of understanding between an institution and the Reserve Bank.  
When  informal  action  will  not  suffice,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  authority  to  take  formal,  public 
enforcement  action  to  compel  the  management  and  directors  of  a  banking  organization  to  address 
anti-money  laundering  and  BSA  compliance  problems.  These  actions  include  written  agreements, 
cease and desist orders, and civil money penalties, and are legally enforceable in court. These actions 
are not delegated to the Reserve Banks, and are undertaken only with the concurrence of the Board’s 
General  Counsel  and  the  Board’s  Director  of  the  Division  of  Banking  Supervision  and  Regulation. 
Because  these  actions  are  public,  they  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  a  banking  organization, 
particularly one that is a public company. In determining whether formal action is appropriate, Federal 
Reserve staff considers all relevant factors, including the nature, severity, and duration of the problem, 
the anticipated resources and actions necessary to resolve the problem, and the responsiveness of 
the directors and management.  
In  cases  where  examiners  have  identified  a  violation  of  the  compliance  program  requirement,  the 
federal banking agencies are bound by law to take formal enforcement action. The same law requiring 
the banking agencies to promulgate rules requiring the four-part compliance program that I discussed 
earlier provides that if an institution fails to establish and maintain the required procedures, or if it has 
failed to correct any previously identified problem with the procedures, then the agency must issue a 
formal  action  requiring  the  institution  to  correct  the  problem.  The  Federal  Reserve  takes  this 
responsibility very seriously and has issued a number of public actions against banking organizations 
in  fulfillment  of  this  statutory  mandate.  Federal  Reserve  staff  exerts  every  effort  to  ensure  that  this 
statute is implemented consistently, and Board staff acts as a central coordinator for the examination 
and  enforcement  staff  at  the  different  Reserve  Banks.  Over  the  past  three  years,  for  example,  the 
Federal Reserve has taken approximately twenty-five formal, public enforcement actions addressing 
BSA/AML-related  matters.  Actions  have  been  taken  against  large  banking  organizations  as  well  as 
smaller ones - the one constant is that the examination process identified regulatory violations in the 
organizations’ compliance programs that, under the law, mandated the supervisory actions.  
In addition to taking action itself, the Federal Reserve may refer a BSA-related matter to Treasury’s 
Financial  Crimes  Enforcement  Network  (FinCEN)  for  consideration  of  an  enforcement  action  based 
solely  on  BSA  violations,  rather  than  a  program  failure  or  issues  relating  to  safety  and  soundness. 
Treasury  has  delegated  to  the  federal  financial  banking  agencies  the  authority  to  examine  for  BSA 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
compliance those institutions they normally examine for safety and soundness; however, Treasury has 
not  delegated  the  authority  to  take  an  enforcement  action,  such  as  the  assessment  of  a  fine,  for 
violations of the Bank Secrecy Act.  
Federal Reserve staff coordinates enforcement actions with other regulators or agencies, including in 
the area of anti-money laundering. If a banking organization’s problems involve entities supervised by 
different regulators, resolution of enterprise-wide problems may involve multiple enforcement actions. 
For example, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), FinCEN, and the Federal Reserve 
coordinated their recent enforcement actions against Riggs National Corporation; Riggs Bank, N.A.; 
and Riggs International Banking Corporation, the bank’s Edge Act subsidiary, to ensure consistency 
and concurrent resolution of open issues. The Federal Reserve coordinates enforcement actions with 
state banking supervisors on a regular basis, and enforcement actions involving operations of foreign 
banking  organizations  may  be  resolved  in  cooperation  with  supervisors  abroad.  In  several  recent 
matters, there was close coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice as well.  
The applications process 
Before I describe some more aspects of the Federal Reserve’s supervisory process, let me touch on a 
very important component of the Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering process - the processing of 
applications and notices filed with the Board. The Federal Reserve has had a longstanding practice of 
considering  an  applicant’s  compliance  with  anti-money  laundering  laws  in  evaluating  various 
applications,  including  bank  mergers  and  acquisitions  of  insured  depositories  by  bank  holding 
companies as well as applications filed by foreign banks to establish U.S. banking offices under the 
Foreign Bank Supervisory Enhancement Act. The USA Patriot Act included a provision memorializing 
our practice in the application area and required the Board to take into account the effectiveness of an 
applicant’s BSA compliance program when it considers applications under various laws.  
Under our longstanding protocols as well as the new law, every application matter considered by the 
Federal  Reserve  includes  a  BSA/AML  compliance-related  component  whereby  staff  has  to  make 
specific  judgments  regarding  an  applicant’s  compliance  with  the  law  in  this  important  area.  While  I 
cannot, of course, comment on specific cases, I can report to you that Board staff has on some recent 
occasions advised banking organizations considering expansion or other activities requiring the filing 
of applications with the Federal Reserve to concentrate instead on their BSA/AML programs. While not 
the  full  equivalent  of  an  enforcement  action,  I  am  sure  that  you  can  appreciate  the  fact  that  every 
banking  organization  that  is  seeking  or  planning  on  seeking  Federal  Reserve  approval  of  an 
application makes every effort possible to ensure that its anti-money laundering program is considered 
to be fully satisfactory by examiners and that any deficiencies that may be identified are addressed as 
expeditiously  as  possible.  The  applications  process  gives  the  Board  a  strong  tool  in  the  BSA/AML 
area.  
Guidance to banking organizations 
Turning  back  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  normal  supervision  process,  Board  and  Reserve  Bank 
supervisors  seek  to  provide  guidance  to  banking  organizations  to  assist  them  to  fully  understand 
applicable regulatory requirements and what is expected by the regulators. While financial institutions 
are,  of  course,  fully  responsible  for  their  own  compliance,  the  supervisors  play  an  important  role  in 
ensuring  that  regulatory  requirements  are  correctly  understood  and  uniformly  applied.  This  is 
particularly true in areas such as compliance with new regulations promulgated since the USA Patriot 
Act.  
The  Federal  Reserve  views  its  supervisory  role  as  including  initiatives  to  enhance  awareness  and 
understanding by examiners throughout the Federal Reserve System, by banking organizations under 
Federal Reserve supervision, and by the financial industry at large. To promote a full understanding of 
anti-money laundering requirements, the Federal Reserve issues Supervision and Regulation letters, 
which  are  used  to  advise  Reserve  Bank  supervisory  staff,  supervised  institutions,  and  the  banking 
industry  about  policy  matters;  provides  on-going  training  to  examiners;  speaks  regularly  before  the 
financial  industry;  and  issues  guidance  in  conjunction  with  other  regulators  and  Treasury.  These 
initiatives are meant to respond to or anticipate questions that arise regarding anti-money laundering 
requirements. The Federal Reserve is keenly aware of the resources that anti-money laundering and 
counter-terrorist financing requirements demand of financial institutions and believes that it is our duty 
to assist them in meeting their obligations.  
4 
 BIS Review 35/2004
Federal Reserve resource commitment 
The Federal Reserve’s BSA/AML function ranges from supervising and regularly examining banking 
organizations  subject  to  Federal  Reserve  supervision  for  compliance  with  the  BSA  and  relevant 
regulations,  to  requiring  corrective  action  for  detected  weaknesses  in  BSA/AML  programs,  to 
enhancing  money  laundering  investigations  by  providing  expertise  to  the  U.S.  law  enforcement 
community, and to providing training to U.S. law enforcement authorities and various foreign central 
banks and government agencies. Over the past three years, for example, Federal Reserve experts in 
BSA/AML-related  matters  have  participated  in  special  reviews  of  funds  transfers  for  federal  law 
enforcement and intelligence authorities, taught classes at FBI and Department of Homeland Security 
training  academies,  held  seminars  for  central  bank  and  foreign  supervisory  authorities  in  over  ten 
countries,  including  Botswana,  Mexico,  Russia  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  and  engaged  in 
discussions on AML-related matters at international fora such as the Basel Cross-border Group and 
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF).  
Over the course of the past ten plus years, the Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering program has 
grown dramatically. From a senior official at the outset assigned to coordinate the Federal Reserve’s 
BSA activities in the late 1980s, to the creation and staffing in early 2004 of a new section within the 
Board’s  Division  of  Banking  Supervision  and  Regulation  dedicated  solely  to  anti-money  laundering 
efforts (the Anti-Money Laundering Policy and Compliance Section), the Federal Reserve continues to 
commit  a  growing  number  of  its  resources  to  BSA/AML  compliance.  In  1993,  the  Federal  Reserve 
System began the practice of designating a senior examiner at each of the twelve Reserve Banks to 
serve as a Bank Secrecy Act coordinator for the BSA examiners at that Reserve Bank. The number of 
senior  BSA  examiners  throughout  the  System  has  grown  tremendously,  particularly  since  the 
enactment  of  the  USA  Patriot  Act  and  the  increasing  complexity  of  BSA  examinations.  The  web  of 
BSA  examiners  throughout  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  brought  together  through  a  direct 
communication channel with the Board’s AML Policy and Compliance Section. This communication is 
an important tool for gathering examination experiences and providing consistent guidance throughout 
the Federal Reserve System.  
By  any  standard,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  a  leadership  role  in  the  U.S.  government’s  and 
international banking and regulatory community’s anti-money laundering efforts.  
Supervisory coordination 
Due  to  the  complexity  of  financial  institutions  today,  it  is  imperative  that  the  Federal  Reserve 
coordinate  with  a  long  list  of  agencies  on  issues  tied  to  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act.  First,  the  Federal 
Reserve  views  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  and  FinCEN  as  important  partners  due  to  their 
leadership role in administering the Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, for a number of complex financial 
institutions,  the  Federal  Reserve  shares  supervisory  and  regulatory  responsibilities  with  the  OCC, 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision at the federal level, with 
the banking agencies of the various states, and with foreign banking authorities for the international 
operations of U.S. banks and the operations of foreign banks in the United States.  
This  network  of  partners  requires  a  high  degree  of  coordination.  The  regulatory  authorities 
communicate constantly regarding BSA-related matters. For example, among bank regulators, there 
are a number of electronic systems in place that allow secure access to examination information. This 
allows regulators to monitor the status of organizations under their direct or indirect purview. It is also 
the Federal Reserve’s practice to notify relevant functional regulators when a supervisory action may 
have impact on an institution subject to their supervision.  
In addition, bank regulators collaborate in the development of consistent examination procedures and 
examiner  training.  The  USA  Patriot  Act  required  a  surge  of  rulemaking  activity,  and  the  Federal 
Reserve and its regulatory colleagues continue to advise Treasury as it completes this important work.  
Law enforcement coordination 
The  Federal  Reserve  routinely  coordinates  with  federal  and  state  law  enforcement  agencies  with 
regard to potential criminal matters, including anti-money laundering and financial crime activities. This 
coordination  may  occur  when  the  Federal  Reserve  takes  action  to  address  matters  that  are  also 
addressed in a criminal proceeding, when the financial condition of a bank is affected by a criminal 
matter, or when law enforcement draws on Federal Reserve staff expertise in its investigative work. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 5
The  Federal  Reserve  maintains  open  channels  of  communication  with  law  enforcement,  whether 
through interagency working groups or informal staff level contacts.  
Conclusion 
The Federal Reserve believes that banking organizations should take reasonable and prudent steps to 
combat illicit financial activities such as money laundering and terrorist financing, and to minimize their 
vulnerability to risks associated with such activity. For this reason, the Federal Reserve’s commitment 
to  ensuring  compliance  with  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act  continues  to  be  a  high  supervisory  priority.  The 
Federal  Reserve  has  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  criminal  activity  does  not  pose  a  systemic 
threat,  and,  as  important,  in  improving  the  ability  of  individual  banking  organizations  in  the  United 
States and abroad to protect themselves from illicit activities.  
Thank you again for inviting me today to explain the Federal Reserve’s work in this important area.  
6 
 BIS Review 35/2004
