Toshihiko Fukui: Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy - an overall 
review 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Representatives, Tokyo, 9 June 2004. 
 Introduction  
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2003 to the Diet on June 4, 2004. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan’s economy  
I. 
When I spoke to this committee in March 2004, I presented the assessment that Japan’s economy 
was  recovering  gradually.  Since  then,  industrial  production  and  corporate  profits  have  continued  to 
increase due to a substantial rise in exports, and against this background business fixed investment 
has continued to recover. The decline in household income is gradually coming to a halt, and private 
consumption is showing some positive movements. With a virtuous cycle in operation, the economy 
continues to recover gradually and domestic demand is becoming firmer.  
As  for  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  recovery  as  momentum  increases 
gradually.  
Overseas economies are likely to continue growing relatively fast, despite some negative factors such 
as geopolitical risks and the rise in crude oil prices. The U.S. economy continues to show balanced 
growth.  Private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  remain  firm,  and  in  the  employment 
situation a recovery which had been delayed is becoming clearer. East Asian economies, particularly 
China,  are  likely  to  continue  high  growth.  Reflecting  such  developments  in  overseas  economies, 
Japan’s exports and production are expected to continue on an increasing trend.  
Furthermore, corporate profits are likely to remain on an uptrend as exports and production increase, 
given the progress in dealing with problems, such as excessive labor and debt, which were part of the 
background to the delay in Japan’s economic recovery. Business fixed investment is therefore likely to 
continue  on  an  uptrend,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The  increase  in  production  and 
corporate  profits  is  expected  to  exert  positive  effects  gradually  on  the  household  sector  through 
changes  in  employment  and  income  as  well  as  in  asset  prices.  Against  this  background,  private 
consumption is expected to recover at a moderate pace.  
On  the  price  front,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  have  been  rising  recently,  due  to  the 
strengthening of commodity prices at home and abroad and to the improvement in supply and demand 
conditions,  and  they  are  expected  to  continue  increasing  for  some  time.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in consumer prices (excluding fresh food) has been close to zero percent. As for the outlook, 
the  output  gap,  which  affects  the  underlying  trend  of  prices,  is  expected  to  narrow  steadily,  but 
temporary  factors,  such  as  the  increase  in  rice  prices  that  has  contributed  to  a  slowdown  in  the 
year-on-year rate of decline in consumer prices, will dissipate gradually. Furthermore, the increase in 
productivity in the corporate sector is likely to absorb the effects of the rise in commodity prices. Given 
this  situation,  consumer  prices  are  basically  projected  to  continue  falling  slightly  on  a  year-on-year 
basis.  
As for the recent rise in crude oil prices, however, future developments and their effects require close 
monitoring.  
The money market continues to be stable overall against the background of the Bank’s provision of 
ample liquidity. In the capital market, Japanese stock prices declined temporarily from late April given 
declines  in  stock  prices  and  rises  in  interest  rates  worldwide,  but  they  rose  thereafter.  Long-term 
interest rates have been stable on the whole, but are recently rising somewhat.  
The  environment  for  corporate  finance  is  becoming  more  accommodative  on  the  whole,  although  it 
remains severe for firms with high credit risks. The rate of decline in lending by private banks has been 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
diminishing slightly, and the fund-raising environment for firms in the capital market through corporate 
bonds and CP continues to be favorable.  
Conduct of monetary policy  
II. 
The Bank has been conducting the quantitative easing policy with the outstanding balance of current 
accounts held at the Bank as the operating target. In accordance with the current target range for the 
outstanding balance of “around 30 to 35 trillion yen,” the Bank provides ample liquidity to the money 
market.  The Bank  has  also  made  a commitment  to maintain  the quantitative  easing  policy  until  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide 
basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  
Against the background of this policy, financial institutions have been more confident in raising funds 
in  the  money  market,  and  this  has  been  contributing  to  stability  in  financial  markets.  The  Bank’s 
commitment to maintaining the policy has contributed to stabilizing market participants’ projection of 
future interest rates, and thus market interest rates have been stable. In this situation, firms have been 
able  to  raise  funds  at  low  interest  rates.  Reflecting  the  recovery  of  the  economy,  firms’  returns  on 
investment are expected to increase, and the current quantitative easing policy will therefore further 
promote their positive activity. The effects of the quantitative easing policy will support the economy 
more strongly as it continues to recover.  
With these points in mind, the Bank has continued to conduct its quantitative easing policy with the 
commitment based on the CPI.  
The Bank has been making efforts to make credit intermediation in the market more diversified and 
efficient so that monetary easing effects permeate further throughout the economy, and these efforts 
are  expected  to  improve  the  Japanese  capital  market  in  the  long  term.  As  part  of  such  efforts,  the 
Bank  started  to  purchase  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  from  July  2003,  and  the  total  amount  of 
ABSs  purchased  to  date  has  reached  around  800  billion  yen.  In  addition,  the  Bank  hosted  the 
Workshop  on  Securitization,  and  exchanged  views  about  practical  problems  and  possible  solutions 
with market participants to back the development of the ABS market. In April 2004, the Bank released 
the results of the discussions held at the Workshop, which contained specific proposals, for example, 
a proposal that prices of securitized products should be evaluated more accurately and efficiently.  
In  May,  the  Bank  introduced  a  facility  which  provides  the  markets  with  Japanese  government 
securities (JGSs) held by the Bank as a secondary source with a view to enhancing the liquidity of 
JGS  markets.  The  Bank  has  been  making  a  wide  range  of  efforts  to  improve  the  infrastructure  of 
financial markets and will continue to do so.  
Purchases of stocks held by commercial banks  
III. 
The Bank started to purchase stocks held by commercial banks from November 2002 to reduce the 
risk that stock price fluctuations might impact negatively upon the business management of individual 
financial  institutions,  potentially  resulting  in  instability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  total 
amount of stocks purchased by the Bank as of May 31, 2004 was 1,979.9 billion yen.  
Conclusion  
Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  as  it  gains  further  momentum  gradually.  To 
ensure  that  this  recovery  will  become sustainable  and  to  overcome  deflation,  the  Bank  considers  it 
essential that a wide range of economic entities continue to make efforts to revitalize the economy.  
The Bank is determined to firmly support Japan’s economy by continuing with monetary easing even 
as the economy continues to recover, in order to realize sustainable growth and overcome deflation.  
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
