Zdenĕk Tůma: Euro adoption, acceding countries and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Zdenĕk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the IMF Conference, Prague, 
3 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is my pleasure and honour to address you during this high-level conference which we co-host at the 
Czech National Bank. Today we had an excellent opportunity to exchange views on the preconditions 
and implications of adopting the euro in the acceding countries. These debates will provide us with a 
springboard for our discussions on euro adoption strategies, which are scheduled for tomorrow. 
Even  though  the  actual  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  still  lies  in  the  relatively  distant  future,  the 
acceding countries have to be prepared well in advance. That is why last year was marked in most 
acceding  countries  by  co-operation  between  central  banks  and  governments  to  define  their  joint 
positions  on  the  euro.  Many  of  the  acceding  countries  subsequently  published  euro  area  entry 
strategies. In these documents they discussed the potential benefits and challenges of adopting the 
euro and outlined a roadmap for their entry. 
According to the traditional cost-benefit framework, one can expect that the acceding countries, which 
are  mostly  small  open  economies,  will  derive  numerous  benefits  from  adopting  the  euro.  These 
benefits involve, among other things, a reduction of foreign exchange risk, and the elimination of the 
danger of exchange rate turbulence and crises. Euro area entry provides an attractive solution to the 
“fear of floating” dilemma for these countries. The expected benefits should in the long run outweigh 
the costs associated with giving up national monetary and exchange-rate policies as adjustment tools. 
Today,  however,  I  do  not  want  to  focus  too  much  on  this  traditional  optimumcurrency-area  debate. 
Instead, I would like to highlight another aspect of euro adoption, the implications of euro adoption for 
financial stability. 
By  reducing  exchange  rate  risk  and  currency  turbulence,  monetary  integration  provides  easier  and 
safer  access  to  foreign  capital.  Therefore,  it  can  be  expected  that  it  would  lead  to  more  efficient 
allocation  of  resources,  faster  real  convergence,  better  inter-temporal  consumption  smoothing  and 
more  efficient  diversification  of  risk.  In  this  sense,  euro  area  entry  augments  the  benefits  of 
international financial liberalisation. At the same time, it reduces many of the financial stability costs 
associated  with  the  liberalisation  process,  such  as  currency  crises,  currency  mismatches  in  the 
economy, and high exchange rate volatility. 
I would like to emphasise, though, that euro adoption should not be considered a panacea in terms of 
financial  stability.  The  euro  will  not  solve  all  the  challenges  faced  by  the  acceding  economies  in  a 
world of fully liberalised financial markets. The euro will address some of these challenges, but it may 
generate new ones, equally serious in nature. The benefits of freer access to foreign financing may be 
plagued by vulnerabilities and resulting turbulence. The only change may be in the type of risks, with a 
shift from exchange rate risk to other risks in the domestic financial system. 
Let me elaborate on where these challenges may come from. It is a well-known fact that the size of the 
banking sector in most post-communist acceding countries still remains far below the EU average. In 
the  acceding  countries,  bank  credit  to  the  domestic  private  sector  typically  has  a  ratio  of  30  to 
40 percent of GDP, while the EU average is around 100 percent of GDP. This difference is to a large 
extent natural, reflecting the lower GDP levels of the acceding countries, their history, and the recent 
weaknesses in their legal and institutional environments. 
Nevertheless, it is quite likely that this legacy of the past will be overcome in the foreseeable future. 
The driving force might be the real convergence process. And perhaps more importantly, the acceding 
countries  can  capitalise  on  their  reform  achievements  of  recent  years.  Despite  differences  in  their 
reform strategies and numerous transitional difficulties, most acceding countries have achieved great 
progress  in  building  their  financial  systems.  Their  banking  sectors  are  now  mostly  stabilised, 
privatised, and typically dominated by foreign ownership. Moreover, the acceding countries have also 
achieved  considerable  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  their  general  legal  and  institutional 
frameworks. 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
Recent  empirical  studies  by  the  IMF  have  shown  that  there  might  be  scope  for  substantial 
convergence  in  bank  credit  in  the  acceding  countries  with  EU  levels.  In  some  cases  and  in  some 
periods, the real credit growth might reach as much as 30 percent a year, or even more. This is in line 
with the credit growth rates observed in some euro area members since the mid-1990s. 
Some recent empirical literature has indicated that the probability of bank failures and banking crises 
increases with credit booms. Banks may become less cautious in granting loans during the boom, due 
to  the  prevailing  optimism  and  good  performance  at  the  macroeconomic  level.  And  even  if  the 
optimism is justified by the fundamentals, it may go a bit too far, leading to an eventual build-up of 
financial imbalances. Their subsequent bursting could hit the real economy to such an extent that it 
would have repercussions for the financial system. 
Here I come back to the issue of euro adoption, which may be a very relevant factor in this debate for 
several reasons. First, by providing easier access to external financing for banks, adoption of the euro 
may amplify a credit boom. Second, it may be associated with a wave of optimism about the future 
economic prospects of the acceding countries, given the positive net benefits expected from euro area 
entry.  Third,  euro  adoption  requires  nominal  convergence,  including  a  reduction  in  nominal  interest 
rates to the euro area level. This may support a credit expansion to some economic sectors. Finally, in 
a currency union a national credit boom cannot be addressed by monetary policy actions. 
To take the current euro area members as an example, the ratios of private credit to GDP a decade 
ago in Ireland, Portugal and Spain ranged between 45 and 75 percent. At present, this ratio exceeds 
100 percent in all these three cases. The trend has been also growing fast in Greece, albeit from a 
lower base. In Portugal, for instance, domestic banks took the opportunity to issue eurodenominated 
bonds in euro area markets to increase rapidly the volume of domestic loans both to the corporate 
sector and to households. Capital inflows through banks financed a mounting current account deficit. It 
also fuelled fast growth of domestic demand and GDP in 1998-2000. 
This experience could in principle be viewed as a manifestation of the expected potential benefits of 
monetary  integration.  In  fact,  it  has  been  argued  that  euro  area  membership  has  enabled  the 
participating countries to overcome the famous Feldstein-Horioka puzzle, i.e. the traditional strong link 
between  domestic  savings  and  investment.  In  other  words,  the  current  account  constraint  may 
become non-binding after euro adoption, which should lead to a more efficient allocation of capital in 
the long run. 
However, it might be also questioned whether such a fast credit expansion will lead to a build-up of 
vulnerabilities  in  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions,  firms  or  households.  In  the  case  of 
Portugal, for example, the debt burden of the household sector has exceeded 100 percent of yearly 
disposable income, even though a decade ago this ratio was comparable to the current situation of 
some  acceding  countries.  As  a  result,  one  can  think  of  adverse  scenarios  in  which  the  repayment 
capacities  of  the  banks’  clients  would  deteriorate  substantially,  with  adverse  consequences  for 
financial stability. Fortunately, this has not happened so far in reality. The economic cycle experienced 
by Portugal in recent years has, nonetheless, been a challenging experience. 
I  do  not  want  to  suggest  that  the  materialisation  of  such,  or  even  more  severe,  financial  stability 
challenges linked to euro adoption is the most likely future scenario for the acceding countries. There 
may be many country-specific characteristics influencing the balance of risks in a favourable way. For 
example, countries that have operated currency board regimes for many years have got used to living 
without  their  own  monetary  policies  and  with  low  interest  rates  ahead  of  euro  area  accession.  The 
acceding countries have in general made substantial progress with nominal convergence by now. It is 
also important to stress that the future development of the financial systems in acceding countries may 
be  strongly  influenced  by  the  large  presence  of  foreign  capital  in  both  their  financial  and  corporate 
sectors. 
I  also  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  challenges  of  euro  adoption  outweigh  the  benefits  in  terms  of 
financial stability. First, the challenges are linked to scenarios which may have rather low probability 
and  are  at  this  stage  being  discussed  only  as  part  of  prudential  analyses.  Second,  the  actual 
comparison  of  the  benefits  and  challenges  may  differ  from  one  acceding  country  to  another.  For 
instance, countries with currency boards or other fixed exchange rates are likely to face more serious 
currency  mismatches  in  their  financial  sectors  and  economies,  as  hard  peg  regimes  discourage 
hedging against exchange rate fluctuations. This residual risk can be eliminated by euro adoption, and 
fasttrack entry into euro area thus seems to be an optimal exit strategy from the current regime. In the 
case of countries with floating exchange rates, on the other hand, the direct exchange rate risk may be 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2004
much  smaller.  The  debate  may  therefore  pay  more  attention  to  preconditions  that  should  be  met 
before entry to minimise the risks of excessive credit booms with undesirable consequences. 
Let me conclude by saying that central bankers in acceding economies should focus on two issues in 
the period ahead. We should aim to meet the nominal convergence criteria in a sustainable manner 
and we should also provide good guidance in the area of financial stability. 
And we certainly need much more discussion to find ways in which central banks, fiscal authorities 
and  financial  system  regulators  can  foster  financial  stability  in  the  monetary  union.  The  balance  of 
risks will depend very much on the particular legal and regulatory framework of each economy and the 
quality  of  corporate  governance  in  financial  institutions.  The  risks  could  become  serious  only  if  the 
inflow  of  external  funds  were  to  be  intermediated  by  a  weak  domestic  financial  sector.  Further 
improvements in the legal and regulatory framework are thus very important. We must also strengthen 
our  capacities  in  macroprudential  analysis,  as  early  identification  can  help  prevent  financial 
vulnerabilities from building up further. On the supervisory front, we need to address the cross-border 
as well as growing cross-sector integration in our financial systems. Finally, sound fiscal policies also 
play a significant role in maintaining financial stability. 
I am glad that this conference provides a good opportunity to discuss these policy challenges and their 
implications in more depth. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 3
