Bank of Japan’s February report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 5 February 2004. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Japan’s economy is recovering gradually.  
Exports  are  recently  increasing  substantially  and  business  fixed  investment  continues  a  gradual 
recovery.  Reflecting  these  developments,  industrial  production  is  also  increasing.  The  decline  in 
household income is gradually coming to a halt and private consumption is virtually flat. Meanwhile, 
housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is declining.  
As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is anticipated to continue recovering, albeit at a moderate pace.  
Overseas economies are projected to continue growing relatively fast. Based on this projection, it is 
expected that exports and production will continue increasing and that the recovery trend in business 
fixed investment will also become more visible. However, given persisting structural factors such as 
excessive  debt,  the  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  remain  moderate.  Private 
consumption  is  likely  to  remain  virtually  flat  for  some  time,  since  the  employment  and  income 
situations  are  unlikely  to  improve  markedly.  Meanwhile,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a 
declining trend.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been firm, due to the rise in rice prices and 
the  strengthening  of  overseas  and  domestic  commodity  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in 
consumer prices (excluding fresh food) has been close to zero percent, while temporary factors such 
as the rise in rice prices have exerted upward pressure on prices.  
Turning to the outlook, domestic corporate goods prices are expected to remain firm for the immediate 
future. As for consumer prices, the year-on-year rate of change is likely to be around zero percent for 
the time being due partly to the rise in rice prices. However, they are basically projected to continue 
falling  slightly,  since  the  imbalance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy  still  remains 
considerable despite its gradual improvement.  
As for the financial environment, the environment for corporate finance is becoming somewhat more 
accommodative  on  the  whole,  although  it  is  still  severe  for  firms  with  high  credit  risks.  The  issuing 
environment for CP and corporate bonds is favorable on the whole, especially for firms with high credit 
ratings. Also, the lending attitudes of private banks have been slightly more accommodative. The pace 
of  decline  in  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  is  becoming  somewhat  moderate.  Under  these 
circumstances, the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued continues to be above the 
previous  year’s  level,  and  the  rate  of  decline  in  lending  by  private  banks  is  diminishing  slightly.  As 
growth  of  banknotes  in  circulation  is  on  a  downtrend  due  mainly  to  decreasing  anxieties  about  the 
financial system, the year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base is moving around 15 percent. The 
year-on-year growth rate of the money stock is at the 1.0-2.0 percent level. As for developments in 
financial  markets,  money  market  conditions  continue  to  be  extremely  easy,  as  the  Bank  of  Japan 
provides ample liquidity. In the foreign exchange and capital markets, while the yen’s exchange rate 
against the U.S. dollar is rising somewhat from the previous month, stock prices are declining slightly. 
Long-term interest rates are around the same level as last month.  
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
February 4 and 5, 2004. 
2   The Bank's view was determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 4 and 5, 2004. 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
