Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board’s semiannual monetary policy report 
to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington, 
11 February 2004.  
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.  
When I testified before this committee in July, I reported that conditions had become a good deal more 
supportive of economic expansion over the previous few months. A notable reduction in geopolitical 
concerns,  strengthening  confidence  in  economic  prospects,  and  an  improvement  in  financial 
conditions boded well for spending and production over the second half of the year. Still, convincing 
signs  of  a  sustained  acceleration  in  activity  were  not  yet  in  evidence.  Since  then,  the  picture  has 
brightened.  The  gross  domestic  product  expanded  vigorously  over  the  second  half  of  2003  while 
productivity  surged,  prices  remained  stable,  and  financial  conditions  improved  further.  Overall,  the 
economy has made impressive gains in output and real incomes; however, progress in creating jobs 
has been limited.  
Looking forward, the prospects are good for sustained expansion of the U.S. economy. The household 
sector's  financial  condition  is  stronger,  and  the  business  sector  has  made  substantial  strides  in 
bolstering balance sheets. Narrowing credit risk spreads and a considerable rally in equity prices have 
reduced financing costs and increased household wealth, which should provide substantial support for 
spending by businesses and households. With short-term real interest rates close to zero, monetary 
policy  remains  highly  accommodative.  And  it  appears  that  the  impetus  from  fiscal  policy  will  stay 
expansionary,  on  net,  through  this  year.  These  circumstances  all  should  spur  the  expansion  of 
aggregate  demand  in  2004.  At  the  same  time,  increases  in  efficiency  and  a  significant  level  of 
underutilized resources should help keep a lid on inflation.  
In  retrospect,  last  year  appears  to  have  marked  a  transition  from  an  extended  period  of  subpar 
economic performance to one of more vigorous expansion. Once again, household spending was the 
mainstay, with real personal consumption spending increasing nearly 4 percent and real outlays on 
residential structures rising about 10 percent. Last year's reductions in personal income tax rates and 
the  advance  of  rebates  to  those  households  that  were  eligible  for  the  expanded  child  tax  credit 
boosted  the  growth  of  real  disposable  personal  income.  The  very  low  level  of  interest  rates  also 
encouraged  household  spending  through  a  variety  of  channels.  Automakers  took  advantage  of  low 
interest  rates  to  offer  attractive  incentive  deals,  buoying  the  purchase  of  new  vehicles.  The  lowest 
home  mortgage  rates  in  decades  were  a  major  contributor  to  record  sales  of  existing  residences, 
engendering  a  large  extraction  of  cash  from  home  equity.  A  significant  part  of  that  cash  supported 
personal consumption expenditures and home improvement. In addition, many households took out 
cash  in  the  process  of  refinancing,  often  using  the proceeds  to  substitute  for  higher-cost consumer 
debt. That refinancing also permitted some households to lower the monthly carrying costs for their 
homes and thus freed up funds for other expenditures. Not least, the low mortgage rates spurred sales 
and starts of new homes to very high levels.  
These developments were reflected in household financing patterns. Home mortgage debt increased 
about 13 percent last year, while consumer credit expanded much more slowly. Even though the ratio 
of overall household debt to income continued to increase, as it has for more than a half-century, the 
rise  in  home  and  equity  prices  enabled  the  ratio  of  household  net  worth  to  disposable  income  to 
recover  to  a  little  above  its  long-term  average.  The  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  large  volume  of 
mortgage refinancing activity helped reduce households' debt-service and financial-obligation ratios a 
bit. And many measures of consumer credit quality improved over the year, with delinquency rates on 
consumer loans and home mortgages declining.  
A  strengthening  in  capital  spending  over  2003  contributed  importantly  to  the  acceleration  of  real 
output. In the first quarter of the year, business fixed investment extended the downtrend that began in 
early 2001. Capital spending, however, ramped up considerably over the final three quarters of 2003, 
reflecting  a  pickup  in  expenditures  for  equipment  and  software.  Outlays  for  high-tech  equipment 
showed particular vigor last year. Even spending on communications equipment, which had been quite 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 1
soft  in  the  previous  two  years,  accelerated.  A  growing  confidence  of  business  executives  in  the 
durability of the expansion, strong final sales, the desire to renew capital stocks after replacements 
had been postponed, and favorable financial conditions all contributed to the turnaround in equipment 
spending.  
By  contrast,  expenditures  on  nonresidential  structures  continued  to  contract  on  balance,  albeit  less 
rapidly  than  in  2001  and  2002.  High  vacancy  rates  for  office  buildings  and  low  rates  of  capacity 
utilization  in  manufacturing  evidently  limited  the  demand  for  new  structures.  Inventory  investment 
likewise  failed  to  pick  up  much  momentum  over  the  year,  as  managers  remained  cautious.  Firms 
finished  2003  with  lean  inventories  relative  to  sales,  an  encouraging  sign  for  the  expansion  of 
production going forward.  
To  a  considerable  degree,  the  gathering  strength  of  capital  spending  reflects  a  substantial 
improvement  in  the  financial  condition  of  businesses  over  the  past  few  years.  Firms'  profits  rose 
steeply during 2003 following smaller gains in the previous two years. The significantly stronger cash 
flow generated by profits and depreciation allowances was more than adequate to cover rising capital 
expenditures in the aggregate. As a result, businesses had little need to borrow during 2003. For the 
nonfinancial business sector as a whole, debt is estimated to have grown just 3-1/2 percent.  
Firms  encountered  very  receptive  conditions  in  longer-term  credit  markets  in  2003.  Interest  rate 
spreads on both investment-grade and speculative-grade bond issues narrowed substantially over the 
year, as investors apparently became more confident about the economic expansion and saw less risk 
of  adverse  shocks  from  accounting  and  other  corporate  scandals.  Corporate  treasurers  took 
advantage of the attractive market conditions by issuing long-term debt to lengthen the maturities of 
corporate liabilities.  
As  a  consequence,  net  short-term  financing  was  extremely  weak.  The  stock  of  business  loans 
extended by banks and commercial paper issued by nonfinancial firms declined more than $100 billion 
over the year, apparently owing to slack demand for short-term credit rather than to a constriction in 
supply. Interest-rate spreads on commercial paper, like those on corporate bonds, were quite narrow. 
And  although  a  Federal  Reserve  survey  indicates  that  banks  had  continued  to  tighten  lending 
conditions early in the year, by the second half, terms and standards were being eased noticeably. 
Moreover, responses to that survey pointed to a lack of demand for business loans until late in the 
year.  
Partly  as  a  result  of  the  balance-sheet  restructuring,  business  credit  quality  appears  to  have 
recuperated considerably over the past few years. Last year, the default rate on bonds fell sharply, 
recovery rates on defaulted issues rose, the number of rating downgrades moderated substantially, 
and delinquencies on business loans continued to decline. The improved balance sheets and strong 
profits of business firms, together with attractive terms for financing in open markets and from banks, 
suggest that financial conditions remain quite supportive of further gains in capital spending in coming 
quarters.  
The profitability of the business sector was again propelled by stunning increases in productivity. The 
advance in output per hour in the nonfarm business sector picked up to 5-1/4 percent in 2003 after 
unusually brisk gains in the previous two years. The productivity performance of the past few years 
has been particularly striking in that these increases occurred in a period of relatively sluggish output 
growth. The vigorous advance in efficiency represents a notable extension of the pickup that started 
around the mid-1990s. Apparently, businesses are still reaping the benefits of the marked acceleration 
in technology.  
The  strong  gains  in  productivity,  however,  have  obviated  robust  increases  in  business  payrolls.  To 
date,  the  expansion  of  employment  has  significantly  lagged  increases  in  output.  Gross  separations 
from employment, two-fifths of which have been involuntary, are about what would be expected from 
past cyclical experience, given the current pace of output growth. New hires and recalls from layoffs, 
however, are far below what historical experience indicates. To a surprising degree, firms seem able 
to continue identifying and implementing new efficiencies in their production processes and thus have 
found it possible so far to meet increasing orders without stepping up hiring.  
In  all  likelihood,  employment  will  begin  to  grow  more  quickly  before  long  as  output  continues  to 
expand.  Productivity  over  the  past  few  years  has  probably  received  a  boost  from  the  efforts  of 
businesses to work off the stock of inefficiencies that had accumulated in the boom years. As those 
opportunities to enhance efficiency become scarcer and as managers become more confident in the 
durability of the expansion, firms will surely once again add to their payrolls.  
2 
 BIS Review 9/2004
A consequence of the rapid gains in productivity and slack in our labor and product markets has been 
sustained  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  As  measured  by  the  chain-weighted  price  index  for 
personal  consumption  expenditures  excluding  food  and  energy,  prices  rose  less  than  1  percent  in 
2003.  Given  the  biases  in  such  indexes,  this  performance  puts  measured  inflation  in  a  range 
consistent with price stability--a statutory objective of the Federal Reserve and a key goal of all central 
banks because it is perceived as a prerequisite for maximum sustainable economic growth.  
The recent performance of inflation has been especially notable in view of the substantial depreciation 
of  the  dollar  in  2003.  Against  a  broad  basket  of  currencies  of  our  trading  partners,  the  foreign 
exchange  value  of  the  U.S.  dollar  has  declined  about  13  percent  from  its  peak  in  early  2002. 
Ordinarily,  currency  depreciation  is  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  dollar  prices  of  imported  goods  and 
services,  because  foreign  exporters  endeavor  to  avoid  experiencing  price  declines  in  their  own 
currencies,  which  would  otherwise  result  from  the  fall  in  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar. 
Reflecting  the  swing  from  dollar  appreciation  to  dollar  depreciation,  the  dollar  prices  of  goods  and 
services  imported  into  the  United  States  have  begun  to  rise  after  declining  on  balance  for  several 
years, but the turnaround to date has been mild. Apparently, foreign exporters have been willing to 
absorb some of the price decline measured in their own currencies and the consequent squeeze on 
profit margins it entails.  
Part of exporters' losses, however, have apparently been offset by short forward positions against the 
dollar  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  A  marked  increase  in  foreign  exchange  derivative  trading, 
especially in dollar-euro, is consistent with significant hedging of exports to the United States and to 
other  markets  that  use  currencies  tied  to  the  U.S.  dollar.  However,  most  contracts  are  short-term 
because long-term hedging is expensive. Thus, although hedging may delay the adjustment, it cannot 
eliminate the consequences of exchange rate change. Accordingly, the currency depreciation that we 
have  experienced  of  late  should  eventually  help  to  contain  our  current  account  deficit  as  foreign 
producers export less to the United States. On the other side of the ledger, the current account should 
improve as U.S. firms find the export market more receptive.  
 Although the prospects for the U.S. economy look quite favorable, we need to remind ourselves that 
all  forecasts  are  projections  into  an  uncertain  future.  The  fact  that  most  professional  forecasters 
perceive much the same benign short-term outlook that is our most likely expectation provides scant 
comfort.  When  the  future  surprises,  history  tells  us,  it  often  surprises  us  all.  We  must,  as  a 
consequence, remain alert to risks that could threaten the sustainability of the expansion.  
Besides the chronic concern about a sharp spike in oil or natural gas prices, a number of risks can be 
identified. Of particular importance to monetary policy makers is the possibility that our stance could 
become  improperly  calibrated  to  evolving  economic  developments.  To  be  sure,  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee's  current  judgment  is  that  its  accommodative  posture  is  appropriate  to  foster 
sustainable  expansion  of  economic  activity.  But  the  evidence  indicates  clearly  that  such  a  policy 
stance will not be compatible indefinitely with price stability and sustainable growth; the real federal 
funds rate will eventually need to rise toward a more neutral level. However, with inflation very low and 
substantial slack in the economy, the Federal Reserve can be patient in removing its current policy 
accommodation.  
In  the  process  of  assessing  risk,  we  monitor  a  broad  range  of  economic  and  financial  indicators. 
Included in this group are a number of measures of liquidity and credit creation in the economy. By 
most standard measures, aggregate liquidity does not appear excessive. The monetary aggregate M2 
expanded only 5-1/4 percent during 2003, somewhat less than nominal GDP, and actually contracted 
during the fourth quarter. The growth of nonfederal debt, at 7-3/4 percent, was relatively brisk in 2003. 
However,  a  significant  portion  of  that  growth  was  associated  with  the  record  turnover  of  existing 
homes and the high level of cash-out refinancing, which are not expected to continue at their recent 
pace. A narrower measure, that of credit held by banks, also grew only moderately in 2003. All told, 
our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  to  date  does  not  seem  to  have  generated  excessive 
volumes of liquidity or credit.  
That  said,  as  we  evaluate  the  risks  to  the  economy,  we  also  assess  developments  in  financial 
markets. Broad measures of equity prices rose 25 percent in 2003, and technology stocks increased 
twice as quickly. The rally has extended into this year. And as I noted previously, credit spreads on 
corporate  bonds  have  narrowed  considerably,  particularly  for  speculative-grade  issues.  This 
performance  of  financial  markets  importantly  reflects  investors'  response  to  robust  earnings  growth 
and  the  repair  of  business  balance  sheets  over  the  past  few  years.  However,  history  shows  that 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 3
pricing  financial  assets  appropriately  in  real  time  can  be  extremely  difficult  and  that,  even  in  a 
seemingly benign economic environment, risks remain.  
The outlook  for  the  federal  budget  deficit  is  another  critical  issue  for policymakers  in assessing  our 
intermediate- and long-run growth prospects and the risks to those prospects. As you are well aware, 
after a brief period of unified budget surpluses around the beginning of this decade, the federal budget 
has  reverted  to  deficits.  The  unified  deficit  swelled  to  $375  billion  in  fiscal  2003  and  appears  to  be 
widening  considerably  further  in  the  current  fiscal  year.  In  part,  these  deficits  are  a  result  of  the 
economic  downturn  and  the  period  of  slower  growth  that  we  recently  experienced,  as  well  as  the 
earlier decline in equity prices. The deficits also reflect fiscal actions specifically intended to provide 
stimulus to the economy, a significant step-up in spending for national security, and a tendency toward 
diminished restraint on discretionary spending. Of course, as economic activity continues to expand, 
tax  revenues  should  strengthen  and  the  deficit  will  tend  to  narrow,  all  else  being  equal.  But  even 
budget  projections  that  attempt  to  take  such  business-cycle  influences  into  account,  such  as  those 
from the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget, indicate that very 
sizable deficits are in prospect in the years to come.  
As  I  have  noted  before,  the  debate  over  budget  priorities  appears  to  be  between  those  advocating 
additional tax cuts and those advocating increased spending. Although some stirrings in recent weeks 
in the Congress and elsewhere have been directed at actions that would lower forthcoming deficits, to 
date  no  effective  constituency  has  offered  programs  to  balance  the  budget.  One  critical  element  
- present in the 1990s but now absent - is a framework of procedural rules to help fiscal policy makers 
make the difficult decisions that are required to forge a better fiscal balance.  
The  imbalance  in  the  federal  budgetary  situation,  unless  addressed  soon,  will  pose  serious  longer-
term  fiscal  difficulties.  Our  demographics  -  especially  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation 
beginning in just a few years - mean that the ratio of workers to retirees will fall substantially. Without 
corrective  action,  this  development  will  put  substantial  pressure  on  our  ability  in  coming  years  to 
provide even minimal government services while maintaining entitlement benefits at their current level, 
without debilitating increases in tax rates. The longer we wait before addressing these imbalances, the 
more wrenching the fiscal adjustment ultimately will be.  
The  fiscal  issues  that  we  face  pose  long-term  challenges,  but  federal  budget  deficits  could  cause 
difficulties  even  in  the  relatively  near  term.  Long-term  interest  rates  reflect  not  only  the  balance 
between  the  current  demand  for,  and  current  supply  of,  credit,  they  also  incorporate  markets' 
expectations of those balances in the future. As a consequence, should investors become significantly 
more doubtful that the Congress will take the necessary fiscal measures, an appreciable backup in 
long-term  interest  rates  is  possible  as  prospects  for  outsized  federal  demands  on  national  saving 
become more apparent. Such a development could constrain investment and other interest-sensitive 
spending  and  thus  undermine  the  private  capital  formation  that  is  a  key  element  in  our  economy's 
growth prospects.  
Addressing  the  federal  budget  deficit  is  even  more  important  in  view  of  the  widening  U.S.  current 
account deficit. In 2003, the current account deficit reached $550 billion - about 5 percent of nominal 
GDP. The current account deficit and the federal budget deficit are related because the large federal 
dissaving represented by the budget deficit, together with relatively low rates of U.S. private saving, 
implies a need to attract saving from abroad to finance domestic private investment spending.  
To date, the U.S. current account deficit has been financed with little difficulty. Although the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar has fallen over the past year, the decline generally has been gradual, and 
no material adverse side effects have been visible in U.S. capital markets. While demands for dollar-
denominated assets by foreign private investors are off their record pace of mid-2003, such investors 
evidently continue to perceive the United States as an excellent place to invest, no doubt owing, in 
large  part,  to  our  vibrant  market  system  and  our  economy's  very  strong  productivity  performance. 
Moreover,  some  governments  have  accumulated  large  amounts  of  dollar-denominated  debt  as  a 
byproduct of resisting upward exchange rate adjustment.  
Nonetheless, given the already-substantial accumulation of dollar-denominated debt, foreign investors, 
both  private and  official,  may  become  less willing  to  absorb  ever-growing claims  on  U.S.  residents. 
Taking  steps  to  increase  our  national  saving  through  fiscal  action  to  lower  federal  budget  deficits 
would help diminish the risks that a further reduction in the rate of purchase of dollar assets by foreign 
investors could severely crimp the business investment that is crucial for our long-term growth.  
4 
 BIS Review 9/2004
The  large  current  account  deficits  and  the  associated  substantial  trade  deficits  pose  another 
imperative - the need to maintain the degree of flexibility that has been so prominent a force for U.S. 
economic  stability  in  recent  years.  The  greatest  current  threat  to  that  flexibility  is  protectionism,  a 
danger that has become increasingly visible on today's landscape. Over the years, protected interests 
have often endeavored to stop in its tracks the process of unsettling economic change. Pitted against 
the powerful forces of market competition, virtually all such efforts have failed. The costs of any new 
protectionist initiatives, in the context of wide current account imbalances, could significantly erode the 
flexibility  of  the  global  economy.  Consequently,  creeping  protectionism  must  be  thwarted  and 
reversed.  
 In summary, in recent years the U.S. economy has demonstrated considerable resilience to adversity. 
It  has  overcome  significant  shocks  that,  in  the  past,  could  have  hobbled  growth  for  a  much  longer 
period than they have in the current cycle. As I have noted previously, the U.S. economy has become 
far more flexible over the past two decades, and associated improvements have played a key role in 
lessening the effects of the recent adverse developments on our economy. Looking forward, the odds 
of sustained robust growth are good, although, as always, risks remain. The Congress can help foster 
sustainable expansion by taking steps to reduce federal budget deficits and thus contribute to national 
saving and by continuing to pursue opportunities to open markets and promote trade. For our part, the 
Federal  Reserve  intends  to  use  its  monetary  tools  to  promote  our  goals  of  economic  growth  and 
maximum employment of our resources in an environment of effective price stability.  
BIS Review 9/2004 
 5
