Alan Greenspan: Economic outlook  
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington, 
8 September 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on the 
state  of  the  U.S.  economy  and  current  fiscal  issues.  I  speak  for  myself  and  not  necessarily  for  the 
Federal Reserve.  
As you know, economic activity hit a soft patch in late spring after having grown briskly in the second 
half of 2003 and the first part of 2004. Consumer spending slowed materially, and employment gains 
moderated  notably  after  the  marked  step-up  in  early  spring.  That  softness  in  activity  no  doubt  is 
related, in large measure, to this year’s steep increase in energy prices. 
The  most  recent  data  suggest  that,  on  the  whole,  the  expansion  has  regained  some  traction. 
Consumer  spending  and  housing  starts  bounced  back  in  July  after  weak  performances  in  June, 
although early readings on retail sales in August have been mixed. In addition, business investment 
remains  on  a  solid  upward  trend.  In  the  manufacturing  sector,  output  has  continued  to  move  up  in 
recent months, though part of that rise likely reflected an increase in inventory investment. In the labor 
market, though job gains were smaller than those of last spring, nonfarm payroll employment growth 
picked back up in August. 
Despite  the  rise  in  oil  prices  through  mid-August,  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  have  eased  in 
recent months. To be sure, unit labor costs rose in the second quarter as productivity growth slowed 
from its extraordinary pace of the past two years and employee compensation per hour remained on 
an upward trend. But, as best we can judge, the growth in profit margins of non-energy, nonfinancial, 
corporations,  which,  at  least  from  an  accounting  perspective,  had  contributed  significantly  to  price 
pressures earlier, has recently slowed. Moreover, increases in non-oil import prices have lessened - a 
development  that,  coupled  with  the  slowing  of  profit-margin  growth,  has  helped  to  lower  core 
consumer price inflation in recent months. 
 Movements in energy prices have been a major influence on overall inflation this year. In the second 
quarter, gasoline prices rose rapidly as a marked pickup in gasoline demand strained refinery capacity 
and resulted in sharply higher profit margins. In May and June, refinery and marketing margins rose to 
levels that were 25 cents to 30 cents per gallon over typical spreads going into the summer driving 
season. 
As a consequence of the steep run-up in prices, demand for gasoline eased, and an accompanying 
increase  in  inventories  helped  to  reverse  the  bulge  that  had  occurred  in  refinery  and  marketing 
margins.  That  reduction  in  margins  resulted  in  a  decline  in  the  price  of  regular  gasoline  of  about 
20 cents per gallon despite the concurrent sharp rise in the price of crude oil. With margins having 
returned  to  more-typical  levels,  prices  of  both  gasoline  and  home  heating  oil  are  likely  to  reflect 
changes in crude oil prices more directly. 
 Evaluating the impact of rising oil prices on economic activity in the United States has long been a 
subject of dispute among economists. Most macroeconomic models treat an increase in oil prices as a 
tax on U.S. residents that saps the purchasing power of households and raises costs for businesses. 
But  economists  disagree  about  the  size  of  the  effects,  in  part  because  of  differences  in  the  key 
assumptions employed in the statistical models that underlie the analyses. Moreover, the models are 
typically  based  on  average  historical  experience,  which  is  dominated  by  periods  of  only  moderate 
fluctuations in oil prices and thus may not adequately capture the adverse effects on the economy of 
oil price spikes. In addition to the difficulties of measuring the impact of oil prices on economic growth, 
the oil price outlook itself is uncertain. 
Growing  concerns  about  the  long-term  security  of  oil  production  in  the  Middle  East,  along  with 
heightened worries about the reliability of supply from other oil-producing regions, led to a pronounced 
increase in the demand to hold inventory at a time when the level of world commercial oil stocks was 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
rising only modestly. Some of that increased demand came from investors and speculators who took 
on larger net long positions in crude oil futures, especially in distantly dated contracts. Crude oil prices 
accordingly rose sharply, which, in turn, brought forth increased production from OPEC and induced 
some investors to take profits on long inventory positions. The resulting reduction in the speculative 
demand  for  inventories  has,  at  least  temporarily,  reduced  pressures  in  these  markets,  and  crude 
prices have come off from their highs of mid-August. 
Nevertheless,  the  outlook  for  oil  prices  remains  uncertain.  Higher  prices  have  damped  the 
consumption  of  oil  -  for  example,  U.S.  gasoline  consumption,  seasonally  adjusted,  fell  about 
200,000 barrels a day between April and July. But the growing concerns about long-term supply, along 
with large prospective increases in demand from the rapidly growing economies of China and India, 
both  of  which  are  expanding  in  ways  that  are  relatively  energy  intensive,  have  propelled  prices  of 
distant futures to levels well above their ranges of recent years. 
Meanwhile,  despite  the  paucity  of  new  discoveries  of  major  oil  fields,  improving  technology  has 
significantly increased the ultimate recovery of oil from already existing fields. During the past decade, 
despite  more  than  250  billion  barrels  of  oil  extracted  worldwide,  net  proved  reserves  rose  well  in 
excess  of  100  billion  barrels.  That  is,  gross  additions  to  reserves  have  significantly  exceeded  the 
extraction of oil the reserves replaced. Indeed, in fields where, two decades ago, roughly one-third of 
the oil in place ultimately could be extracted, almost half appears to be recoverable today. Gains in 
proved  reserves  have  been  concentrated  among  OPEC  members,  though  proved  reserves  in  the 
United  States,  essentially  offshore,  rose  3-1/2  percent  during  the  past  five  years.  The  uptrend  in 
proved reserves is likely to continue at least for awhile. Oil service firms continue to report significant 
involvement in reservoir extension and enhancement.  
Nevertheless, future balances between supply and demand will remain precarious, and incentives for 
oil consumers in developed economies to decrease the oil intensity of their economies will doubtless 
continue.  Presumably  similar  developments  will  emerge  in  the  large  oil-consuming  developing 
economies. 
 The remainder of my remarks will address the federal budget, for which the incoming data suggest 
that the unified deficit has recently leveled out. With the economy continuing to improve, the deficit is 
more likely to decline than to increase in the year ahead. 
Nonetheless,  the  prospects  for  the  federal  budget  over  the  longer  term  remain  troubling.  As  yet, 
concerns about the budget do not appear to have left a noticeable imprint on the financial markets. In 
recent  years,  even  as  fiscal  discipline  has  eroded,  implied  one-year  forward  Treasury  rates  at  long 
horizons, which history suggests are sensitive to changes in the fiscal outlook, have held fairly steady. 
Various  measures  of  long-term  real  interest  rates  have  also  remained  at  moderate  levels  over  this 
period. 
These developments, however, do not warrant complacency about the fiscal outlook. With the baby 
boomers starting to retire in a few years and health spending continuing to soar, our budget position 
will almost surely deteriorate substantially in coming years if current policies remain in place. 
The enormous improvement of the federal budget balance in the second half of the 1990s and early in 
the  current  decade  was due  importantly  to  the  rapid growth  in  labor productivity  during  that  period, 
which led, both directly and indirectly, to a vast but, in retrospect, temporary increase in revenues. The 
Budget Enforcement Act (BEA) of 1990, and the later modifications and extensions of the act, almost 
surely  contributed  to  the  better  budget  outcomes  as  well,  before  the  brief  emergence  of  surpluses 
eroded  the  will  to  adhere  to  its  deficit-containment  rules.  The  key  provisions  of  the  BEA  expired  in 
2002, and no replacement has been adopted.  
Reinstatement of a structure like the BEA would signal a renewed commitment to fiscal restraint and 
would  help  restore  discipline  to  the  annual  budgeting  process.  But  it  would  be  only  a  part  of  any 
meaningful  endeavor  to  establish  a  framework  for  fiscal  policy  choices.  The  BEA  was  designed  to 
constrain legislative actions on new initiatives. It contained no provisions for dealing with unanticipated 
budgetary outcomes over time. It was also not designed to be the centerpiece for longer-run budget 
policy; importantly, the BEA did not set a clear objective toward which fiscal policy should aim. 
Budget outcomes over the next decade will deviate, as they always have from projections - perhaps, 
significantly.  Accordingly,  it  would  be  quite  helpful  to  have  mechanisms  in  place  that  assist  the 
Congress in making mid-course corrections as needed. Four or five decades ago, such mechanisms 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
were unnecessary, in part because much of the budget was determined on an annual basis. Indeed, in 
the  1960s,  discretionary  spending,  which  is  subject  to  the  annual  appropriations  process  and  thus 
comes  under  regular  review  by  the  Congress,  accounted  for  about  two-thirds  of  total  outlays.  That 
share  dropped  markedly  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  as  spending  on  retirement,  medical,  and  other 
entitlement programs rose sharply. In the early 1990s, it fell below 40 percent, where it has remained 
over the past decade. 
The  rise  in  the  share  of  expenditures  that  is  not  subject  to  annual  review  complicates  the  task  of 
making fiscal policy by effectively necessitating  an extension of the budget planning horizon. In the 
1960s and early 1970s, the President’s budgets provided information mainly for the upcoming fiscal 
year.  The  1974  legislation  that  established  a  new  budget  process  and  created  the  Congressional 
Budget  Office  required  that  CBO  provide  five-year  budget  projections.  By  the  mid-1990s,  CBO’s 
projection horizon had been pushed out to ten years. 
Given the changing composition of outlays, these longer planning horizons and the associated budget 
projections were essential steps toward allowing the Congress to balance budget priorities sensibly. 
Among  other  things,  this  change  has  made  the  budget  process  more  reliant  on  forecasting.  To  be 
sure, forecasting has become more sophisticated as statistical techniques and economic models have 
evolved.  But  because  of  the  increasing  complexity  of  our  markets,  the  inaccuracy  of  forecasts  - 
especially those that go beyond the near term - is a large problem. 
A well-designed set of measures for mid-course corrections would likely include regular assessments 
of existing programs to verify that they continue to meet their stated purposes and cost projections. 
Although the vast majority of existing programs would doubtless be extended routinely, some that face 
appreciable opposition and offer limited societal benefit might not clear hurdles set by the Congress 
unamended, if at all. More generally, mechanisms, such as triggers, to bring the budget back into line 
if it goes off track should be considered, particularly measures that force a mid-course correction when 
estimated future costs for a program or tax provision exceed a specified threshold. 
I do not mean to suggest that our budget problems will be solved simply by adopting a set of budget 
rules  that  restrain  new  legislation  -  even  if  those  rules  are  augmented  by  effective  mechanisms  for 
making mid-course corrections. The fundamental challenge that we face is to come to grips with the 
adverse  budgetary  implications of  an aging  population  and current  health  entitlements  and  with  the 
limits on our ability to project the likely path of medical outlays. The rapid increase in revenues during 
the 1990s significantly muted the necessity of making choices between high-priority tax and spending 
initiatives.  In  the  context  of  an  unprecedented  increase  in  retirees,  the  need  to  make  stark  choices 
among budget priorities will again become pressing. Federally funding access to advances in medical 
technology, for example, likely will have to be weighed against other spending programs as well as tax 
initiatives that foster increases in economic growth and the revenue base. 
Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force and accordingly the ratio of retirees 
to workers remains relatively low, we are in a demographic lull. But short of an outsized acceleration of 
structural  productivity  or  a  major expansion of  immigration,  this state  of  relative  tranquility  will  soon 
end. 
In 2008 - just four years from now - the leading edge of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the 
earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits may be claimed and the age at which about 
half  of  prospective  beneficiaries  have  retired  in  recent  years.  In  2011,  these  individuals  will  reach 
65 and will thus be eligible for Medicare. 
The  pressures  on  the  federal  budget  from  these  demographic  changes  will  come  on  top  of  those 
stemming  from  the  relentless  upward  trend  in  expenditures  on  medical  care.  Indeed,  outlays  for 
Medicare  and  Medicaid  have  grown  much  faster  than  has  nominal  GDP  in  recent  years,  and  no 
significant slowing seems to be in the offing. 
In 2003, outlays for Social Security and Medicare amounted to about 7 percent of GDP; according to 
the programs’ trustees, by 2030 that ratio will nearly double. Moreover, such projections are subject to 
considerable uncertainty, especially those for Medicare. Unlike Social Security, where benefits are tied 
in  a  mechanical  fashion  to  retirees’  wage  histories  and  we  have  some  useful  tools  for  forecasting 
future benefits, the possible variance in medical spending rises dramatically as we move into the next 
decade  and  beyond.  As  with  Social  Security,  forecasting  the  number  of  Medicare  beneficiaries  is 
reasonably straightforward. But we know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue 
to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Technological innovations 
can  greatly  improve  the  quality  of  medical  care  and  can,  in  some  instances,  reduce  the  costs  of 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the 
potential to add to overall spending - in some cases, by a great deal. Other sources of uncertainty - for 
example, about how longer life expectancies among the elderly will affect medical spending - may also 
turn out to be important. As a result, the range of future possible outlays per recipient is extremely 
wide.  
Developing ways to deal with these uncertainties will be a major part of an effective budget strategy for 
the longer run. Critical to that evaluation is the possibility that, as a nation, we may have already made 
promises  to  coming  generations  of  retirees  that  we  will  be  unable  to  fulfill.  If,  on  further  study,  that 
possibility  turns  out  to  be  the  case,  it  is  imperative  that  we  make  clear  what  real  resources  will  be 
available so that our citizens can properly plan their retirements. This problem raises a more-general 
principle of public policy prudence. If, as history strongly suggests, entitlement benefits and tax credits, 
once bestowed, are difficult to repeal, consideration should be given to developing a framework that 
recognizes that potential asymmetry. 
 Re-establishing  an  effective  procedural  framework  for  budgetary  decisionmaking  should  be  a  high 
priority.  But  it  is  only  a  start.  As  we  prepare  for  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation  and 
confront the implications of soaring expenditures for medical care, a major effort by policymakers to 
set priorities for tax and spending programs and to start making tradeoffs is long overdue. 
The significant improvement in the budget in the 1990s reflected persistent efforts on the part of this 
committee and others. If similar efforts are made now, they should assist in preparing our economy for 
the fiscal challenges that we will face in the years ahead. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
