Caleb M Fundanga: Media relations and key economic development in Zambia 
during 2003 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of the Bank 
of Zambia 9th media seminar, Ndola, 4 March 2004. 
 The Chairperson,  
Distinguished Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Allow me to first welcome you all, to this year’s media seminar. It is my pleasure to be with you again 
and preside over the opening of this important seminar. For those that are attending for the first time, 
you  are  more  than  welcome.  I  would  like  to  urge  you  to  feel  free  and  actively  participate  in  the 
discussions.  
It  is  also  gratifying  that  the  seminar  has  been  possible  this  year  after  skipping  2003  to  enable  us 
assess  whether  or  not  it  was  meeting  the  intended  objectives.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  considers  this 
seminar important and has decided to hold one despite financial constraints that the Bank like other 
institutions in the country is going through. This is because the Bank attaches a lot of importance to 
media development and indeed the partnership with the media fraternity. In this vein, I urge all of you 
to treat this seminar with the seriousness it deserves.  
Chairperson, this seminar is one way through which the Bank can contribute to capacity building of the 
media in order for it to play a meaningful role in the country’s quest for economic development and 
poverty alleviation. A well-informed and balanced media is a key vehicle in our crusade to uplift the 
standards  of  living  of  our  people.  Further,  I  share  the  view  that  the  development  of  our  fledgling 
democracy goes hand-in-hand with a corresponding healthy growth of a free media. This is crucial for 
proper  expression  of  the  freedom  and  liberties  that  our  people  expect  and  do  enjoy.  Even  more 
important to us is the proper interpretation and explanation of Government development programmes 
and the role of the public in making such programmes attainable.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  stress  here  that  freedom  of  the  press  does  not  imply  abrogation  of 
professional conduct. To the contrary it calls for exemplary professional and ethical conduct. We also 
look to the media for a supportive approach where issues of national and developmental nature are 
brought to the attention of policy makers. It is therefore imperative that as journalists you desist from 
sensational  reporting  that  can  only  be  disruptive  to  well  intended  policies.  We  expect  you  to  be 
constructive and not to lose your freedom and objectivity in your reporting.  
It is my earnest appeal to you, to spend some time reporting on positive developments in our great 
country  in  addition  to  highlighting  the  various  constraints  in  the  implementation  of  key  economic 
policies. It is also important for the media to highlight the various roles that respective stakeholders 
must play in order to effectively contribute to the much-needed national development.  
Chairperson,  the  media  in  Zambia  has  an  even  more  onerous  responsibility,  in  view  of  multiparty 
democracy. This is so because in order to elicit their full participation in the decision making process, 
the  electorate  need  to  be  well  informed.  With  a  well-informed  electorate,  policy  makers  and 
implementers including the Bank of Zambia will be better placed to develop and implement policies 
and programmes that are responsive to the needs of the Zambian people. This means that the media 
needs to disseminate information, while at the same time fulfill its watchdog role of being a mirror of 
our society. 
Having  said  this,  may  I  generally  express  my  satisfaction  at  the  cooperation  we  enjoyed  with  the 
media  and  the  role  you  played  during  2003.  I  must  commend  you  the  media  for  having  been 
supportive particularly during the trying times and urge you to continue. We in the Bank will always 
keep our doors open to be on hand to explain or indeed clarify any issues that will enhance your work. 
We  will  also  continue  to  hold  quarterly  Media  Briefings  on  economic  developments  in  general  and 
monetary and financial sector developments in particular, which are within the mandate of the Bank. 
Chairperson,  allow  me  to  highlight  the  key  economic  developments  during  2003.  Despite  several 
setbacks at the beginning of 2003, including, food production shortfall, the pullout of Anglo-American 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
Corporation from Konkola Copper Mines, fiscal difficulties arising from, amongst other things, higher 
than  programmed  wages,  recurrent  departmental  charges  (RDCs)  and  payments  to  ex-RAMCOZ 
workers, high lending interest rates and delay to reach agreement on a new PRGF arrangement and 
the consequent failure to reach the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative completion point, 
several  positive  and  encouraging  developments  were  recorded  during  the  year,  particularly  in  the 
second half of the year. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  some  of  the  positive  developments  are  that,  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year 
national output increased, with real gross domestic product (GDP) growing by 4.3 percent, which was 
higher  than  the  3.3  percent  growth  registered  in  2002.  With  a  population  growth  rate  of  just  under 
3 percent,  this  means  a  positive  per  capita  growth  showing  some  improvement  towards  poverty 
reduction.  The  growth  in  real  GDP  was  mainly  attributed  to  favourable  developments  in  both  the 
domestic and global economy. In the domestic economy, a recovery in agriculture from the effects of 
drought in the 2001/2002-season coupled with Government’s support in the area of input supply to the 
small  but  viable  farmers  through  the  Fertiliser  Support  Programme  (FSP)  were  major  factors  to  the 
recorded positive growth. 
In  addition,  the  recovery  of  the  world  economy  pushed  prices  of  non-fuel  commodities  up  which 
assisted in the growth of non-traditional and metal exports leading to an expansion of the growth in 
mining  and  quarrying  sector.  The  other  key  sectors  that  contributed  to  the  observed  growth  were 
tourism, manufacturing, construction and energy. 
In addition, annual overall inflation declined to 17.2 percent in December 2003 from 26.7 percent in 
December 2002 and compared well to the revised target of 17.1 percent. This was mainly attributed to 
the slow down in food inflation, as food prices continued to fall in 2003, following an improvement in 
the supply of most food items. The country has come from a position of being a net importer of food to 
becoming a net exporter of maize and maize products to the countries in the region. 
Chairperson,  following  the  increased  confidence  related  to  the  introduction  of  the  Broad-based 
Inter-bank  Foreign  Exchange  System  on  23rd  July  2003,  and  the  weakness  of  the  US  dollar  in  the 
international  markets,  the  Kwacha  was  fairly  resilient  against  the  US  dollar  depreciating  by  only 
7.5 percent  during  2003  compared  with  a  depreciation  of  13.2  percent  the  previous  year.  This 
resilience was also supported by the good performance of the non-traditional exports sector as well as 
the favourable earnings from copper exports due to the high copper prices, which rose to 100.11 US 
cents in December 2003 from 72.38 US cents in December 2002. 
Relative stability of the Kwacha exchange rate also contributed to the subdued inflation registered in 
the year. As you may already know, the main objective of introducing the new system was to enhance 
the efficiency of the foreign exchange market and make price discovery more transparent. This came 
by way of improving information flows among market players, thereby reducing speculative behaviour 
among  them.  I  am  glad  that  this  system  is  working  well  and  the  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  and 
support its performance with the view to enhance and consolidate the gains so far achieved. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  another  notable  development  during  2003  was  the  decline  in  commercial 
banks’  lending  rates.   This  was  reflected  in  the  weighted  average  lending  base  rate,  which  fell  to 
37.7 percent in December 2003 from 42.4 percent during the same month in 2002. I am glad to inform 
you  that  this  trend  has  continued  with  the  lending  base  rate  falling  further  to  36.2  percent  and 
33.7 percent  in  January  and  February  2004,  respectively.  This  mainly  followed  the  downward 
adjustment  of  the  statutory  reserve  requirement  by  3.5  percentage  points  to  14.0  percent  from 
17.5 percent  on  both  kwacha  and  foreign  currency  deposit  liabilities  held  by  commercial  banks  at 
end-October  2003.  As  expected,  the  downward  adjustment  in  statutory  reserve  ratios  led  to  an 
improvement in the availability of liquidity to commercial banks. 
It  is  our  expectation  that,  with  time,  commercial  banks’  lending  to  the  productive  sector,  especially 
agriculture will increase. The Bank is closely monitoring the developments in credit to the productive 
sector.  I must stress here that lowering of lending rates is not an end in itself. We in the Bank would 
like to see this development accompanied by an observable increase in loans extended to the growth 
sectors of our economy for them to thrive, stimulate national output and create employment. It is only 
through this that our efforts to reduce the current levels of poverty, estimated at 73 percent shall yield 
positive results. 
Chairperson, the Media can also play a role in lowering lending rates through educating the borrowing 
public on the importance of paying back. You may be aware that part of the explanation to the high 
lending  rates  in  Zambia  has  been  the  high  risk  premiums  supported  by  a  long  history  of  loan 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
delinquency.  Therefore,  a  change  in  credit  culture  underpinned  by  improved  loan  repayment  will 
restore  confidence  to  suppliers  of  loanable  funds;  thereby  reduce  risk  premiums,  which  in  turn  will 
have a positive bearing not only on lending rates but also on increased lending to the public.  
Furthermore, the media has a mammoth task in the country’s efforts aimed at reaching the completion 
point  under  the  HIPC  Initiative  through  explaining  to  the  public,  the  importance  and  benefits  to  the 
country. I should mention here that the fiscal measures put in place by Government are not primarily 
for  reaching  the  completion  point  but  are  ideal  for  any  country’s  search  for  fiscal  prudence  and 
macroeconomic stability, which are essential for spurring savings and private sector investments, and 
hence  economic  growth.  Therefore,  with  or  without  HIPC,  the  country  needs  to  restore  prudent 
budgetary operations.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  some  favourable  developments  are  also  expected  during  this  year.  This 
optimism is premised on the following factors: 
• 
Favourable weather during the 2003/2004 agricultural season supported by continued input 
supply under the Fertiliser Support Programme, which will support growth of the agriculture 
sector. 
The exchange rate is expected to remain relatively stable in view of several factors including 
the confidence market players have continued to show in the broad-based inter-bank foreign 
exchange  system,  increased  metals  production and  favourable metals  prices  on  the world 
market, good performance of the non-traditional exports and less demand for food imports. 
Progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  mining  sector  with  the  completion  of  the  sale  of 
RAMCOZ and the identification of an equity partner for Konkola Copper Mines.  In addition, 
the new Kansanshi mine owned by First Quantum Metals was commissioned recently and 
production is expected to commence soon. All these developments are expected not only to 
improve foreign exchange supply and contribute to exchange rate stability but to the growth 
in national output and employment. 
It is anticipated that inflationary pressures will be subdued following continued adequate food 
supply  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  and  the  expected  favourable  food  output  for  the 
2004/2005  consumption  period  owing  to  favourable  weather  and  continued  input  supply. 
Further,  the  anticipated  continuation  in  the  exchange  rate  stability  will  also  contribute  to 
moderating inflationary pressures. 
Government  net  domestic  financing  from  the  banking  system  is  expected  to  be  within  the 
projected level, which is essential to inducing a further downward movement in yield rates on 
Government  securities,  and  thus  in  commercial  banks’  lending  interest  rates.  Such  a 
development will contribute to a drop and stability in prices of goods and services, and hence 
dampen inflationary pressures. 
    Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  years’  seminar,  like  the  previous  ones,  is  based  on  carefully  selected 
topics  guided  by  the  need  to  appraise  each  other  on  topical  issues  such  as  the  operations  of  the 
foreign  exchange  inter-bank  system,  the  need  for  affordable  lending  rates  and  the  HIPC.  I  am 
confident  that  my  staff  and  other  presenters  will  do  a  good  job  of  stimulating  discussions  of  these 
topics and others for you to have a full appreciation and understanding to be better placed to explain 
the same to the members of the public and those of your colleagues who for one reason or another 
could not have the opportunity of being with us. 
This year we are also privileged to have Dr. Zulu as one of the resource persons. Dr. Zulu was the first 
Zambian Governor of the Bank of Zambia. After a distinguished career at home, which also saw him 
serve as Economic Advisor to the President. Dr. Zulu later went to the IMF where he served for many 
years as Director, first for the Africa Department and later for the Central Banking Department, which 
in  1991  was  renamed  Monetary,  and  Exchange  Affairs  Department.   In  this  capacity,  Dr.  Zulu  also 
served at the United Nations as the IMF Managing Director’s liaison officer. 
Chairperson,  may  I  remind  the  participants  that  in  2003  the  Bank  of  Zambia  launched  an  annual 
publication  called  the  BoZ  Reader.  The  first  publication  was  entirely  based  on  articles  by  the  Bank 
staff. In my remarks during the launch of the Reader, I called upon members of the public and indeed 
the press to subscribe articles to this publication. May I inform you that the Bank has commenced the 
process of the second publication and therefore I would like to reiterate my invitation to you to submit 
articles on key or topical developmental issues facing the country. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
At this juncture, may I wish you fruitful discussions and officially declare this seminar open. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2004
