Svein Gjedrem: On monetary policy and the krone 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway), 
Industrinettverket Sunnhordland, Stord, 7 June 2004.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  26  May,  Inflation  Report  1/04  and  on 
previous speeches. 
The charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
to 
 The primary objective of monetary policy is to ensure nominal stability.  
There  were  wide  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Economic 
developments were marked by high and variable inflation. Inflation rose gradually and it took a long 
time before it fell.  
The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind these pronounced swings in 
the  Norwegian  economy.  With  a  policy  of  low  interest  rates  and  devaluations,  inflation  took  root. 
Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation and the value of tax- deductible 
interest expenses rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 were unable in the long term to prevent a 
decline  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  On  the  contrary,  they  proved  to  be  self-reinforcing.  The  wide 
fluctuations culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s, and a rise in costs as a consequence of the 
spring 1986 wage settlement. A pronounced downturn and high unemployment followed at the end of 
the 1980s.  
In  order  to  achieve  nominal  stability,  monetary  policy  must  provide  a  nominal  anchor.  Since  the 
Second  World  War,  there  have  been  several  monetary  policy  reforms  in  Norway.  In  the  period 
between  1972  and  1986,  monetary  policy  was  to  a  limited  extent  focused  on  stabilising  the  rise  in 
prices.  
During this period, inflation was high and variable. Consumer prices in Norway rose almost twice as 
much as in Germany. At the same time, the value of the Norwegian krone against the German mark 
was almost halved, contributing to high imported inflation.  
From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble and the cost shock, it was recognised that a 
substantial revision of economic policy would be necessary and that the problems created by inflation 
had to be taken seriously. From 1986 to 1992, Norway operated a fixed exchange rate regime. The 
fixed exchange rate was the anchor for inflation in Norway. The difference between inflation in Norway 
and Germany narrowed substantially. Deteriorating competitiveness due to high wage growth would 
no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. Substantial emphasis was placed on the importance 
of wage formation for developments in employment. Only when wage growth dropped below the level 
of our trading partners did unemployment begin to fall and the manufacturing sector began to pick up. 
Thus,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  not  introduced  in  order  to  strengthen  the  internationally 
exposed business sector. On the contrary, it was a breach in the approach whereby monetary policy 
and frequent devaluations had been used to shelter these sectors. The fixed exchange rate was an 
intermediate target for achieving low and stable inflation.  
The  exchange  rate  remained  stable  up  to  autumn  1996,  partly  because  wage  growth  was  low  and 
overall demand did not generate pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show wider 
fluctuations. The experience of the last half of the 1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot 
fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments in international financial markets led to more pronounced 
fluctuations. And more fundamentally, when labour market pressures rose and incomes policy failed, 
exchange  rate  developments  no  longer  provided  signals  for  wage  formation  and  fiscal  policy.  High 
petroleum  revenues,  fiscal  slippage  and  expectations  of  increased  use  of  petroleum  revenues 
contributed to this. The exchange rate was therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor. Towards 
the end of the 1990s, increased emphasis was placed on the fundamental preconditions for exchange 
rate stability. Monetary policy instruments were oriented with a view to bringing price and cost inflation 
down towards the price stability objective of the European Central Bank (ECB).  
BIS Review 34/2004 
 1
Monetary policy 
In  most  countries,  price  stability,  or  low  and  stable  inflation,  is  the  objective  of  monetary  policy. 
Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that the absence of price stability 
has resulted in unstable output and employment.  
History shows that higher growth cannot ultimately be achieved in exchange for higher inflation. An 
economic  policy  that  fuels  inflation  does  not  generate  higher  economic  growth.  On  the  contrary,  it 
paves the way for subsequent recession and unemployment.  
After the Second World War, there was a long period of trying to achieve price stability by means of 
various  intermediate  targets  such  as  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  a  target  for  growth  in  the  money 
supply. The first explicit inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 
1991, the UK in 1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. Inflation targeting is now the norm in small 
and  medium-sized  open  economies.  Denmark  is  an  important  exception.  Since  the  mid-1980s, 
Denmark has conducted a very disciplined fiscal and wage policy. Combined with ERM II membership, 
this has enabled Denmark to maintain a credible and successful fixed exchange rate regime.  
Pursuant to the Regulation on Monetary Policy laid down by the Government on 29 March 2001, the 
operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation.  
Norway’s mandate is as follows: 
“Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, 
contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate  developments.  At  the  same  time, 
monetary  policy  shall  underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable  developments  in  output  and 
employment.  
Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  
Norges  Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary  policy  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  first  paragraph,  be 
oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual 
consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. [...]”  
The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth its intentions. The last paragraph specifies what Norges 
Bank is required to do.  
The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the internal value of the 
krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation fosters economic growth 
and stability in financial and property markets.  
The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s 
external value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments.  
With open trade with other countries and free capital movements, we do not have the instruments to 
fine-tune the krone exchange rate. The krone has appreciated when economic activity has been high 
and  there  have  been  expectations  of  a  wide  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other 
countries. The krone has depreciated when activity has declined and the interest rate differential has 
narrowed. There is also a strong tendency for the krone to revert to a level that stabilises the price 
level in Norway relative to our trading partners, measured in a common currency.1
The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. The inflation target is such an anchor.  
The conduct of monetary policy 
Norges  Bank’s  operational  conduct  of  monetary  policy  shall  be  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to variability 
in inflation as well as variability in output and employment. Inflation shall be 2½ per cent over time. 
Monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  with  long  and  variable  lags,  and  the  Bank  must  therefore  be 
forward-looking in interest-rate setting. In the operational conduct of monetary policy in Norway, the 
path of inflation and the real economy in the period ahead will be taken into account.  
                                                      
1   See Akram, Farooq Q (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk 
Økonomisk Tidsskrift, 118, pp 89-112. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2004
Normally,  the  interest  rate  is  set  with  a  view  to  achieving  inflation  of  2½  per  cent  at  the  two-year 
horizon. This time horizon usually provides a reasonable balance between stabilising inflation on the 
one  hand  and  smoothing  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment  on  the  other.  If  extraordinary 
conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than two years, the Bank will provide 
an assessment of this. The same applies if special emphasis is placed on developments in financial 
markets.  
There is one main monetary policy instrument: the interest rate. The interest rate is set with a view to 
achieving  low  and  stable  inflation,  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  to  avoid  substantial  variations  in 
output and employment.  
In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour, capital and technology and by the ability 
to  adapt,  but  in  the  short  and  medium  term  monetary  policy  can  also  have  an  impact  on  the  real 
economy.  
Flexible exchange rates 
In a small, open economy, the exchange rate is an important channel for monetary policy.  
The  krone  fluctuates.  This  is  not  surprising  because  other  countries’  currencies  also  fluctuate.  The 
krone  exchange  rate  is  the  price  of  our  currency  measured  in  a  foreign  currency.  Developments  in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment.  
The chart shows the effective exchange rate for Norway and a number of other small countries with 
inflation targeting. Exchange rate fluctuations are approximately the same for Norway, Sweden and 
Canada, whereas the krone exchange rate fluctuates less than the exchange rate for Australia and 
New Zealand. Therefore, the krone does not stand out as particularly unstable compared with other 
countries’ currencies.  
The forward exchange and options markets have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces 
transaction  costs  and  it  is  easier  to  find  counterparties.  This  has  provided  companies  with  greater 
scope for hedging against foreign exchange risk. Instruments that reduce the risks associated with a 
floating krone are increasingly being used, also in Norway.  
Hedging against fluctuations in the krone involves costs for businesses. A krone that is stable - but too 
strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - 
but weak - is a source of high inflation.  
Petroleum  revenues  generally  provide  substantial,  but  uneven  currency  inflows  into  Norway.  The 
currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and large variations in the exchange rate. This 
tendency  is  countered  when  the  annual  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central  government 
budget is predictable and independent of annual revenue flows, and the remainder is invested abroad.  
Investments  by  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  in  foreign  currencies  create  a  capital  outflow  that 
contributes to curbing the appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability.  
Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of 
considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact 
on inflation and output. When there are prospects of moderate economic activity, low wage growth and 
low inflation, Norges Bank will reduce the interest rate. This will normally result in a depreciation of the 
krone.  Prices  for  imported  goods  and  services  will  increase.  A  weaker  krone  strengthens  the 
competitiveness  of  Norwegian  enterprises  and  indirectly  leads  to  higher  output,  employment  and 
inflation.  
Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to 
exchange  rate  movements.  During  periods  of  political  and  economic  unrest,  investors  may  choose 
individual currencies as a safe haven - often the Swiss franc. In autumn 2002, the Norwegian krone 
was probably also perceived as a safe haven. In addition, oil prices rose as a result of the uncertainty 
associated with the war in Iraq.  
Since December 2002, the interest rate has been reduced by a total of 5¼ percentage points. The 
krone depreciated by about 13 per cent from its strongest level in January 2003 up to summer 2003. In 
autumn  2003,  the  krone  showed  a  tendency  to  appreciate  against  the  euro.  This  partly  reflected 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 3
lowered  market  expectations  concerning  an  interest  rate  increase  abroad  and  expectations  that 
interest  rates  might  rise  earlier  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro 
appreciated in relation to other currencies. Changes in the krone resulted in an unintended tightening 
of monetary policy. The krone depreciated again in December, however, owing to low inflation figures 
and a reduction in interest rates. The interest rate reduction was probably of considerable importance 
as it eliminated the excess return on NOK investments.  
The krone has again appreciated since last winter. Parallels can be drawn with the situation towards 
the end of 2002. The current high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high for a long 
period  may  have  been  important  for  the  appreciation  of  the  krone.  When  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty  with  regard  to future  developments  in  oil  prices,  market  participants  may  hedge  against 
risk by investing in NOK.  
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Petroleum  Fund  acts  as  a  buffer  against  wide  fluctuations  in  the  krone 
exchange rate as a result of petroleum revenues. An increase in petroleum revenues will normally also 
result in higher capital outflow from the Petroleum Fund. The market may at times have a tendency to 
underestimate this stabilisation mechanism. If oil prices develop through the rest of 2004 in line with 
current  forward  prices,  and  the  other  assumptions  in  the  Revised  National  Budget  for  2004  for 
calculating  allocations  to  the  Petroleum  Fund  for  2004  prove  to  be  correct,  purchases  of  foreign 
currency for the Petroleum Fund may be resumed this year. This will then be in addition to the regular 
transfers  of  profit  from  the  State’s  Direct  Financial  Interest  in  petroleum  activities  (SDFI)  to  the 
Petroleum Fund, which are invested abroad.  
Higher  oil  prices  mean  higher  revenues  for  the  oil  companies.  International  and  Norwegian  oil 
companies with activities in Norway increase their capital outflow when profits increase. Thus, in the 
short and medium term, cumulative profits in the petroleum sector generate little added capital in the 
domestic economy.  
If  petroleum  revenues  are  disregarded,  Norway  has  a  current  account  deficit.  The  deficit  has  been 
increasing in recent months, and this may also, in isolation, boost demand for foreign exchange in the 
Norwegian foreign exchange market.  
The  krone  appreciation  has  probably  been  affected  by  shifts  in  themes  in  the  international  foreign 
exchange markets, due in part to an upward adjustment of interest rate expectations in the US in April. 
In addition, financial market expectations of higher interest rate increases in Norway in 2005 and 2006 
relative  to  other  countries  have  probably  contributed.  A  self-reinforcing  mechanism  may  have  been 
functioning for a short period after the krone began to rise in value at the beginning of March this year.  
Interest  rate  developments  abroad  may  have  a  considerable  influence  on  movements  in  the  krone 
exchange rate. The inflation outlook in Norway implies that Norway will not be the frontrunner when 
other  countries  increase  interest  rates.  As  mentioned  earlier,  themes  shift  in  foreign  exchange 
markets. Norges Bank does not have the instruments for fine-tuning the exchange rate.  
Normally,  Norges  Bank  will  not  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  order  to  influence  the 
exchange  rate.  Foreign  exchange  market  intervention,  irrespective  of  whether  foreign  exchange  is 
bought or sold, is not an appropriate instrument for influencing the krone over a longer period. We do 
not wish to act in a way that may trigger a game situation in the foreign exchange market. Foreign 
exchange intervention rather than a change in the interest rate may give ambiguous signals to foreign 
exchange operators and a game situation may arise. However, interventions may be appropriate if the 
krone  deviates  substantially  from  the  level  that  the  Bank  judges  to  be  reasonable  in  relation  to 
fundamentals,  and  if  exchange  rate  developments  weaken  the  prospect  of  achieving  the  inflation 
target. Interventions may also be appropriate in response to pronounced short-term fluctuations in the 
krone when liquidity in the foreign exchange market falls to a very low level.  
Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, when inflation is low and stable, the exchange rate 
will generally stabilise over time. When inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading 
partners  for  a  longer  period,  the  krone  has  generally  depreciated.  When  inflation  in  Norway  is 
expected to be broadly in line with that of other countries, the exchange rate will usually also return to 
its normal range following periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak.  
The advantage of a flexible exchange rate is perhaps most evident when the economy is sluggish. If 
the krone were to remain at a level that is too strong, nominal wages would have to remain unchanged 
over  a  longer  period  or  fall  in  order  to  bolster  companies  and  jobs.  This  only  occurs  when 
unemployment is very high. With a flexible exchange rate, a depreciation of the krone can also boost 
competitiveness. A flexible exchange rate can reduce fluctuations in employment and output.  
4 
 BIS Review 34/2004
Empirical studies2 have also suggested that economic growth in industrialised countries with floating 
exchange  rates  has  been  as  strong  as,  and  often  stronger  than,  growth  in  countries  with  a  stable 
exchange rate. A precondition is that there is an economic policy framework so that inflation does not 
spin out of control.  
The real exchange rate 
The chart shows developments in two measures of the real krone exchange rate, i.e. consumer prices 
and relative labour costs in Norway relative to trading partners, measured in a common currency. The 
real exchange rate measured by relative labour costs in a common currency is an expression of the 
cost competitiveness of Norwegian companies. The real krone exchange rate as measured in terms of 
developments in relative prices is an expression of the Norwegian krone’s purchasing power. When 
the  curves  in  the  chart  are  above  zero,  the  exchange  rate  is  stronger  and  competitiveness  weaker 
than the average level since 1970. The real exchange rate has fluctuated considerably over time and 
has deviated substantially from the average level over longer periods. Nevertheless, there has been a 
tendency for the real exchange rate to revert to this level. In the chart, the point for 2004 shows the 
real exchange rate with wage and inflation projections for 2004 from Inflation Report 1/2004. In relative 
prices, the real exchange rate is now about 2 per cent weaker than the average since 1970, whereas it 
is almost 4 per cent stronger than its historical average measured in terms of relative labour costs.  
Economic developments 
Interest rate expectations have been revised upwards in a number of countries.  
Growth has picked up in the US. As in the second half of 2003, growth is primarily being driven by 
private  consumption  and  business  investment.  Following  a  surprisingly  long  period  of  weak  labour 
market developments, employment has begun to edge up and is now higher than at the same time last 
year.  In  recent  months,  inflation  has  increased  from  a  very  low  level.  As  a  result,  interest  rate 
expectations have been revised upwards, and the key rate in the US is expected to be raised at the 
end of June.  
In the euro area, inflation has been approximately in line with the objective defined by the European 
Central Bank. The preliminary estimate for May points towards rising inflation, particularly as a result 
of  higher  oil  prices.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  euro  area  is  low  and  unemployment  remains  high. 
Growth potential is weaker than in the US, although GDP growth picked up in the first quarter. As in 
the  US,  private  consumption  is  an  important  factor  driving  growth.  Increased  net  exports  also 
contributed to growth in the euro area in the first quarter. Interest rate expectations in the euro area 
have  also  been  revised  upwards  somewhat  recently.  The  market  now  expects  the  ECB  to  raise 
interest rates at the end of 2004 or the beginning of 2005.  
Interest  rate  expectations  were  continuously  revised  downwards  up  to  March  2004.  Interest  rates 
abroad have been unusually low for 2½ years. This has been the greatest challenge for our monetary 
policy. Even though a somewhat swifter rise is now expected, it appears that interest rates among our 
most important trading partners will remain low for a period ahead.  
In Norway, output growth has picked up after a growth pause. The interest rate reductions since 2002 
have  contributed  to  the  turnaround  and  a  soft  landing  for  the  economy.  Private  consumption  is 
showing fairly strong growth. Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in 
the Norwegian economy in the period ahead.  
The analyses in Inflation Report 1/2004 indicate that inflation will remain low for a period, then rise 
through  the  summer  and  autumn.  The  depreciation  of  the  krone  from  January  2003  and  up  to  last 
winter is expected to push up prices for imported consumer goods, while the recent appreciation will 
have a dampening effect.  
                                                      
2   See  Kenneth  Rogoff,  Aasim  M  Husain,  Ashoka  Mody,  Robin  Brooks  and  Nienke  Oomes  (2003):  “Evolution  and 
Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes”, IMF Working Paper, 03/243, Eduardo Levy-Yeyati and Frederico Sturzenegger 
(2003): “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth”, American Economic Review, 
September 2003, pp 1173-93, and Jeannine Bailliu, Robert Lafrance and Jean-Francois Perrault (2003): “Does Exchange 
Rate Policy Matter for Growth?”, International Finance, 6:3, pp 381-414. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 5
In both March and April, inflation in Norway was approximately as projected in the Inflation Report. In 
April, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 0.2 per cent. Adjusted for some temporary factors, the 
year-on-year rise was 0.5 per cent.3 The rate of increase in the last three months was 1.1 per cent 
annualised.4 TNS Gallup’s expectations survey indicates that expectations concerning inflation ahead 
are stable at about 2½ per cent.  
As  you  know,  Norges  Bank  has  established  a  regional  network.  In  the  interview  round  conducted 
earlier  this  spring,  our  contacts  in  Region  South-West  reported  that  the  pick-up  in  the  economy  is 
broadening  out  and  gaining  strength,  and  that  it  is  no  longer  solely  driven  by  stronger  household 
demand. In addition to a high level of activity in the construction industry and strong growth in retail 
trade, the upturn is now also being driven by higher exports and increased activity in the petroleum 
industry. Optimism seems to be holding up, and the market outlook for the next six months is bright for 
all sectors, although brightest for retail trade and construction. So far, optimism has only resulted in a 
moderate  willingness  to  invest.  In  general,  investment  remains  at  a  normal,  average  level.  The 
exception  is  housing  investment  and  investment  within  retail  trade.  In  contrast  to  earlier  periods, 
several sectors, such as petroleum-related manufacturing, retail trade and services for the business 
sector, are now reporting rising employment.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy is probably somewhat stronger than projected in Inflation Report 
1/04. On the other hand, capacity utilisation at the end of 2003 may have been somewhat lower than 
projected  earlier.  Consumer  prices  have  moved  approximately  in  line  with  projections  in  Inflation 
Report 1/2004.  
The aim of monetary policy is higher inflation. With the current low level of inflation, it is appropriate to 
be  particularly  vigilant  with  regard  to  developments  in  consumer  prices.  However,  consumer  prices 
may show random variations from one month to the next. We now have several monthly observations 
showing  a  rise  in  prices  that  is  consistent  with  the  most  recent  forecasts.  Later  this  year,  we  will 
receive further confirmation of whether consumer prices are rising in line with our projections. We also 
place emphasis on avoiding imbalances in the real economy. The economy is probably approaching a 
normal rate of capacity utilisation. When inflation increases from a very low level, this will provide a 
basis for gradually moving towards a more normal short- term interest rate level in Norway. This may 
counter excessive credit growth and excessive pressures on domestic resources in the medium term. 
Interest  rate  developments  abroad  may  have  a  considerable  influence  on  movements  in  the  krone 
exchange rate. The inflation outlook in Norway implies that Norway will not be the frontrunner when 
other countries increase interest rates.  
Interest  rates  were  left  unchanged  at  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  meeting  on  26  May  2004. 
Norges Bank’s key interest rate, the sight deposit rate, therefore remains at 1.75 per cent. According 
to Norges Bank’s assessment, with a sight deposit rate of 1.75 per cent at present, the probability that 
inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2½ per cent is greater than the probability that it will be 
higher.  
                                                      
3   Adjusted for the effect of the interest rate’s direct impact on house rents, changes in parental payments to day-care centres 
and for special factors relating to indirect tax changes earlier in the year. 
4   Seasonally adjusted, three-month moving average recalculated as an annual rate. 
6 
 BIS Review 34/2004
