Lucas Papademos: Policy-making in EMU - strategies, rules and discretion 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Banco  de 
España (Bank of Spain), Madrid, 19 April 2004. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I am very pleased and honoured to have been invited to speak here today at the Banco de España. 
Thank you very much, Governor Caruana, for the invitation and your kind remarks. And thank you all 
for participating in this event. I believe that this is the first time that a member of the Executive Board 
of the European Central Bank has delivered a public address in Madrid since the terrible events of 
11 March. I would therefore like to take this opportunity to convey, personally and also on behalf of all 
my  colleagues  at  the  European  Central  Bank,  our  sincere  condolences  and  our  solidarity  with  the 
people of Spain. We all stand united against these acts of terror, which have resulted in a great loss of 
life and have inflicted so much pain on so many innocent people.  
In difficult times like these, when Europeans are drawn closer together, it is meaningful to focus on 
values and principles as well as on tangible proofs and actions which define our common identity and 
can pave the way towards a better and peaceful future. A specific and important symbol of European 
unity is our common currency, which is shared by more than 300 million citizens in 12 countries. For 
euro area central bankers in particular, there is indeed no greater a symbol of our European unity than 
the fact that we now have a single monetary policy and we are all part of the same central banking 
system,  the  Eurosystem.  As  an  important  and  active  member  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  Banco  de 
España  plays  a  major  role  in  the  performance  of  all  the  System’s  functions,  and  not  just  in  the 
decentralised implementation of monetary policy. Also in preparing, taking and communicating policy 
decisions, the Eurosystem would not be able to function effectively without the valuable contributions 
of all its components. And the Banco de España manifestly enriches the policy debate and enhances 
the performance of the Eurosystem. 
The euro and the single monetary policy have been in place for more than five years. The economic 
and  monetary  constitution  embedded  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  defines  the  EU’s  economic  policy 
framework, which incorporates the main policy goals as well as a number of fundamental principles for 
good economic governance. These include price stability as the primary objective of monetary policy, 
the  principle  of  central  bank  independence,  and  the  need  to  secure  sound  public  finances  for 
sustainable growth.  
More  than  a  decade  after  the  signing  of  the  Treaty,  the  “Maastricht  consensus”  regarding  these 
objectives and principles remains valid. At the same time, the conduct of the single monetary policy 
and of national economic policies and the interaction between them continue to be debated by both 
academics  and  policy-makers.  The  debate  relates  to  several  issues  and  reflects  concern  regarding 
policy effectiveness. One issue is the optimal assignment of policy objectives to instruments. Another 
is the appropriateness of the strategies employed by the authorities to achieve their objectives. A third 
topic,  which  has  been  the  subject  of  discussion  among  economists  for  many  years,  concerns  the 
merits of adopting rules versus exercising discretion in the conduct of policy.  
In  my  address,  I  will  concentrate,  first,  on  the  strategies  employed  by  monetary  and  economic 
authorities to maintain price stability and foster higher sustainable growth and, second, on the role and 
effectiveness  of  rules  versus  discretion  in  policy  implementation.  In  the  context  of  the  euro  area 
economy, the assessment of the formulation and implementation of policies must take into account, 
among other things, the European Union’s institutional setting.  
The single monetary policy: strategy and implementation 
II. 
I will examine these issues by focusing, first, on the single monetary policy. As you may recall, in 1998 
the Governing Council of the ECB adopted an explicit monetary policy strategy. It is a rather novel 
strategy, one which is particularly appropriate for the special characteristics of the euro area economy. 
It incorporates many elements of the successful monetary policy strategies employed by the national 
central  banks  of  the  euro  area  before  1998.  It  provides  a  consistent,  coherent  framework  both  for 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
internal analysis and decision-making and for explaining to the public the decisions made. Last year, 
following a thorough evaluation, the Governing Council confirmed and further clarified this strategy. 
There are many reasons for arguing that the ECB’s strategy is well suited to the conduct of monetary 
policy in the euro area. One argument is that our strategy is rather robust, as it takes into account a 
comprehensive  set  of  information  based  on  a  variety  of  analyses  and  empirically  plausible  models, 
which help the ECB to take appropriate monetary policy decisions in an uncertain and ever-changing 
environment.  Indeed,  the  common  challenge  confronted  by  all  central  banks  is  to  make  decisions 
under conditions of uncertainty.  
Therefore,  the  ECB,  in  seeking  to  maintain  price  stability,  has  to  analyse  all  available  information 
carefully and continuously in order to arrive at a comprehensive assessment of developments, of the 
shocks to the economy, and of the associated risks to price stability. In the end, we have to base our 
decisions  on  a  sound  evaluation  of  the  possible  outcomes  under  alternative  scenarios  about  the 
future.  At  the  same  time,  to  reassure  the  public  that  we  are  committed  and  able  to  deliver  price 
stability, we must present the information used in arriving at our assessment of the economic outlook 
and  we  must  explain  our  decisions  on  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  a  timely,  transparent  and 
systematic manner. 
Let me elaborate on certain key elements of the ECB’s strategy, which are critical in reaching robust 
and sound decisions on the appropriate policy stance consistent with our mandate. First and foremost, 
the strategy makes unambiguously clear our commitment to maintaining price stability and establishes 
a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  the  policy  aim.  This  provides  both  a  firm  anchor  for 
inflation expectations in the euro area and a yardstick for holding the ECB accountable. 
A  second  important  feature  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  is  that  it  is  forward-looking  and  has  a 
medium-term  orientation.  Given  the  long  and  uncertain  time  lags  in  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy impulses to the economy, central banks cannot steer price developments in the short run, and 
with a high degree of precision, especially in the event of certain disturbances. For instance, monetary 
policy  cannot  offset  the  short-term  impact  on  the  price  level  of  an  unanticipated  rise  in  commodity 
prices or indirect taxes. Consequently, it must be conducted with a view to preventing and minimising 
any secondary effects of such shocks, so as to maintain price stability over the medium term. 
The medium-term orientation of our policy allows for a gradual response to some economic shocks. 
This reflects the notion that monetary policy should be made conditional on the circumstances. The 
precise policy reaction will, of course, depend on the nature and size of shocks. Supply-side shocks, 
for  example  those  stemming  from  disruptions  in  the  global  oil  supply,  may  require  a  more  gradual 
monetary  policy  response  than  shocks  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy.  Its  medium-term 
orientation also implies that the single monetary policy can avoid inducing unnecessarily high output 
volatility in the economy, without compromising price stability. 
Another  key  element  of  our  strategy  is  that  it  is  based  on  an  eclectic  analytical  approach  and  a 
commitment  to  conduct  analysis  and  to  explain  policy  decisions  in  a  systematic  and  structured 
manner. In so doing, we base our assessment on two analytical perspectives, or two pillars, which we 
refer to as “economic analysis” and “monetary analysis”. This broadly based framework ensures that 
we  arrive  at  a  robust  overall  assessment  of  the  current  economic  and  monetary  situation  and  the 
associated risks to price stability. An important reason for employing these two analytical perspectives 
in order to cross-check our assessment of the economic outlook and associated risks is that although, 
in theory, they can be combined in a unified analytical approach, in practice their integration has not 
been achieved in an effective manner.  
 Some economists have argued that our monetary policy is too judgemental, seemingly discretionary, 
and difficult to explain. To reduce discretion, they would prefer it if the ECB had a simple strategy in 
which interest rates are changed quasi automatically in response to a single or a few easily observable 
variables.  Others  would  even  prefer  the  strategy  to  be  replaced  by  the  adoption  of  a  policy  rule, 
determining  the  monetary  policy  stance  as  an  explicit  function  of  some  variables,  or  by  an  even 
simpler rule relating to an intermediate target. Such alternative approaches are, in my view, not well 
suited to the formulation of monetary policy in the euro area. 
Let  me  start  with  simple  rules.  For  instance,  under  the  famous  k-percent  rule  proposed  by 
Milton Friedman  in  1956,  central  banks  would  have  to  ensure  that  some  specified  measure  of  the 
money  stock  rises  by  a  pre-defined  fixed  rate  each  year,  irrespective  of  economic  conditions  and 
circumstances. The main problem with such a rule is that it would not accommodate money demand 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
shocks,  including  those  of  a  more permanent nature  relating  to structural change  and  innovation  in 
financial markets. This may lead to undesirably high volatility in interest rates, prices and output. For 
good reasons, such monetary targeting rules have never been applied in practice, at least not in their 
strictest form. 
Several  more  sophisticated  rules  have  been  developed  since  then.  In  recent  years,  the  most 
prominent are the Taylor-rules, based on a proposal by John B. Taylor in 1993. In their simplest forms, 
such rules express the monetary policy instrument - the short-term nominal interest rate - as a function 
of the deviation of a few key macroeconomic variables, typically actual or expected inflation and actual 
output, from their target levels. 
There are, however, a number of reasons suggesting that great caution should be exercised in giving 
such rules an important role in the actual conduct of monetary policy. First, central banks would not be 
able to exploit - that is, use fully and effectively - all available information if they were to follow and 
respond to the developments in just two variables. In addition, our imperfect knowledge of the state of 
the economy and the possibility of non-linearities in the economy’s structure and agents’ behaviour 
make  the  normative  use  of  such  simple  rules  questionable.  Indicators  that  are  crucial  for  the 
application of these rules - in particular the output gap and the equilibrium real interest rate - are not 
observable and can only be estimated with a high degree of uncertainty. Recent research has shown 
that sizeable and persistent measurement errors can impair the quality of these estimates if they are 
based  on  real-time  data,  and  that  such  errors  typically  lead  to  a  significant  deterioration  in  the 
effectiveness of such simple rules. This makes their systematic use for determining policy decisions a 
risky undertaking. 
To avoid the drawbacks associated with Taylor-rules, the use of so-called “optimising” rules has been 
suggested.  These  rules  allow  a  larger  information  set  contained  in  a  given  model  to  be  taken  into 
account.  Given  the  policy  objectives  and  an  empirically  estimated  model  which  links  objectives  to 
policy  instruments,  the  optimal  policy  path  and  its  response  to  potential  shocks  can  be  derived.  Of 
course, such an approach, while optimal and internally consistent given available information, is only 
as good as the model on which it is based. Sometimes, even small changes to the model used can 
lead  to  very  different  results.  Such  a  lack  of  robustness  might  cause  serious  policy  errors  in  an 
uncertain  and  ever-changing  economic  environment.  Indeed,  a  good  strategy  must  perform  well 
across a broad variety of empirically plausible models, and it has to allow for the judgement of policy-
making bodies. 
For these very reasons, optimising rules have also never been applied in a pure form. However, they 
may be seen as providing a theoretical basis for “inflation targeting”, a framework for monetary policy 
decision-making,  which  in  various  forms  has  been  adopted  and  pursued  quite  successfully  by  a 
number of central banks.  
There  are  different  views  on  how  inflation  targeting  should  be  defined.  In  its  broadest  definition, 
inflation targeting is simply a monetary policy framework that accords overriding importance to low and 
stable inflation or price stability. In this sense, almost all central banks that strive for price stability can 
be described as “inflation targeters”, including the ECB. 
In  a  narrower  sense,  however,  inflation  targeting  is  sometimes  defined  as  a  framework  in  which 
forecasts  of  future  inflation  play  the  central  role  and  are  used  as  the  overriding  or  even  sole, 
all-encompassing tool for internal decision-making and the external communication of policy decisions. 
At the extreme, inflation targeting is sometimes viewed as an approach that effectively boils down to a 
simple  policy  rule,  whereby  changes  in  official  interest  rates  are,  more  or  less,  mechanically 
determined  as  a  function  of  the  deviation  of  an  inflation  forecast  from  the  inflation  objective  at  a 
specific fixed time horizon, typically of around two years. 
In my view, such an exclusive, narrow focus on an inflation forecast would neither do justice to the 
intrinsic  complexity  of  the  decision-making  process,  nor  would  it  provide  a  transparent  means  of 
communicating this complexity. Indeed, for these reasons, a number of central banks employing an 
inflation targeting strategy have decided not to publish inflation forecasts. This includes the Banco de 
España when it adopted, in 1995, a monetary policy framework based on the setting of a quantitative 
direct inflation target. This approach had the advantage of providing a clear benchmark for inflation 
expectations, while helping to avoid a situation where the public was under the impression that the 
complexity of monetary policy making could be subsumed under a single forecast figure.  
A further problem posed by strict forms of inflation targeting is that limiting attention to a pre-specified 
horizon is arbitrary. Central banks may have to react differently to different types of economic shocks. 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 3
Inflation  forecasts  or  projections,  while  useful  and  indeed  indispensable  ingredients  of  a  monetary 
policy framework, cannot be the only input in decision-making. The same inflation forecast figures can 
be associated with quite different states of the economy, reflecting the effects of different factors and 
shocks, and thus potentially requiring different policy responses on the part of the central bank. For 
this  reason  too,  monetary  authorities  carefully  take  into  account  the  specific  determinants  of  the 
economic situation and outlook as well as the nature and size of the threats to price stability. Such an 
analysis  may  require  adapting,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  horizon  for 
restoring price stability in response to the nature and magnitude of shocks. In this respect, it is notable 
that  quite  a  few  “inflation-targeting  central  banks”  have  recently  relaxed  their  emphasis  on  a  fixed 
horizon,  in  favour  of  the  more  flexible  medium-term  notion,  thereby  moving  closer  to  the  approach 
adopted by the ECB. 
All  in  all,  the  uncertainty  and  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  state,  structure  and  dynamics  of  the 
economy severely limit the usefulness of relying on a single model and on simple and fully defined 
policy  reaction  functions  for  determining  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance.  If  monetary  policy 
bases  its  decisions  on  just  one  single  equation  or  set  of  equations,  it  effectively  assumes  to  have 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  key  structural  aspects  of  an  ever-changing  economy.  In  a  complex  and 
changing economic environment, a mechanical use of fully specified decision rules is too restrictive to 
ensure an optimal, robust policy. Simple rules limit the amount of information used and underrate the 
need for judgement in the use and interpretation of any economic model. They are no substitute for an 
ongoing articulated analysis of all the economic and monetary forces at work in the economy and for 
the need to check all policy proposals for their robustness across a variety of frameworks. 
 My  remarks  on  rules  should,  however,  not  be  interpreted  as  implying  that  I  am  advocating 
unconstrained discretion in the conduct of monetary policy. On the contrary, monetary authorities need 
to  behave  in  a  systematic  and  predictable  manner  in  order  to  enhance  policy  effectiveness  and 
credibility. There are two main reasons for this. The first is precisely the same reason as the one which 
argues  against  the  adoption  of  simple  or  specifically  defined  rules,  namely  the  uncertainty  and 
imperfect  knowledge  about  the  functioning  of  the  economy  and  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
process. Consequently, the uncertainty facing policy-makers suggests that extremes - that is, simple 
rules and unconstrained discretion - should be avoided. The second reason is the need to ensure that 
the public and market participants have full confidence in the central bank’s commitment and ability to 
fulfil its mandate and achieve its overriding objective of price stability. There can be - and there must 
be - no doubt concerning our determination to maintain price stability over the medium term. And in 
order  to  do  this  effectively,  there  must  be  no  discretion  in  the  sense  that  monetary  policy  would 
deliberately  try  to  surprise  the  market.  Indeed,  predictability  is  a  pre-condition  for  a  successful 
monetary policy that reduces unnecessary volatility and stabilises inflation expectations. 
These  arguments  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  a  central  bank  might  exercise  discretion  to 
mitigate  the  effects  of  sizeable  unanticipated  disturbances  on  the  economy.  Although  an  activist 
monetary policy aiming to fine-tune the economy should normally be avoided, there may be particular 
circumstances involving severe shocks which could  warrant prompt discretionary measures. Such a 
policy response, however, should be exercised with caution, and it should be constrained by and fully 
consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability 
over the medium term. 
In order to guide market expectations and clearly specify the orientation and commitment of our policy 
of stability, we have announced an explicit monetary policy strategy. In addition, we regard it as crucial 
that  the  continuous  and  systematic  explanation  of  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  context  of  our 
strategy helps the public over time to understand and broadly anticipate how monetary policy reacts to 
observable  data  and  indicators.  In  this  sense,  decision-making  in  the  Governing  Council  could  be 
described  as  “rule-like”  in  the  broad  sense  that  it  is  based  on  an  explicit  strategy  involving  a 
comprehensive analysis of all available relevant information, which is then explained and justified in a 
transparent  and  systematic  manner.  However,  given  the  complexity  of  the  real  world,  data  and 
parameter  uncertainty  and  ongoing changes  in  our knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  economy,  the 
“policy reaction function” of a central bank cannot be written down in stone, in a precise quantitative 
form. There is a need for judgement in the conduct of monetary policy. In other words the central bank 
needs  some  flexibility  (or  if  you  prefer  “discretion”)  in  the  sense  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  it 
committing itself to a fully specified reaction function. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2004
The EMU fiscal policy framework 
III. 
The debate about rules also applies to fiscal policy in the euro area, but the relevant arguments and 
conclusions  are  not  the  same.  Indeed,  some  rules  are  contained  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. The usefulness and effectiveness of these rules have been the subject of 
quite  extensive  discussions  among  economists  ever  since  their  introduction.  And  the  debate  over 
these rules has intensified in the light of recent fiscal developments.  
The rules of the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact have a solid economic rationale. A sound 
fiscal  policy  contributes  to  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  with  low  inflation  and  favourable 
financing conditions. This, in turn, promotes investment and long-term growth. A sound fiscal policy 
also creates room for manoeuvre to cushion the effects of the economic cycle. And, by reducing the 
burden associated with debt servicing costs, it facilitates the task of governments in pursuing basic 
economic and social objectives.  
The case for fiscal rules relates to the notion that fiscal policy is prone to suffer from a deficit bias. 
There is no shortage of evidence that fiscal policy is influenced by the electoral cycle. In consequence, 
a vicious cycle of increasing deficits and debt can easily set in, which is very hard to reverse later on.  
In the usual setting, in which the jurisdiction of monetary and fiscal policy coincides, a case for some 
kind of fiscal rule to ensure budgetary discipline can be made. In a monetary union, the case for fiscal 
rules  is  much  more  compelling.  To  understand  why,  it  is  worth  comparing  the  implications  of 
inappropriate fiscal behaviour for the performance of an economy inside and outside EMU. 
In a country that is not an EMU member, a lax fiscal policy is punished primarily by financial markets, 
particularly by the foreign exchange market. Excessive government borrowing leads to higher credit 
risk-premia and greater inflation uncertainty. Higher interest rates are required by investors to hold the 
larger stock of government debt, and the exchange rate is likely to come under pressure.  
In a monetary union, the situation is somewhat different. By relaxing its fiscal policy, the government of 
a Member State may hope to enjoy the short-term benefits of increased economic activity while the 
negative  consequences  are  spread  across  the  entire  euro  area.  Of  course,  given  the  “no-bailout” 
clause in the Treaty, which stipulates that neither the Community nor the other Member States shall be 
liable for or assume the commitments of another Member State, financial markets may also punish this 
country  via  higher  credit  risk  spreads.  However,  financial  markets  tend  to  react  very  slowly  and 
sometimes in a discontinuous way. 
In view of such incentives, the case for rules to protect against lax fiscal policies is much stronger in a 
monetary union than in a national setting. Rules are needed to defend both a country’s own interest 
and the common interest in fiscal discipline, and to provide an early warning against the emergence of 
possibly greater and longer-lasting problems.  
 Fiscal rules are essential for the proper functioning of a monetary union. But what form should these 
rules  take?  The current  EU  fiscal  framework  is  based  on  a set of  rules contained  in  the Maastricht 
Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact. The general government deficit should be kept below 3% of 
GDP and budgetary positions should be maintained close to balance or in surplus over the medium 
term. By respecting the “close-to-balance-or-in-surplus” rule, a government can create sufficient room 
for  the  automatic  stabilisers  to  operate  and  help  cushion  the  effects  of  cyclical  downturns  without 
breaching the 3% ceiling.  
Unfortunately,  as  we  all  know,  respect  for  these  rules  in  recent  times  has  been  mixed  at  best.  A 
number of countries failed to reach close-to-balance budgetary positions during the upturn in 1999 and 
2000.  As  a  result,  they  soon  found  themselves  close  to  or  in  breach  of  the  3%  ceiling  when  the 
economic  situation  deteriorated.  Portugal  breached  the  3%  ceiling  in  2001.  Germany  and  France 
breached it in 2002. It now seems that the Netherlands and the United Kingdom joined France and 
Germany in 2003, and the European Commission predicts that in 2004 Italy, Portugal and Greece may 
also exceed the 3% limit. Thus half of the euro area countries now find that they have no budgetary 
room for manoeuvre and most of them have to consolidate their public finances during a period of still 
relatively weak economic growth. 
Those who criticise the rules of the Stability Pact argue that they are not flexible enough and that the 
EU should look for a better set of fiscal rules. But this is easier said than done. I acknowledge that the 
rules of the Pact may not be perfect. I would stress, however, that the Pact’s rules and procedures are 
much more flexible than commonly perceived. Moreover, we also need to keep in mind that a lot of 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 5
thought went into the design of the existing rules. The arguments presented in the ongoing debate are 
not new. They were all known when the Treaty was drafted. Many of the alternatives now proposed 
were  also  considered  in  the  past,  and  it  was  felt  that  they  involved  problems  of  their  own.  I  am 
therefore sceptical whether these alternatives would be an improvement on the current rules.  
Economic  theory  suggests  a  number  of  desirable  properties  for  fiscal  rules.  Fiscal  rules  should  be 
simple, transparent, flexible and enforceable. The problem is that a fiscal rule designed to exhibit one 
of  these  desirable  properties  will  often,  as  a  result,  exhibit  less  of  another.  There  is,  typically,  a 
trade-off  to  be  faced.  This  is  often  a  trade-off  between  what  is  theoretically  right  and  what  is 
operationally feasible in the real world. And it is natural that academic economists tend to favour the 
former,  while  policy-makers,  including  central  bankers,  also  take  into  account  the  latter.  These 
trade-offs  become  even  more  acute  in  a  multinational  environment  of  twelve  countries.  These 
considerations  only  strengthen  my  conviction  that  revising  these  rules  is  not  likely  to  help  us  very 
much. 
Having  said  this,  I  do  not  deny  that  the  implementation  of  the  rules  and  procedures  of  the  existing 
fiscal  framework  could  be  improved.  And  in  some  respects  improvements  have  been  or  are  in  the 
process of being made. A good example is the assessment of the long-term sustainability of public 
finances. According to the Maastricht Treaty, Member States’ debt levels should be kept below 60% of 
GDP  or  at  least  be  declining  towards  this  level  at  a  satisfactory  pace.  This  provides  a  useful 
benchmark against which to assess the long-term health of the public finances. But a comprehensive 
assessment of long-term sustainability clearly needs to go beyond reliance on a single indicator. It also 
needs  to  be  forward-looking  taking  into  account  future  liabilities,  especially  as  regards  spending  on 
pensions  and  health  care,  which  can  be  expected  to  increase  substantially  as  a  result  of  ageing 
populations. The measurement of such liabilities is, however, shrouded with methodological difficulties 
and subject to a high degree of uncertainty.  
The Commission and the Member States have made considerable efforts to address methodological 
issues and to draw up comparable measures of long-term sustainability. Moreover, in recent years, 
sustainability  has  been  as  an  integral  part  of  the  assessment  of  Member  States  fiscal  plans  in  the 
context of the Stability and Growth Pact. This progress is welcome and should continue. Ultimately, 
however,  a  certain  degree  of  judgement,  or  “discretion”,  when  assessing  long-term  sustainability 
cannot  be  avoided,  given the  complexities  involved.  Assessments  of  long-term  sustainability  do  not 
therefore lend themselves to be summarised in terms of a single debt variable that could serve as the 
basic benchmark for multilateral surveillance. For this reason, such assessments should preferably be 
seen as providing additional information, as a complement to or as a means of better implementing the 
EU’s current fiscal rules rather than as an entirely different or new approach.  
In  other  areas  too,  the  implementation  of  the  EU’s  fiscal  rules  is  being  or  could  be  improved.  The 
problems now faced by a number of governments reflect, to a large extent, a failure to strengthen the 
public  finances  during  periods  of  robust  growth.  In  this  context,  fiscal  surveillance  has  been 
complicated by the difficulty of identifying budgetary trends. And there is no doubt that, in recent times, 
there has also been a lack of political willingness on the part of some Member States to abide by the 
rules  and  to  apply  peer  pressure  on  others  to  do  so.  It  would  therefore  help  if  we  can  strengthen 
incentives to reach sound budget positions in good times. It would help if we continue to work on and 
improve our analysis of structural budget balances. And it would help if we can find ways of bringing 
more pressure to bear on Member States that deviate from the fiscal rules.  
But, once again, such improvements do not require the Pact itself to be changed. They can be made 
within  the  existing  framework.  By  changing  the  rules  of  the  Pact  in  the  ways  suggested  by  some 
economists,  we  might  solve  some  problems.  But  we  would  also  create  new  and  possibly  greater 
problems than we have today.  
In the end, what matters for Europe is that there remains a public consensus on the importance of 
sound  fiscal  policies.  Ultimately,  it  is  crucial  to  understand  that  fiscal  rules  are  in  the  interest  of 
everyone.  Then,  it  will  also  be  much  easier  for  Member  States  to  follow  the  rules,  as  it  will  be 
understood and accepted that it is in their very own interest and also in the interest of the euro area as 
a whole to do so.  
6 
 BIS Review 22/2004
Raising the EU’s growth potential: the Lisbon strategy 
IV. 
The  EU’s  macroeconomic  framework,  notwithstanding  current  fiscal  problems,  has  delivered  price 
stability. But to what extent has it been effective in delivering economic growth? 
There is no doubt that the EU currently suffers a growth deficit, at least when compared to “the other 
big economy”, the United States. Since the mid-1990s, the EU has grown at around just 2% per year 
on  average  compared  with  more  than  3%  in  the  case  of  the  US.  This  largely  reflects  different 
demographic developments but also, to some extent, different rates of productivity growth. 
But it is not only the pace of growth in Europe which is slower than that in the US; also per capita 
income is 40% higher in the US than in Europe. And Europe is not catching up - more recently it has 
even been falling further behind. Some economists have argued that these facts and developments 
are  largely  due  to  different  preferences  for  work  and  leisure,  as  reflected  in  a  higher  labour  force 
participation rate and longer working hours in the US. But arguing that the gap of per capita income is 
a  consequence  of  a  general  preference  for  more  leisure  time  in  Europe  can  only  provide  a  partial 
explanation.  In  my  view,  lower  participation  rates  and  shorter  working  hours  in  Europe  can  be 
ascribed, to a considerable extent, more to rigid labour market institutions and the disincentives set by 
tax and social security systems than to the free choice of individuals to work less or stay unemployed. 
In  other  words,  I  am  convinced  that  with  more  flexible  labour  markets,  fewer  restrictions  and  lower 
taxes on labour, many people would decide to work more than at present. And indeed, this would be 
one important response to the mounting problems related to the ageing of the European population.  
It is a fact that our employment rates, our working hours per employed person, and our productivity 
continue to lag behind those on the other side of the Atlantic. Some EU countries have employment 
rates comparable to those in the US and others can match the US in terms of productivity. But none 
manages  to  do  both.  Clearly,  Europeans  would  benefit  from  a  narrowing  of  this  gap  by  raising 
employment  rates  and  working  hours,  increasing  productivity,  and  thereby  raising  the  EU’s  growth 
potential.  
Increasing the Union’s growth potential ultimately requires decisive structural reforms. This fact has 
long been recognised by EU policy-makers, most notably by the European Council when it adopted 
the  Lisbon  Strategy  four  years  ago.  On  that  occasion,  and  in  the  years  since  then,  the  European 
Council  has  identified  a  considerable  number  of  measures  to  improve  the  functioning  of  product, 
capital and labour markets. And there is no doubt that some progress has been made. But there is 
also no doubt that we are confronted with an implementation gap. There is a gap between rhetoric and 
real action that needs to be closed if the goals of the Lisbon strategy are to be achieved.  
One of the main difficulties in implementing the Lisbon Strategy is that structural reforms often involve 
short-term  adjustment  costs  to  specific  members  or  groups  of  society,  while  the  benefits  are  more 
dispersed  and,  in  some  cases,  realised  or  become  more  visible  over  a  longer-term  horizon.  The 
implementation  of  structural 
far-sightedness  and 
perseverance  on  the  part  of  policy-makers  and  social  partners.  It  also  requires  convincing 
explanations to the public of why reforms are needed and of the significant and permanent benefits 
they will bring for society at large. One positive consequence of such reforms is that they enhance the 
shock absorption capacity of the economy and the effectiveness of macroeconomic policies. Greater 
market flexibility and higher productivity growth will facilitate, other things equal, the conduct of policies 
to support growth, consistent with the maintenance of price stability. 
requires  considerable 
therefore 
reforms 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
Let me conclude by saying that the euro area approach to policy-making reflects the need to balance 
rules and discretion in the monetary and fiscal domains. A stability-oriented monetary policy, sound 
fiscal policies that respect the rules of the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact, and 
structural  reforms  to  raise  employment  and  productivity,  lay  a  solid  foundation  for  achieving 
sustainable non-inflationary economic growth and higher social welfare.  
The benefits of these policies can already be seen in some countries of the euro area. And here in 
Madrid, I cannot help but mention Spain as an outstanding example. In Spain, progress in structural 
reforms  has  contributed  to  a  positive  economic  performance  and  a  significant  reduction  of 
unemployment in recent years. Spain also provides an example of how the rules of the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  can  be  respected  even  in  difficult  times.  And  Spain  has  clearly  benefited  from  the 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 7
favourable  financing  conditions  that  have  resulted  from  the  transition  to  EMU  and  from  the  ECB’s 
conduct of a stability-oriented monetary policy.  
I hope it has become clear from what I have explained - maybe somewhat too extensively - that I am 
not just praising Spain’s monetary and economic policy achievements because I want to be a polite 
and complimentary guest. Spain’s performance provides telling evidence that we can be confident in 
the  ability  of  our  policy  framework  -  with  its  combination  of  strategies,  rules  and  constrained 
discretion - to deliver stability and growth in Europe. The challenges are manifold, but I believe that we 
are on the right track. On such an optimistic note, I should like to end and thank you very much for 
your attention.  
Muchas gracias. 
8 
 BIS Review 22/2004
