Toshihiko Fukui: The centenary of the Bank of Japan’s London office 
Speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the reception for the centenary of 
the Bank of Japan Representative Office in London, 29 June 2004. 
 Welcoming guests to the party and expressing appreciation for the 100-year-long friendship 
Distinguished guests, Governor King, Ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the entire institution of the Bank of Japan, let me extend our gratitude to all of you and 
your predecessors for our long-standing friendship and your cooperation with our London office. We 
have  been  extremely  happy  to  work  with  every  one  of  you,  regardless  of  nationality,  domicile  or 
profession. Some guests have worked with us in the financial, academic and public sectors, and some 
other guests have worked for the UK-Japan relationship. We also owe very much to the guests from 
the active and hard-working Japanese community here.  
The year of 2004 marks the centenary of the Bank of Japan’s London Office. I will take this opportunity 
to  share  with  you  some  reflections  over  the  past  century  by  highlighting  major  events  that  have 
involved our London office.  
Looking back on the 100-year history and thinking about the central bank  
What prompted the Bank of Japan to open an office in London 100 years ago?  
The imminent objective then was to supervise the issuance and repayment operations of Japanese 
government bonds  in  London.  In  1904,  Japan,  despite  being  a small  emerging  country, was  forced 
into the so-called Russo-Japanese War. In order to engage in the warfare, the Japanese government 
issued sterling-pound bonds four times in the London market. Funds raised through the four issues 
altogether  amounted  to  double  the  size  of  the  Japanese  government  budget  in  an  ordinary  year. 
Under  the  circumstances,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  open  its  London  office  to  superintend  the 
operations of the national debt.  
Some of you may recall how such large issuance was arranged. It was Baron Korekiyo Takahashi, 
then Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, who stayed in London to negotiate for the issuance. His 
efforts were supported by Baring Brothers, Hongkong Shanghai Bank, and Mr. Alexander Shand of 
the then Parr’s Bank amongst others. It is well known that Baron Takahashi later became Governor of 
the Bank of Japan, and subsequently Minister of Finance and Prime Minister.  
You can find a hard copy of the bond in the showcase at the back of this room. It is interesting to note 
that the coupon rate was reduced from 6% for the first two issues to 4.5% for the rest. The rate of the 
third and fourth issues was lowered because this small and underdeveloped country in the Far East 
had won some battles against all the odds.  
What  was  the  significance  of  opening  the  London  office?  It  represented  our  commitment  to  never 
betray  trust  given  us  by  the  market.  I  am  pleased  to  emphasize  that  history  shows  the  impeccable 
record of honoring the national debt and fulfilling our commitment. The role of managing the national 
debt  is  nowadays  no  longer  deemed  a  major  function  of  our  Bank  or  central  banks  in  industrial 
countries. Our principal objective today is to maintain price stability and financial stability. Yet, we find 
there is a timeless and shared element in the evolving objectives of the central bank between now and 
then. Honoring debt repayment and maintaining price stability both point to one thing in common. It is 
“trust in the currency.” It has never changed as one of the ultimate objectives of the central bank.  
When we review the past century, we are again impressed by the depth of the London market and the 
dynamism of market initiatives here. The successful flotation of Japanese government bonds in 1904 
epitomizes such characteristics of the London market. We also find, over the century, numerous cases 
in which Japanese banks and businesses benefited from their participation in the London market.  
In  the  area  of  intellectual  thinking  and  its  applications,  we  have  been  quite  often  inspired  by  the 
monetary authorities in the UK in general and the Bank of England in particular. We highly appreciate 
the close cooperation and the constant exchanges of views between us.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
The Bank of Japan has not been a mere beneficiary. It has also contributed somewhat to nurturing the 
London  market  and  maintaining  its  stability.  Several  months  ago,  senior  officials  at  the  Bank  of 
England kindly reminded us of two major examples amongst others. The first one is, curiously enough, 
that  the  Bank  of  Japan  was  instrumental  in  the  development  of  London’s  money  market  at  the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century.  Upon  the  request  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
utilized  a  large  pool  of  funds  from  the  Japanese  government  bond  issuance  for  the  purpose  of  the 
better  functioning  of  the  money  market  in  London.  Let  me  give  you  a  rough  idea  of  how  large  the 
proceeds  of  Japanese  government  bond  issuance.  The  total  amount  was  more  than  double  the 
amount of the gold reserves of the Bank of England.  
The second example is the scheme for credit facility that was made available to the UK during the 
period  from  1964  to  1977.  The  scheme  was  undertaken  under  the  auspice  of  broader  international 
initiatives, and the two central banks, in particular, were in very close cooperation. For details, please 
refer to the handout of a historical summary of major events that involved the UK-Japan relationship.  
In this regard, I would also like to refer to some of the Bank of England’s collections that are displayed 
in the showcase. The collections are commemorative of relations between the Bank of England and 
Japan as a whole. They are made available here today kindly by Mr. Keyworth, the archivist of the 
Bank of England.  
Concluding remarks  
Finally,  let  me  move  from  the  past  to  the  future.  The  future  is  always  uncertain,  but  some  current 
trends  and  changes  can  be  certain  in  the  future  as  well.  Among  them  are  globalization  and  the 
advancement of communications technology. It is true that these things will reduce notional distance 
between countries, but nobody would deny the importance of direct face-to-face interactions between 
people in the market.  
As  far  as  we  understand  it,  the  very  strength  of  the  London  market  comes  from  such  direct 
face-to-face  interactions  between  market  participants,  who  work  here  in  financial,  accounting,  legal 
and other related businesses. The London market attracts the best and brightest professionals and 
management from all over the world. In fact, their close interactions generate the dynamism of market 
development. That is why the Bank of Japan highly values information and insights that our London 
office gains from direct contacts here. Moreover, that is why the Bank of Japan sees our London office 
as one of the important channels of communication to market participants.  
In concluding, I thank again, all the guests, predecessors and your institutions for the 100-year-long 
friendship and cooperation. And I am convinced that this established good relationship will continue for 
another century. There is no “exit policy” from London.  
I wish all the best for each of you. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
