David Dodge: Policies for changing times 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Mexican Business Coordinating 
Council, Mexico City, 17 February 2004. 
 Good morning. I am glad to have the opportunity to meet with business leaders in Mexico today. 
I am also glad to have this opportunity to meet with our colleagues at the Banco de México. Our two 
central banks have had a long and fruitful relationship, one that includes swap facilities, joint research, 
and close consultations. I believe that public servants and business leaders in Canada and Mexico 
have a great deal in common and much to learn from one another. 
Indeed, in many ways, Canada and Mexico are partners. We share common issues and challenges. 
We both share borders with the United States, the most important export market for each of us. Both 
Canada and Mexico have recently faced setbacks in cross-border trade with the United States. These 
stem  not  only  from  weaker  U.S.  domestic  demand,  but  also  from  specific  trade  problems  and  from 
border-crossing delays associated with tighter security. 
We  have  both  been  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  the  world  economy  and  by  global  economic 
imbalances - although the impact of these factors appears to have been somewhat less in Canada 
than in Mexico over the past three years. And we are both working on the structural adjustments that 
are necessary to weather shocks and to thrive in a changing environment. 
Today, I want to focus my remarks on Canada’s adjustment to global economic changes. I will talk 
about our efforts to adjust to longer-term economic forces and about our challenges in this regard. 
And I will talk about some of the lessons that we have all learned during the past couple of decades. 
Policy-makers  in  both  Canada  and  Mexico  have  drawn  on  these  lessons  to  improve  our 
macroeconomic policy frameworks, and thus to better manage and adjust to change. I will conclude 
with some thoughts about how Canada and Mexico can continue to adjust to the economic changes 
that face us in the future. 
The most important lesson that we have all learned is that structural adjustments are key in adapting 
to change, and that macroeconomic policies have a role to play in making those adjustments with a 
minimum of economic and social disruption. 
Past adjustments 
Canada has experienced two periods in recent decades when significant economic adjustment was 
required. The first was during the 1970s, when we were hit by a rapid slowdown in productivity growth 
and by the effects of the oil crisis. Policy-makers in Canada used macroeconomic and microeconomic 
policies to try to cushion the economy from the impact of those events. As a result, our adjustment 
was slower and more painful than it needed to be. We ended up with a weak economy, high inflation, 
and large government budget deficits. 
The  lesson  that  Canadians  learned  from  this  period  is  that  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic 
policies must be clearly focused on facilitating adjustment to economic change. By the beginning of 
the 1990s, it was clear to us that we needed a framework of policies to help with that adjustment, to 
bring down inflation, and to put our public finances in order. 
The first major change came in 1991, when the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed on a 
series  of  explicit  inflation-reduction  targets.  The  agreement  called  for  an  inflation  target  that  would 
gradually  reduce  the  rate  of  inflation  to  2  per  cent,  the  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  range.  The 
agreement has been extended three times, with the latest one covering the period to the end of 2006. 
Each time, the midpoint of the target range has been kept at 2 per cent. 
This framework has served us very well. Since the end of 1994, inflation has averaged almost exactly 
2 per cent. Moreover, not only has inflation fallen, it has become more stable than it was in the 1970s 
and early 1980s. Just as importantly, we found that inflation expectations quickly fell into line with the 
2 per cent target. And expectations have remained close to 2 per cent in recent years. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
One of the most important consequences of adopting a system of inflation-control targets is that we at 
the Bank of Canada can now explain more clearly to business, to labour, and to the general public 
what  we  are  doing  and  why.  One  should  not  underestimate  the  benefits  that  arise  from  having  the 
public  understand  the  policies  and  actions  of  its  monetary  authority.  This  understanding  makes  the 
conduct of monetary policy easier, and gives citizens a measure by which to judge the performance of 
their central bank. While no single mechanism is perfect in this regard, our experience suggests that 
the outcomes of monetary policy are better with a clear, well-understood framework. 
The second major adjustment that we had to make in Canada was to get our fiscal situation under 
control. In the early 1990s, the combined federal and provincial deficits were running at about 8 per 
cent  of  GDP.  This  was  clearly  unsustainable.  And  so  between  1993  and  1997,  governments  in 
Canada made a determined, and successful, effort to eliminate their deficits. 
This  fiscal  adjustment  helped  improve  the  credibility  of  our  economic  policies  and  reduced  the  risk 
premium on Canadian bonds demanded by investors. 
Canada’s economy, like that of Mexico and many others, also underwent structural adjustments in the 
1990s, in both the public and private sectors. These adjustments were enormously helpful, because 
they made the Canadian economy more flexible. 
Governments  moved  to  reduce  distortions  in  the economy  by  eliminating  many  industrial subsidies, 
reducing  personal  income  taxes,  and  reforming  the  unemployment  insurance  system.  At  the  same 
time, enterprises responded to the challenges of trade liberalization by improving the quality of their 
products  and  marketing  them  aggressively  to  new  North  American  customers.  These  adjustments 
were not easy. But they did leave Canada’s economy in a better position to handle economic shocks 
and, therefore, to grow on a sustained basis. 
Canada’s  floating  exchange  rate  helped  facilitate  these  structural  adjustments.  The  depreciating 
Canadian  dollar  in  the  late  1990s  encouraged  foreign  demand,  which  helped  to  compensate  for 
reduced demand from the government sector. It also helped by sending signals to businesses about 
the kinds of adjustments that were needed. 
In sum, a sound macroeconomic policy framework, appropriate structural adjustments, and a floating 
exchange rate all did their part to help Canada’s economy adjust to the changing circumstances of the 
1990s.  While  these  adjustments  were  difficult,  the  payoff  came  quickly.  By  the  end  of  the  decade, 
Canadians were beginning to see higher real incomes. 
International forces 
So that’s a quick backward look. Let’s now consider the ongoing international forces at work in our 
economies. Both Canada and Mexico are going to need to increase productivity in the face of fierce 
competition from China and other lower-cost countries. 
Indeed,  it  is clear  that  all countries  are  going  to have  to  find  ways  to  become more competitive.  In 
Canada, we have an opportunity in the next few years to again realize solid, steady productivity gains, 
thanks  to  past  investments  in  information  and  communications  technology.  Of  course,  technology 
alone is not enough to guarantee higher productivity. To actually realize productivity gains, enterprises 
must make the necessary investments and organizational changes. And they must train their staff to 
use technology to its best advantage. 
Other  forces  in  the  world  economy  bear  watching.  These  include  significant  imbalances  in  global 
current-  and capital-account  flows.  And  new  players,  particularly in  Asia, are becoming  increasingly 
powerful in the global economy. As I’ve mentioned, that increases the competitive pressure facing our 
manufacturers. But it also means new, fast-growing sources of demand, and new opportunities. 
Adjustments in the future 
In the face of all of these forces, what kinds of economic adjustments will be needed in the future? Let 
me speak about the adjustments that we in Canada will have to make. 
First, our economy will need more high-productivity  activities. For significant gains in productivity to 
resume, governments must ensure that their microeconomic policies encourage flexibility and do not 
hinder innovation in the public and private sectors. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
Canada  already  benefits  from  an  educated  and  skilled  labour  force.  Nevertheless,  workers  must 
continue  to  have  access  to  the  training  they  need  to  take  advantage  of  new  technologies.  And 
businesses need to ensure that their organizational structure and practices allow them to realize the 
potential of these new technologies. 
Second, Canada, like Mexico, must keep its fiscal house in order. As I have said, we have made great 
strides  in  reducing  our  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP.  That  ratio  will  need  to  decline  further  to  give 
Canada the flexibility to meet the demands of our aging population. 
Third,  we  must  provide  the  appropriate  microeconomic  policies  with  regard  to  labour  markets, 
intellectual property law, environment, and foreign investment, among others. 
Fourth, we must ensure that our social policies strike a balance between facilitating the adjustments 
that need to be made and supporting those members of our society who are displaced by structural 
adjustment. 
Fifth,  I  believe  that  it  is  crucial  that  Mexico  and  Canada  continue  working  together,  and  with  our 
U.S. partners, to make NAFTA even more successful. And the benefits we have seen from NAFTA 
should  strengthen  our  resolve  to  see  freer  trade  globally.  We  need  to  continue  to  work  towards 
reduced trade barriers at the Doha round of multilateral trade negotiations. It won’t be easy, but the 
long-term economic benefits will make our efforts worthwhile. 
What is the role of monetary policy in all of this? As always, it is to facilitate adjustments by helping to 
maintain the balance between supply and demand in our economies. 
For the Bank of Canada, this means that we will aim to maintain inflation near 2 per cent by trying to 
keep the economy operating as close as possible to its full production capacity. That is our constant 
goal.  But  it  also  means  that,  at  the  same  time,  we will  be  aware  of  the  longer-term  forces  that  are 
driving adjustments in our economy. In Canada, we know that, with a stronger currency, the economy 
will have to rely more on domestic demand and less on foreign demand for ongoing, solid growth. We 
will take this into account as we set monetary policy. 
Both Canada and Mexico have, as a critical element of their monetary policy frameworks, a flexible 
exchange rate. This gives monetary authorities the ability to set monetary policy tailored to our own 
domestic economic circumstances. A floating Canadian dollar, or floating Mexican peso, facilitates the 
necessary economic adjustments and sends important price signals to economic participants. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. For many firms and many employees, we know that adjustment can be painful and 
difficult. But in today’s world, not adjusting is not an option. 
Fortunately,  in  both  our  countries,  we  are  making  these  adjustments  under  relatively  favourable 
conditions.  Global  demand  is  strengthening,  and  credit  conditions  are  good.  We  have  a  better 
knowledge  of  what  we  need  to  do.  And  we  have  made  important  progress  in  strengthening  our 
macroeconomic frameworks. 
The challenges that we will face make it even more important that we continue to strengthen our policy 
frameworks in order to adjust to changing circumstances and to take advantage of potential gains. The 
faster we are able to adjust, the greater the wealth we can create for our citizens. 
That is not to say that adjusting will be easy. Indeed, the experience of recent decades proves that it 
can be difficult, at least over the short term. But if we take the leap, and seize the opportunities that 
change will bring, our societies will surely benefit. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 3
