Alan Greenspan: Nomination hearing  
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 
15 June 2004. 
 I want to express my gratitude to President Bush for his confidence in me and to you, Mr. Chairman 
and members of the committee, for expeditiously holding this hearing on my renomination for a fifth 
term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve 
has had a close and productive relationship with this committee over the years. If you and your Senate 
colleagues afford me the opportunity, I look forward to working with you in advancing our shared goal 
of  strengthening  the  firm  foundation  upon  which  the  American  people  have  built  a  prosperous 
economy and a sound and efficient financial system.  
The  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  most  impressive  in  recent  years  in  the  face  of 
staggering shocks that in years past would almost surely have been destabilizing. Economic policies 
directed  at  increasing  market  flexibility  have  played  a  major  role  in  that  solid  performance.  Those 
policies, aided by major technological advances, fostered a globalization, which unleashed powerful 
new forces of competition, and an acceleration of productivity, which at least for a time has held down 
cost pressures.  
We  at  the  Federal  Reserve  gradually  came  to  recognize  these  structural  changes  and  accordingly 
altered our understanding of the key parameters of the economic system and our policy stance. But 
while we lived through them, there was much uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy 
and about the influence of monetary policy.  
The Federal Reserve’s experiences over the past two decades make it clear that such uncertainty is 
not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that 
landscape.  As  a  consequence,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  has  come  to 
involve,  at  its  core,  crucial  elements  of  risk  management.  This  conceptual  framework  emphasizes 
understanding the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face, quantifying those risks 
when possible, and assessing the costs associated with each of the risks.  
This framework entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the 
probabilities of achieving over time our goals of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic 
growth that we associate with it. In designing strategies to meet our policy objectives, we have drawn 
on the work of analysts, both inside and outside the Fed, who over the past half century have devoted 
much  effort  to  improving  our  understanding  of  the  economy  and  its  monetary  transmission 
mechanism.  A  critical  result  has  been  the  identification  of  key  relationships  that,  taken  together, 
provide  a  useful  approximation  of  our  economy's  dynamics.  Such  an  approximation  underlies  the 
statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy 
decisions.  
However,  despite  extensive  efforts  to  capture  and  quantify  what  we  perceive  as  the  key 
macroeconomic  relationships,  our  knowledge  about  many  of  the  important  linkages  is  far  from 
complete and, in all likelihood, will always remain so. Every economic model, no matter how detailed 
or how well designed, conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world 
that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis. Policymakers have needed to reach 
beyond  models  to  broader  -  though  less  mathematically  precise  -  hypotheses  about  how  the  world 
works.  
A  central  bank  needs  to consider  not  only  the  most  likely  future  path  for  the  economy  but  also  the 
distribution  of  possible  outcomes  around  that  path.  The  decisionmakers  then  need  to  reach  a 
judgment  about  the  probabilities,  costs,  and  benefits  of  the  various  possible  outcomes  under 
alternative choices for policy.  
As  the  transcripts  of  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  meetings  attest,  faced  with  these  abundant 
challenges, we find the making of monetary policy to be an especially humbling activity. In hindsight, 
the  paths  of  inflation,  real  output,  employment,  productivity,  stock  prices,  and  exchange  rates  may 
seem to have been preordained, but no such insight existed as we experienced these developments 
at the time.  
BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
Yet, during the past quarter-century, policymakers managed to defuse dangerous inflationary forces 
and to deal with the consequences of a stock market crash, a large asset price bubble, and a series of 
liquidity crises. These developments did not divert us from the pursuit and eventual achievement of 
price stability and the greater economic stability that goes with it.  
Going forward, we must remain prepared to deal with a wide range of events. Particularly notable in 
this regard is the fortunately low, but still deeply disturbing, possibility of another significant terrorist 
attack in the United States. Our economy was able to absorb the shock of the attacks of September 11 
and to recover, though remnants of the effects remain. We at the Federal Reserve learned a good 
deal  from  that  tragic  episode  with  respect  to  the  impact  of  policy  and,  of  no  less  importance,  the 
functioning under stress of the sophisticated payments system that supports our economy. Our efforts 
to further bolster the operational effectiveness of the Federal Reserve and the strength of the financial 
infrastructure continue today.  
Each generation of policymakers has had to grapple with a changing portfolio of problems. So while 
we  importantly  draw  on  the  experiences  of  our  predecessors,  we  can  be  sure  that  we  will  confront 
different problems in the future.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  fortunate  to  have  worked  in  a  particularly  favorable  structural  and 
political environment over the past quarter-century. But we trust that monetary policy has contributed 
meaningfully to the impressive performance of our economy in those years. I have been extraordinarily 
privileged  to  serve  my  country  at  the  Federal  Reserve  during  most  of  these  years  and  would  be 
honored if the Senate saw fit to enable me to continue this service.  
2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
