Ishrat Husain: Future challenges facing South Asian economies  
Speech by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Central Bank Anniversary 
Lecture 2004, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 26 August 2004. 
 The first decade of the 21st century is bringing about several fundamental structural changes in the 
economies  around  the  world.  South  Asian  economies  have  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  internal 
transformation of their economies if they choose to benefit from the opportunities presented by these 
structural changes. There is a need to shift from the old paradigm of dependence upon official aid and 
putting  blame  on  the  unjust  international  economic  order  for  their  woes  to  the  new  paradigm  of 
becoming an active participant in the emerging globalized economy. 
What  are  the  key  characteristics  of  this  new  globalized  economy?  First  and  foremost  is  an  open 
trading environment in which low cost and reliable producers of quality goods and services are able to 
deliver  them  just  in  time  will  derive  maximum  gains.  The  countries  in  this  environment  will  have  to 
compete for market shares in their quest for selling goods and services to the rest of the world. 
Second, the integration of financial markets and liberal flows of cross border capital particularly foreign 
direct  investment  provide  ample  scope  for  supplementing  domestic  savings  and  raising  investment 
levels  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  growth  and  poverty  reduction.  In  South  Asia,  the  earnings  and 
remittances of workers employed overseas do play a key role in accumulation of net foreign assets. 
Third,  rapid  changes  in  information  technology  and  communications  can  lead  to  efficiency 
improvement in the utilization of capital and labour and thereby to total productivity increase. But, at 
the same time, it places severe burden on the prospects of employment for unskilled labour. Fourth, a 
silent  revolution  in  expectations  of  the  so  far  voiceless  voters  is  taking  place  due  to  a  perceptible 
impact  of  electronic  media  and  skilful  management  of  these  expectations  and  delivery  of  tangible 
results against promises is assuming a new dimension in good governance. 
This  evening  I  would  like  to  address  the  following  question:  To  what  extent  are  the  South  Asian 
Economies  prepared  to  face  these  four  major  challenges  and  what  is  the  agenda  that  they  should 
follow  in  the  next  ten  years  or  so?  Before  I  share  my  views  on  this  question,  let  me  offer  a  few 
thoughts on the process of decision-making that should be followed by the leaders of South Asia in 
order to bring about the paradigm shift I have talked about.  
Each country must begin by preparing a long-term vision and the road map to translate this vision into 
action with milestones and timelines. This vision and road map must have a non-partisan and national 
consensus and all political parties must be agreed and committed to the broad thrust and the direction 
of the economy. Of course, there will be many nuances and approaches to implementation and the 
road map will be altered in light of experience gained but, at least, the investors and economic actors 
will  be  assured  that  there  will  be  no  abrupt  reversals  and  significant  derailments.  China  offers  an 
excellent example of this process where the vision and the road map adopted by Deng XaoPing has 
been followed, with some modifications and alterations, by successive governments. The skeptics may 
contest  this  conclusion  by  arguing  that  the  same  political  party  has  remained  in  power  since  1978. 
While this is true, but the point I wish to underscore is that in plural democratic societies when even 
the contesting political parties have a broad agreement on the vision and direction of the economy, the 
voters  will  judge  their  performance  by  their  relative  success  in  implementing  the  programs,  policies 
and projects and bringing about an improvement in the living standards of their electorate during their 
respective tenures. It is the differentiation in their relative performance that will distinguish the record 
of one political party from the other and win and lose the support of the electorate. 
Past achievements and current status. 
Let me now turn to the substantive question that I have raised, i.e. the state of preparedness of the 
South Asian economies in meeting these future challenges.  
South Asia has shown a remarkable growth about at 5.6 percent in the last ten years which is above 
the  average  of  developing  countries.  Most  countries  have  been  able  to  achieve  and  maintained 
macroeconomic  stability  i.e.  low  inflation,  low  domestic  interest  rates,  stable  and  flexible  exchange 
rates. They have built up foreign exchange reserves to cushion themselves against external shocks. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
Fiscal  consolidation  and  discipline  have  begun  to  set  in  with  fiscal  deficits  being  brought  down  to 
manageable levels. 
Private sector has become the main vehicle for investment, production and distribution of goods and 
services while state intervention has been limited to provision of physical infrastructure, social services 
and other public goods in support of private investment and making markets function efficiently. 
Trade  liberalization  has  proceeded  quite  rapidly  and  average  tariff  rates  have  declined  drastically. 
Export  promotion  is  being actively  pursued  and  inward  looking  import substitution  and protection  of 
domestic industry have been abandoned as principles of public policy. 
Financial sector and capital market reforms have been stepped up in almost all the countries and are 
at  various  stages  of  implementation.  New  laws  and  regulatory  mechanisms  have  been  adopted  to 
strengthen the banking sector and securities markets. Directed credit and credit ceilings, administered 
and  subsidized  interest  rates  have  gradually  given  way  to  market-based  allocation  of  credit  and 
determination of prices. 
India  has  become  a  leader  in  outsourcing  of  information  technology  enabled  services.  Low  wages, 
large English speaking technical manpower, availability of venture capital and networking with the U.S. 
firms  have  brought  about  a  major  expansion  in  I.T.  exports.  Pharmaceuticals,  health  care, 
biotechnology,  research  and  development  are  also  beginning  to  attract  attention  from  multinational 
companies. Indian firms are also beginning to acquire firms abroad and are integrating themselves in 
the  global  economy.  However,  other  countries  in  the  region  are  still  way  behind  and  have  a  lot  of 
catching up to do. Services sectors account for 60 percent of the output of developed countries and 
many  services  are  becoming  mobile  across  border  due  to  breakthrough  in  technology  and 
communication. Thus the outsourcing of services is a sensible strategy. 
These improvements in macroeconomic fundamentals have led to up gradation of credit worthiness of 
India and more recently Pakistan. Both the countries have established access to international bond 
market at fine pricing. It will, therefore, be fair to surmise that economic fundamentals have improved 
to  a  very  large  extent  in  all  the  South  Asian  countries  in  the  last  decade  or  so.  Broad  political 
consensus on the content and direction of economic policies and their credible and consistent pursuit 
should provide some signal to the markets that the South Asian economies can be relied upon in the 
exchange of goods and services and inflow of capital. 
Agenda for the future. 
However, the challenges ahead and tasks for economic managers in the region are simply daunting. 
Sri  Lanka  and  India  have  almost  one  quarter  of  their  population  living  below  the  poverty  line.  The 
estimates  for  Bangladesh  are  in  the  mid  40  percent,  while  Pakistan  has  one-third  of  its  population 
living below the poverty line. Unemployment rates are quite high and Human Development indicators 
are dismally low. Moreover, these task have to be pursued in the context of a more volatile economic 
environment - both domestic, as well as, international. Capital inflows and outflows have much greater 
potential to destabilize markets, exchange rate and interest rates. 
Technological,  communication  and  media  revolution  especially  the  satellite  television  and  cable 
channels  have  raised  the  expectations  of  the  common  man  through  the  demonstration  effect  of 
conspicuous consumption by powerful and affluent classes. These expectations are placing enormous 
pressures on the ruling classes for providing access to basic necessities of life to the majority of the 
population. At the same time, the state apparatus for delivery of these services in most South Asian 
countries  has  become  largely  dysfunctional  due  to  induction  of  poor  quality  personnel,  corruption, 
inertia, waste and institutional decay. How to narrow this widening gap between the rising expectations 
of the common man and the declining capacity of state institutions is one of the most difficult tasks for 
the leaders of South Asia. 
South Asia is lagging behind the East Asian economies and have a lot of catching up to do and, that 
too, in the shortest period of time. I do not wish to go into the details of all the comparative indicators 
of the two regions which are well known to all of us, but suffice to say that we are way behind China, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines both in levels as well as the rate of improvement. 
What can be done to reduce poverty and unemployment and catch up with the East Asia? We should 
recognize this region is our benchmark against which we should evaluate our performance although it 
is  our  biggest  competitor  in  the  global  markets,  particularly  China,  which  is  becoming  an  industrial 
giant.  Let  me  offer  some  thoughts  on  this  issue  but  also  hasten to  add  that  these  are  by  no  mean 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
exhaustive and are being presented only in the spirit of provoking a broader debate and discussion in 
our countries on this important subject. 
(a) 
Between 1980 and 2001, South Asia received $17 billion as Official Development Assistance 
(ODA).  However,  between  1990  and  2001  ODA  inflows  have  declined  both  in  per  capita 
terms as well as percent of GDP. There was a change in the composition of external capital 
inflows  with  a  declining  share  of  aid  in  relation  to  other  types  of  inflows.  This  change  in 
composition  suggests  that  the  influence  of  the  official  donors  and  particularly  the 
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) is thus likely to wane in the future while that of the 
fund managers, rating agencies, equity research houses, investment banks and multinational 
companies is likely to gain ascendancy. Thus, credibility of economic policies pursued by the 
countries assumes a much important role than the relationships nurtured with donors and the 
IFIs. The market’s power to penalize imprudent policies and breach of commitment is more 
damaging  to  the  economy  than  the  slippages  in  the  observance  of  IMF  or  World  Bank 
conditionalities. If we recall Mexico had to suffer heavily when the incoming Zedillo regime 
reversed the pre-commitment made by the Salinas regime to the markets on the exchange 
rate.  The  country  witnessed  huge  and  sudden  capital  outflows,  depreciation  of  currency, 
inflation and economic recession. To keep access to the international financial markets the 
South  Asian  Countries  will  have  to  maintain  not  only  open  and  liberal  foreign  exchange 
regimes, sound and robust financial sector but pursue consistent, credible and transparent 
economic policies. 
Along with sound economic policies there is growing evidence about the critical role of good 
governance and institutional quality in the growth-poverty reduction nexus. The features of 
weak  governance  that  is  normally  associated  with  South  Asia  are  corruption,  political 
patronage, lack of transparency, low observance of rule of law, absence of level playing field, 
heavy tilt in delivery of scarce of public goods and services towards the privileged and elite 
classes.  
The political leaders are now beginning to realize that the disenchantment of the electorate 
with  these  poor  governance  practices  increases  the  burden  of  incumbency  and  puts  their 
survival at serious risk. Thus, improved governance should be on the top of the agenda of all 
political parties in South Asia if they are interested in assuring their electoral sustenance. 
Bureaucratic hassles, long drawn procedures, un-even application of rules and regulations, 
excessive  discretionary  powers  in  the  hands  of  lower  level  bureaucracy,  shortages  of 
essential infrastructure facilities and low productivity of labor force have made the region not 
such an attractive place for foreign investors. Consequently, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
has not yet made any significant impact on the economies of the region. FDI accounts for 
0.5% of GDP with India receiving $3-4 billion annually and Pakistan about $1 billion. Portfolio 
investment to India had taken an upward trend but suffered a set back in the aftermath of the 
recent elections. 
A major overhaul of the structure of Civil Service, Judiciary, Police and Local Government 
Institutions,  Business  process  re-engineering  and  inculcation  of  modern  management 
practices will be required in all the countries of the region. 
Political and geopolitical risks in the region are still quite elevated. The long standing hostility 
between  India  and  Pakistan,  the  acquisition  of  nuclear  and  missile  capability  by  the  two 
countries and the consequential sanctions imposed upon them, the active frontline status of 
Pakistan in the war against terrorism, the prolonged civil war between Tamil Tigers and the 
government in Sri Lanka, and the frequent strikes called by the opposition parties against the 
government  in  power  in  Bangladesh  have  added  risks  to  doing  business  and  locating 
investment  in  these  countries.  The  external  perceptions  about  our  region  are,  therefore, 
heavily biased due to these risks. The sooner we can overcome these problems, the better 
off the region will be a reliable trading partner, active participant in the international capital 
markets and a choice location for foreign investment. 
Investment in education and human development in countries other than Sri Lanka has been 
inadequate in volume, deficient in quality and lacking in relevance. The most recent census 
data for 2001 shows that India’s literacy rate has gone up to 64 percent but female literacy 
rate is less than 50 percent. It also demonstrates that at least one third of its population and 
labor force is not fully equipped to take up the ever changing and more complex tasks of the 
economy trying to outclass other competing countries. In Pakistan and Bangladesh almost 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
half of their population and two-third of female population are illiterate. This large proportion 
of women among illiterates is a cause for serious concern. 
Sri Lanka is the only country in the region with almost one hundred percent literacy. But this 
full literacy level raises another stark fact in our face i.e., the growing imbalance between the 
demand for skills imposed by market economic forces and the supply of skills produced by 
our  educational  institutions.  There  is  a  surfeit  of  highly  educated  graduates  who  are  not 
employable and there is a shortage of workers who can carry out routine technical jobs in 
production  and  service.  India  produces  good  quality  Science  and  Engineering  graduates 
every  year  who  can  cater  to  the  high  end  of  the  job  market  but  lack  of  attention  to  non-
University technical education and its quality have created wide gaps at the middle end of 
the  job  market.  This  situation  is  much  aggravated  in  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh  where  the 
issues of quality, relevance and numbers are all intertwined. Sri Lanka has no problem with 
the  numbers  but  high  level  of  unemployment  among  University  graduates  testifies  to  this 
mismatch in the skills. The widespread frustration among the parents and graduates on one 
hand and a high level of dissatisfaction among the employers in finding the right persons for 
the right jobs are further evidence of the imbalance in labor market. 
This skill imbalance and lack of employability has serious repercussions for the composition 
and  growth  of  the  basket  of  goods  that  can  be  exported.  The  most  dynamic  and  rapid 
growing  sectors  of  exports  in  the  world  market  today  and  in  the  medium  term  are  those 
associated  with  high  technology  and  to  some  extent  medium  technology.  While  India  is 
making some headway in increasing its penetration of high technology exports the record of 
other countries in the region is not very promising. They are still stuck in the low technology 
exports  particularly  textiles  and  clothing  which  have  a  declining  shares  in  the  world  trade. 
Thus  the  need  to  overcome  the  skill  obsolescence  and  turn  towards  medium  and  high 
technology exports was never as apparent as it is today. 
One  particular  means  through  which  this  change  in  the  composition  of  exports  can  be 
accelerated is by removing the barriers and constraints in the way of foreign investors and 
Multinational Corporations (MNCs). FDI is an important force for integration for this as MNCs 
have set up supply chains and integrated production networks that tend to locate each stage 
of  production  in  the  country  with  the  lowest  cost.  Affiliates  of  a  MNC  in  one country  often 
export  to  another  for  eventual  sales  in  a  third  country  market.  These  affiliates  act  as  the 
on-the-job  training  grounds  for  the  acquisition  and  dissemination  of  the  skills  needed  for 
production  and  minimizing  costs.  These  skills  are  then  disseminated  and  multiplied 
throughout other firms in the country. 
There is a very little intra-regional trade-taking place in South Asia. Intraregional trade has 
remained stagnant at less than 2% of the total trade in the last twenty-five years. A study 
carried  out  by  the  Pakistan  Ministry  of  Commerce  in  1996  concluded  that  due  to  low 
transportation  costs,  cultural  similarities  which  influence  taste  and  cause  profitable 
complementarities to emerge and low transaction costs, the economic benefits of liberalizing 
trade  with  India  outweigh  costs.  Despite  this,  the  trade  between  the  two  neighbouring 
countries  has  remained  negligible.  Regional  trading  arrangements  have  made  a  huge 
difference  in  North  America,  Europe  and  East  Asia,  but  they  have  been  unsuccessful  in 
South Asia. The recent attempt to revitalize SAARC is in the right direction and will stimulate 
trade and growth but only to the extent that it unleashes competition that lowers domestic 
prices, enables achieving economies of scale and acquiring new technology. 
SAFTA  arrangements  can  be  successful  in  the coming  year  but  they  require a  number  of 
important preparatory measures. These are described below: 
• 
Trade  facilitation  through  expeditious  border  crossings,  quick  custom  clearance, 
efficient  port  facilities,  improved  transport  links  should  precede  or  take  place 
simultaneously with the expansion of volume of cross border trade. 
Domestic  tax,  tariff  and  subsidy  policies  that  affect  production  and  trade  incentives 
should be harmonized to avoid recurrence of trade disputes and frequent use of anti 
dumping laws. As India provides a lot of subsidies to its producers in various forms 
and  shapes  the  smaller  countries  are  hesitant  to  allow  MFN  status  to  India.  The 
recourse to a long negative list that restricts the volume of trade should be avoided at 
all costs. 
 BIS Review 50/2004
(e) 
(f) 
4 
      Macroeconomic policies such as fiscal and monetary policies should be harmonized to 
achieve a stable, non-discriminating macroeconomic environment for all the countries 
in the region 
Supporting  institutions  to  manage  and  facilitate  integration,  for  example,  setting 
standards, establishing regional development funds and for dispute resolution should 
be created. 
Communication  and  transport  infrastructure  between  the  bordering  countries  should 
be improved and upgraded to facilitate increased trade and factor mobility. 
Legal regulations for investor protection, intellectual property rights enforcement, anti-
trust law, commercial law, labor relations, financial institutions should be harmonized. 
Financial markets should be widened and regulatory changes introduced to promote 
cross-border investment, listings, syndication, bond issues, etc. 
South Asian countries should tap the enormous potential of their large expatriate population 
in mobilizing investment capital, foreign exchange earnings, skilled manpower and exports of 
ethnic  products  and  services.  India,  Pakistan,  Bangladesh  and  Sri  Lanka  together  receive 
about $20 billion of remittances from their workers annually but their contribution in domestic 
capital  formation  is  insignificant.  Unlike  overseas  Chinese  Community  that  has  played  a 
substantial  role  in  foreign  direct  investment,  nonresident  Indians  have  been  a  source,  to 
some extent, of professional, technical and managerial skills but not much in terms of large 
financial outlays. The non-resident deposits transferred to India account for only a miniscule 
proportion of their wealth holdings abroad. These flows are quite stable in nature and should 
be  able  to  augment  domestic  savings  for  accelerating  the  pace  of  investment  without 
creating future debt obligations. Innovative products and investment vehicles to attract the 
savings  of  nonresident  South  Asians  should  be  encouraged  with  the  help  of  regulatory 
agencies. 
(g) 
South Asian countries have so far missed the boat by not becoming a part of global value chain and 
participating  in  international  supplier  chain  arrangements.  There  is  no  single  business  model  for 
participating in this chain and there can be many phases of transition and many modes of involvement. 
For example, joint ventures, franchising, purchasing by international firms, licensing, sub-contracting, 
fully  owned  firm,  original  equipment,  manufacturing,  original  design  and  manufacturing,  strategic 
partnerships for technology, overseas acquisition of equity are the diverse means whereby developing 
country enterprises can gain wide access to international markets at their own level of capability, climb 
the  technology  ladder  and  benefit  from  globalization.  East  Asia  is  a  major  participant  in  this  global 
supply chain and produces parts and components for a variety of manufactures. It is time that South 
Asian countries do make an attempt to get engaged in this value chain. 
Finally,  I  turn  to  the  impact  of  WTO.  I  wish  to  clear  the  confusion  that  as  if  something  drastic  or 
unexpected or unknown is going to hit us in the near future due to WTO. All the countries in the region 
are  already  members  of  this  organization  since  1995  and  have  made  binding  commitments  to 
maximum tariffs. In some cases the applied tariffs are lower than the bound tariffs. In actual practice, 
the South Asian countries have liberalized their imports and have been flooded with cheaper imports 
from China in the recent years. There could be no greater threat to the survival of domestic industry 
than  competition  from  Chinese  goods.  Some  industrial  firms  could  not  face  the  onslaught  of  this 
invasion and have died. Others have taken up by the challenge by cutting the fat, taking up the slack, 
becoming cost efficient, improving quality are competing with the new entrants. Thus the process of 
restructuring and transition is ongoing and should not pose any systematic threat to the industries of 
the region. 
What  we  all  seem  to  be  focusing  upon  is  the  abolition  of  the  textile  quotas  under  the  Multi-fiber 
agreement and the adoption of new agreement on Clothing and Textiles in January 2005. The impact 
of  this  new  pattern  of  textile  trade  on  the  economies  of  South  Asia  region  is  highly  varied  and 
differentiated. Most simulation studies and modeling exercises carried by the World Bank, USITC and 
independent consulting firms give credence to the view that China followed by India and Pakistan will 
be the main beneficiaries of the abolition of quotas. These countries are all vertically integrated i.e., 
from producing cotton all the way to finishing, dyeing, stitching, etc. and enjoy low wage costs and low 
raw material costs. Pakistan, for example, has invested $3 to 4 billion during the past five years to 
modernize  and  acquire  state-of-the-art  machinery  that  can  produce  quality  goods  according  to  the 
varying  specifications  and  changing  demand  patterns  of  the  buyers.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 5
obvious  if  all  the  ready  made  garment  exporting  firms  in  Bangladesh  and  Sri  Lanka  will  be  able  to 
survive in the post 2005 markets. Both countries are seized of this problem and are taking measures 
to assist their firms and their workers. 
Whatever the benefits of regional trading blocks they are no substitute for participation in multilateral 
trade  arrangements.  Multilateral  arrangements  provide  a  much  larger  market  to  exploit  which  is 
several times the size of any regional block, enlarge the market access substantially and permit wider 
competition, larger scale of operation and greater specialization all of which increase productivity and 
growth. Thus the successful completion of Doha Development Round is very much in the interests of 
South  Asian  countries  but  the  deferential  impact  on  the  various  countries  in  the  region  has  to  be 
handled  carefully,  imaginatively  and  expeditiously.  Short-term  adjustment  costs  to  the  workers  and 
business have to be absorbed in the long run interest of expansion in those activities in which these 
countries have dynamic comparative advantage. 
Conclusion 
South Asian countries have undergone remarkable improvement in their economic landscape during 
the last ten years or so and despite many vicissitudes and shocks have been able to maintain positive 
growth momentum. The challenges for the coming decade are however, of different nature. While the 
policy reform and good management of the past will certainly help the internal transformation of these 
economies  the  task  facing  the  leaders  of  these  countries  are  formidable.  To  maximize  the  benefits 
from globalisation and thus help reduce the incidence of poverty the future agenda should focus on 
good  governance  and  institutional  reform,  investment  in  skilled  manpower,  shift  away  from  low 
technology  exports,  aligning  with  international  value  chain  of  production,  attracting  foreign  private 
capital  flows  including  that  from  expatiate  nationals,  promoting  intra-regional  trade  and  mitigating 
political and geopolitical risks. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2004
