Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Remaking Malaysia - investing in the New Malaysia 
Opening address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Euromoney 
Conference - “Remaking Malaysia: Investing in the New Malaysia”, Kuala Lumpur, 3 August 2004. 
 Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi,  
Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim and good morning, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this conference on 'Remaking Malaysia and Investing in 
the New Malaysia'. We are most honoured today by the presence of Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri 
Abdullah  Ahmad  Badawi,  Prime  Minister  and  Finance  Minister  of  Malaysia  who  has  graciously 
accepted our invitation to deliver the Keynote Address of the Conference.  
This conference takes place at a time of strengthening economic conditions in the global and domestic 
economy. At the forefront of investors' minds is the sustainability of these trends. There is also much 
interest  on  the  policy  strategies  being  adopted  and  how  Malaysia  will  reposition  itself  in  this  more 
competitive  environment.  This  Conference  has  brought  together  key  policy  makers,  investors,  fund 
managers as well as leading corporate and government officials to discuss these issues. 
Building on the economic success that has been achieved for more than three decades, Malaysia is 
now taking the opportunity to reposition its strategies to ensure the sustainability of this strong growth 
performance. In Remaking Malaysia, the strategy is essentially to focus on our distinct capabilities and 
to leverage on the areas of our strengths to secure our competitive advantage. 
Let me touch briefly on the current economic developments:  
• 
Malaysia  has  seen  a  steady  and  strengthening  economic  recovery  since  2001,  with  the 
growth  performance  strengthening  substantially  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  increasing  the 
potential for growth for the year as a whole to surpass our earlier estimates.  
This  favourable  performance  has  been  accompanied  by  a  rebalancing  of  focus  between 
external and domestic sources of growth. In the external sector, there has been a greater 
balance  between  the  traditional  and  new  markets  and  between  the  goods  and  services 
sectors.  
In  the  domestic  sector,  there  has  been  a  greater  balance  between  the  economic  sectors. 
The strategy to have a more diversified economic structure and more extensive markets has 
aimed to reduce vulnerability of the economy to global shifts in demand in any specific sector 
or to any particular region.  
The  positive  fundamentals  of  low  inflation,  strong  external  balance,  low  debt  and  stable 
employment  conditions  have  accorded  policy  flexibility  to  support  the  growth  during  this 
period.  
   Going  forward,  the  process  of  rebalancing  the  economy  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  the 
economy can be expected to intensify and widen.  
• 
There will be a greater rebalancing between the role of the public and private sectors in the 
economy, with the public sector activity focussed on providing the enabling environment to 
strengthen the role of the private sector in the economy.  
While  large  domestic  corporations  and  multinational  corporations  will  continue  to  be 
important  in  the  economy,  the  role  of  the  small  and  medium-scale  enterprises  will  gain 
significance.  
Greater  focus  will  be  given  to  secure  competitiveness  on  a  more  comprehensive  basis  in 
terms  of  other  dimensions  such  as  productivity  and  efficiency,  labour  quality,  logistics, 
research and development, the delivery system and the supply chain.  
  BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
Malaysia  will  also  continue  to  leverage  on  our  low  country  risks  in  terms  of  the  political  stability, 
industrial maturity and the supply of a skilled workforce. 
To  promote  endogenous  sources  of  growth,  greater  focus  has  been  directed  at  promoting  greater 
private investment, including by the small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The financial infrastructure 
and  incentive  structure  will  continue  to  be  enhanced  to  promote  investment  in  new  sub-sectors  in 
particular, the services, agriculture and manufacturing sectors. 
On the external front, while there has been a synchronisation of growth among the major economies, 
there has also been some rebalancing of the relative strength of the growth among the economies. 
The  increase  in  the  expansion  of  world  trade  and  the  strengthening  of  labour  market  conditions  in 
most of these economies suggest continued and self-sustaining growth. Meanwhile, the Asian region 
has  shown  strong  growth  performance  amidst  robust  intra-regional  trade.  This  will  be  mutually 
reinforcing  for  the  region  in  expanding  the  cumulative  domestic  market  of  the  region  and  thus 
contributing to the overall growth prospects of the region. 
While growth remains strong, there are risks on the horizon. The recent moves to raise interest rates 
have  however  aimed  to  adjust  the  economic  expansion  to  converge  to  more  sustainable  levels. 
Policies  in  a  number  of  the  major  economies  have  now  shifted  from  addressing  a  deflationary 
environment  to  a  more  neutral  position  that  is  aimed  at  removing  the  inflationary  bias.  This  is  in 
contrast to an anti-inflationary stance which would require aggressive tightening. 
On  the  domestic  front,  Malaysia continues  to  be highly  integrated  with  the world  economy  in  which 
economic  and  financial  developments  in  our  major  trading  partners  will  have  implications  on  our 
economy. The strengthening of our economic structure, our financial system and our macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  particularly  since  the  Asian  crisis  in  1997-1998,  has  raised  our  tolerance  level  for 
absorbing volatility, enhanced our resilience to shocks, improved the agility to adjust to change and 
increased  our  policy  flexibility  to  mitigate  any  adverse  external  developments  on  our  domestic 
economy.  
Going  forward,  the  strong  growth  in  manufacturing  and  services  sectors  will  continue  to  sustain 
growth. The prospects for higher consumption spending is also positive. With the savings rate still high 
at about 35% of GNP and the rising incomes, Malaysia has the potential to promote a higher level of 
consumption  without  undermining  the  potential  for  financing  of  private  investment  from  domestic 
sources.  The  higher  consumption  has  also  not  created  risks  of  increased  household  indebtedness 
which has remained within prudential levels at less than 60% of GDP.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Capital  spending  continues  to  gain  momentum  both  in  domestic  and  export  oriented  activities. 
Domestic  companies  are  also  forging  strategic  alliances  as  part  of  the  strategy  to  expand  to  new 
export  markets  and  leverage  on  new  technologies.  The  on-going  capacity  expansion  and  more 
competitive  business  environment  will  keep  inflation  low  thereby  allowing  domestic  interest  rates  to 
continue  to  remain  low  for  sometime  to  come.  Malaysia's  trade  and  investment  links  with  Asia, 
particularly with the large economies in the region, is also expected to strengthen further.  
There also continues to be steady inflows of foreign direct investment. In addition to sustained inflows 
into  the  manufacturing  and  oil  and  gas  sectors,  these  flows  have  become  more  broad  based  with 
higher  shares  of  new  flows  shifting  towards  higher  value-added  activity  in  the  services  sector.  This 
structural change in FDI flows reflect the changing opportunities Malaysia accords with the services 
sector now gaining significance as an engine of growth. The new inflows have also tended to be low 
import content and higher value added. The FDI in services sector has also been increasingly broad 
based. A number of regional and global business processing centres and other regional facilities have 
been  set  up  including  the  OHQs,  regional  offices,  international  procurement  centres  and  regional 
distribution centres. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As part of the Government policy commitment to improve the delivery system and reduce the cost of 
doing business, the Central Bank has undertaken a progressive liberalisation of domestic rules and 
regulations to reduce the cost of doing business. An area of focus has been the rules governing the 
foreign  exchange  transactions.  Reducing  cost  of  managing  risks  associated  with  such  transactions 
include  the  recent  liberalisation  of  rules  on  foreign  currency  accounts,  interest  rates  swaps  and 
hedging.  To  broaden  and  deepen  our  capital  markets,  the  multilateral  agencies  and  multinational 
corporations  are  now  allowed  to  issue  bonds  in  Malaysia.  Going  forward,  Malaysia  will  continue  to 
undertake further liberalisation while balancing the need to accord flexibility and choices to businesses 
with the macroeconomic objectives of ensuring stability in financial markets. Ensuring such long-term 
stability that facilitates planning and investment decisions has been an important part of maintaining 
our competitive position.  
In the development of our financial sector, the banking sector continues to be the pillar of the financial 
system and is now at its strongest position with high level of capitalisation, improving asset quality and 
stronger  profitability.  Policy  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  banking  system,  including  in  the  areas  of 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks, risk management, corporate governance and best practices in 
transparency  and  disclosure  have  contributed  to  strengthen  the  system  further.  These  have  been 
complemented with initiatives to deepen the bond and equity markets, resulting in a more diversified 
financial infrastructure. 
Another priority area has been the development of the Islamic financial system as a viable component 
of  the  financial  system.  With  more  than  two  decades  experience  in  developing  Islamic  finance, 
Malaysia today has a comprehensive Islamic financial system with all the core components of banking, 
takaful  and  the  money  and  capital  markets,  and  supported  by  a  strong  legal  and  supervisory 
framework. The assets mobilised by the Islamic banking sector have increased significantly to account 
for  about  10%  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  system.  In  the  Islamic  capital  market,  outstanding 
Islamic bonds amounted to about 45% of the total outstanding bonds.  
As our domestic financial system develops and strengthens, Malaysia has gradually moved towards a 
more deregulated and liberalised environment. In the regulation of the banking institutions, a balance 
will be made between promoting competition and innovation, and maintaining prudence and stability. 
Regulations  will  continuously  be  reviewed  to  provide  greater  operational  flexibility  for  banking 
institutions  without  compromising  prudential  objectives.  The  introduction  of  the  new  interest  rate 
framework reflects the move to promote more efficient pricing in the banking system. As progress is 
achieved  in  enhancing  the  capacity  and  capability  of  domestic  institutions,  the  financial  sector  will 
continue to be gradually liberalised. Moving forward, further deregulation will be undertaken to simplify 
and liberalise regulations and administrative rules for businesses. To ensure stability as regulations 
are lifted, leveraging on technology to improve data monitoring systems have enhanced the ability to 
monitor developments to assess any emerging risks to the system.  
During this period of strong fundamentals and rising potential for economic expansion, Malaysia has 
the flexibility to introduce measures not only to support growth but also to improve the quality of the 
growth and its long term sustainability. This includes significant investment in education and according 
priority  towards  achieving  socio-economic  stability.  Overall,  a  balanced  and  holistic  approach  to 
economic management is aimed to ensure the foundation for a strong economy and its competitive 
position in the global economy.  
Thank you.  
