Alan Greenspan: Government-sponsored enterprises 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  U.S.  Senate, 
24 February 2004. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  Senator  Sarbanes,  and  Members  of  the  Committee:  Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to 
discuss the role of housing-related government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) in our economy. These 
GSEs - the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae), the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corporation  (Freddie  Mac),  and  the  Federal Home  Loan  Banks (FHLBs)  -  collectively  dominate  the 
financing of residential housing in the United States. Indeed, these entities have grown to be among 
the largest financial institutions in the United States, and they now stand behind more than $4 trillion of 
mortgages - or more than three-quarters of the single-family mortgages in the United States - either by 
holding  the  mortgage-related  assets  directly  or  assuming  their  credit  risk.1  Given  their  ties  to  the 
government and the consequent private market subsidized debt that they issue, it is little wonder that 
these GSEs have come under increased scrutiny as their competitive presence in the marketplace has 
increased. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  not  focus  on  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks,  although  much  of  this  analysis 
applies  to  them  as  well.  In  fact,  because  the  Home  Loan  Banks  can  design  their  advances  to 
encompass almost any type of risk, they are more complex to analyze than other GSEs and, hence, 
raise additional issues. 
 During  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  (hereafter  Fannie  and  Freddie) 
contributed importantly to the development of the secondary mortgage markets for home loans and to 
the  diversification  of  funding  sources  for  depository  institutions  and  other  mortgage  originators. 
Although  the  risk  that  a  home  mortgage  borrower may  default  is small  for  any  individual mortgage, 
risks  can  be  substantial  for  a  financial  institution  holding  a  large  volume  of  mortgages  for  homes 
concentrated  in  one  area  or  a  few  areas  of  the  country.  The  possible  consequences  of  such 
concentration of risk were vividly illustrated by the events of the 1980s, when oil prices fell and the 
subsequent economic distress led to numerous mortgage defaults in Texas and surrounding states. 
The secondary markets pioneered by Fannie and Freddie permit mortgage lenders to diversify these 
risks geographically and thus to extend more safely a greater amount of residential mortgage credit 
than might otherwise be prudent. 
The key to developing secondary markets was securitization, and Fannie and Freddie played a critical 
role  in  developing  and  promoting  mortgage  securitization,  the  process  whereby  mortgages  are 
bundled  together  into  pools  and  then  turned  into  securities  that  can  be  bought  and  sold  alongside 
other  debt  securities.  Securitization  by  Fannie  and  Freddie  allows  mortgage  originators  to  separate 
themselves from almost all aspects of risk associated with mortgage lending: Once the originator sells 
                                                      
1   Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac stand behind mortgages in two ways: The first method is to purchase mortgages, bundle them 
together, and then sell claims on the cash flows to be generated by these bundles. These claims are known as mortgage-
backed  securities  (MBS).  The  second  method  involves  Fannie’s  and  Freddie’s  purchasing  mortgages  or  their  own 
mortgage-backed securities outright and financing those purchases by selling debt directly in the name of the GSE. Both 
methods create publicly traded securities and thus permit a wide variety and large number of purely private investors to fund 
mortgages. Using the first method, Fannie and Freddie are relieved of interest-rate risk but are still exposed to credit risk 
because they guarantee MBS investors against the risk that some homeowners will default on the underlying mortgages. 
The second method of funding mortgages increases Fannie’s and Freddie’s debt outstanding and expands their balance 
sheets. In this case, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac must manage the interest rate, prepayment, and credit risks associated 
with the mortgages they purchase.  
In the conforming mortgage market, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, using these two methods, play dominant roles in funding 
and  managing  the  credit  risk  of  the  mortgages,  but  they  do  not  participate  directly  in  the  origination  of  mortgage  credit. 
Depository  institutions,  mortgage  bankers,  and  their  affiliates  originate  most  mortgages.  However,  the  underwriting 
standards of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac substantially influence which borrowers receive mortgage credit. As discussed 
below,  because  of  Fannie  Mae’s  and  Freddie  Mac’s  government-sponsored  advantages,  there  currently  is  no  secondary 
market for conforming mortgages other than that provided by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. If a bank chooses not to sell the 
mortgage that it originates, it must fund that mortgage and manage the associated credit and interest rate risks itself. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 1
the  loan  into  the  secondary  market,  he  or  she  may  play  no  further  role  in  the  contract.  This 
development was particularly important before the emergence of truly nationwide banking institutions 
because it provided a dramatically improved method for diversifying mortgage credit risk. Fannie and 
Freddie demonstrated that, by facilitating the diversification of mortgage portfolios and insisting on the 
application of sound loan underwriting standards, the  credit risk associated with holding conforming 
mortgages  could  be  reduced  to  very  low  levels  and  could  be  distributed  across  a  wide  variety  and 
large number of investors. This innovation in the mortgage market led to the securitization of many 
other assets and to the creation of many other types of securities. During the 1980s, the GSEs led the 
private sector in this innovation, and their contribution enhanced the stability of our financial markets. 
Mortgage securitization continues to perform this crucial function, and its techniques have now been 
applied  by  the  private  sector  in  many  markets,  including  markets  for  automobile  loans,  credit  card 
loans,  nonconforming  mortgages,  and  commercial  mortgages.  Asset-backed  securities  and  the 
secondary  markets  in  which  they  trade  generally  provide  both  households  and  businesses  with 
excellent access to credit at an appropriate risk-adjusted interest rate. Moreover, credit supply is far 
more stable today than it was because it is now founded on a much broader base of potential sources 
of funds. The aspiring homeowner no longer depends on the willingness of the local commercial bank 
or savings and loan association to hold his or her mortgage. Similarly, the sources of credit available 
to purchasers of cars and users of credit cards have expanded widely beyond local credit institutions. 
Unbeknownst to such borrowers, their loans may ultimately be held by a pension fund, an insurance 
company,  a  university  endowment,  or  another  investor  far  removed  from  the  local  area.  This 
development  has  facilitated  the  substantial  growth  of  nonmortgage  consumer  credit.  Indeed,  in  the 
United  States,  more  than  $2  trillion  of  securitized  assets  currently  exists  with  no  government 
guarantee, either explicit or implicit. 
 Given  their  history  of  innovation  in  mortgage-backed  securities,  why  do  Fannie  and  Freddie  now 
generate  such  substantial  concern?  The  unease  relates  mainly  to  the  scale  and  growth  of  the 
mortgage-related asset portfolios held on their balance sheets. That growth has been facilitated, as 
least in part, by a perceived special advantage of these institutions that keeps normal market restraints 
from being fully effective. 
The GSEs’ special advantage arises because, despite the explicit statement on the prospectus to GSE 
debentures that they are not backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, most investors 
have  apparently  concluded  that  during  a  crisis  the  federal  government  will  prevent  the  GSEs  from 
defaulting  on  their  debt.  An  implicit  guarantee  is  thus  created  not  by  the  Congress  but  by  the 
willingness  of  investors  to  accept  a  lower  rate  of  interest  on  GSE  debt  than  they  would  otherwise 
require in the absence of federal sponsorship. 
Because  Fannie  and  Freddie  can  borrow  at  a  subsidized  rate,  they  have  been  able  to  pay  higher 
prices to originators for their mortgages than can potential competitors and to gradually but inexorably 
take over the market for conforming mortgages.2 This process has provided Fannie and Freddie with a 
powerful  vehicle  and  incentive  for  achieving  extremely  rapid  growth  of  their  balance  sheets.  The 
resultant  scale  gives  Fannie  and  Freddie  additional  advantages  that  potential  private-sector 
competitors cannot overcome. Importantly, the scale itself has reinforced investors’ perceptions that, in 
the event of a crisis involving Fannie and Freddie, policymakers would have little alternative than to 
have the taxpayers explicitly stand behind the GSE debt. This view is widespread in the marketplace 
despite  the  privatization  of  Fannie  and  Freddie  and  their  control  by  private  shareholders,  because 
these institutions continue to have government missions, a line of credit with the Treasury, and other 
government benefits, which confer upon them a special status in the eyes of many investors. 
The  part  of  Fannie’s  and  Freddie’s  purchases  from  mortgage  originators  that  they  do  not  fund 
themselves,  but  instead  securitize,  guarantee,  and  sell  into  the  market,  is  a  somewhat  different 
business. The value of the guarantee is a function of the expectation that Fannie and Freddie will not 
                                                      
2   Conforming  mortgages  are  mortgages  that  are  eligible  for  purchase  by  Fannie  and  Freddie.  Fannie  and  Freddie  can 
purchase mortgages only below the conforming loan limit (currently $333,700) and will purchase only those mortgages that 
meet their underwriting standards, including, for many mortgages, the standard that the mortgage is equivalent in risk to a 
mortgage with an 80 percent loan-to-value ratio. This latter requirement makes it difficult to know the extent of the market, 
but market participants generally believe that Fannie and Freddie purchase a large share of the truly conforming mortgages.  
2 
 BIS Review 12/2004
be allowed to fail. While the rate of return reflects the implicit subsidy, a smaller amount of Fannie’s 
and Freddie’s overall profit comes from securitizing and selling mortgage-backed securities (MBS). 
 Fannie’s  and  Freddie’s  persistently  higher  rates  of  return  for  bearing  the  relatively  low  credit  risks 
associated with conforming mortgages is evidence of a significant implicit subsidy. A recent study by a 
Federal Reserve economist, Wayne Passmore, attempts to quantify the value of that implicit subsidy 
to the private shareholders of Fannie and Freddie. His research indicates that it may account for more 
than half of the stock market capitalization of these institutions. The study also suggests that these 
institutions pass little of the benefit of their government-sponsored status to homeowners in the form of 
lower mortgage rates. 
Passmore’s analysis suggests that Fannie and Freddie likely lower mortgage rates less than 16 basis 
points,  with  a  best  estimate  centering  on  about  7  basis  points.  If  the  estimated  7  basis  points  is 
correct, the associated present value of homeowner savings is only about half the after-tax subsidy 
that  shareholders  of  these  GSEs  are  estimated  to  receive.  Congressional  Budget  Office  and  other 
estimates  differ,  but  they  come  to  the  essentially  same  conclusion:  A  substantial  portion  of  these 
GSEs’  implicit  subsidy  accrues  to  GSE  shareholders  in  the  form  of  increased  dividends  and  stock 
market  value.  Fannie  and  Freddie,  as  you  know,  have  disputed  the  conclusions  of  many  of  these 
studies. 
As noted by the General Accounting Office, the task of assessing the costs and benefits associated 
with  the  GSEs  is  difficult.  One  possible  way  to  advance  the  technical  discussion  would  be  for  the 
Congress to request disinterested parties to convene groups of technical experts in an effort to better 
understand and measure these costs and benefits. 
 The Federal Reserve is concerned about the growth and the scale of the GSEs’ mortgage portfolios, 
which  concentrate  interest  rate  and  prepayment  risks  at  these  two  institutions.  Unlike  many  well-
capitalized savings and loans and commercial banks, Fannie and Freddie have chosen not to manage 
that  risk  by  holding  greater  capital.  Instead,  they  have  chosen  heightened  leverage,  which  raises 
interest rate risk but enables them to multiply the profitability of subsidized debt in direct proportion to 
their  degree  of  leverage.  Without  the  expectation  of  government  support  in  a  crisis,  such  leverage 
would not be possible without a significantly higher cost of debt. 
Interest  rate  risk  associated  with  fixed-rate  mortgages,  unless  supported  by  substantial  capital, 
however, can be of even greater concern than the credit risk. Interest rate volatility combined with the 
ability of homeowners to prepay their mortgages without penalty means that the cash flows associated 
with the holding of mortgage debt directly or through mortgage-backed securities are highly uncertain, 
even if the probability of default is low. 
In  general,  interest  rate  risk  is  readily  handled  by  adjusting  maturities  of  assets  and  liabilities.  But 
hedging  prepayment  risk  is  more  complex.  To  manage  this  risk  with  little  capital  requires  a 
conceptually  sophisticated  hedging  framework.  In  essence,  the  current  system  depends  on  the  risk 
managers at Fannie and Freddie to do everything just right, rather than depending on a market-based 
system  supported  by  the  risk  assessments  and  management  capabilities  of  many  participants  with 
different views and different strategies for hedging risks. Our financial system would be more robust if 
we relied on a market-based system that spreads interest rate risks, rather than on the current system, 
which concentrates such risk with the GSEs. 
 As always, concerns about systemic risk are appropriately focused on large, highly leveraged financial 
institutions such as the GSEs that play substantial roles in the functioning of financial markets. I should 
emphasize that Fannie and Freddie, to date, appear to have managed these risks well and that we 
see  nothing  on  the  immediate  horizon  that  is  likely  to  create  a  systemic  problem.  But  to  fend  off 
possible future systemic difficulties, which we assess as likely if GSE expansion continues unabated, 
preventive actions are required sooner rather than later. 
As a general matter, we rely in a market economy upon market discipline to constrain the leverage of 
firms, including financial institutions. However, the existence, or even the perception, of government 
backing undermines the effectiveness of market discipline. A market system relies on the vigilance of 
lenders  and  investors  in  market  transactions  to  assure  themselves  of  their  counterparties’  strength. 
However, many counterparties in GSE transactions, when assessing their risk, clearly rely instead on 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 3
the  GSEs’  perceived  special  relationship  to  the  government.  Thus,  with  housing-related  GSEs, 
regulators  cannot  rely  significantly  on  market  discipline.  Indeed,  they  must  assess  whether  these 
institutions hold appropriate amounts of capital relative to the risks that they assume and the costs that 
they might impose on others, including taxpayers, in the event of a financial-market meltdown. The 
issues  are  similar  to  those  that  arise  in  the  context  of  commercial  banking  and  deposit  insurance  - 
indeed, they are the reason that commercial banks are regulated and subject to stringent regulatory 
capital standards. 
Traditionally, questions of capital adequacy for financial institutions have been evaluated with regard 
to credit and interest rate risks. However, in the case of the GSEs and other large regulated financial 
institutions  with  significant  roles  in  market  functioning,  liquidity  and  operation  risks  also  need  to  be 
considered.  Determining  the  suitable  amount  of  capital  for  Fannie  and  Freddie  is  a  difficult  and 
technical  process,  and  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  judgment,  a  regulator  should  have  a  free  hand  in 
determining the minimum and risk-based capital standards for these institutions. 
The  size  of  Fannie  and  Freddie,  the  complexity  of  their  financial  operations,  and  the  general 
indifference of many investors to the financial condition of the GSEs because of their perceived special 
relationship to the government suggest that the GSE regulator must have authority similar to that of 
the banking regulators. In addressing the role of a new GSE regulator, the Congress needs to clarify 
the circumstances under which a GSE can become insolvent and, in particular, the resultant position - 
both  during  and  after  insolvency  -  of  the  investors  that  hold  GSE  debt.  This process  must  be clear 
before it is needed; otherwise, should these institutions experience significant financial difficulty, the 
hands  of  any  regulator,  and  of  public  authorities  generally,  would  be  constrained  by  uncertainties 
about the process. Left unresolved, such uncertainties would only heighten the prospect that a crisis 
would result in an explicit guaranteeing of GSE debt. 
* * * 
World-class  regulation,  by  itself,  may  not  be  sufficient  and  indeed,  as  suggested  by  Treasury 
Secretary Snow, may even worsen the situation if market participants infer from such regulation that 
the government is all the more likely to back GSE debt. This is the heart of a dilemma in designing 
regulation for the GSEs. On the one hand, if the regulation of the GSEs is strengthened, the market 
may view them even more as extensions of the government and view their debt as government debt. 
The result, short of a marked increase in capital, would be to expand the implicit subsidy and allow the 
GSEs to play an even larger unconstrained role in the financial markets. On the other hand, if we fail 
to strengthen GSE regulation, the possibility of an actual crisis or insolvency is increased. 
Some observers have argued that Fannie and Freddie are simple institutions with a function that is 
clear to all. The evidence suggests that this is far from the case. The difficulties of creating transparent 
accounting standards to reflect the gains and losses associated with hedging mortgage-prepayment 
risk highlight that the business of taking on interest rate and prepayment risk is far from simple and is 
difficult to communicate to outside investors. 
Most  of  the  concerns  associated  with  systemic  risks  flow  from  the  size  of  the  balance  sheets  that 
these GSEs maintain. One way the Congress could constrain the size of these balance sheets is to 
alter  the  composition  of  Fannie’s  and  Freddie’s  mortgage  financing  by  limiting  the  dollar  amount  of 
their debt relative to the dollar amount of mortgages securitized and held by other investors. Although 
it is difficult to know how best to set such a rule, this approach would continue to expand the depth 
and  liquidity  of  mortgage  markets  through  mortgage  securitization  but  would  remove  most  of  the 
potential  systemic  risks  associated  with  these  GSEs.  Ideally  such  a  ratio  would  focus  the  business 
operations of Fannie and Freddie on the enhancement of secondary markets and not on the capture 
of the implicit subsidy.3 
Limiting the debt of Fannie and Freddie and expanding their role in mortgage securitization would be 
consistent with the original congressional intent that these institutions provide stability in the market for 
residential  mortgages  and  provide  liquidity  for  mortgage  investors.  Deep  and  liquid  markets  for 
mortgages are made using mortgage-backed securities that are held by non-GSE private investors. 
Fannie’s and Freddie’s purchases of their own or each other’s securities with their debt do not appear 
needed to supply mortgage market liquidity or to enhance capital markets in the United States. 
                                                      
3   Likewise, the ability of Federal Home Loan Banks to hold mortgages and mortgage-backed securities directly could also be 
limited, so that mortgage-related interest rate risks are managed by a variety of purely private investors. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2004
The expansion of homeownership is a widely supported goal in this country. A sense of ownership and 
commitment to our communities imparts a degree of stability that is particularly valuable to society. But 
there are many ways to enhance the attractiveness of homeownership at significantly less potential 
cost to taxpayers than through the opaque and circuitous GSE paradigm currently in place. 
Even with a constraint on debt issuance, Fannie and Freddie would remain among the largest financial 
institutions  in  the  United  States  and  would  be  able  to  grow  with  the  size  of  the  mortgage  markets. 
These  are  important  organizations  that,  because  of  their  implicit  subsidy,  are  expanding  at  a  pace 
beyond  that consistent with  systematic safety.  They have  made, and should  -  with  less  reliance  on 
subsidies - continue to make, major contributions to the financial system of the United States. 
 In sum, the Congress needs to create a GSE regulator with authority on a par with that of banking 
regulators, with a free hand to set appropriate capital standards, and with a clear process sanctioned 
by the Congress for placing a GSE in receivership. However, if the Congress takes only these actions, 
it runs the risk of solidifying investors’ perceptions that the GSEs are instruments of the government 
and  that  their  debt  is  equivalent  to  government  debt.  The  GSEs  will  have  increased  incentives  to 
continue to grow faster than the overall home mortgage market. Because they already purchase most 
conforming  mortgages,  they,  like  all  effective  profit-maximizing  organizations,  will  be  seeking  new 
avenues to expand the scope of their operations, assisted by a subsidy that their existing or potential 
competitors do not enjoy. 
Thus,  GSEs  need  to  be  limited  in  the  issuance  of  GSE  debt  and  in  the  purchase  of  assets,  both 
mortgages and nonmortgages, that they hold. Fannie and Freddie should be encouraged to continue 
to expand mortgage securitization, keeping mortgage markets deep and liquid while limiting the size of 
their  portfolios.  This  action  will  allow  the  mortgage  markets  to  support  homeownership  and 
homebuilding  in  a  manner  consistent  with  preserving  the  safe  and  sound  financial  markets  of  the 
United States. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 5
