Kishori J Udeshi: Role of central bankers in an emerging economy like India 
Address  by  Ms  Kishori  J  Udeshi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Finance 
Convention of The Wellingkar Institute of Management, Mumbai, 19 March 2004. 
Ms  Kishori  J  Udeshi  is  grateful  to  Shri  Rajiv  Ranjan,  Director,  Department  of  Economic  Analysis  &  Policy,  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, for his assistance. 
 Dr. Kanu Doshi was kind enough to leave the choice of topic for today’s lecture, to be decided by me. I 
chose  this  topic  as  I  consider  it  to  be  one  which  would  perhaps  be  of  interest  to  bright  and  young 
students  and  one  of  contemporary  relevance.  Although  the  role  of  central  banking  is  extensively 
discussed in the literature on monetary economics, the role of central bankers has remained obscure 
as  central  bankers  were  traditionally  meant  to  operate  in  anonymity  and  therefore  their  public 
accountability  was  unclear.  Governor  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  highlighted  this  neglect  of  the  central  banker 
while adducing to a common perspective that ‘the central banker is neither fish nor fowl; neither an 
academician nor a banker’. A serious research on why central bankers have been neglected brings to 
the fore several useful insights about the role of central bankers in general and in emerging countries 
in particular.  
First, a principal reason for lack of focus on the role of the central banker is the common perception 
that  the  central  banker  involves  itself  only  with  the  discharge  of  certain  specialised  and  arcane 
functions.  Such  a  perspective  derives  justification  from  extreme  generalization  of  central  banking 
functions, and a common set of instruments used for monetary control to achieve a common set of 
objectives  such  as  price  stability  and  sustained  economic  growth.  Such  a  generalised  perspective, 
however, lacks a serious appeal. Should we say that a central banker from a developed country is no 
different from that of a developing or emerging country? In particular, should we compare a central 
banker  from  United  States,  or  United  Kingdom  with  the  central  banker  of  a  small  underdeveloped 
economy.  
Second, central banks are considered as monopoly institutions in their areas of activities. There is a 
common perception that it is only in a competitive environment that organisations and their managers 
can  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  distinctive  and  core  competencies.  Even  though  central  banks  are 
monopoly  institutions,  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  document  the  differential  effectiveness  of 
public policy, even though the same set of instruments are used across countries. Evidence shows 
that  economic  policies  may  be  more  effective  in  some  countries  but  less  effective  in  others.  In  the 
context of central banks, styles of monetary management differ significantly across countries due to 
differences in socio-economic-technological-institutional environment.  
A third viewpoint is that central bankers perform only macro-level functions and thus, do not have a 
feel  of  micro-level  operations.  This  viewpoint  is  erroneous.  Central  banks  sometimes  do  have  to 
engage in micro-level functions. 
Central banking functions 
Modern day central banking extends far beyond the domain of traditional functions such as currency 
management, banker to Government and promoting financial soundness. These re-orientations have 
been the natural corollary of pursuing monetary policy measures that are focused on definitive, well-
defined and quantifiable objectives.  
Central banks in emerging economies differ from their counterparts of developed countries in several 
ways. In some developed countries, central banks are vested only with the conduct of monetary policy. 
In most emerging countries, central banks, besides monetary policy, also shoulder the responsibilities 
of debt management, and regulation/supervision of banks and financial institutions. Even in regard to 
the conduct of monetary policy, central banks in emerging economies have to contend with several 
objectives, and distinct trade-offs as compared with some developed countries which pursue a single 
objective  of  price  stability.  While  pursuing  multiple  objectives,  and  managing  complex  trade-offs, 
central banks in emerging countries assume the responsibility of looking after the interests of several 
agents  including  depositors,  intermediaries,  government,  business,  and  external  trade.  In  regard  to 
choice  of  instruments,  given  the  level  of  market  development,  and  multiple  objectives,  emerging 
countries  cannot  entirely  rely  on  single  instrument  such  as  interest  rates.  Rather,  central  banks  in 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
emerging countries prefer a judicious mix of interest rates, cash reserves, and other instruments. The 
most  striking  feature  of  central  banking  in  emerging  countries  pertains  to  their  critical  role  in 
development of financial markets and active involvement in the institution building process.  
Institution building  
In  the  Indian  context,  the  RBI,  in  consultation  with  the  Government,  has  played  a  major  role  in 
institution  building  since  independence.  Efforts  in  this  direction  encompass  RBI’s  contribution  to 
development of commercial banking, development finance institutions in the areas of agriculture and 
industry,  and  specialised  institutions  for  development  of  financial  markets.  After  initiation  of  the 
economic  reforms  of  the  early  1990s,  the  role  of  RBI  in  the  area  of  developing  financial  markets 
particularly  the  government  securities,  money  markets  and  payment  and  settlement  systems,  have 
come to the fore. Moreover, in a global environment,  with increasing integration of the international 
economy, the RBI’s role as the regulator and supervisor of commercial banks and financial institutions 
has  assumed  a  central  place  in  promoting  transparency  and  credibility  of  institutions  and  monetary 
and financial policies.  
Monetary policy  
Most central bankers presently enjoy independence in choosing their policy instrument and have used 
it to rely on  setting short-term interest rates. As a logical offshoot, many central banks in emerging 
markets  are  giving  more  exposures  to  pursuing  price  stability  as  one  of  the  main  objectives  of 
monetary policy. In the RBI, there is a Financial Markets Committee (FMC), which meets daily before 
the  opening  of  the  markets  and  at  times  more  frequently,  when  the  situation  warrants.  The  FMC 
reviews the liquidity and interest rate situation in financial markets and advises top management on 
the  course  of  action  that would  be  required by  RBI  during  the  day.  This  institutionalised  framework 
helps  the  RBI  to  take  an  integrated  view  on  all-important  decisions  having  an  impact  on  financial 
markets. 
Economists  have  long  debated  as  to  what  should  be  the  objective(s)  of  monetary  policy.  In  most 
developed  countries,  monetary  stability,  defined  as  the  price  stability,  constitutes  the  dominant 
objective  of  monetary  policy.  In  emerging  economies,  central  banks  have  to  contend  with  several 
concerns;  price  stability,  sustained  growth,  financial  system’s  stability,  stable  exchange  rate,  and 
operating  objectives  of  liquidity  management.  The  animated  discussion  on  central  bank  objectives 
ranges  broadly  between  single  objective  and  multiple  objectives.  Such  discussion  entails  a  generic 
analysis of advantages and disadvantages of single or multiple objectives, and the nature, and scope 
of central banking organisation, which differs across the country groups of developed and emerging 
countries due to significant difference in socio-economic-technological-institutional environment.  
Adoption of a single objective of monetary policy by central banks is based on the arguments that (i) 
monetary  policy  should concentrate  its instruments  on  one  objective,  free  from  any  policy  trade-off, 
thereby  strengthening  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy;  (ii)  a  single  objective  promotes 
transparency,  accountability  and  independence  of  monetary  policy;  (iii)  a  single  objective  is  more 
realistic in a deregulated and globalised economic and financial system; and (iv) it is easier to observe 
the channels of transmission, and therefore, easier to determine the ‘right’ instruments. Since a central 
bank’s  monetary  policy  actions  could  involve  several  implications  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the 
counter-arguments against a single objective derive from the fact that (i) economic objectives should 
be  achieved  simultaneously  (in  harmony),  and  a  single  objective  may  disrupt  that  harmony;  (ii) 
monetary policy by itself may not be able to bring down inflation further and other wings of policy have 
to be deployed.  
The  case  for  multiple  objectives  for  central  banks  entails  “co-ordination”  of  a  range  of  policies  and 
thus, a spectrum of objectives. The principal reason as to why central banks in emerging economies 
have  to  contend  with  multiple  objectives,  or  at  least  dual  objectives  of  price  stability  and  economic 
growth derives from the concerns of socio-economic-political systems. James Tobin, a Nobel laureate 
economist, argued that since central banks form an integral part of government, they cannot dissociate 
from the major objectives of the society, which includes sustained economic growth and price stability. 
William  Poole,  a  revered  central  banker  viewed  that  economic  growth  is  a  citizens’  objective  and 
central bankers too are citizens.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
Currency  management  is  one  of  the  most  important  traditional  function  of  central  banks  in  most 
countries. Central banks serve as a service provider to issue and distribute currency notes and coins. 
In  most  developed countries,  high degree  of  homogeneity  in  the  society  as  reflected  in  the  culture, 
language, tastes and preferences of the public and the efficient distribution of income could induce a 
homogenous pattern of currency demand and thus, facilitate to achieve better currency management 
as  compared  with  that  of  developing  countries.  In  developing  countries,  significant  diversity  in 
socio-economic  development  across  regions  induce  completely  different  currency  preference  of  the 
public  across  regions,  and  across  demographic  segments,  thus,  entailing  dynamic  and  complex 
currency management tasks for central bankers. What is noteworthy is the way in which technology 
has been harnessed to bring about improvement in currency management. The RBI performs the role 
of currency management with the objectives of ensuring adequate availability of coins and notes and 
maintaining the quality of notes in circulation. This is done through its 18 Regional issue offices/sub 
offices and a wide network of currency chests, repositories and small coin depots spread across the 
country. In pursuance of the Clean Note Policy, efforts are being made to improve the quality of notes 
in circulation.  
In most emerging markets including India, central banks manage Government debts. Quite apart from 
the need to decide on issues such as the kind of auctioning, the types of securities to be auctioned 
and  the  maturity  profile  of  the  securities,  there  remains  the  issue  of  the  extent  of  support  that  the 
central bank and commercial banks should extend to the Government borrowing programme. This is 
important from not only the point of view of deepening the Government securities markets, but also in 
terms of its the flow and cost of credit to the commercial sector. As adviser to Government, central 
bankers need to interact intimately with the Government on fiscal policy matters and provide a unified 
and  coherent  signal  to  the  market  on  the  macro  policy  stance.  In  recent  years,  central  banks  have 
become pro-active in the area of structural reforms.  
The Indian case provides an excellent testimony towards this point. The strategy of financial reforms, 
was worked out in close coordination with the Government, and undertaken in appropriate sequential 
steps and synchronised with real sector reforms. This was all the more relevant in the Indian scenario 
where the Government has a significant stake in the banking system and consequently, any disruption 
in  the  financial  structure  could  have  significant  budgetary  implications.  The  RBI  has  undertaken 
wide-ranging  reforms  to  deepen  and  widen  the  financial  markets  -  money  market,  Government 
securities market and foreign exchange market. These markets have become vibrant and competitive.  
Central  bankers,  in  the  present  era,  rely  on  a  combination  of  policy  measures  in  their  day-to-day 
operations.  They  undertake  combinations  of  actions  primarily  to  provide  signals  about  their  policy 
stance  to  market  participants.  Reforms  of  the  tools  of  monetary  policy  have  therefore  gained 
prominence. Such reforms have been made possible by the growing emphasis on indirect instruments 
of monetary control and the de-emphasis on direct instruments of policy. Open market operations, in 
such a milieu, have grown in importance. Interest rate flexibility is another tool. A major instrument of 
statutory pre-emption, such as the Cash Reserve Ratio has been progressively de-emphasized and 
instead, short-term instruments, such as the Repo Rate and in the medium-term, instruments such as 
Bank Rate have become important. Likewise, in several instances, the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), 
an erstwhile important prudential measure, has increasingly been scaled down. The idea inherent in 
these transformations in the approach to monetary policy is to provide banks with maximum freedom 
in their portfolio choice, without losing sight of the risks in asset accretion, and to provide opportunity 
to  ensure  that  their  resource  allocation  is  optimal.  Given  the  concerns  of  an  emerging  economy, 
certain portion of banks resources are often prescribed to be allotted under the ‘priority sector norms’; 
but in this case as well, the range of activities covered under priority sector has been expanded to 
provide greater choice to banks. And let us not forget the central bank’s authority and power of “moral 
suasion” which can act as a supervisory and regulatory force, even when no explicit oversight of the 
financial system is in place. 
Liquidity determination is the key to the efficiency of the actions of the monetary authorities. As the 
economy increasingly opens up, the interactions between domestic and external markets are expected 
to impinge on liquidity as much as the growth impulses from within the economy. Liquidity however is 
not  static,  in  view  of  the  speed  of  transactions  and  settlements  and  the  sharp  increase  in  financial 
innovations. Since liquidity is a function of both domestic monetary policies as much as external sector 
policies and debt management strategy, modern day central bankers are confronted with the enviable 
task of balancing a tightrope walk to ensure that the economy remains on track. 
As  bankers  to  banks,  central  bankers  tend  to  exercise  considerable  discretion  and  rarely  go  by 
straightjacket  rule-based  methods.  While  the  ‘lender-of-the-last’  resort  function  of  the  central  banks 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
continues to be important, in addition, the central bank provides access to refinance facilities and a 
whole  host  of  services,  as  in  the  matter  of  payments  and  settlement,  funds  transfer,  settling  of 
government securities through the NDS and the like.  
Another area where central bankers of emerging countries have assumed new responsibilities pertains 
to managing the economy in response to external developments in the context of globalisation. Deputy 
Governor Dr. Rakesh Mohan has rightly pointed out that globalisation has offered several benefits as 
well as a host of challenges. In an increasingly global environment, countries have to adapt to greater 
internationalisation of economic policies. In this regard, central bankers in emerging countries have to 
be  alert  to  international  developments  and  acquire  skills  in  the  areas  of  international  banking, 
international  finance  and  economics,  international  regulations  and  international  relations  in  order  to 
function effectively while managing the monetary and financial conditions of the economy. 
In the area of banking soundness, central banks in emerging markets have become major initiators of 
activity.  Financial  supervision,  whether  on-site  or  off-site,  has  assumed  prominence  in  the  face  of 
market imperfections and ensuring depositor protection. It is widely recognised that the Asian crisis 
was  to  a  large  extent,  the  outcome  of  lax  supervisory  standards  pursued  in  these  crisis-ridden 
economies. The soundness of banks and other non-bank entities depend not only on the operation of 
these  entities,  but  also  the  efficacy  of  the  supervisory  process.  In  this  context,  the  Core  Principles, 
enunciated  by  the  BIS  in  1997,  have  quickly  become  a  benchmark and we  in  the  RBI  are  by  now, 
compliant  with  most  of  these  Principles.  In  view  of  the  growing  risks  that  banking  entails  and  the 
scarcity of supervisory resources, many central banks are increasingly moving towards a risk-based 
approach  to  supervision  in  order  to  ensure  optimum  utilisation  of  supervisory  resources.  Following 
recent advancements, central banks have developed macro-prudential indicators in order to monitor 
the health of financial entities within the overall economic environment in which they operate. 
High  quality  regulation  and  supervision,  which  contribute  directly  to  improvements  in  operating 
efficiency, are beneficial for emerging countries since efficiency in the allocation of resources to most 
productive  sectors  cannot  be  achieved  and  sustained  without  achieving  operating  efficiency. 
Regulation  and  supervision  of  institutions  is,  however,  not  a  simple  task  especially  in  the  Indian 
context as it involves a large network of banks and other financial institutions and their large number of 
branches  spread  over  the  entire  country.  Banks  and  their  branches  too  involve  a  wide  network  of 
inter-action  with  different  market  segments  owing  to  diversified  portfolios  in  a  deregulated 
environment. In this context, central bankers have to be highly skilled, vibrant and most dynamic in 
order to be effective in regulation and supervision.  
In several countries, central banks assume a pivotal place in the payments and settlements system. 
As  financial  transactions  become  increasingly  complex,  there  arises  the  need  to  harness  financial 
markets to fully exploit the advances in information technology and communications networking. Some 
important research studies show that a relatively large involvement of the central bank in the financial 
system contributes to financial development. For emerging countries, the central bank involvement in 
the  payment  system  enhances  financial  development.  There  is  a  considered  view  that  an  efficient 
payment  and  settlement  system  contributes  to  operating  and  allocation  efficiencies  of  the  financial 
system and thus, overall economic growth. Payments and settlement systems in emerging countries 
involve several features, which are distinct from that of developed countries.  
One of the guiding principles followed by RBI in the reforms in the payment and settlement systems 
has  been  the  need  to  provide  for  a  safe,  secure  and  efficient  systems.  RBI  has  identified  the 
Systemically Important Financial Intermediaries (SIFI), which have the propensity for systemic risks. 
The  introduction  of  screen  based  trading  in  Government  securities  following  the  delivery  versus 
payment model in the form of Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) was a milestone in this regard. The 
commencement of foreign exchange clearing by the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. aimed at net 
settlement  of  the  foreign  exchange  transactions  is  a  major  step  forward,  which  has  brought  about 
more efficiency and safety. The RBI has also embarked upon the introduction of a Real Time Gross 
Settlement (RTGS) System for settlement of inter-bank and customer related funds transfers on a real 
time  mode.  Going  beyond  technological  upgradation,  the  issue  also  remains  of  formulating  an 
appropriate  legal  framework,  in  which  transactions  could  take  place  in  a  safe,  sound  and  secured 
manner. The growth of e-transactions and ‘digital signatures’ is a case in point.  
As  you  would  be  aware,  the  challenges  to  central  bankers  in  the  present  day  are  manifold  and  I 
venture  to  list  out  a  few  for  this  discerning  audience.  First  the  challenge  of  financial  sector 
liberalisation.  While  competitive  financial  markets  no  doubt  aid  in  efficient  allocation  of  resources, 
failure or even disruptions in one segment of the financial sector can have serious ‘contagion effects’ 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2004
throughout the rest of the economy. Thus central bankers need to be vigilant and alert to domestic and 
external developments.  
There also remains the challenge of ensuring soundness of financial institutions. The supervision of 
the  financial  system  is  getting  increasingly  complicated  with  the  growth  of  ‘one-stop-banking’  and 
conglomerates as well as off-shore financial activities operating in multiple segments of the financial 
markets, leading to blurring of distinction among the various segments themselves. Repeated financial 
crises  across  the  world  have  provided  graphic  evidence  of  the  fact  that  financial  disruptions  can 
engender  serious  output  costs.  In  this  context,  the  need  for  effective  supervision  can  hardly  be 
underscored.  
In conclusion, central banking is passing through challenging yet exciting times. While developments 
within  the  country  charter  its  transformation,  the  experience  of  other  countries  provides  invaluable 
lessons in the approach to promote growth, whilst maintaining price stability.  
All in all, the life of a central banker is one of anonymity, staid and boring. It is only in moments when 
the  going  is  tough  that  central  bankers  emerge  from  isolation  and  lean  against  the  wind  to  battle 
splenetic insurmountable odds. Central bankers choose their profession because they are driven by a 
commitment  to  public  service,  which  they  hold  dearer  to  themselves  irrespective  of  financial 
remuneration. The conduct of central banking inherently involves the ultimate good of the society. An 
inappropriate choice of instruments or targets can lead to large losses of macro-economic well being. 
Ultimately, all citizens are stake holders in the central bank. Former Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan rightly 
referred  to  central  banks  as  the  public’s  own  institutions.  Every  central  banker  is  conscious  of 
operating at the apex of the financial system and at the centre of the macro-economic management, 
continuously balancing risks against every policy action. In this sense, a central banker has to possess 
certain  unique  qualities  -  integrity  and  professionalism  of  the  highest  order,  finely  honed  analytical 
skills,  the  capability  to  take  decisions  under  difficult  circumstances,  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
manner in which the economy functions, adaptability and a dynamism with which to respond to a life of 
continuous change and challenge. What is more they have to avoid partisanship and command public 
support. Together, these attributes distinguish a central banker as a leader and manager of people, 
situations and money, always dedicated to service to the nation. No wonder that central bankers are 
called priests at the temple of money. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 5
