Martín Redrado: Central Bank of Argentina’s key mission for the next six years 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, before the Senate, Buenos 
Aires, 5 October 2004. 
 Thank  you  very  much,  Mr.  Vicepresident,  Mr.  Chairman  of  the  Agreements  Committee.  On  the 
occasion of my first public speech I will present the guidelines of the office Mr. President has entrusted 
to me for the next six years. 
As Chairman of the Central Bank’s Board, I wish to deliver on a very clear and precise mission, which 
is intended in the first place for the more than 2,300 employees I am in charge of leading in the coming 
years, but also for the general public and the Senate so that it may assess our management’s goals 
and how we attain them over this 6-year term. 
I would like to underline that the Central Bank’s key mission for the next six years is to make the peso 
become a store of value for the Argentine people as a whole. In recent times, we have succeeded in 
recovering  the  peso,  our  country’s  currency,  as  a  transaction  reserve.  The  Argentine  people  have 
resumed transactions in pesos. However, our mission’s main objective is to restore the peso’s power 
in  terms  of  saving,  because  only  by  consolidating  Argentine  savings  in  pesos  can  we  encourage  a 
vigorous investment process that should permit the fulfillment of the financial system’s major role in 
transforming  Argentine  savings  into  investment,  into  a  productive  investment  that  creates  more 
employment, more well-being and more possibilities for the population as a whole. 
In a word, the major role of accomplishing these targets and of making the peso become a store of 
value implies that every monetary policymaker decides what instruments will be used. 
On some occasions throughout our history, our exchange rate has been pegged as an anchor for our 
monetary policy. Other countries instead have pegged their interest rate. I would like to be very clear 
on this point - the Central Bank of Argentina has established that an inflation targeting approach is the 
Bank’s best contribution to allowing our people to save in pesos and to appreciating our people’s real 
wages. This is our Bank’s major role. It may be seen as an indirect and subtle role in furthering well-
being and real wage growth, but protecting our currency’s value indeed leads to encouraging saving in 
pesos and therefore long-term saving. 
And now, I would like to focus on this inflation targeting policy because I feel it has caused enough 
confusion, at least in the public opinion and perhaps among some analysts. 
First, the concept of inflation targets allows the Central Bank to set goals on an annual or several-year 
basis. These goals help underpin the expectations of the citizenry, investors and producers, and serve 
as  an  anchor  for  decision-making  regarding  investment,  consumption,  and  expense.  Therefore, 
monetary policy tools should become neither a dogma nor a fetish. The monetary policy will be guided 
by  inflation  targets,  which  does  not  imply  that  the  Central  Bank’s  Governor,  Board,  and 
2,300 employees  working  with  me  as  from  September  23  should  be  focused  solely  on  the  inflation 
rate. It is a matter of nuances. 
The  Central  Bank’s  Governor  must  naturally  focus  on  the  inflation  rate  but  also  on  other  economic 
variables, especially on growth, employment and income distribution. It is a matter of nuances. This 
Board  will  clearly  make  its  monetary  policy  hinge  upon  inflation  targeting,  but  it  will  not  be  a  blind 
Board.  It  will  not  be  a  Board  working  as  if  on  a  desert  island,  but  it  will  consider  all  the  economic 
variables and, at the same time, base its credibility on the establishment of these goals. 
And  as  the  establishment  of  these  goals  is  related  to  their  communication  to  the  general  public,  I 
would like to make a commitment with all of you, with the Budget and Treasury Committee, and with 
the Finance Committee. Every three months, I will personally report on the inflation targets, on how the 
purpose  of  this  monetary  program  will  be  met,  so  that  we  can  recover  the  budding  credibility  our 
monetary policy is getting after attaining the expected targets over the last 16 running months. 
Credibility can only be built by seeking the fulfillment of those goals on a step-by-step and daily basis. 
I would like to point out the first goal of my office, namely to consolidate the peso as a store of value. 
But, as any other Central Bank, I intend that the interest rates and reference rates set by the Central 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
Bank and especially what the economists know as government bond yields should become a key tool 
in economic policy, despite their decline in recent years. 
When  you  analyze,  for  instance,  the  management  of  other  central  banks,  you  see  how  they  set  a 
short-term reference rate on a monthly or two-month basis. This not only provides a further monetary 
policy  tool  that  enables  us  to  control  inflation  expectations  but  also  serves  as  a  benchmark  for  the 
financial system in the first place, and then for the private sector. It allows us to correlate a variety of 
yields based upon real facts. Thus, efforts have already been made to set a rate and a 3-year yield 
curve. The idea is to establish a short-term reference rate and then extend the terms so that long-term 
funding  may  be  obtained.  Naturally,  if  we  are  thinking  in  terms  of  strengthening,  as  stated  by 
Mr. Vicepresident upon opening this session, one of the major challenges is the creation of long-term 
credit in pesos. And when we complete our office on September 23, 2010, we will be judged by two 
factors  -  the  maintenance  of  currency  stability,  real  wages,  and  the  purchasing  power,  and  our 
contribution  to  Argentina’s  growth  through  the  creation  of  a  medium-  and  long-term  credit  market, 
which  is  still  non-existent  in  our  country.  With  this  target  in  mind,  it  is  of  course  necessary  to 
strengthen financial institutions in terms of liquidity and solvency. 
We must therefore encourage banking services, that is, the possibility of having more deposits in the 
financial system, of having the financial system provide more services in terms of payment services to 
the population as a whole. Which is our starting point? It is important to know which is our frame of 
reference. I will briefly outline the international and domestic frames because we must be aware of the 
risks involved in the international scenario, which also account for the US current account deficit. 
As you all know the US currently suffer from a high current account deficit, today amounting to nearly 
6% of their GDP, along with a fiscal deficit. In my opinion, if an economic analyst had a look at the 
figures of the US economy unaware of the country in question, it could easily forecast that it would 
soon  run  into  trouble.  And  the  Chairman  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  told  me  that  an  adjustment  is 
unavoidable. I cannot say when or how this will occur, but I can say that there will be an increase in 
interest rates, and that next year’s scenario will be one of growth. For the first time, all the regions in 
the world are growing, both the US, at a 4% rate, the EU, at a 2% rate, Latin America, whose economy 
has begun to pick up again at a 3.5% rate, and Japan, which after a long recession is growing at a 
4% rate, although this may prove unsustainable over time. 
We  can  therefore  state  that  we  have  an  interest  rate  increase  scenario.  The  Federal  Reserve  has 
already raised the short-term rate, the federal funds rate, and we can see that the gap between the 
short  and  long-term  rates  has  been  reduced.  Today  the  world  is  witnessing  an  increase  in  interest 
rates, which so far has been very gradual. I would like to touch especially on some issues that were 
discussed  in  Washington  last  weekend.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  made  a  special  point  of  it  and 
Dr. Greenspan has asked the monetary authorities worldwide for flexibility, so that they may be in a 
position to absorb any shocks arising in the international markets. The main request by the US today 
is that China should loosen the exchange rate peg to the dollar. 
China has maintained a pegged rate regime. Its Central Bank has the largest reserves in the world, 
with US$ 450 billion, and if the Chinese administration floated the Renminbi, their currency would be 
revalued. What would a revaluation bring about? It would make Chinese goods more expensive and it 
would hamper China’s massive exports, especially to the US. Just to give you an idea, the US have a 
trade  deficit  on  the  order  of  US$  110  billion  with  China,  and  are  therefore  requesting  a  flexible 
exchange rate. Let me tell you that on Friday I had lunch with the Governor of the Central Bank of 
China. We discussed the new state policy pursued by our president aiming at a rapprochement with 
the Pacific Asia region, in particular with China, as our countries undoubtedly complement each other 
in many ways. The Governor then said that ‘we will not float our currency. The US can rest assured 
that  we  will  continue  to  buy  US  Treasury  bonds,  so  that  there  is  nothing  to  be  concerned  about.’ 
Summing  up,  as  far  as  the  central  banks  go,  no  changes  are  expected  in  their  current  asset 
composition, given that many of these banks in Southeast Asia hold a large number of US Treasury 
bonds. However, in this scenario the private sector might claim that it has reached a cap with regard to 
US asset holdings, so that a higher increase in interest rates could follow. 
Last time an increase in interest rates took place world wide, during 93-95, we suffered the Tequila 
effect.  But  then  Latin  America’s  economic  policy  as  a  whole  was  totally  different  from  today’s. 
Basically, most economies had a fixed exchange rate, with growing indebtedness and expanding fiscal 
policies. Today’s scenario is just the opposite. First, we are less dependent upon foreign capital. Most 
of our countries have a balanced current account. In Argentina’s case, you all know that we have a 
large  trade  surplus  and  therefore  a  good  dollar  inflow.  We  also  have  more  flexible  exchange  rate 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
regimes and more cautious fiscal policies. It is true, however, that our country still has to deal with a 
high indebtedness level inherited from the past. 
What  I  mean  by  this  is  that,  as  far  as  any  likely  adjustments  in  the  international  economy  are 
concerned,  we  currently  have  a  more  flexible  monetary,  fiscal,  and  financial  structure.  What  Alan 
Greenspan  stated  on  Saturday  is  clearly  happening  in  Argentina.  Today  our  country  has  enough 
flexibility to adjust to any unexpected events arising in the international scenario. 
Let  us  now  focus  on  the  domestic  scenario.  At  the  moment,  Argentina  basically  has  an  economic 
policy  structure  with  a  very  conscientious  fiscal  policy  and  a  primary  surplus  on  the  order  of 
4 percentage points of GDP. With a current account surplus, Argentina’s exports this year will be worth 
US$  11.5  billion  more  than  its  imports.  This  means  funding  for  our  companies  and  exchange  rate 
stability. The Central Bank’s projections for next year also indicate a steady continuity of surplus. If an 
economy has fiscal strength as well as strength in the foreign sector, it has a positive cashflow and 
enough backing to face needs and any external crisis. In this scenario, ours is a flexible but cautious 
monetary  policy.  We  have  therefore  been  capable  of  partly  overcoming  our  major  worry,  and  I  am 
saying this not as an economist or as the Governor of the Central Bank but as an Argentine citizen. 
We have succeeded in improving our social indices, with a decrease in poverty and unemployment 
levels. There is of course still a huge amount of work ahead. 
As  to  the  fiscal  accounts,  we  can  see  that  on  the  right  axis  the  fiscal  surplus  accounts  for  almost 
4 percentage points of our GDP. On the left axis, in red, we have primary expenses, income. There is 
clearly  a  surplus  providing  good  backing  for  healthy  policies.  Finally,  while  exports  and  imports  are 
growing, some gaps still exist. We have enough cashflow to honor our commitments and to create a 
more fluid financial system and exchange rate regime. 
Let us now focus on the core of this presentation, that is, our monetary policy. You should be left with 
no  doubts  as  to  how  you  can  assess  our  performance  every  time  we  come  here  or  whenever  you 
deem it necessary. This relates to the credibility of the monetary targets and inflation expectations as 
an anchor, as a frame of reference where the general public, the consumers, and the companies can 
act. And it must be acknowledged that we have built on the basis of a credibility that has increased 
over the last few months. 
First, there is a consensus on inflation expectations, as shown in the survey conducted by the Central 
Bank among more than 50 research agencies, consulting firms, etc. (Survey on Market Expectations). 
The range we have included here, which also appears in the 3-year Program as agreed upon with the 
International Monetary Fund for next year, is between 5% and 8%, and 7.9% as per the budget. Let us 
see how expectations are falling halfway through these figures, which implies that the targets set by 
the Central Bank are credible because everyone expects the inflation rate to drop between 5% or 8%. 
In  terms  of  distribution,  i.e.,  the  number  of  firms,  consultants  or  foundations  forecasting  inflation 
between  7%  and  9%,  there  are  no  great  differences  concerning  expectations.  This  means,  as 
reported,  that  the  Central  Bank’s  monetary  policy  is  credible  both  for  the  general  public  and  the 
analysts. 
The  Central  Bank  has  been  showing  a  consistent  monetary  policy  and  has  set  quantitative  targets 
considering  the  severe  instability  suffered  in  recent  years.  Therefore,  the  Bank  has  adopted  a 
monetary base and has set an expanded monetary base as a target, which has allowed us to move 
forward. However, I am convinced that the best way to work in future is by establishing an inflation 
targeting policy. 
As to monetary issues, in recent months the monetary base has remained within the target inflation 
band as agreed upon in the 3-year program, which strengthens credibility and keeps the inflation rate 
down. 
As  to  whether  there  is  a  big  amount  of  money,  as  to  whether  this  amount  has  been  increased  too 
much in recent years, or whether there is still enough room for a monetary base expansion, I would 
like to show you which are the Central Bank’s current monetary contraction tools or which are the tools 
available today in the market to absorb and control an oversized monetary base expansion. 
First,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  is  a  surplus  administration  with  a  tightening  approach  because  it 
saves more than it spends. Also, the quasi-monies have been absorbed. The financial sector follows 
an  equally  tightening  approach.  During  2002,  a  series  of  rediscounts  were  granted  with  a  view  to 
assisting  financial  institutions  face  the  bank  run.  Now,  as  agreed,  they  are  repaying  them  to  the 
Central Bank, and this has led to monetary contraction. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
There is also the Central Bank bills, the so-called LEBACs, which have also served as a monetary 
absorption instrument. Let us see now how they are being used to set a longterm rate. And which has 
been the major source of expansion? What I have just pointed out. Thanks to the dollars coming from 
foreign trade, that is, to Argentina’s foreign trade surplus the Central Bank has been able to buy those 
dollars, issue pesos, increase reserves and circulation. 
What  do  I  mean  by  this?  We  are  in  a  position  to  have  this  expansion  capacity  because  we  have 
reached a balance. Any monetary policy must, by definition, be a cautious one, a policy that seeks a 
balance. Here are three contraction sources and only one expansion source, which is not illegitimate 
but sound. Our country’s productive integration with the rest of the world is creating the resources the 
Central Bank is currently acquiring. 
I would like to comment on something the economic analysts have been discussing these last days. Is 
there a large or a small amount of money? Has there been a substantial currency issue? There was a 
significant increase when the more than 6 billion in quasi-monies were absorbed. But then we have 
always maintained the same monetary program, with an increase in the amount of money. 
However, it is clear that in any economy we focus on other monetary instruments apart from money in 
circulation, such as sight deposits and time deposits. And when we analyze our country in terms of 
further  monetary  instruments,  that  is,  not  only  considering  the  notes  and  coins  in  the  hands  of  the 
public  but  also  the  checking  account  deposits,  the  sight  deposits,  and  especially  the  time  deposits, 
there is still plenty of room for growth. 
We should note that this scenario of monetary stability has made a major contribution. There is the 
idea that the Central Bank intervenes considerably in the exchange market, and in fact I can show you 
that the volumes operated by the Central Bank are becoming less and less significant. We want to 
provide predictability and that the Central Bank’s interventions should be predictable. A Central Bank 
should not come up with surprises. And this has also enabled us to recover our reserves. 
I will therefore comment briefly on this other instrument which in my opinion is of great importance, 
namely, setting an interest rate, a market reference rate. And we can see what has happened with the 
so-called  LEBACs.  Since  January  2003  rates  have  been  dropping,  while  maturity  terms  have 
increased.  On  average,  these  bills  mature  approximately  in  300  days,  having  started  at  less  than 
100 days. 
Our intention is to gradually extend maturity terms, so that bill auctions may not only show a drop in 
interest rates. And you have surely been able to assess the outcomes of last week’s first auction under 
the new authorities. We plan to continue on this path with every auction called by the Central Bank, 
that is, we do not want to use the LEBACs as an absorption instrument but basically as a reference 
rate. 
Another of our major goals will be to set what we know as a short-term reference rate. In May this 
year, owing to tax due dates, especially income tax, many companies had to borrow money from the 
interbanking market, which led to a significant cash demand. Following this, the Central Bank set a 
rate for swaps. As you know, swap operations consist in the Central Bank buying and buying back 
bonds to borrow or lend money. 
As way of example, today the Central Bank has set the so-called passive swaps corridor whereby the 
Central Bank borrows money from financial institutions at a 2.5% annual rate. It has also set an active 
swaps corridor with a 3.5% cap whereby the Central Bank lends money to these institutions. Market 
rates have gradually converged toward this corridor. Our intention is to use this economic policy tool 
as a way of converging toward and not just setting this market reference rate. 
At present, the pubic sector’s deposits in the Banco de la Nación and other public banks amount to 
30 billion pesos. Of the 100 billion pesos deposited in the financial system, a third corresponds to the 
public  sector.  Since  our  very  first  week  in  office,  our  Board  has  attempted  to  make  public  banks 
become more active in the swaps market, and in particular that we may reduce the gap in this corridor, 
today  between  3.5%  and  2.5%.  During  last  week,  we  have  seen  the  Banco  Nación  operate  with  a 
narrower corridor, lending money at a 2.8% annual rate. This shows that setting a reference rate and 
working jointly with the other public banks is already yielding fruit. 
I would now like to go back in history a bit to avoid tags. During the 80s Argentina’s monetary policy 
was  hyperexpansive.  The  Central  Bank  was  always  issuing  to  offset  the  imbalances  of  the  public 
sector. The monetary base was always expanding and never contracting. Therefore, the Central Bank 
contributed to the growing inflation and recession. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2004
In the 90s the capacity to conduct a monetary policy disappeared. The exchange rate was pegged and 
the  remaining  variables  had  to  adjust  to  that  exchange  rate.  The  Central  Bank  never  offsets 
imbalances and is not a lender of last resort, since this leads to deflation and economic recession, as 
happened between 1998 and 2002. 
Which  is  our  vision  concerning  the  Central  Bank’s  new  reality  for  the  next  decades?  A  flexible 
monetary  policy  capable  of  adjusting  but  at  the  same  time  extremely  cautious.  The  policy  must  be 
expansive when the economy so requires and it does not pose a threat to inflation stability. Basically, if 
we have a contractive fiscal policy we are in a position to generate an expansion policy. However, we 
are clearly focused on the inflation rate and inflation expectations for the coming years. And if inflation 
stability is threatened, the monetary policy must necessarily be of a contractive nature. 
Now some thoughts concerning the financial system. The adjustment strategy followed by our financial 
system is also an atypical strategy with regard to what happened under other crisis situations. In those 
cases, there was someone arriving with a 40 billion dollar check to recapitalize financial institutions. 
Argentina has not been given the possibility and its only asset has been time. And by capitalizing on 
time, financial institutions have had the chance to recover profitability, liquidity, and solvency. 
If we analyze the last quarter, loans have been growing at a 30% annual rate. Anyway, what in fact 
grows is the short-term loans. The long-term loan market is not active as yet, and although deposits 
are keeping an upward trend, the pace is very slow. 
The adjustment of the financial system has already been made, and I want to be very clear on this 
point. As to the employment rate, measured in thousands of people, today nearly 90,000 individuals 
work in the financial system. With regard to the financial institutions, there are currently 90 of them, 
and there has also been a reduction in the number of branches. We must acknowledge, however, that 
our financial system requires a greater lending capacity so that it may expand. 
In terms of loans to the private sector, they barely account for 8% of Argentina’s GDP in 2004. In 2000 
they accounted for 22%. We intend to raise this indicator to international levels with a view to creating 
more long-term loans in pesos for the people, more loans for households. 
We  should  also  ensure  a  wider  credit  distribution.  The  industrial  sector  is  receiving  3.8%  of  asset 
financing and primary production 2.7%. These figures show us the road map, the diversification, the 
increase we must allocate to these sectors. But an increase in loans requires a scenario of solvency 
and liquidity, and to this end loan loss allowances should increase, as they have actually done and the 
Central  Bank  must  safeguard  this  rise.  Furthermore,  the  non-performing  portfolio  must  drop  with 
respect to total financing. Today we must face a series of challenges - our deposits have very short 
terms,  there  is  a  mismatch  in  interest rates  and  in assets and  liabilities adjustments.  As  you  know, 
some  liabilities  in  the  financial  system  are  currently  adjusted  by  the  CER  index;  hence  the  need  to 
work on risk coverage tools. 
Another  major  goal  is  to  set  regulations  that  may  allow  small  and  medium-size  businesses  recover 
access to credit, that may allow credit back to companies which due to the crisis have been forced to 
refinance their debt. In general, there is a flaw in the financial system and in our control system which 
to me is critical, namely, looking back instead of looking ahead. Any business must be judged by its 
payment capacity, its business plan, its volume of exports and of sales, its growth expectations, and in 
many cases, to put it clearly, the banks, the Central Bank’s past and current regulation looks at the 
picture rather than watching the movie, that is, it makes an equity analysis. 
Every time we go to the bank we are asked what kind of real collateral we can offer, and in fact the 
banks’  business  is  not  to  be  real  estate  agents.  Our  aim  should  not  be  for banks  to  get houses  or 
apartments or factories, the real collateral, when things go wrong, but to make a true assessment of 
future risks. The financial system should not be a real estate agent but should be capable of efficiently 
managing people’s savings and invest them productively. 
Therefore, the first thing is to be able to give a debtor a one rating, even if he has refinanced. In the 
past,  if  someone  had  refinanced  his  debt,  he  could  no  longer  get  new  loans.  But  this  is  changing. 
However, we must avoid focusing so much on equity. 
So I think there is much work ahead, and in this sense we are going to listen to everyone’s opinion. 
You  know  that  our  approach  is  to  seek  a  consensus,  and  this  has  been  demonstrated  during  our 
recent office in the public sector. To seek a consensus because these policies should neither favor a 
given party nor be ideological. These policies should belong to the Argentine people as a whole, and 
we shall work  with all  the  sectors,  with  the  productive  sectors,  with  a  view  to loosening  regulations 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 5
without compromising on solvency or liquidity, so that more and more people may access credit and 
the regionalization of credit may be implemented. And in this sense the Executive Power’s action with 
regard to credit unions has been significant. We plan to help advance this issue as we believe that 
credit should reach all the corners of our country, and we are therefore working in this direction. We 
want to improve regulatory standards so that they should be closer to our country’s reality, and thus 
generate credit for the private sector. 
But it is clear that the major challenge is that all our deposits are short term. We cannot request banks 
to give long-term loans if their whole funding is short term. That would be wishful thinking on our part. 
We should then note that the private sector deposits are stagnant. The only thing that is growing today 
is  the  public  sector  deposits.  But  time  deposits,  except  for  CER-adjusted  deposits,  are  markedly 
inactive. Hence the need for our management to focus on the creation of new instruments that may 
persuade people to save again. We should note that time deposits are decreasing while CER-adjusted 
deposits,  as  shown  by  the  blue  line,  are  increasing,  which  is  leading  to  the  mismatch  I  have  just 
mentioned. And this is an issue deserving our attention. What steps must be taken to generate long-
term funding? New instruments must be created, and perhaps one of the hallmarks of our office at the 
Argentine  Securities  Commission  (Comisión  Nacional  de  Valores)  was  the  introduction  of  new 
transparency regulations as well as the creation of a series of new instruments. As head of the Central 
Bank’s new administration, I also intend to introduce a number of new instruments that may allow us to 
obtain long-term funding. 
To start with, we have to create adjustable corporate bonds that may be placed mostly with the AFJPs 
(Pension Funds Managers). Today the AFJPs receive 200 million pesos by way of private savings on 
a monthly basis, and this amount is turned into certificates of deposit, into short-term deposits. Hence 
the need to create instruments. We will have to work with Congress on the fiscal treatment of this type 
of bonds, so that the financial sector may place corporate bonds at four, five or ten years. So, if it has 
ten-year funds, it may be able to relend them also at ten years. 
We must also create what is known as adjustable deposits, that is of variable yield. Today we have 
fixed  deposits.  We  are  designing  and  are  working  on  deposits  that  may  serve  as  collateral  for  the 
principal, and whose return should be adjusted to a series of indices, such as the soybean index, the 
Merval index. The principal is therefore guaranteed and there is no risk, as may be the case for an 
uninitiated investor who invests in more sophisticated options of this kind. The principal is guaranteed 
but it has variability and there are new incentives to have certificates of deposits. 
Moreover, I am convinced that institutional investors, such as insurance companies, investment funds 
and,  of  course,  pension  funds,  should  be  allowed  to  buy  portfolio,  to  buy  portfolio  directly  from  the 
banks,  to  generate  funding.  And  to  this  end,  regulations  must  also  be  of  assistance.  We  must 
standardize  loans  to  the  private  sector  regarding  maturity  terms,  interest  rates,  so  that  we  may 
securitize, i.e, that those loans may be granted by the banks, that long-term bonds may be issued with 
the backing of such cash flow, and subsequently generate long-term instruments that provide funding 
to the financial system. 
When we speak of consolidating the reference rate, we clearly mean being more and more active, by 
allowing the public and private banks to work more dynamically within this 2.5-3.5 corridor. We also 
mean  encouraging  swaps  between  banks  so  that  the  Central  Bank  is  not  the  only  market  maker. 
Working on rate structure. You know that the Central Bank has LEBACs but also Central Bank notes. 
These  notes  are  over  2-year  bonds  and  we  plan  to  extend  maturity  terms,  so  that  in  the  next  bill 
auctions  there  are  longer-term  bonds  capable  of  generating  yields  over  time  and  of  becoming  a 
reference for the market as a whole. 
In this sense, one of our first actions last week was to restrict operations to swaps, i.e., 7-day swaps 
with LEBACs. Also, with long-term bonds, with Central Bank notes. Why? To promote a wider use of 
these bonds, and once there is a greater hunger for them, we can launch longer-term issues and thus 
extend maturity terms and interest rates, and make our system more trustworthy. 
We said we need a financial system in pesos, with an efficient lender of last resort. In a word, we have 
for  the  first  time  a  retaining  net  that  was  non-existent  when  our  financial  system  was  in  trouble. 
Therefore, we must have a policy of optimum cash requirements to optimize liquidity. 
At the beginning of my presentation, I said we should encourage the financial system’s raw material, 
that is, the banks and banking, both in terms of services, which I shall explain right away, and in terms 
of deposits. We should note that, although the money in circulation in the hands of the general public 
has  increased  from  4.2  to  6.5  of  the  GDP,  banking  services  are  still  not  widely  used.  There  is 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2004
0.5 account  per  inhabitant,  while  in  other  countries  there  are  2.7  accounts.  And  this  has  to  do  with 
strengthening  institutions,  with  restoring  their  credibility,  and  above  all  with  conferring  them  more 
transparency. 
We  must  also  work,  obviously  according  to  fiscal  needs,  to  lift  a  tax  that  today  is  clearly  distortive, 
namely, the tax on bank debits and credits. The blue line shows the 0.2% yield of time deposits. This 
drop in certificates of deposit is undoubtedly accounted for by the tax burden. Here we had a negative 
yield, as shown by the dark blue line, or a very small yield. And the orange line indicates the implicit 
income  tax  rate  as  a  result  of  a  tax  on  bank  debits  and  credits.  At  present,  the  income  tax  thus 
obtained  accounts  for  75%.  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  fiscal  needs  should  be  our  paramount 
concern, but if we want more savings we must remove dispersions. And this has to be done gradually 
and jointly with the Executive Power. 
If our intention is to have a wider use of banking services, we cannot expect a magic solution. We 
must  remove  the  tax  on  bank  debits  and  credits  and  we  must  urgently  improve  transparency.  We 
should provide more and better information, that is, there should be no implicit costs, no productive 
interest  rates,  no  small  print  statements  deceiving  us  at  the  time  of  requesting  a  loan,  even  the 
shortest-term loans. As to credit cards, we cannot expect an increase in the use of credit card services 
and payments if costs are not transparent. 
I  would  like  to  stress  the  contribution  that  this  House  has  made  toward  the  regionalization  and 
increase  of  credit  to  all  the  sectors  throughout  our  country,  and  also  to  small-  and  medium-size 
businesses. Setting up cooperative credit unions is topmost in our agenda, so that once regulated they 
may rapidly be promoted and be present at even the smallest villages in our country. Being subject to 
less  requirements  and  having  less  obligations,  these  credit  unions  will  permit  any  community  in 
Argentina to ask for a loan, and the financial sector may act accordingly. 
Also,  if  we  note  the  losses  suffered  by  the  financial  system  in  the  past,  we  can  see  that  asset 
profitability is slightly improving. Here’s an issue we will gradually improve on. At present banks take 
deposits  from  the  public  at  a  relatively  low  rate,  and  if  you  analyze,  as  we  have  done  with  the 
Superintendent and our whole team, the situation of the 90 banks currently in operation in our system, 
we will see that most of them take deposits from the public and place them at the Central Bank as 
LEBACs. 
As you know, today the LEBACs are accruing an annual rate on the order of 6.6%, which we have 
decreased a little and intend to drop even further. What’s going on? Deposits are taken at 1.5, 2, 2.5% 
and placed at 6.5% without risk, when in fact they are being placed at the Central Bank. If we drop the 
interest  rate,  we  will  also  put  pressure  on  the  financial  system  so  that  the  excess  of  liquidity  as 
deposits  may  be  channeled  toward  (…).  The  way  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  is  to  increase 
capitalization, that is, that banks put their shoulder to the wheel, risk their capital. Because that is what 
it amounts to, and we are on the way to capitalizing banks for 2.2 billion pesos. 
Summing  up,  you  will  be  able  to  assess  our  work  team  basically  by  the  accomplishment  of  these 
targets.  I  am  a  man,  a  professional,  who  has  always  set  goals,  and  these  goals,  thanks  God  and 
because God has been by my side all along, I have always succeeded in attaining. And we want you 
and  the  general  public  as  a  whole  to  judge  us  by  these  goals,  in  terms  of  our  capabilities,  our 
efficiency, and above all in terms of our capacity of achievement. 
And  our  goals  are  to  consolidate  price  stability  and  restore  the  peso’s  role  and  value.  Create  a 
reference interest rate, a medium- and long-term reference, promote banking services, strengthen the 
financial  system’s  health,  and  above  all  build  a  people-friendly  financial  system.  And  to  be  people-
friendly it must comply with its key role, that is, create a long-term peso market that may assist, that 
may  contribute  to  a  fair  growth  process  so  that  Argentina  may  become  a  fairer,  more  sympathetic 
country, in a word, a country worth living in. Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 7
