David Dodge: The strength and resiliency of the Canadian economy 
Notes for remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, on behalf of the Canadian 
Minister  of  Finance,  Mr  Ralph  Goodale, 
the  German-Canadian  Business  Club  of 
Berlin-Brandenburg-Association of Berlin Merchants and Industrialists, Berlin, 22 November 2004. 
to 
 It  is  an  honour  to  be  with  you  today.  As  you  may  know,  this  is  the  second  time  that  I  have  visited 
Berlin. In June 2003, I had the honour to speak at this group’s founding ceremony in my role as the 
Governor of the Bank of Canada on the need, based on Canada’s experience, for a solid economic 
policy during uncertain times. I have very fond memories of this visit and I am pleased to see so many 
familiar faces today. 
Since that time you have made great efforts to promote strong German-Canadian trade relations and 
build a better understanding of the economic and social conditions in both of our countries. 
Today I would like to speak to you on behalf of Canada’s Minister of Finance, Ralph Goodale, who 
sincerely regrets not being able to be with you today. 
In his Economic and Fiscal Update November 16, Minister Goodale described the remarkable strength 
and  resiliency  of  the  Canadian  economy  following  numerous  shocks  in  2003,  including  SARS,  a 
single, isolated case of “mad cow” disease and the strong appreciation of the Canadian dollar. 
Canada weathered this period of economic slowdown, and has recovered from relatively weak growth 
of two per cent in 2003. In fact, Canada saw growth of 3.4 per cent in the first half of the year - much 
stronger than expected. Private sector forecasters now expect growth of three per cent for all of 2004, 
and 3.2 per cent growth in 2005. In the Bank of Canada’s recent Monetary Policy Report, the Bank 
projects economic growth of 2.9 per cent in 2005 and 3.2 per cent in 2006. 
The origins of this success can be found in policies that began a decade ago. In 1993 Canada had the 
second-worst government debt-to-GDP ratio among G-7 countries.  
It had high unemployment. It had low productivity growth. Federal debt servicing costs were absorbing 
38 cents of every dollar of government revenue. 
This situation was clearly unsustainable, and many difficult and unpopular decisions had to be taken to 
clean up public sector balance sheets during the 1990s. 
In  1994  the Government  launched  a series  of expenditure  reductions which, by  1997, had  reduced 
program spending by almost 20 per cent. 
In 1996, action was taken to introduce major reforms to our nation’s public pension plan, to put it on a 
sound financial footing. 
Taking  these  actions  was  very  difficult.  So,  what  was  essential  during  this  time  was  clearly 
communicating to Canadians the steps that had to be taken to get our fiscal house in order, and the 
ominous consequences of not doing so. 
Fortunately,  Canadians  understood  that  you  can’t  forever  consume  more  than  you  produce.  They 
displayed the innate good sense necessary to make short-term sacrifices for the long-term interests of 
their families. 
As a result, Canadians transformed a vicious circle of rising deficits and debt into a virtuous circle of 
balanced budgets and surpluses, and falling debt. 
Reducing,  and  ultimately elimating,  the  deficit  in  the  1990s  helped  Canada’s  international credibility 
and led to a reduction in the risk premium demanded by investors. This fiscal improvement allowed for 
lower interest rates, and made easier the implementation of monetary policy. 
Not only did lower interest rates reduce debt-servicing costs, they also stimulated economic growth, 
which  brought  in  more  revenues  for  the  government.  The  extra  revenues  and  lower  debt-servicing 
costs, in turn, led to an even better fiscal position. 
The results have been striking. Canada has been among the G-7 leaders in economic growth since 
2000. Canada is the only G-7 country expected to post a total government sector surplus this year and 
next. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
High-quality early childhood development; 
Predictable and long-term funding to municipalities for critical infrastructure needs; 
Meaningful action on the disparities that impede opportunities for Aboriginal Canadians; and 
Meeting the imperatives of national defence and national security. 
As a result of this reduction in the federal debt, public debt charges as a share of revenues have fallen 
from 38 per cent to just over 19 per cent - the lowest level since the 1970s. 
The federal debt-to-GDP ratio has fallen from a peak of 68 per cent to 41 per cent last year. And the 
Government has set the objective to reduce that to 25 per cent within 10 years. 
Business confidence is also high, and investment is increasing. 
The  main  point  here  is  that,  in  the  end,  tough  choices  pay  off.  While  the  initial  work  of  fiscal 
consolidation is certainly difficult, it pays dividends later on. 
Now that Canada is in the midst of this virtuous circle, the Government has the means to invest in key 
priority areas, while at the same continuing to meet its fiscal targets. 
One  of  these  priority  areas  is  health  care.  In  September,  the  federal  government  and  Canadian 
provinces  and  territories  announced  a  10-year,  $41  billion  heath  accord  that  would  focus  on 
streamlining  health  care  delivery,  training  more  health  professionals,  investing  in  better  equipment, 
and enhancing research and innovation. 
The Government is also focused on the delivery of other key commitments to Canadians, including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As Minister Goodale said in his Economic and Fiscal Update presentation, meeting these priorities will 
require ongoing fiscal discipline. 
It will also require attention to improving productivity. But given the current high ratio of employment to 
population,  and  given  that  Canada’s  population  will  soon  begin  to  age  rapidly,  we  will  have  to  rely 
increasingly on productivity to raise living standards in the future. 
To  increase  productivity,  we  Canadians  need  to  invest  in  human  capital,  physical  capital  and 
innovation  -  the  three  drivers  of  productivity  growth.  The  key  will  be  to  adapt  to  change  through 
policies that promote flexibility. 
That’s why Canada is investing in the skills and knowledge of our people, and is creating a competitive 
environment through lower taxes that encourage investment in physical capital and reward the efforts 
of entrepreneurs. 
These flexibility-enhancing policies, along with lower barriers to trade, smart regulation and openness 
to international investment, are the building blocks of Canada’s modern and prosperous economy. 
Collaboration  between  Canada  and  Germany  is  part  of  this  effort  to  encourage  international 
investment. 
As one example, our two countries have a long-standing relationship in science and technology. The 
driving force behind this relationship is the Bilateral S&T Cooperation Agreement, signed in 1971. 
And there is the very successful partnership between the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) 
and the Helmholtz Association of German National Research Centres.  
The  Canadian  Embassy  in  Berlin  deserves  real  credit  for  encouraging  this  flourishing collaboration, 
and promoting technology-oriented partnerships. 
Such cooperation is critical in an increasingly connected global economy. So, too, are forward-looking 
initiatives such as the Trade and Investment Enhancement Agreement between Canada and the EU, 
which  would  allow  qualified  workers  to  move  much  more  easily  between  the  EU  and  Canada  and 
would enhance the ability of our financial sectors to seize investment opportunities. 
Once  concluded,  this  Agreement  would  present  Germany,  Europe  and  Canada  with  a  unique 
opportunity to make our economies more global, more efficient and more prosperous. 
Now let’s turn to a different issue. As you know, G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
met in Berlin over the weekend. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
Among  the  themes  of  our  discussions  were  the  importance  of  promoting  flexibility  in  national 
economies  to  help  adjustment  to  changing  circumstances,  and  the  need  for  reductions  of  global 
imbalances. The  importance  of  a sound  domestic  and  international  financial system  to  facilitate  the 
trade,  savings  and  investment  necessary  to  bring  about  a  reduction  of  these  imbalances  was  also 
discussed. 
So let me conclude these remarks this morning with a few thoughts on the importance of international 
monetary arrangements to facilitate the reduction of imbalances. 
Most major industrialized countries and a large number of emerging market countries are operating 
with  flexible  exchange  rates.  The  notable  exceptions  are  China  and  a  number  of  countries  in 
Southeast  Asia  which,  either  explicitly  or  implicitly,  tie  their  currencies  to  the  yuan,  which  is  in  turn 
pegged to the U.S. dollar. 
With two systems operating, not everyone is playing by the same “set of rules,” and imbalances are 
building. The concern is two-fold: 
• 
First,  the  sense  that  some  countries  are  not  playing  by  the  rules  could  give  rise  to 
protectionism,  with  potentially  very  serious  negative  consequences  for  the  global  trading 
system. 
And second, a disproportionate burden of adjustment to changing economic circumstances 
is being borne by those of us with flexible exchange regimes, including Canada and Europe. 
So there is a real need, going forward, to think hard about these international monetary arrangements. 
Of course, there is much more to the resolution of global imbalances than just exchange rate regimes. 
There  are  issues  of  savings  and  investment  flows  and  of  promoting  strong  economic  growth 
worldwide, through strong domestic demand in each country. 
But  the  issue  of  international  monetary  arrangements  deserves  critical  attention  and  debate,  as  we 
look out over the medium- and longer-term to the challenges facing the global economy. 
To conclude, I hope these remarks give you a good perspective on the fiscal health of the Canadian 
economy and on some of the bilateral initiatives between our two countries. As well, I hope that I have 
given you some food for thought on international monetary arrangements. 
Thank you for your attention. Let’s now turn to hear your views. 
 BIS Review 71/2004 
 3
