Ewart S Williams: Challenges facing the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Thirty-Sixth Annual Monetary Studies Conference, jointly hosted by the Central Bank of Trinidad 
and Tobago and the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies, St Augustine, 1-4 November 2004. 
 On behalf of the Management and staff of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, I wish to extend a 
warm welcome to all the participants (especially our guests from the Caribbean and further afield), to 
the Thirty-sixth Annual Monetary Studies Conference. The Central Bank is especially pleased to be 
collaborating with the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies to jointly host this Conference, in this 
our 40th Anniversary year. 
I should note that this Conference has existed for almost as long as the Central Bank and has become 
an important fixture in the conference agenda in the Caribbean. 
It, in fact started as, the Regional Programme of Monetary Studies, in 1968, under the leadership of 
Sir Alister McIntyre, (who was then, Director of the Institute of Social and Economic Research on the 
St. Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies). 
As Dr. Jackson indicated, the first Conference was really intended to focus on the implications of the 
new sterling agreements following the devaluation of the pound sterling  to  which  most  of  our 
currencies were pegged. The agenda also included a few other topics: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv)  
It’s interesting, but many of these continue to be burning issues today. 
For many years this conference continued to be staged, in a process of close collaboration between 
the regional Central Banks, University of the West Indies and the University of Guyana, but essentially 
administered  by  the  University.  And  here  we  need  to  pay  tribute  to  those  “essentially  unpaid 
co-ordinators” who did yeoman work in keeping the programme alive: Professor Compton Bourne, 
Maurice Odle, Adlith Browne and Ramesh Ramsaran. 
In  May  1995,  UWI  and  the  Regional  Central  Banks  signed  a  formal  agreement  to  establish  the 
Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies (the CCMS). The core mission of the Centre is to provide 
CARICOM Central Banks with timely economic intelligence as well as monetary and financial policy 
advice by: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
financial accounting in the Caribbean; 
the operation of insurance companies; 
the development of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Area; and 
the design of an ideal accounting framework for the plantation economy. 
conducting relevant research; 
developing a regional repository of monetary, financial and economic information; 
disseminating  its  research  findings  through  Seminars,  Conferences  and  Workshops 
including, of course, this Annual Monetary Studies Conference. 
It is widely recognized that the Monetary Studies Programme and the CCMS have served the region 
well. Perhaps one of the most enduring contributions of the programme has been the provision of a 
training ground for many of the regions’ noted economists. In fact, several of our prominent regional as 
well as national policy makers have “cut their teeth”, in the programme. 
Over the years, the CCMS, for its part, has developed an impressive range of publications covering 
both theoretical and policy issues. 
The CARICOM Economic Performance and Convergence Report one of its main outputs, provides 
important comparative information about regional economic performance, and has proved to be quite 
useful in the deliberations of the Committee of Central Bank Governors. 
The  Centre  also  has  established  a  network  of  research  associates,  drawn  from  the  regional  and 
international community. The relationships cultivated by this network have allowed for the provision of 
joint research with relevance for the Caribbean region. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 1
CCMS broke new ground a few years ago with its Annual Senior Level Policy Seminar which provide 
an  important  forum  for  the  discussion  of  practical  issues  of  importance  to  the  business  community. 
These seminars have been a tremendous success. 
Globalisation  and  the  rapid  evolution  of  the  regional  financial  environment  have  created  new 
challenges for Caribbean Central Banks in their quest to maintain monetary and financial stability. It is 
my view that the CCMS has a critical role to play in helping us address these challenges. 
And I think that the CCMS could provide this critical support in a number of ways. 
Firstly,  I  think  that  CCMS  could  contribute  more  to  economic  and  financial  intelligence  at  the 
regional  level  through  the  expansion  of  regional  databases  that  provide  up-to-date  information  on 
financial sector performance. Secondly, I think that the CCMS must get involved in joint research 
with the regional central banks on the urgent issues that confront us - issues such as the conduct of 
monetary and financial policy under different exchange rate regimes: as exchange rate management: 
issues of monetary and financial sector policy co-ordination in the context of the CSME. 
Of course, I am fully aware of the kinds of challenges that the CCMS itself faces, not least of which is 
the financial resource constraint. The Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago is a strong supporter of the 
CCMS and I feel that all the regional central banks should be prepared to finance the Center at a level 
that facilitates the recruitment and maintenance of high-quality staff. 
UWI has been a strong supporter of the CCMS but the University may also have to do more if we are 
to maintain a high quality center for monetary research. 
And finally, the time may have come when we need to look to the private financial community - the 
banks, the insurance companies and so on - to contribute to the financing of the CCMS, if even for 
paid research. 
Let’s  face  it,  we  all  stand  to  benefit  from  the  work  that  could  emanate  from  a  well-staffed,  well-
resourced and high quality regional center for monetary and financial studies. 
With these few words, Mr. Chairman, I would like to wish all the participants a most stimulating and 
successful conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2004
