Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 30 November 
2004. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Membres  de  la  Commission  Economique  et  Monétaire,  j’ai  l’honneur  de 
paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui dans le cadre de notre dialogue régulier. Je me réjouis 
beaucoup  de  ce  dialogue  qui  place  l’Union  Economique  et  Monétaire  européenne  au  premier  rang 
parmi  les  économies  industrialisées  en  ce  qui  concerne  la  fréquence  et  la  profondeur  du  dialogue 
entre le Parlement et l’Institut d’Emission. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation de la 
situation  économique  et  monétaire  actuelle.  Ich  möchte  außerdem  zu  aktuellen  Themen  der 
Fiskalpolitik und zum Fortschritt im Bereich der Strukturreformen Stellung nehmen, insbesondere im 
Hinblick  auf  den  Lissabon  Prozess  und  jüngste  Produktivitätsentwicklungen  in  der  Wirtschaft  des 
Euroraums. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
After the positive developments in the first half of 2004, more recent data have indicated that growth 
dynamics moderated somewhat in the second half of the year. Real GDP growth in the third quarter of 
2004 is estimated to have been 0.3% quarter on quarter, following growth rates of 0.7 % and 0.5 % in 
the  previous  two  quarters.  Although  it  is  difficult  to  interpret  with  certainty  the  estimate  for  the  third 
quarter given the lack of a breakdown by components, it appears that the contribution of net exports 
was negative, the inventory built up was strong and private consumption growth remained sluggish. 
These developments seem to be related in particular to the effects of the increase in oil prices, which 
has reduced real disposable income in the euro area and has also dampened global economic growth. 
Despite the adverse impact of the oil prices, a number of conditions remain in place for the euro area 
to  continue  to  grow  in  2005,  albeit  at  a  somewhat  slower  pace  than  previously  anticipated.  On  the 
external side, while global growth is moderating, it nonetheless remains robust. In this context, euro 
area exports should continue to benefit from favourable global demand conditions. On the domestic 
side,  investment  should  be  supported  by  the  global  environment,  the  very  favourable  financing 
conditions  in  the  euro  area,  solid  profits  and  greater  corporate  efficiency  gained  through  business 
restructuring. Finally, there is scope for private consumption to strengthen, in particular if uncertainties 
surrounding the extent and pace of the implementation of structural reforms are reduced. 
The  outlook  for  economic  activity,  both  globally  and  domestically,  continues  to  be  surrounded  by 
uncertainties, in particular as a result of present and possible future developments in oil markets which 
can dampen the strength of the recovery both inside and outside the euro area. 
In  any  event,  it  is  important  that  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  be  avoided.  In 
addition,  it  would  be  essential  to  refrain  from  taking  measures  which  would  prolong  the  necessary 
adjustment  process.  Finally,  monetary  policy  must  remain  firmly  committed  to  the  objective  of 
maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
Over  recent  months,  oil  price  developments  have  also  had  a  significant  impact  on  consumer  price 
inflation.  In  November,  annual  HICP  inflation  was  estimated  by  Eurostat  to  have  been  2.2%,  after 
2.4% in October. In addition, increases in indirect taxes and administered prices earlier this year have 
had a notable effect on consumer prices. 
Looking  ahead,  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  remain  above  2%  for  the  coming  months,  but  should 
moderate thereafter in the absence of additional upward shocks. The information available does not 
suggest  that  stronger  underlying  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  Wage 
increases have remained moderate over recent quarters. In the context of moderate economic growth, 
this trend should continue in the future. 
There are a number of upward risks to price stability. Such risks are mainly associated with oil price 
developments, uncertainty regarding future increases in indirect taxes and administrative prices, and 
potential second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In this respect, it is 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 1
essential that long-term inflation expectations remain solidly anchored to our definition of price stability 
and are not affected by current upward movements in HICP inflation. 
Our monetary analysis also calls for vigilance regarding upside risks to price stability over the medium 
term. The shorter-term dynamics of M3 growth have strengthened over recent months. This seems 
very much related to the low level of interest rates in the euro area. 
This  very  low  level  of  interest  rates  also  fuels  private  sector  demand  for  credit.  In  particular,  the 
demand for loans for house purchases is strong, supported by strong house price dynamics in several 
euro area countries. The growth in loans to non-financial corporations has also picked up over recent 
months. 
As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few years, there remains substantially 
more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This could pose risks 
to price stability over the medium term. In addition, persistently high excess liquidity and strong credit 
growth  could  also  become  a  source  of  unsustainable  asset  price  increases,  particularly  in  property 
markets. Such developments need to be monitored carefully. 
I  would  now  like  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  fiscal  policies.  Many  governments  are  currently  in  the 
process  of  finalising  their  2005  budgets.  While  a  number  of  countries  have  managed  to  maintain 
sound  budgetary  positions  over  recent  years,  five  euro  area  countries  are  expected  by  the 
Commission to have deficits close to or above 3% of GDP during this year and next. 
This  is  a  disappointing  development.  It  reflects  an  insufficient  commitment  to  address  the  existing 
structural  imbalances.  The  current  economic  environment  should  be  utilised  to  embark  on 
comprehensive  budget  consolidation  where  needed.  This  would  send  a  strong  and  confidence-
inspiring  signal  that  the  objectives  of  sound  public  finances  and  a  growth-friendly  environment  are 
being pursued. 
Turning to the European fiscal framework, we remain convinced that there is no need to change the 
text  of  the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Having  said  that,  we  do  see  room  for 
improvement in the way the fiscal rules are implemented. In particular, there is a need to ensure the 
pursuit  of  prudent  fiscal  policies  in  good  times  and  for  a  stronger  focus  on  public  debt  and 
sustainability.  In  this  respect,  some  of  the  Commission’s  proposals  concerning  the  so-called 
“preventive arm” of the Pact are welcome and warrant further consideration. As regards the so-called 
“corrective arm” of the Pact, however, the ECB is concerned about proposals that could undermine the 
nominal anchor of 3% for the deficit-to-GDP ratio. This anchor of the fiscal framework is essential for 
maintaining  expectations  of  fiscal  discipline.  This  contributes  to  macroeconomic  stability,  economic 
growth and employment creation. The excessive deficit procedure and the Stability and Growth Pact 
remain a foundation for trust and confidence in EMU. 
In this respect, reliable and timely government statistics are of vital importance to the credibility of the 
budgetary  surveillance  process.  The  European  accounting  rules  must  be  fully  respected  when 
recording all types of expenditure and revenue. This should be done in a manner that is consistent 
and stable over time and homogeneous across countries. The procedures must not be vulnerable to 
political cycles, as stated by the ECOFIN Council. Countries should consider the quality and integrity 
of their statistics as a matter of priority. 
The need for structural reform in the euro area 
2. 
Let me now turn to the Lisbon agenda. The European Council intended to reinforce the process of 
structural reforms as from 2000 onwards. However, almost five years later, the European programme 
to become “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world [..] by 2010” 
has  not  been  implemented  as  promised.  In  this  regard,  the  recent  report  by  the  High  Level  Group 
chaired  by  Wim  Kok,  which  provides  an  independent  assessment  of  the  Lisbon  strategy  and 
contributes  to  next  year’s  mid-term  review  of  the  strategy,  expresses  an  urgent  call  for  renewed 
impetus. It proposes a stronger commitment of national governments and a sharpening of the Lisbon 
strategy’s  focus  by  placing  particular  emphasis  on  the  acceleration  of  employment  and  productivity 
growth  “via  a  wide  range  of  reform  policies  as  well  as  a  wider  macroeconomic  framework  as 
supportive as possible of growth, demand and employment.” 
The  ECB  welcomes  the  conclusions  of  the  High  Level  Group  as  well  as  the  subsequent  ECOFIN 
reaction,  which  is  also  supportive.  Concerning  the  role  of  macroeconomic  policies  in  fostering  the 
success of the Lisbon process, I would like to stress that an independent monetary policy aimed at 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2004
delivering price stability and being credible in that delivery over the medium and long term, together 
with a fiscal policy in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact to maintain fiscal sustainability, are 
the  best  contributions  that  macroeconomic  policies  can  make  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of 
reforms. Price stability is a necessary condition for being effective in fostering sustainable growth as 
well as of supporting employment and social cohesion, thus supporting the Lisbon objectives which, in 
turn, are another necessary condition for enhancing growth and job creation. Consequently, as was 
concluded by the ECOFIN Council in its first reaction to the Kok report, the macroeconomic framework 
needs to be supportive of stability and growth. 
As  for  increasing  the  incentives  to  implement  reforms,  the  ECB  has  in  the  past  pointed  to  the 
supportive  role  of  a  more  transparent  and  effective  benchmarking  based  on  sensibly  defined 
quantitative  indicators.  Apart  from  creating  peer  pressure  and  accountability  on  the  side  of 
policymakers,  benchmarking  can  be  a  crucial  driver  of  public  discussion  in  the  EU,  raising  public 
awareness about the benefits all European citizens could derive in terms of growth and job creation 
from  these  necessary  reforms.  This  is  a  reasonable  approach  to  further  the  implementation  of  the 
Lisbon strategy in a context where structural reform is the responsibility of Member States. 
In the absence of sufficient progress in structural reform, weak productivity growth has contributed to 
the  low  growth  performance  observed  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  years.  In  the  1980s,  the  annual 
growth  rate  of  labour  productivity  per  hour  worked  was  on  average  2.3%  in  the  euro  area.  It 
significantly decelerated during the 1990s to reach an average of 1.2% over the period 1996-2003. 
As a consequence, the gap with the United States has widened over recent years. More specifically, 
since the mid-1990s, the gap in labour productivity growth between the United States and the euro 
area was on average 0.7 percentage point when measured per hour worked. However, it was nearly 
twice as large when measured per head due to considerable divergences in trends in average working 
hours between the two economies. 
Alongside further progress on reforms directed towards higher rates of labour utilisation in the euro 
area,  developments  in  recent  years  reinforce  the  need  to  implement  policies  aimed  specifically  at 
boosting  labour  productivity.  In  this  respect,  one  of  the  main  priorities  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  is  to 
encourage innovation and technological diffusion, which are among the key factors affecting long-term 
productivity growth. 
First,  policies  should  aim  at  easing  regulations.  Regulations  limiting  product  market  competition  or 
hindering  labour  market  adaptability  have  negative  repercussions  on  innovation  and  technological 
advancements. EU countries made significant progress in product market reforms during the 1990s, 
but significant barriers to competition and innovation remain, in particular in the service sectors, which 
urgently need to be tackled. The ECB would strongly back the Commission’s initiatives in that respect. 
Second, policies should promote investment in research and development, which is also an important 
driver  of  innovation.  Third,  policies  should  aim  at  improving  human  capital.  Technological 
advancements  imply  that  labour  skills  change  over  time.  Therefore,  measures  favouring  the 
continuous  development  of  human  capital  contribute  to  further  innovation,  facilitate  the  use  of 
advanced technologies and allow technical change to translate into more jobs. 
To conclude, the Lisbon agenda incorporates the relevant priorities to promote long-term productivity 
growth  as  a  key  condition  to  making  Europe  more  competitive  and  dynamic.  The  ECB  supports 
governments, parliaments and social partners who are courageously implementing these necessary 
reforms. 
I am now ready to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 3
