European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 4 November 
2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Persistently high and rising oil prices have had a visible direct impact on consumer prices this year, 
and  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  significantly  above  2%  in  the  coming  months.  This  is  a  worrisome 
development,  but  there  is  no  strong  indication  as  yet  that  medium-term  inflationary  pressures  are 
building up in the euro area. In particular, wage growth appears to remain limited, in the context of 
ongoing  moderate  real  GDP  growth  and  weak  labour  markets.  Against  this  background,  we  have 
decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged at their present levels, which are very low by 
historical standards. However, there are upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Strong 
vigilance is therefore warranted with regard to all developments which could increase such risks.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. The economic 
recovery started in the second half of 2003, and we saw positive developments in the first half of 2004. 
Although short-term indicators have become more mixed, the basic determinants of economic activity 
remain  consistent  with  continuing  economic  growth  in  2005.  On  the  external  side,  we  see  some 
moderation taking place following a period in which the world economy has experienced its strongest 
dynamism  in  many  years.  Nevertheless,  euro  area  exports  should  continue  to  benefit  from  positive 
global  demand  conditions  in  2005.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  be  supported  by  the 
global environment, the very favourable financing conditions in the euro area, improved earnings and 
greater corporate efficiency gained through business restructuring. Furthermore, scope exists in the 
euro area as a whole for private consumption to strengthen, particularly once labour market prospects 
improve more visibly. 
However,  this  outlook  is  surrounded  by  continuing  uncertainty,  in  particular  stemming  from  recent 
developments  in  oil  markets.  On  the  one  hand,  the  magnitude  and  nature  of  this  shock  differ  from 
earlier experiences, when oil price rises were much stronger and mainly due to supply constraints. In 
addition, the oil intensity of production is significantly lower in the euro area. On the other hand, recent 
oil price increases constitute a nonetheless sizeable adverse shock to the euro area economy. If oil 
prices were to remain at current levels, or even increase further, they would dampen the strength of 
the recovery both inside and outside the euro area. Under certain conditions, a smoother absorption of 
the oil price shock can be ensured: in particular, second-round effects in wage and price-setting must 
continue to be avoided, and fiscal authorities should refrain from taking measures which would prolong 
the necessary adjustment process.  
With regard to consumer prices, annual inflation increased to 2.5% in October, according to Eurostat’s 
flash  estimate.  This  was  a  strong  increase,  after  the  decline  to  2.1%  in  September  from  2.3%  in 
August, and shows that oil price developments have had a sizeable direct impact on the euro area 
HICP  in  recent  weeks.  Moreover,  the  oil  price  shock  may  feed  through  the  economy  and  generate 
further indirect effects, as indicated by developments in producer prices. 
Looking  further  ahead,  however,  the  information  available  so  far  does  not  suggest  that  stronger 
underlying  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  Wage  increases  have  remained 
limited since the last quarter of 2003, and this trend is expected to persist in the context of ongoing 
moderate growth and weak labour markets.  
Nevertheless,  a  number of  upward risks  to  the outlook  for price  stability  have emerged  over  recent 
months.  Risks  are  mainly  associated  with  oil  price  developments,  possible  renewed  increases  in 
indirect taxes and administrative prices, and potential second-round effects stemming from wage and 
price-setting behaviour.  
Further indications for the medium-term outlook are provided by the monetary analysis. The downward 
trend in annual M3 growth in the first half of this year appears to have come to a halt in recent months. 
The  shorter-term  dynamics  of  M3  have  strengthened  and  its  annual  growth  rates  are  rising.  These 
developments reflect the stimulative effect of the historically low level of interest rates in the euro area 
BIS Review 65/2004 
 1
on  monetary  expansion.  Demand  for  the  most  liquid  components  of  M3  contained  in  the  narrow 
aggregate  M1  is  particularly  strong.  The  low  level  of  interest  rates  is  also  fuelling  private  sector 
demand for credit. In particular, the growth rate of loans for house purchase continues to rise and is 
now approaching double digits. Yet loan demand is becoming more broadly based, and the annual 
growth of loans to non-financial corporations is also picking up.  
Given the continued strength of M3 growth over the past few years, there remains substantially more 
liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This could pose inflationary 
risks in the future if the excess liquidity is not progressively reduced as a result of reverse portfolio 
shifts. Moreover, persistently high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a source of 
unsustainable asset price increases, particularly in property markets. 
To sum up, the economic analysis suggests that underlying inflationary pressures are still contained, 
but  a  number  of  medium-term  upside  risks  to  price  stability  need  to  be  monitored  closely.  It  is 
particularly important that these do not affect long-term inflation expectations. Cross-checking with the 
monetary analysis continues to support the case for strong vigilance with regard to the materialisation 
of risks to price stability. 
I would now like to make a few remarks on fiscal policies. Most countries have presented their budget 
plans for 2005. In some cases there are encouraging signs that Member States are planning to correct 
excessive  deficits  or  make  progress  towards  close-to-balance  or  in-surplus  budgetary  positions. 
However, there are other cases where there are significant risks that commitments under the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  will  not  be  met,  or  where  imbalances  are  on  the  rise  and  new  breaches  of  the 
3% reference value might occur. It is therefore imperative that 2005 budgets prioritise consolidation 
where  this  is  necessary.  Moreover,  it  is  of  vital  importance  that  the  reliable  compilation  and  timely 
reporting of government finance statistics are ensured. Appropriate budgetary targets and compliance 
with  fiscal  commitments  and  reporting  requirements  will  help  to  build  confidence,  support  the 
economic upswing and prepare for the impact of population ageing.  
As  regards  the  European  fiscal  framework,  the  Governing  Council  remains  convinced  that 
improvements  in  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  possible  and  would  be 
beneficial. In this regard, the European Commission’s proposals for improving the implementation of 
the  preventive  arm  of  the  Pact  are  useful.  At  the  same  time,  the  Governing  Council  warns  against 
changes to the Pact and, in particular, the excessive deficit procedure. It considers the credibility of the 
3% deficit limit essential to anchoring expectations of fiscal discipline. Moreover, strict surveillance and 
effective  peer  pressure  on  national  budget  policies  are  indispensable  to  preserving  sound  fiscal 
policies. 
Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate the need for progress on structural reform. 
Fiscal  consolidation  plans  should  be  part  of  a  structural  reform  agenda  that  favours  growth, 
competitiveness and employment. As regards labour and product markets, the mid-term review of the 
Lisbon agenda - now being prepared for the European Council meeting in March 2005 - is a major 
opportunity to increase momentum in these fields. Structural reforms are crucial to a better performing 
EU  economy,  i.e.  an  economy  with  higher  potential  growth,  more  employment  opportunities  and 
greater resilience to shocks. Efforts to accelerate key economic reforms are now more important than 
ever.  
2 
 BIS Review 65/2004
