Zdeněk Tůma: Education in the Czech Republic - the case of the missing 
generation  
Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, on the occasion of graduation 
from the EMBA programme at CMC Graduation School of Business, Prague, 4 December 2004. 
 In  recent  years  I  have  heard  many  strong  statements  about  knowledge  based  economy.  Today’s 
graduation is obviously an excellent opportunity for yet another speech on this issue but I fear it would 
be too general and therefore “empty”. Instead, I would like to contribute with my personal experience 
and observations.  
We  have  almost  forgotten  that  15  years  ago  there  were  not  any  Czechs  nor  Slovaks  educated  in 
modern  economics  or  business.  Economic  programs  were  focused  on  central  planning  and  marxist 
theory of socialism before 1990. Nobody - with one exception - was allowed to study abroad since the 
1960s. When my friend Martin Kupka returned from Geneva in 1989 from his studies, he brought the 
textbook  on  macroeconomics  by  Dornbusch  and  Fischer.  He  told  me:  “We  should  translate  it  into 
Czech”.  At  the  same  time,  another  group  was  working  on  the  translation  of  “Economics”  by 
Paul Samuelson. Later on, we translated the textbook on corporate finance by Brealey and Myers.  
In other words, we started from scratch. It had two - though interrelated - aspects. First, we had only 
limited knowledge about what economics and business programs should look like. And second, there 
were no people with well-founded experience on how to run and lecture these programs. There was a 
generation problem - one generation was - and still is - missing.  
Where we stand today and how we have coped with those drawbacks? There was no magic solution 
but I dare say that today we have almost overcome the problem of missing generation in economic 
education  and  that  we  have  been  closing  the  gap  between  us  and  the  developed  world  fast.  I  see 
three important factors which contributed to this development. On the first place I would put the new 
generation of young and strongly motivated people. They created enormous pressure on those who - 
with their limited know-how - started to prepare new economic courses. This is my second point in this 
respect that there was a learning-by-doing process of creating new courses, mostly designed along 
the  recent  trends  in  economics  and  business  education.  Despite  the  fact  we  did  not  have  any 
experience with these courses, we roughly knew which direction to go. Last but not least, the Czech 
education  system  received  a  strong  support  from  abroad,  both  in  terms  of  visiting  lecturers  and 
money. In some cases, these two aspects were interconnected, and completely new programs were 
gradually built up. Among all, let me name Center for Economic Research and Graduate Education, 
US Business School Prague and CMC Graduate School of Business.  
I can offer another illustration of how far we have gone. I have been with the Czech National Bank for 
six years. But as an academician I was in contact with the central bank already at the beginning of 
1990s. At that time, the staff was struggling with very basic issues: a new statistics and data on the 
newly born market economy, ways how the economy should be analysed and what kind of theory or 
model should be applied etc. The Czech National Bank was receiving a lot of help from the foreign 
central banks and international institutions. Today, we  are at the level of state-of-art and we do not 
receive but provide foreign technical assistance. We assist directly to a number of countries as well as 
our  experts  are  invited  to  IMF  missions  around  the  world.  And  yet  our  staff  is  based  primarily  on 
people educated in the Czech Republic.  
I consider it as a good signal that we have reached significant achievements in economic education 
and  that  the  problem  of  missing  generation  will  soon  cease  to  exist.  I  can  only  hope  that  we  will 
continue with this process of catching up and that CMC will keep contributing to it.  
What can I wish to you personally? Let me recall my recent visit to the Bank of Israel on the occasion 
of its 50th anniversary. We were having lunch with the Finance Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and we 
discussed necessary fiscal reforms. Mr. Netanyahu said that for pushing reforms through, one needs 
three  things:  the  vision,  the  will  and  the  political  power.  I  can  only  add  that  combining  these 
ingredients - the vision, the will and the power of knowledge - form the leader, regardless whether we 
talk about politics, managements, or science. Having in mind education and network you have gained 
   1/2 
during the EMBA course you have the best assumptions to succeed. I wish you all the very best in 
your further professional carriers.  
   2/2 
