Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The importance of financial literacy among women in Asia 
Special address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Citigroup-
INSEAD Women’s Financial Education Summit 2004, Hong Kong, 2 November 2004. 
 Introduction 
Asia represents the fastest growing region in the global economy. Of significance, is that more than 
half the population in Asia are women. The participation of women in the economy would therefore not 
only  enhance  their  own  economic  well  being  but  would  also  contribute  towards  raising  further  the 
economic potential of Asia. Women are already engaged in both the informal and formal sectors and 
are  increasingly  emerging  as  a  more  important  force  in  the  economy.  The  effective  participation, 
however,  needs  to  be  an  informed  participation.  Financial  literacy  among  women  becomes  an 
important  part  of  this  process,  regardless  of  the  income  constituency  to  which  they  belong.  There 
needs to be a better understanding of their financial rights and responsibilities, and their opportunities 
for income generation and the associated risks and costs involved. This is particularly important for 
Asia, where rapid economic and financial transformation is occurring. Financial literacy among women 
is thus a vital part of this process, not only to promote greater engagement of women in the current 
economic environment, but also to prepare them for the future. 
It is my great honour and pleasure to be here today to speak on the importance of financial literacy 
among women in Asia. My remarks today will first discuss some of the major structural and cultural 
transformations in Asia that are changing and impacting the economic environment faced by women in 
Asia, and their rapidly changing role in the economy. I will also touch on aspects of the challenges 
faced by women in Asia in their endeavour for greater economic engagement. This will be followed by 
a discussion on the important enablers for enhanced financial literacy and to share with you Malaysia’s 
experience  in  driving  a  more  financially  literate  society  in  particular,  that  enhances  the  inclusion  of 
women in the economic mainstream. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Asia is being transformed. For more than two decades now we have seen unprecedented structural 
and  cultural  changes  in  Asia  that  have  resulted  in  the  transformation  of  the  environment  faced  by 
women. Asia has emerged as the fastest growing region in the world with GDP in Asia now accounting 
for 23% of the world economy, compared to 17% in 1980. Per capita income during this period has 
more than quadrupled. If these trends continue, by the year 2020 Asia will account for about 27% of 
the world economy while the income per capita would have further tripled. These dynamic changes 
have made financial literacy among women even more vital. 
Indeed,  against  these  favourable  trends,  there  has  been  a  growing  participation  of  women  in  the 
growth  and  development  process  in  Asia.  In  particular,  there  has  been  a  strong  migration  from  the 
informal to the formal sector, following the modernisation and industrialisation process. The increase in 
the relative significance of the financial sector in most Asian economies can be seen in terms of the 
momentum in the financialisation of savings and the increase in the volume of financial transactions 
being conducted through the formal financial sector. These trends are being reinforced by the shift of 
activities  that  is  taking  place  from  the  traditional  sectors  to  the  industrial  and  services  sectors.  On 
average, the industrial and services sector now accounts for 74% of the economy in Asia, compared to 
60% in 1980. In contrast, agriculture now accounts for 12%, compared to 26% in 1980. Involved in this 
transformation, women have demonstrated a high degree of mobility, participating in all segments of 
economic  activity.  Most  discernable  is  the  increasing  participation  of  women  in  the  services  sector. 
Here in Hong Kong, the percentage of women in the services sector relative to the total population 
increased from 43% in 1980 to 87% in 1999. Similarly in Indonesia, the rise was from 32% to 42%, 
and in Malaysia, it was from 33% to 57% and in Thailand, from 18% to 34%. 
In Asia, the demographic structure also reinforces the economic potential of Asia. The population in 
Asia continues to grow at a relatively high and stable rate to account for more than half the world’s 
population. Of significance is the relatively young demographic structure in Asia. More than 50% of 
women fall in the age group 15 to 49 years, similar to that for men. This demographic structure thus 
not only contributes to enhance the potential of the economy but combined with rising incomes and 
improved  standards  of  living,  has  resulted  in  increases  in  consumption  spending.  This  resultant 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 1
increase  in  purchasing  power  has  strengthened  domestic  demand,  making  it  an  important  driver  of 
growth  in  the  Asian  economies.  Indeed,  these  trends  have  strengthened  the  sustainability  of 
consumption-based  growth.  As  part  of  this  process,  women  have  become  an  important  consumer 
target group with enhanced purchasing power. In fact, in several of the Asian economies, women are 
emerging as a  key  target market.  This greater capacity  for  earning,  spending,  saving  and  investing 
requires ability for financial management, and hence the urgency for greater financial literacy. 
While financial literacy is important, regardless of economic status, it becomes even more important 
for  those  that  are  less  privileged.  For  those  that  have  less  to  manage,  it  becomes  more  vital  to 
manage  the  finances  even  more  effectively.  It  is  also  those  that  have  been  under-served  by  the 
financial  system  that  need  to  be  more  aware  of  the  financial  services  that  they  should  be  able  to 
access,  and  the  benefits  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  various  options  available.  They  too  have  the 
same  need  for  maximising  the  benefits  from  their  limited  resources,  and  to  achieving  financial  and 
economic security. Strengthening their financial position becomes even more important for this target 
group. There needs to be awareness of the alternative assets that can be accumulated not only to 
generate an income stream but also towards building wealth. Of equal importance is to draw those 
operating  in  the  informal  sector  into  the  formal  sector,  where  their  financial  requirements,  whether 
households or businesses can be better served. 
A  further  phenomenon  taking  place  in  Asia  is  the  increased  regional  economic  and  financial 
integration that is taking place. This has manifested itself in increased intra-regional trade, investment 
flows  and  the  increased  intra-regional  presence  of  corporations  and  financial  institutions.  A  more 
recent phenomenon is the increased mobility of labour in the region. Of significance is the number of 
women  who  have  ventured  beyond  their  own  borders  in  search  of  new  employment  opportunities. 
While data on this is not available, the statistics on remittances of income show this is a growing trend. 
Overseas  employment  is  particularly  evident  in  the  manufacturing  and  services  sectors.  Financial 
literacy  under  these  circumstances  becomes  even  more  vital.  In  venturing  to  new  areas  where 
different  systems,  languages  and  cultures  prevail,  it  becomes  important  to  have  knowledge  of  the 
basic financial matters so as to maximise the benefits the new employment is expected to yield. 
As the formal economies of Asia prosper and grow, there is a greater need to integrate the informal 
sectors of the economy with the formal sector. There are millions of women in Asia involved in a wide 
range  of  economic  activities  from  the  home,  making  handicraft,  assembling  parts  for  international 
brand  names  and  working  in  the  fields.  They  work  for  a  small  income,  and  generally  in  difficult 
circumstances. Deliberate actions to integrate the informal economy into the formal economy will give 
this  segment  of  society  increased  opportunities.  In  many  countries,  the  success  of  various  national 
and international socio-economic reform programs have resulted in women becoming an increasing 
part of the formal economy. Through the concerted efforts of women’s rights movements, economic 
policy  intervention  and  gradual  shifts  in  cultural  norms,  women  today  have  more  opportunities  for 
education,  careers  and  political  representation.  However,  in  many  instances  the  increase  in 
participation  in  the  formal  economy  has  not  come  with  a  commensurate  level  of  sophistication  in 
financial  literacy.  As  a  result,  women  continue  to  face  special  challenges  in  their  endeavour  to  be 
active participants in the economic system. 
Challenges women in Asia face in financial literacy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  discuss  some  of  the  challenges  faced  by  women  in  Asia  in  their  endeavour  to 
become  more  financially  literate  and  financially  independent.  Firstly,  with  the  socio-economic 
environment  in  Asia  changing  rapidly,  there  is  greater  uncertainty  and  volatility  which  represents  a 
challenge even for financial experts. The financial system has also become more complex, with new 
risks emerging. This increased sophistication thus makes it increasingly difficult for those who are less 
financially literate to make sound decisions. 
Secondly,  the  advances  in  technology  has  led  to  a  proliferation  of  financial  products  and  services. 
There needs to be a greater understanding of the basic concepts and practices of banking, insurance 
and equity so as to know how to make choices from the wide range of financial products available, and 
to  assess  the  respective  risks,  costs  and  returns.  Also  important  is  the  basic  principles  of  debt 
management, wealth management and personal budgeting to be able to understand the importance of 
long-term savings in funding future requirements. 
Financial  literacy  involves  being  able  to  identify  and  understand  the  opportunities  for  income 
generation, access to funding, and learning how to make the most of the range of financial products 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2004
available. It also involves learning how to manage financial risks in an environment where the financial 
infrastructure  may  be  under developed.  This  may relate  to  the  laws  and procedures  in  the  country. 
Also  important  is  the  need  to  be  able  to  recognize  illegal  schemes  and  other  exploitative  practices 
such as predatory lending. 
Thirdly, while women in Asia are being less stereotyped and given greater opportunities for entering 
into the economic mainstream, nonetheless the working conditions for women in many countries have 
tended to be less favourable. The exploitation of labour in the informal sector in some instances are 
particularly  bad,  not  only  for  women,  but  also  for  children  and  minority  groups.  Women  who  are 
disadvantaged in this manner have found it difficult to escape from the trap of indebtedness. 
Frequently, the disadvantaged and those who are not able to access the formal financial system have 
resorted to the informal financial systems. Recourse to these financial sources have also been due to 
the lack of awareness. These may be in the form of deposit schemes that entail high risk, access to 
financing from sources that are highly costly, and almost inevitably against high collateral. Very often, 
the practices are unfair and deceptive. Examples in predatory lending are found to be unscrupulous 
and highly disadvantageous to the borrower. 
Fourthly,  in  some  Asian  societies,  traditions  continue  to  create  cultural  pressures  that  restrict  a 
woman’s choices and liberties. Though there is increased freedom for women to pursue education and 
careers,  in  some  societies,  cultural  pressures  still  make  it  more  difficult  for  a  woman  to  get  the 
exposure on financial matters. In addition, the increased incidence of divorces and single parenthood 
mean that more women are left to fend for themselves and their children. In certain Asian societies, 
single women may face unusual difficulties in arranging their finances. In some cases, a woman may 
even have difficulty claiming her legal rights in a contract, even though the law does not dispute such 
a right. Deeply entrenched human behaviour is not able to change as rapidly as the financial system is 
evolving. 
Fifthly,  statistics  on  life  expectancy  confirm  that  women  tend  to  live  longer.  In  segments  of  society 
where women earn less than men, combined with the fact that  they may live longer, it is crucial to 
have  financial  acumen  in  order  to  increase  the  financial  independence  of  women.  This  trend  also 
magnifies the need to plan for retirement especially in an era of rising medical costs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
thus  has 
investments.  The  effort 
Enabling environment for financial literacy 
The  promotion  of  greater  awareness  and  understanding  in  financial  issues  in  a  dynamic  and 
constantly changing environment has to be a continuous process. The effort needs to focus not only 
on  providing  education  programmes  but  also  on  putting  in  place  the  supporting  infrastructure  to 
enhance  the  access  to  financial  services,  to  ensure  an  environment  of  financial  transparency  and 
disclosure  as  well  as  adequate  consumer  protection.  Enhanced  financial  literacy  is  about  bringing 
people into the financial mainstream so that they are able to make well informed decisions regarding 
their  earnings,  spending,  savings  and 
to  encompass  a 
comprehensive  set  of  strategies  including  the  education  process  reinforced  by  the  supporting 
infrastructure. 
The  goal  of  any  financial  education  programme  is  to  increase  awareness  of  the  value  of  effective 
financial  management,  to  show  how  it  can  contribute  to  financial  security  and  improvement  in  the 
economic well-being. The most effective of programmes have been those that are targeted to specific 
groups. Fundamental education for greater financial literacy that will have most sustainable impact are 
those  through  the  school  system.  Such  educational  programmes  would  provide  the  education  to 
women from an early age. Essentially, it would not result in the marginalisation of anyone target group, 
in  particular  women.  Such  programmes  would  therefore  best  serve  its  purpose  as  part  of  the  core 
curriculum. Indeed, the national education system can play a pivotal role in financial literacy within a 
country. 
The  responsibility  of  promoting  economic  and  financial  literacy  needs  to  be  a  collaborative  effort 
amongst the authorities, the financial service providers and the community to connect to the different 
target groups including all social groups. These would include the lower income groups, workers and 
businesses. Important are programmes directed to families where women have an important role and 
to engage those we have not been able to participate fully to benefit from the favourable economic 
environment prevailing in the region. 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 3
Among  the  successful  financial  education  programmes  are  those  with  specific  objectives  that  are 
tailored to meet particular needs. This includes programmes to promote savings for specific objectives; 
for education; or for retirement. The education programmes can also be linked to other objectives such 
as good health, house ownership and so on. Financial products can be tailored for such purposes to 
not only to promote interest but to also meet these objectives. 
All  distribution  channels  need  to  be  relied  on  to  maximise  the  effectiveness  of  financial  education 
programmes. Formal training programmes can be reinforced by web based content via the Internet. 
The World Wide Web offers dramatic economies of scale in terms of distribution of content at low cost. 
Connectivity to the Internet can serve to bring information from all over the world to the local education 
system. Iterative programmes can be useful to encourage participation. Web based programmes while 
requiring computer literacy, has a wider outreach and allows for flexibility of time that is of particular 
importance to women. 
A further means by which financial advise is provided is through financial advisors. Financial advisors 
are  able  to  address  the  issues  for  the  more  sophisticated  investors.  Similarly,  infrastructure  for 
advisory  services  for  small  businesses  is  key.  This  can  in  particular  be  provided  by  financial 
institutions. Systems need to be in place where consumers and businesses are explained their rights 
and  responsibilities.  Micro  credit  institutions  have  also  been  highly  successful  in  many  countries  in 
providing access to financial services to microenterprises. This will contribute towards greater reliance 
on the formal financial infrastructure and less on the informal structures. 
Higher  level  of  consumer  education  and  financial  literacy  must  be  complemented  with  effective 
disclosure  regime,  fair  and  transparent  market  practices,  simplification  of  financial  products  and 
enhanced communications in the marketplace to minimise information asymmetry. 
While efforts may be taken to enhance transparency and disclosure by service providers, and while 
programmes for enhanced literacy can produce positive results, consumer protection is still needed. 
Given  the  asymmetry  of  information,  consumers  often  do  not  have  enough  information  to  be 
completely  protected.  Building  the  confidence  of  consumers  also  requires  that  there  be  adequate 
avenues for consumers to seek redress to enable consumers to resolve conflicts through an equitable 
process.  Also  important  are  the  requirements  for  complaints  to  be  handled  promptly  by  financial 
institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Malaysian experience 
Let me briefly take a moment to share with you the experience of Malaysia in developing an enabling 
environment to promote financial literacy. 
For  several  decades,  Malaysia  has  made  significant  economic  progress.  The  economy  grew  by  an 
average  of  7%  per  year,  while  the  per  capita  income  has  increased  from  USD 300  in  1970  to 
USD 4,236  in  2004.  From  a  commodity-based  economy,  Malaysia  now  has  a  highly  diversified 
economy, with significant contribution from the manufacturing and services sectors. Women account 
for  about  half  of  Malaysian  population,  and  have  played  an  important  role  in  this  economic 
transformation  process.  Women  account  for  about  45%  of  the  labour  force,  with  increasing 
representation  at  the  professional,  managerial  and  technical  levels.  Such  progress  is  achieved 
following  increased  educational  opportunities  that  have  been  made  available  to  women.  Female 
primary and secondary students account for half of total enrolment, while at public universities, female 
students account for 55% of total enrolment. While women continue to play a major role in household 
financial planning, a new generation of women who are financially independent and sophisticated is 
emerging. 
The  financial  sector  in  Malaysia  has  also  experienced  significant  progress,  with  greater  diversity  of 
players, products as well as delivery channels with extensive distribution nationwide. The widespread 
distribution of financial institutions has been a conscious and deliberate policy to ensure the widest 
reach of financial services to both the urban and rural areas. With the improved access of consumers 
and  businesses  to  financial  products  and  services,  consumer  education  on  financial  matters  is  an 
important priority for the Central Bank. 
Consistent  with  the  belief  of  the  importance  of  instilling  financial  awareness  at  an  early  age,  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  introduced  a  pocket  money  book  to  inculcate  smart  financial  management  habits 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2004
among students in 1996. The programme also included Household Account Books to assist families in 
the management of household income, savings and investments. This was distributed to cover a wider 
group, including women, teachers and workers. 
Following this, in 1997 together with the Education Ministry, the Central Bank embarked on a School 
Adoption  Programme.  Through  this  programme,  more  than  7000  schools  have  been  adopted  by 
banking institutions to play a leading role in educating school children on basic financial knowledge. In 
October this year, an online interactive version of the Pocket Money Book to be used in the School 
Adoption Programme was launched. 
The Central Bank of Malaysia has also laid out a blueprint known as the Financial Sector Master Plan 
that charts the development of the Malaysian financial system over a ten year period commencing in 
2001. A key component of that plan is the 10-year Consumer Education Programme for the banking 
and  insurance  sectors.  This  programme  is  known  as  BankingInfo  and  InsuranceInfo,  and  was 
launched in 2003. To reach a wide spectrum of the population, various channels are being employed 
to  disseminate  information,  including  through  media,  road  shows,  information  brochures  and  a 
dedicated web site. There is also a dedicated outreach programme aimed at specific target groups, 
which includes women in rural areas, low income earners and disadvantaged women such as single 
mothers. To date, the BankingInfo website has received an overwhelming response - about 14 million 
hits  and  more  than  2.5  million  booklets  were  taken  up  by  the  public.  In  the  insurance  sector,  over 
1.4 million hits have been received on the InsuranceInfo website, and more than 1.3 million insurance 
info-booklets have been disseminated by the insurers to the public. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Similar to many other Asian economies, microenterprises in Malaysia are a substantial contributor to 
employment.  Women  are  extensively  involved  in  microenterprises,  often  operated  as  family  run 
businesses. To support the growth of microenterprises, dedicated agencies and funding mechanisms 
have  been  established.  In  order  to  equip  the  microenterprises  with  proper  knowledge,  education 
materials were developed on the fundamentals of starting a business, specifically addressing issues of 
getting  access  to  appropriate  financing  within  the  constraints  faced  by  microenterprises.  Dedicated 
agencies, including specialist development financial institutions, were identified to provide training and 
advisory services to complement these initiatives. 
In  addition  to  the consumer education programmes,  the Central Bank  has put  in place a consumer 
protection framework. In collaboration with the financial industry the Central Bank has established a 
Financial Mediation Bureau. The Financial Mediation Bureau aims to serve as a one-stop center for 
the  resolution  of  retail  consumer  complaints  against  financial  institutions  regulated  by  the  Central 
Bank. The Central Bank is also establishing a one-stop service centre in the Bank that will function as 
a  Public  Information  Centre  for  the  promotion  of  financial  literacy  among  the  Malaysian  public.  The 
service centre will provide advisory services on financial matters to small and medium enterprises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Concluding remarks 
Financial literacy among women is all about having sufficient awareness of financial matters to enable 
women  to  protect  and  prosper  for  themselves  and  their  families  in  a  world  that  is  becoming 
increasingly more complex and uncertain. To be an effective participant in this modern economy, we 
cannot take financial literacy for granted. It is a knowledge and skill that must be deliberately pursued. 
From a national and institutional perspective, promoting financial literacy must be an integral part of 
the overall agenda for financial and economic reform and development. 
Let me conclude with the words of Jawaharlal Nehru, “We talk of revolutions, political and economic. 
And yet the greatest revolution in a country is the one that affects the status and living conditions of its 
women. It is in so far as our revolution has affected our women that it is basic.” 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 5
