Panayotis Thomopoulos: Post-Olympic Greece 2004 - infrastructural 
development and financial innovation 
Speech by Mr Panayotis Thomopoulos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Euromoney 
Conferences, Athens, 24 November 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a rare opportunity to be able to address a distinguished audience as this one on such a topical 
issue  as  the  future  of  Greece  in  the  post-Olympics  era.  In  everyone’s  mind  there  is  the  question 
whether Greece can sustain the relatively high level of growth achieved in recent years now that the 
demand  stimulus  coming  from  the  preparations  for  the  Olympics  has  come  to  an  end.  This  is  an 
important change for Greece indeed, coming on top of all the difficulties faced by the world economy 
such as the oil shock, the geopolitical uncertainties and the threat of a disorderly resolution of global 
imbalances. Trying to forecast the future is always a perilous activity and under today’s circumstances 
one might be inclined to take a pessimistic view. 
I would like to diverge from the pessimists and I will use my time to explain why Greece can continue 
on  a  path  of  strong  growth  if  we  can  address  the  forthcoming  challenges  by  adopting  sound  and 
market-friendly  policies.  To  use  a  sporting  metaphor,  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  Greece  won  the 
European  gold  medal  with  the  fastest  GDP  growth,  afterwards  our  successive  coaches  failed,  but 
again  since  1994  we  came  under  the  discipline  of  an  excellent  coach,  the  German  inspired 
Maastricht Treaty and finally in 2004 we won the European Champion Football Cup (EURO). Indeed, 
Greece’s annual rate of GDP growth of 3.7% between 1997 and 2004 was the second highest in the 
EU, after that of Ireland, and one-half bigger than that of the euro area. I believe that we can retain 
again a position near the top if we put our best effort to it. 
Year 2005 will be a difficult one, as the necessary fiscal adjustment and high oil prices will constrain 
growth. However, over the medium-term, I do not see a danger of a severe slowdown or recession. Of 
course, we cannot continue to grow for extended periods at rates above 4%, so some deceleration is 
to be expected and may do us some good by helping contain inflationary pressures. Our growth rate 
may regress back to our long-term potential, which I estimate to be around 3½%. I want to note that 
the OECD in its medium-term scenario has recently reached the same broad conclusion - estimating 
an  average  growth  rate  of  about  3½%  per  annum  up  to  the  end  of  this  decade,  which  is  some 
1?% percentage point higher than the scenario presented for the euro area as a whole. Of course, if 
the international economic environment improves, especially EU growth turns out to be much higher 
than 2% Greece will also reach a higher growth path. On the demand side, both private consumption 
and  investment  should  continue  to  be  strong.  The  continuation  of  the  Community  support 
programmes, though on a declining trend, will help support public and private investment for quite a 
few  more  years.  The  on  going  investment  in  infrastructure,  especially  in  the  peripheral  regions,  will 
continue to underpin a fast rate of productivity growth, as the Olympics 2004-related investment has 
done for the Athens area. Businessmen and ordinary citizens can at last appreciate the fruits of all this 
endeavour and forget the discomfort caused as the various works were heading to completion, and I 
am  sure  many  of  our  visitors  today  benefit  from  the  renovated  Athens  area.  The  list  of  projects 
underway or planned, eg Egnatia highway, highway links with our northern neighbours and beyond, 
are  essential  and  will  provide  the  necessary  complement  to  private  investment,  while  business 
investment should also respond to the announced tax relief. 
Despite fears to the contrary, I do not see a danger for private consumption. Private indebtedness has 
indeed increased fast but its level is still quite low by European standards. Compared to the increase 
in the private wealth of Greek households, reflecting both the rise in asset prices and in the housing 
stock,  the  net  private  indebtedness  has  not  increased  much.  Recently,  we  have  started  seeing  a 
gentle  deceleration  of  credit  growth,  which,  I  believe,  is  a  sign  of  responsible  behavior  both  by 
borrowers and banks. Despite horror stories in the newspapers, we are far from the position where 
indebtedness  would  threaten  growth.  As  long  as  growth  remains  robust,  households  will  see  no 
reason to cut back their consumption habits drastically, although temporary minor adjustments cannot 
be ruled out. Indeed, in a phase of disinflation, as the one expected over the next couple of years with 
the aim to narrow the inflation differential vis-a-vis the euro area, a small adjustment in consumption 
trends may take place. 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
The external sector should be able to assume a more prominent role. After a couple of disappointing 
years, there are already some indications that tourism is picking up, helped by the positive image of 
Greece projected by the Olympics and assisted by the improvement in transport infrastructure and the 
upgrading  of  hotel  and  tourist  resorts  in  general.  Moreover,  the  price  fever  associated  with  the 
Olympics seems to have subsided and hoteliers appear to be scaling down prices to more competitive 
levels, while bookings for 2005 are on the rise. In general, tourism will remain a buoyant source of 
growth for the Greek economy, especially if the government decides to allow shops to stay open all 
week-afternoons and to extend the opening hours of the archaeological sites and museums up to late 
afternoon  so  as  to  make  again  our  city  centres  attractive.  The  authorities  should  have  made  a 
cost/benefit analysis in order to assess the significant overall economic gains that could be derived if, 
as  in  the  rest  of  the  civilised  world,  our  museums  and  archaeological  sites  were  open  also  in  the 
afternoons. 
Shipping goes through an upswing, and the related balance of payments receipts will probably reach a 
record €12 billion in 2004, exceeding by a wide margin travel receipts, while the immediate prospects 
for  shipping  remain  favourable.  However,  we  have  to  note  that  although  shipping  may  this  year 
become the largest net export earner, its multiplier effect on the rest of the economy is smaller than 
that of tourism. And this because it employs about 80% fewer people than tourism and, owing to the 
high revenue per capita in shipping, the saving rate is much higher and correspondingly less is spent 
on home products. The emerging upturn in Europe will also help our exports of goods and services. 
On  the  supply  side,  the  huge  investments  in  recent  years  are  now  starting  to  bear  fruit,  while  we 
should not forget the contribution of immigrants to both supply and demand. Immigrants have become 
an essential part of our production system, and - I would also add - of our society, while, at the same 
time,  they  are  becoming a  unique  economic  and  political  link  with  our  neighbouring  countries,  from 
which they originate. They undoubtedly help the integration of the Balkan countries and contribute to 
the economic development of the wider region. 
Much has been said about the fact that Greece is a laggard in implementing the Lisbon strategy. This 
is partially true, but look at it from the other side, there is much more we can still achieve by embarking 
on the implementation of the Lisbon agenda. This should be a priority for policy makers. Liberalising 
the labor and product markets can bring benefits even in the short-run. Allowing greater labor flexibility 
can induce entrepreneurs and, especially, foreign investors to enter the market. Removing oligopolistic 
practices can be a spur to growth and help contain prices. Flexibility in labour market does not mean 
less  protection  but  more  protection  to  all  workers.  The  strict  labour  laws,  which  are,  sometimes, 
unfortunately, interpreted even stricter by judges, is an important factor behind the big underground 
economy. Unregistered labour has no job protection but is also less well paid than registered workers. 
The insider/outsider issue, which has reached big proportions in Greece, is also an important factor 
behind the recorded high unemployment rate, especially affecting young people. The relatively small 
proportion  of  registered  workers  also  undermines  the  capacity  of  the  pension  system  to  pay  in  the 
future the full pension entitlements to to-days working population. Accordingly, the insiders may not 
even themselves be so well off at the end of the day as they think. More flexible labour laws which will 
bring  to  the  surface  the  unregistered  labour  and  the  concomitant  increase  in  social  security 
contributions  will  also  help  to  establish  a  sound  pension  system  delivering  all  its  commitments. 
Accordingly, it is up to the authorities to move in the right direction and also benefit from the reform 
dividend. 
One thing that should be clear to all is that the future will be different from the past. Growth in recent 
years has been based on domestic demand, fuelled by construction, overall easy monetary conditions 
and large deficits, as are now recorded. These favourable factors will play a smaller role in future, as 
the fiscal position moves gradually to balance or surplus and real interest rates increase, reflecting a 
decline  of  inflation  and  a  rise  in  the  nominal  interest  rate,  if  the  ECB  changes  its  monetary  policy 
stance. So we have to give more prominence to external sources of growth and structural measures. 
We  must  adopt  an  “extrovert”  policy  that  gives  priority  to  improving  our  role  in  the  world  economy. 
Sometimes I hear arguments for import substitution as a source of growth. Let us be frank; for a small, 
country-based  economy,  as  the  Greek  one,  only  firms  which  can  also  export  can  have  the  critical 
mass  of  production  to  remain  viable  in  a  highly  competitive  global  economy.  It  is  better  to  delete 
import-substitution from the Greek vocabulary. In reshaping our economy, we should focus on areas 
where we already enjoy a comparative advantage, and by this I have mainly services in mind. This 
does not mean that we should neglect agriculture and industry. I simply want to say that these two 
sectors have ceased to be pillars of growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
that  our  neighbors 
the  condition  of  our  neighbors,  but  now  we  can  enjoy 
The  Greek  agricultural  sector  has  followed  the  international  trend  and  has  now  shrunk  to  less  than 
7% of GDP, and will probably further decline close to the European average. Manufacturing’s share in 
GDP has stagnated and may from now on follow a slow downward trend. We should not be fooled that 
these trends can be reversed, nor should we try to engage in interventions that distort markets and 
incentives.  In  particular,  the  ongoing  reforms  of  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy  and  the  final 
liberalisation of textiles trade next year will put further pressure on these sectors. Greek farmers and 
entrepreneurs  can  certainly  improve  the  quality  of  their  products  and  move  to  higher  value-added 
product lines. They should use the window of opportunity offered now by the unusually low interest 
rates to embark on the necessary investments. But it should be clear that Greece is now an advanced 
economy,  with  a  high  per  capita  income  by  international  standards,  and  cannot  expect  to  remain 
competitive  in  labour-intensive  and  low  value-added  industries.  The  high  productivity  growth  of  the 
recent  past  has  transformed  the  Greek  economy  but  has  also  brought  along  new  challenges.  In  a 
recent study by the OECD in the 10-year period up to 2003, out of the 30 OECD countries, Greece 
ranked  fifth,  after  Ireland,  Korea,  Luxembourg  and  the  Czech  Republic,  in  the  productivity  growth 
table,  with  a  2.8%  annual  rate  of  increase  in  labour  productivity,  some  40%  faster  than  the  OECD 
average. 
We should invest in quality and develop a distinctive image of Greek products. We should also exploit 
our geographic location and the traditional orientation of our trade toward countries in South-Eastern 
Europe and the Middle East. We have long complained that we were in a difficult geopolitical position, 
reflecting 
in 
South-East Europe and the Middle East are becoming market economies and are growing fast. Our 
industry  has  been  quick  to  seize  on  this  opportunity  and  has  re-oriented  Greek  exports  toward  this 
region, whose share of Greek exports has risen from less than 15% in early 1990s to about 25% last 
year. I was amazed to see that Bulgaria is now our fourth biggest customer, while Turkey has moved 
up to the sixth place. 
Greece occupies a very advantageous geographical position; especially northern Greece with its port 
Thessaloniki is  bound  to  become  again  the  indispensable  transit link  for  trade  and  travel  for  all  the 
Balkan countries. FYROM has no other sea outlet, but Thessaloniki also is closer to Sofia than the 
Bulgarian  ports  in  the  Black  Sea,  and  the  same  applies  for  large  regions  in  South-East  Romania, 
South  Serbia  etc.  Companies  established  in  these  regions  will  find  it  more  convenient  to  use 
Thessaloniki as a trading port than other sea outlets. Especially, if one takes into account the queuing 
time needed to cross the Bosphorus, the economic advantage of the Greek ports is more than evident. 
This will be even more so when the EU co-financed trans-European transport networks, opening up 
the Aegean ports to our northern neighbours and beyond, will reach a maturity phase towards the end 
of  this  decade.  Can  Thessaloniki  become  the  Rotterdam  of  the  Balkans?  Keeping  all  proportions  I 
would reply YES, and its expansion in recent years and especially after 2007 when the road linking 
Turkey  to  the  West  (the  Egnatia  highway)  will  have  been  finished  is  a  guarantee  that  Thessaloniki 
along  with  Northern  Greece  will  be  restored  to  its  past  trading  and  economic  glory,  to  say  nothing 
about the fact that it is a very pleasant, in many respects more than Athens, city to live in. 
Greece is in a special position in that its exports of services far exceed its exports of goods. In fact, our 
non-oil  good  exports  are  now  somewhat  less  than  tourism  receipts  and  even  less  than  those  from 
shipping, while our total receipts from services cover more than four-fifths of our total non-energy good 
imports. Many foreign observers indicate, as a source of concern, Greece’s trade imbalance but they 
forget  that  -in  the  world we  live  in-  services  are growing  faster.  We should build  on  our success  in 
these  areas.  It  is  well  known  that  Greece  is  a  major  world  power  in  shipping  and  by  far  the  most 
important  shipping  nation  in  the  European  Union  and,  on  the  basis  of  new  orders,  it  may  increase 
even more its world market share over the medium term. For both economic and geopolitical reasons, 
Europe  needs  a  strong  merchant  fleet,  and  here  lies  Greece’s  important  contribution  to  the  Union. 
Greece, with a shipping tradition of more than three thousand years, should maintain its comparative 
strength  in  this  area  both  for  its  own  benefits  and  the  European  Union’s  as  a  whole.  Shipping  is  a 
sector  subject  to  practically  unhindered  international  competition;  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  not  to 
impose on it measures and regulations that could impair its competitiveness, apart from those required 
for  environmental  reasons.  We  should  also  look  at  ways  to  enhance  the  role  of  Piraeus  as  an 
international shipping center. 
From my previous remarks, it becomes clear that Greece can and should play a significant role as a 
bridge between the industrial countries of Europe on the one hand and South East-Europe and the 
Middle  East  on  the  other.  We  should  aim  to  attract  direct  investment  from  foreigners,  who  will  use 
Greece as their regional headquarters and for their high-end activities, while the more labor-intensive 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
phases  of  production  will  be  located  in  neighbouring  countries  with  more  abundant  labor  supply. 
Greece is well placed for this role. Our labor force is well educated, with a significant part of it having a 
working  knowledge  of  a  foreign  language.  Both  the  quality  of  life  and  infrastructure  have  improved 
enormously  in  the  last  few  years,  especially  in  the  Athens  region  as  a  result  of  the  major  works 
undertaken  for  the  Olympics,  and  now,  as  the  government  has  announced,  the  attention  will  be 
directed to Thessaloniki. 
Undoubtedly, many other countries in the region, notably Turkey, may aspire to do the same but I think 
we  have  the  edge.  Greece  has  an  open  society,  accustomed  to  working  within  an  international 
environment. Indeed, many Greeks have spent years abroad working or studying, and this is an asset 
for them and for the country. Many have also ties to the countries of South East Europe and the former 
Soviet  Union,  as  well  as  to  Middle  East  countries  where  they  had  lived  and  whose  languages  and 
business environment they know. Don’t forget that not so long ago more than 300,000 Greeks were 
living in Egypt. The other very important advantages often cited are related to Greece’s membership of 
the EU for nearly a quarter of a century. Greece offers: 
1. 
legal certainty, as the rules and laws it applies are the same or very similar to those in the 
other more industrialised EU countries; 
macroeconomic stability and the strong currency of a euro area member; 
a friendly business environment; 
a  resilient  economy  and  society  that  have  proved  their  worth  under  normal  conditions  but 
also in turbulent economic periods (e.g. oil shocks, speculative attacks against the drachma, 
abrupt  rises  and  declines  of  the  stock  exchange  that  would  have  forced  many  other 
economies to bend on their knees). 
a sound banking system, with an extended network in all the Balkan countries. Banking is 
the oiling mechanism of the capitalist systems and if the oil is not of a good quality sooner or 
later the engine will come to a stop. Turkey’s banking crisis and the related foreign exchange 
crisis  a  few  years  ago  is  a  reminder.  From  the  early  1990s  the  Bank  of  Greece,  as  the 
supervisory authority, laid down the rules and brought pressure to bear for the modernization 
and  strengthening  of  the  banking  sector.  To-day  we  coordinate  our  efforts  with  the 
commercial  banks  to  promote  the  necessary  adjustments  in  line  with  Basel  II.  The  new 
International  Reporting  Financial  Standards  and  Accounting  Standards,  should  make  the 
banking  system  even  more  flexible,  strengthen  its  capital  base  and  improve  its  internal 
control and risk management systems. Given also the significant presence of Greek banks in 
the  Balkan  countries  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  signed  Memoranda  of  Understanding  for 
cooperation with the supervisory authorities of these countries. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Greek  firms  have  also  risen  to  the  task  of  responding  to  globalisation  not  by  adopting  a  defensive 
strategy,  but  by  embracing  globalisation  themselves.  There  have  been  very  significant  direct 
investments  by  Greek  firms  abroad,  especially  in  the  Balkans.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  the 
financial sector, where Greek banks now occupy top positions in all our neighboring countries. 
About 5,000 Greek firms, mostly small to medium-size enterprises but also a few large ones, are now 
operating  in  the  Balkan  countries  and  Greece  is  between  the  three  biggest  investors  in  the  region. 
This  inevitably  entails  some  delocalisation  of  part  of  Greece’s  manufacturing  and  trading  units. 
However, so long as they retain in Greece their high value added activities (their headquarters, their 
commercial and their research activities etc), this delocalisation in the long run helps both the host and 
the home country economy. I always try to give an example: The UK lost some 3.5 million industrial 
jobs (50% decrease) between 1978 and 2003 and gained over this period some 3 million jobs in the 
financial  sector  (100%  increase);  as  the  value  added  in  the  latter  may  be  4  times  higher  than  in 
industry,  the  total  gain  for  the  economy  has  been  enormous  and  is  the  main  explanation  of  the 
success growth story of the UK in the last couple of decades. I have repeatedly stressed the example 
of  London  as  a  financial  center,  and  all  factors  favours  Athens  for  becoming  a  regional  financial 
center, not only for the Balkans but even for countries further away. Likewise, Athens and Thessaloniki 
can become trading centers for companies operating in the wider area. 
Attracting foreign firms should form a central part of our future strategy. In the foreign direct investment 
league, especially in manufacturing, Greece unfortunately comes close to the bottom in Europe. But 
this hides the fact that many foreign firms, either completely on their own or in alliances with Greek 
firms, operate in Greece, but usually under the trademark of the original Greek owner, even if he has 
died long ago. This special partnership has to develop further, because each side complements the 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2004
other and cross border alliances are an essential support for growth, especially in the case of smaller 
countries.  Though,  as  I  said,  even  if  up  to  now  Greece’s  performance  in  the  area  of  foreign  direct 
investments has been quite disappointing, I believe things are about to change. After many years of 
sustained  effort  there  is  now  a  new,  pro-business  mentality,  as  evidenced  by  the  wide  political 
consensus  on  the  need  to  further  promote  market-friendly  reforms  and  the  recent  lowering  of 
corporate  taxation  is  in  the  right  direction.  Above  all,  we  need  to  reduce  bureaucracy  and  combat 
decisively  all  cases  of  improper  practices.  On  the  latter  issue,  we  should  adopt  a  policy  of 
“zero tolerance.” We should establish clear and simple rules for the conduct of business, which should 
not be amenable to interference from politicians and public servants. The “rules of the game” should 
be transparent and the same for all. 
In a recent OECD study on the business sector, Greece, though not the worst performer, unfortunately 
ranks  among  the  countries  with  most  bureaucratic  impediments:  large  number  of  licenses  and 
certificates required from different authorities both in order to open a new business but also even when 
operating for years, big delays in issuing them, lengthy judicial procedures, retroactive tax controls, 
sometimes going back to more than 10 years etc. I believe that, if the authorities tackle in an efficient 
and pro-business manner these problems and simplify the system, a big obstacle to success will have 
been overcome. To this end, the authorities should not weigh the supposed political cost, since over 
the  medium-term  the  political  cost  of  inertia  is  much  greater.  Even  if  some  mistakes  are  inevitably 
made when trying to change long established practices, reform always pays in the medium to long run. 
I don’t underestimate the cost, since reforms meet resistance from the few but well-organised bodies 
that  have  every  interest  in  perpetuating  the  anomalies.  Against  this  resistance,  those  who  are 
expected to benefit from the reforms are not so militant and organized, since they represent a broad 
spectrum  of  people  but  lower  benefits  per  person.  Besides,  benefits  from  reforms  are  not  always 
immediately  visible  and  thus  those  expected  to  benefit  do  not  appear  to  be  as  combative  as  the 
opponents of reforms. 
Greece’s  post  Olympic  advantage  lies  in  services.  Especially  I  see  Greece  as the  main  provider  of 
modern and high value-added services in the Balkans and even beyond. I identified tourism, which 
moreover, can now draw significant benefits by using the Olympic infrastructure for the organisation of 
big international conferences and other events. The expansion of shipping and related activities, the 
development of a regional financial sector in Greece, the establishment of foreign trading companies 
should henceforth also be the pillars of a fast rate of growth. Last but not least the proposed opening 
of  higher  education  to  private  funded  institutions  should  lead  to  an  improvement  of  the  overall 
educational standards, while bringing to Greece foreign students from the wider region. In addition to 
the  export  earnings,  a  big  proportion  of  foreign  students  will  stay  in  the  country  and  will  instill 
dynamism to the economy, as well as they will strengthen the links between Greece and the countries 
of their origin and raise Greece’s position in the world. 
To  sum  up,  I  see  the  forces  that  have  sustained  Greek  growth  until  recently  (namely  fiscal  stimuli, 
unprecedented  low  real  interest  rates  and  significant  EU  co-financed  infrastructure  projects)  will 
weaken slowly and should be replaced by new sources of growth: a more extrovert business sector, 
which  is  already  starting  to  reap  the  benefit  of  its  recent  investments  abroad,  an  administrative 
machinery friendly to entrepreneurship and lower taxation, as well as greater flexibility in the labour 
and product markets. All these factors can underpin a continuing high rate of productivity growth in the 
years to come. 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 5
