Guy Quaden: Prospects and challenges of the European economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Swiss  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Brussels, 27 October 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I thank you very much for your invitation to speak this evening on the topic: “Prospects and Challenges 
of the European Economy”. 
The European economy is facing many challenges: consolidating the current recovery, redressing the 
public finances which have deteriorated in many countries, reducing unemployment which is still too 
high  and preserving social  cohesion,  preparing  for  the  ageing  process  and  in  particular  its  financial 
consequences, but I think one of them is now the most important: improving Europe’s growth potential. 
Its realisation is a prerequisite for meeting the other challenges mentioned. 
From the outset I want to make it absolutely clear that I am neither a eurosceptic nor a europessimist. 
So, I fully acknowledge and admire the resounding success European integration has achieved in two 
fields over the past few years. 
As a central banker I would of course first like to refer to the introduction of the euro which, as you all 
know,  was  brought  about  in  two  stages  (1999  and  2002).  It  was  a  huge  political,  economic  and 
technological challenge and it was an impressive achievement. 
The finalisation of European monetary integration had a profound effect on the deepening of the single 
market  through  the  elimination  of  the  exchange  risk,  the  reduction  in  transaction  costs  and  the 
increase  in  price  transparency.    This  improvement  of  the  single  market  will  enhance  the  overall 
efficiency of the European economy and, other things being equal, also its growth performance. 
However,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  population  of  our  countries  correctly  perceived  the  latter 
advantage.  Indeed,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  unfortunately  coincided  with  a  severe  slump  in 
economic  activity:  while  in  2000  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  reached  3.5 p.c.  it  declined  the 
following years to reach a mere 0.5 p.c. in 2003. 
Earlier this year European integration achieved another major success. 
Ten new member states joined the European Union, which now makes European reunification almost 
complete. With its 25 member countries, the EU now has a population of 455 million people. With the 
participation  of  Switzerland  we  would  be  still  closer  to  half  a  billion  people.  But  even  without 
Switzerland the EU as a whole has the third largest population in the world (only after China and India) 
making it larger than the US and Japan combined. However, this historic event occurred immediately 
after a period of sluggish economic growth which left the European economy somewhat weakened. 
Therefore,  the  enlargement,  instead  of  generating  enthusiasm,  has  in  many  instances  given  rise  to 
misgivings among the population and even among the enterprises. The concern regards the possible 
delocalisation of enterprises and significant job losses. 
At the microeconomic and sectorial level, the integration of the new Member States will undoubtedly 
entail some adjustments and shifts - it would be naive to claim otherwise -but overall it should result in 
a win-win situation. The past decade has already brought a strong expansion of trading links between 
the  old  and  new  EU  Member  States.  As  purchasing  power  in  those  countries  catches  up  and  their 
markets become more accessible, Western European firms are set to expand their potential outlets 
while the continuing dismantling of trade barriers and harmonisation of the regulatory framework will 
gradually create a level playing field. The expansion of trade leading to increasing specialisation, and 
hence greater productivity, as well as consumers having a wider choice will produce benefits that are 
much larger than the cost of integration. 
These two recent major events show that insufficient growth is a real cause for concern for the people 
in  our  countries  who  feel  insecure  about  their  employment.  This  factor  obscures  the  achievements 
European  integration  has  reached  and  so  prevents  people  from  believing  in  the  dynamism  of  the 
European unification.  
For the coming months a cautious optimism is justified. Mainly driven by the strong growth in the US 
and Asia, economic activity has been higher than expected in the euro zone in the first half of this 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
year. The conditions for a continuation of the recovery remain in place. Economic growth outside the 
euro zone should continue to support euro area exports. On the domestic side, strong foreign demand 
and firm activity growth should sooner or later revive investment and employment. At this stage, the 
signs pointing to a broader-based recovery are mixed, with non negligible variations across countries, 
e.g. the recovery has been stronger and broader-based in Belgium than in Germany as was confirmed 
again today by the publication of preliminary figures for the third quarter. 
The scenario of an ongoing recovery is, as is frequently the case, subject to some risks. The main risk 
relates  to  oil  prices.  The  recent  rise  in  oil  prices  has  been  proportionally  smaller  than  in  previous 
episodes, particularly when expressed in euro, and since the 1970’s, the oil intensity of production in 
the euro zone has fallen significantly. Nevertheless, persistently high and even further increasing oil 
prices would probably dampen both foreign and domestic demand. 
Finally,  the  effects  of  oil  prices  on  growth  and  inflation  will  not  depend  only  on  the  amplitude  and 
duration of the oil price rise, but also on the appropriateness of the responses of our authorities and 
economic agents. Lessons learned from the bad experience of the 1970’s, when there were desperate 
attempts to compensate the consequences of the oil shock by lax budgetary and wage policies, must 
not be forgotten. 
Most  forecasting  institutes  expect  for  the  euro  zone  this  year  and  next  year  growth  rates  between 
2 and 2.25 p.c. close to the growth potential of the zone. That would be good to have but that should 
not be a reason to be satisfied. 
What is needed are efforts to make the European economy more resistant to external shocks as those 
which have reduced its growth in the latest years and to increase its long term growth potential. 
Europe has to cope with a structural problem of low economic growth. The growth performance of the 
euro area is weak from an international point of view, in particular compared to the United States: over 
the past 10 years the American economy has shown an average GDP growth of 3.3 p.c., while the 
euro area could only reach an economic growth of 2 p.c. 
It  is  necessary  to  specify  that  given  unequal  population  growth  further  analysis  shows  that  the 
difference  in  real  GDP  growth  is  half  the  size  if  calculated  in  per  capita  terms  (per  head).  The  fact 
remains however that since the mid 90’s the gap in product or income per head between the US and 
the euro zone has significantly widened. 
Macroeconomic policies are not the explanation of the weaker growth in the euro zone. 
First  of  all  this  is  true  for  monetary  policy.  In  less  than  six  years  the  new  ECB  has  gained  a  high 
degree of credibility. The euro zone has witnessed a period of low rates of inflation and low levels of 
short  term  and  long  term  interest  rates.  For  months  the  ECB’s  nominal  central  rate  has  been 
maintained at 2 p.c., that means zero in real terms, and the level of market long term interest rates 
(the most important rates in the euro zone for the financing of investments by enterprises, households 
and government), which has fluctuated around 4 p.c., is lower than in the US. 
In the fiscal sphere, almost all the governments in the euro zone allowed the automatic stabilisers to 
take  full  effect  during  the  recent  slowdown,  and  that  effect  was  often  reinforced  by  discretionary 
measures. Between 2000 and 2003, the budgetary deficit of general government in the euro area has 
risen from 1.0 p.c. of GDP to 2.7 p.c. The deficits of some countries have even exceeded the ceiling of 
3 p.c. 
Fiscal policy has thus not been an impediment to recovery. One might in fact  wonder whether the 
stimulation  of  the  economy  intended  by  the  fiscal  easing  in  many  countries  was  not  eroded  by  the 
adverse impact which such a relaxation of discipline can have on the climate of confidence. 
It  seems  that  people  in  Europe  more  and  more  have  a  so  called  “Ricardian  perception”  of  fiscal 
deficits.  They  are  more  aware  of  the enormous  challenges  and  costs  our  ageing  society  will  entail. 
People  in  the  different  European  countries  are  really  worried  about  the  long-term  sustainability  of 
public finances. High fiscal deficits will only worsen their anxiety and so incite them to increase their 
precautionary savings. 
The differences in GDP growth per capita between the US and Europe are due to differences in labor 
utilisation and in productivity growth.The level of labor utilisation is much lower in the euro zone. Three 
elements stand out. First, labor force participation rates, especially of women and the youngest and 
oldest  age  groups,  are  substantially  lower  in  continental  Europe:  more  than  10  percentage  points. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
Second,  unemployment rates are  much  higher: currently  around  3  percentage  points.  Third:  annual 
hours worked per employee are lower by more than 300 hours. 
Europe is of course not the US. It has its own specificities which should be taken into account. So at 
least part of the gap in average hours worked between the US and the euro area should be attributed 
to  structural  preferences  rather  than  to  structural  rigidities.  And  in  democratic  societies  people’s 
preferences have to be respected. 
However, when discussing this issue it has to be borne in mind that households also take into account 
the  institutional  environment  and  the  system  of  incentives  and  disincentives  in  place,  including  tax, 
social security and pension systems when deciding on their labour supply. 
Moreover, the problem to what extent the present European system is sustainable cannot be ignored. 
The so-called European model will come under increasing pressure from demographic factors. Further 
policy changes towards stimulating labour supply are inevitable if living standards and social cohesion 
are to be preserved. 
Last remark on the unequal growth between Europe and the US. At a certain time Europe was able to 
compensate a lower utilisation of labor through a higher labor productivity - a higher production per 
hour - but in the last decade its lead in that field has dwindled. 
Since the mid-90’s there was a marked and surprising acceleration in US productivity growth. The bulk 
of  this  acceleration  reflects  the  production  and  use  of  information  technology.  The  take-up  of  new 
technologies has been slower in most European countries which meant that Europe did not benefit to 
the same degree from the productivity boost that came from the technology revolution. 
Over the past years, European policymakers have become more aware of this growth problem Europe 
is facing. So, in March 2000, during the Lisbon summit, an ambitious strategy was adopted aiming to 
increase  the  rate  of  sustainable  economic  growth  and  even  to  enable  Europe  to  become  the  most 
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world in 2010 (I prefer to say modestly: 
one of the most...). 
In order to achieve such a strategic goal the Lisbon agenda has brought together the different strands 
of  reform  policies  on  product,  labour  and  capital  markets  aiming  at  promoting  innovation  and 
employment. Moreover, in order to facilitate monitoring of progress with reforms, quantitative targets 
have  been  set  to  evaluate  progress  in  achieving  for  instance  higher  labor  market  participation  and 
employment rates. 
The Lisbon agenda was excellent in terms of diagnosis. Until now it has however not been given a 
sufficiently powerful implementation. 
One  cannot  say  that  there  was  no  progress  in  the  last  years  in  the  field  of  structural  reforms.  In 
particular progress has been tangible in deregulating and integrating some segments of product and 
financial markets. But the pace of reform needs to be significantly stepped up if the Lisbon targets are 
to be achieved. 
Insufficient participation rates and high unemployment are still preoccupying and ongoing reforms on 
the labour market are needed not only to increase incentives for job creation but also to ensure the 
sustainability of the social security systems. 
The  challenges  are  known  and  the  analyses  are  completed.  Now  the  implementation  should  be 
focused  on.  As  I  have  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  am  neither  a  eurosceptic  nor  a 
europessimist. So I believe Europe can implement the Lisbon agenda. The introduction of the euro 
was a splendid example of a not easy but successful structural reform.  It can be and it should be 
followed by others. 
The  framework  through  which  the  Lisbon  agenda  is  implemented  relies  largely  on  a  peer  pressure 
mechanism, mainly depending on goodwill of governments in individual EU countries. The pressure 
must  be  reinforced,  including  by  clearly  identifying  and  publicising  successful  and  lagging  country 
cases. I have generally referred to average data for the twelve countries of the euro zone but we must 
not ignore that a country like Finland (and more generally the Nordic countries in the EU) has booked 
in  the  most  recent  decade  performances  in  the  field  of  growth  and  employment  rates  which  are 
absolutely  comparable  to  those  of  the  US  and  are  much  better  than  those  of  countries  like,  for 
instance, Germany and Italy. 
Finally, communication must also be improved. The transition from the pre-reform to the post-reform 
equilibrium  conditions  normally  takes  time  and  we  must  recognise  that  within  this  period  some 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 3
uncertainty may occur. For this reason the implementation of social reforms requires strong leadership 
and a timeless explanation effort. We have to convince our public opinion that our countries would be 
better off - with more growth and more jobs - if we could deliver the reforms of the Lisbon agenda. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2004
