Ardian Fullani: Bank-business relationships - a new chapter 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the meeting organised by the Bank 
of Albania in cooperation with the business community of the country, Tirana, 13 December 2004. 
 Honored participants! 
I  regard  today’s  meeting  as  a  special  opportunity  to  both  communities,  the  banking  one  and  the 
business one, to open a new communication and cooperation, a new relationship based on reciprocal 
trust and benefit. 
From  a  naïve  viewpoint,  it  seems  that  our  final  goal,  price  stability  and  country’s  financial  stability 
would  appear  different  from  your  goal,  the  maximization  of  profit  from  the  activity  you  exercise. 
However, going into more details, we would notice that both communities represented in this hall with 
their decisions and achievements make the work of each other easier, towards the indisputable idea 
that no economic growth could exist without economic-financial stability.  
It  is  easier  for  you  to  make  important  decisions  for growing  your  business  in a  stabilized  economic 
environment where inflation rate is low. Otherwise, you would feel insecure, especially concerning the 
perspective of your business. Also, in the case of the country’s financial stability and presence of a 
consolidated banking sector, you would feel more convenient and naturally the flow of free financial 
funds  would  be  addressed  to  qualitative  growth  of  your  businesses.  On  the  other  hand,  a  fragile 
financial  system,  with  insecure  unsupervised  segments  would  increase  the  potential  for  powerful 
shocks, which in one way or another would affect not only the business but also the overall savings. 
Below  I  will  treat  some  complicated  theoretical  issues.  Simultaneously,  I  would  not  like  to  offer  an 
apology  or  to  make  propagandistic  declarations.  Along  with  the  purpose  I  have  to  introduce  some 
recent  initiatives  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  the  viewpoint  of  its  new  vision,  I  will  briefly  treat  the 
awareness  of  your  community  to  enhance  the  cooperation  with  the  banking  system,  including  the 
Bank of Albania, the institution I govern.  
I hope you have recently had the chance to hear and debate about cash reduction in economy, about 
the acute need the banking system has for the creation of some important information registers, as I 
also hope you share the same opinion with me that the banking system has made obvious progress 
recently. 
I  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  declare  right  from  the  beginning  that  it  has  not  to  do  with 
propagandistic  campaigns  but  with  concrete  projects,  which  will  make  the  banking  business  more 
useful, naturally not only for you but for the overall population at large. Protection of the value of your 
savings is our constant commitment.  
Allow me to briefly treat some issues I mentioned above: 
Lending to economy 
1. 
Last week I had a meeting with the banking sector directors, where we discussed about developments 
and perspectives of lending to economy. It was agreed by all that there is much space in this direction, 
while  banks  requested  more  specific  information  in  terms  of  economy  sectors,  where  investment  is 
made and is projected to be made. Of course, this information would assist banks in the process of 
dealing with the requirements and at the same time would assist them even in projecting the future of 
their business. 
Viewed from the above context, I would strongly encourage you to address banks more and more so 
to absorb their financial funds. But, at the same time, more transparency, more clarity is needed in the 
relationships you have and will have with the banking business for being successful. 
   1/3 
Credit information bureau  
2. 
The establishment of credit information bureau is a program initiated by Albanian bank association, for 
the accomplishment of which much work and institutional coordination is needed between actors of 
interest, such as business, banks, public institutions and the Bank of Albania. The credit information 
bureau  is  expected  to  facilitate  not  only  the  information  problems  existing  between  banks  and 
businesses, but also the interbank information that is so much important from the viewpoint of using 
the scale economies. The Bank of Albania will facilitate the conditions for the accomplishment of this 
project. 
Automated Electronic Clearing House system 
3. 
After the successful implementation of the Real Time Gross Settlement system, the Bank of Albania 
has  recently  inaugurated  the  initiation  for  implementing  a  very  important  project  related  to  the 
Automated  Electronic  Clearing  House  system.  The  operation  of  this  new  system  will  lead  to  a 
significant acceleration of payments for the banks’ customers, and due to the absence of this element 
businesses remained away from banks. I would like to use this opportunity to make businesses aware 
of the advantages the operation of this system provides, since both the systems will contribute, among 
others, in reaching international standards of ATM and POS per number of population. The challenge 
for  the  banking  system  and  businesses,  as  well  as  for  the  Bank  of  Albania,  remains  the  public 
encouragement in using them. 
Cash reduction in the economy 
4. 
Some  of  the  above-mentioned  steps  imply  and  contribute  directly  and  indirectly  in  the  reduction  of 
cash  economy.  But  the  Bank  of  Albania  plans  to  undertake  further  steps  in  this  respect,  in 
collaboration with other important institutions like the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy. In this 
context,  first  step  has  been  the  channelling  of  wages  payment  to  a  part  of  the  public  institutions 
through bank accounts. I hope that this process will know further intensive developments in 2005, to 
be extended not only to the central institutions but also to the local ones. 
But the banking system attitude won’t be passive. On the contrary, its role will be active, that is banks 
will  tend  to  address  to  households  and  businesses  with  clear  and  ready  products,  with  quick  and 
efficient  services.  I  estimate  that  in  2005  the  banking  system  will  be  more  attractive,  given  the 
estimations on the latest developments of the banking system either in terms of the increasing number 
of branches or the additional banking services provided to the customers. I think that optimistic signs 
of  the  current  year  will  be  followed  by  vigorous  actions  of  the  banking  system  on  the  payment 
operations  through  electronic  cards,  and  I  would  like  to  express  in  this  spirit  that  solutions  of  the 
banking system should be in the favour of a unified card. 
Evidently,  steps  in  this  direction  will  be  more  complex  and  naturally  some  of  them  require  an 
interinstitutional cooperation. The Bank of Albania is preparing now the path towards a massive use of 
electronic cards in Albania. Credit card service will contribute not only in reducing cash in the economy 
but its final goal remains the reduction of the informal economy. 
The need to get more information 
5. 
The  good  orientation  for  the  right  decision-making,  for  an  institution  such  as  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
requires  an  overall  information,  inter  alia,  on  the  production  performance,  employment  situation, 
expectations and ambitions that businesses have for the future and for a range of other indicators that 
relate to the economic activity on a national scale. I think that it is not a secret to anyone of us to state 
that  this  information  is  rather  rare,  causing  that  many  times  our  decision-making  be  not  effective 
enough and not in conformity with the Bank of Albania capabilities.  
This is the reason why we deem that you may be a valuable window of information that would help us 
a lot in reaching more accurate conclusions on the current and expected developments of the country. 
Considering that your business potential is considerable and global, there will be a possibility to have 
a clearer picture on the performance of the country’s economic activity, not only in the metropolis but 
also  all  over  the  country.  For  this  purpose  we  are  designing  a  new  strategy  for  its  branches  in  the 
districts. These branches will reflect a clear picture of the Bank of Albania and will serve not only for 
   2/3 
the  collecting  and  depositing  of  cash  but  also  as  stations  for  the  gathering  of  information  on  the 
economic and financial activity of the district, preceding the analyses and studies that will serve not 
only to the design of a clear macroeconomic policy but also to the modernization of elements for the 
transmission of this policy from the higher authority to the lower authority and vice versa. 
On the other hand, do not forget that you will have in exchange the opportunity to conduct professional 
analyses  regarding  the  branch  where  you  perform  your  activity,  with  accurate  expectations  about 
markets, businesses and consumer demand. Therefore, even with your credit provider, the banking 
business will be more confident in making decisions and finding potential clients. 
I would like to emphasize that the invitation I address to you today is very sincere, real, away from 
propagandistic clishés. To sum up, I would like to confirm that these communication relations which I 
appeal for today would resist the time only if they would rely on sincerity, confidence and reciprocity. 
I do guarantee that.  
 
   3/3 
