Timothy F Geithner: The Fed Challenge 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the National Academy Foundation’s 2004 Dinner, New York, 8 December 2004. 
 Thank you, Gene, for that generous introduction. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  tonight  to  celebrate  the  National  Academy  Foundation  and  all  of  your 
contributions to this important mission. I am very pleased to accept this award on behalf of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. 
I want to compliment Sandy Weill on his commitment to education and the achievements of the NAF. 
And I want to recognize three important people from the New York Fed who are responsible for the 
Fed Challenge: 
Steve Malin, Lloyd Bromberg and Bob Diamant. 
Among these and other contributions to public service, Sandy serves as a member of the board of 
directors of the New York Fed. I want to tell you his reaction to a presentation early this year on our 
work in financial education. Sandy listened carefully to the description of the full array of New York 
Fed programs. Then, in his typically tentative and understated way, with the same soft approach he 
brought to building one of the most formidable financial institutions in the world, asked why the Bank 
didn’t limit its role in education to simply supporting the National Academy Foundation. His belief, with 
justifiable pride in the Foundation, was that there was no more important contribution the Fed could 
make and no more competent institution engaged in this effort than the Foundation.  
Fortunately for the New York Fed, we have a long and productive collaboration with the Foundation. 
We provide support on curriculum design and professional development. We are working together to 
help  create  a  new  high  school  in  the  city  with  a  finance  theme.  The  NAF  has  adopted  the  Fed 
Challenge for its Academies throughout the country. And we benefit in turn by using the Academy’s 
work as a model for the economic and financial programs we support and initiate.  
If you care about the economic future of America, you have to care about educational reform and the 
mission  of  the  NAF.  This  mission  has  always  been  important,  but  it  is  particularly  important  today. 
Confidence in America depends importantly on success in the education mission.  
Improving educational achievement will play a critical role in generating the innovations necessary to 
drive future productivity growth. And yet, US students remain math challenged, and we are awarding a 
diminishing share of the world’s PHDs in science and engineering.  
Improving  the  quality  of  education  is  vital  to  improving  the  capacity  of  our  citizens  to  manage  the 
challenges that come from global competition, rapid technological change, and the greater share of 
the risk they now bear for saving for retirement. The average American with a college degree earns 
twice  as  much  as  his  neighbor  without  a  college  education,  which  is  about  twice  the  premium  that 
existed 40 years ago. 
Improving access to educational opportunity for all our citizens, regardless of race or the economic 
fortune  of  their  parents,  is  critical  to  the  credibility  of  the  American  ideal  of  equality  of  economic 
opportunity. As Larry Summers has noted, In our country today, a student whose parents are among 
the richest quartile of American is six times more likely than one from the poorest quartile to graduate 
with a B.A. within five years of leaving high school.  
And improving the capacity of our present and future tax payers to make informed judgments about 
economic  policy  is  important  to  improving  the  quality  of  policy  decisions  by  our  elected  officials, 
national  and  locally.  This  is  vital  in  an  era  where  we  face  tremendous  challenges  in  bringing  our 
commitments and resources closer to balance.  
Improving  educational  achievement,  access  to  educational  opportunity,  and  the  level  of  public 
sophistication on economic issues are critical challenges with high returns to progress. This is why we 
will  continue  to  invest  in  educational  programs  and  why  we  are  pleased  to  work  closely  with 
organizations as effective as the NAF in this noble cause. 
   1/2 
I take some comfort in the fact that, when NAF students think of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, they know we have an important role in monetary policy and financial stability. They know we sit 
on a large amount of the gold and dollar reserves of the world. But what they think is really cool is the 
Fed  Challenge,  and  how  they  can  win  a  place  in  the  national  competition.  My  wife  said  to  me  this 
morning that the Fed Challenge sounds considerably more fun and exciting than the real thing. 
I applaud all of you who contribute to this effort. And I thank the NAF for its tribute to the New York 
Fed. 
   2/2 
