Rachel Lomax: Stability and statistics   
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the North Wales Business 
Club, Llandudno, Wales, 23 November 2004. 
I would like to thank Simon Hayes and Jens Larsen for research support and Spencer Dale, Mark Cornelius and colleagues at 
the Bank of England for helpful comments. 
 “The  first  time  we  saw  the  MPC  we  were  given  the  folder  of  all  the  statistics  they  had 
which was something like a foot high. We found it hard to believe that they all read that 
stuff but they claimed they did.Statistics seem to be their life blood…” 
Chairman, House of Lords, Select Committee on Economic Affairs, HL Paper 176 - II. 
The past decade has been a time of unparalleled stability for the UK economy. It is more than twelve 
years  since  the  United  Kingdom  experienced  a  single  quarter  of  negative  GDP  growth.  Consumer 
spending, investment and output have all shown a degree of stability over the past ten years which is 
unmatched  in  any  decade  since  the  war  -  indeed  in  the  twentieth  century.  Inflation  has  been 
impressively stable too, as well as lower on average than at any time since the war. And, to complete 
the story, employment has grown steadily, and unemployment has fallen to a 30 year low. 
A stable economy has created a much better climate for business. So no wonder soaring oil prices 
make  people  nervous.  Those  with  long  memories  know  we  have  achieved  low  inflation  and  steady 
growth before - though never for so long - only to see them slip away. They ask: what’s to prevent that 
happening again? 
A lot has changed in the past fifteen years. We now have an approach to setting interest rates which 
provides much better incentives for policy makers to take the right decisions. This - and the strong 
track record built up over the past decade - has stabilised expectations, with the result that it takes 
more  to  throw  inflation  off  course.  This  is  crucial  insurance  against  the  risks  of  a  more  turbulent 
decade ahead. 
A  trickier  issue  -  and  one  on  which  I  want  to  spend  some  time  tonight  -  is  the  vexed  question  of 
information. Statisticians get an even worse press than economists. But they are indispensable. Just 
as well run businesses need good management information, so successful monetary policy depends 
on having good information about the economy. The statistical fog surrounding the true state of the 
economy has proved a particularly potent breeding ground for policy errors in the past. Are we yet in 
sight of a clearer view? 
The policy framework 
But  let  me  start  first  with  the  policy  framework:  what  grounds  are  there  for  being  confident  that  it 
provides the right incentives for policy makers to take good decisions? 
The origins of the present approach go back to 1992, when the Conservative government adopted an 
inflation target as the centrepiece of a package of reforms designed to rebuild credibility with financial 
markets  in  the  wake  of  sterling’s  abrupt  departure  from  the  ERM.  This  approach  -  which  came  to 
include the popular “Ken and Eddie show” - proved successful in establishing a track record of low and 
stable inflation. In 1997, the incoming Labour Government “entrenched” this success by handing the 
operation of monetary policy over to the Bank of England and setting out a detailed institutional and 
legal  framework  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  result  was  to  depoliticise  interest  rate 
decisions,  within  a  framework  of  accountability  that  left  the  Government  clearly  in  charge  of  setting 
objectives for inflation. 
Taking operational monetary policy decisions out of the hands of politicians was a decisive step. The 
touchstone of a successful monetary policy framework is its credibility. If people believe policy makers 
will always act to keep inflation low, this expectation will itself put a brake on inflationary wage and 
price increases. 
Economists long argued that it was difficult for politicians to make a fully credible commitment to low 
inflation.  And  perceptions  are  what  matter:  even  if  a  government  has  no  intention  of  manipulating 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
monetary policy for political ends, as long as firms, workers and financial markets entertain that as a 
possibility, the job of keeping inflation low will be that much harder. 
Nowadays,  the  Chancellor  specifies  the  inflation  target  each  year,  in  a  letter  to  the  Governor,  but 
decisions about interest rates are taken by a Committee of nine independent experts who have strong 
incentives to keep inflation close to target. 
That is not just because a measurable target provides a clear focus for decisions, important as that is. 
The regime is intentionally highly transparent with a heavy emphasis on accountability to Parliament 
and  the  general  public  as  well  as  the  government  of  the  day.  Our  individual  votes  are  a  matter  of 
public record, and we regularly appear in front of the Treasury Committee to explain our decisions. 
Minutes  of  MPC  meetings  are  published  within  a  fortnight.  And  every  three  months,  we  publish  an 
Inflation  Report,  with  the  MPC  s  views  on  the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  over  the  next  three 
years. This is the subject of regular briefings to business audiences around the country as well as a 
high profile press conference fronted by the Governor. 
All this gives monetary policy watchers - in financial markets and in the country at large - plenty of 
information by which to judge how we are doing, as well as to form their own expectations of future 
inflation and growth. 
How  successful  have  we  been  in  establishing  a  credible  policy  regime?  A  key  test  is  what  people 
expect about inflation, and in particular how those expectations react to unexpected economic news. If 
the regime is credible, people should expect inflation to stay close to target. And any shocks that affect 
inflation in the near-term should have no impact on inflation expectations further out, because people 
believe we will take whatever action is needed to return inflation to target. And by this measure, the 
current policy framework seems to be highly credible. 
There are those who claim that the MPC has never really been tested. In fact, the UK economy has 
been  hit  by  a  number  of  quite  severe  shocks  over  the  past  five  or  six  years.  International  financial 
markets  were  convulsed  by  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in  1997,  the  Russian  debt  default  and  LTCM 
crisis in 1998, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the Enron and WorldCom scandals in 2001/2 which dented 
confidence in corporate governance. Around the same time, we also saw the bursting of the dot.com 
bubble and a slowdown in world activity. 
In the past decades, shocks like this would almost certainly have destabilised UK economic activity 
and inflation. That, after all, is what happened in the 1970s, when the price of oil quadrupled, and then 
again  in  1979  when  it  more  than  doubled.  Since  the  late  90s  however,  medium-term  inflation 
expectations - both as measured by surveys and as implied by financial asset prices - have barely 
budged. Even this year, when oil prices rose by over 70% to their peak in late October before falling 
back,  and  other  producer  input  prices,  including  metals,  have  surged  ahead,  both  surveys  and 
financial asset prices show inflation expectations fluctuating around the MPCs inflation target, within a 
very narrow range. 
This remarkable de-coupling of inflation expectations from economic disturbances is the single most 
encouraging  indicator  that  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  is  doing  its  bit  to  ensure  continued 
economic stability. 
The importance of reliable information 
In  monetary  policy  as  in  business,  reputations  that  have  taken  decades  to  build  can  be  lost  with 
distressing speed: it only takes one banana skin to turn a confident stroll into a painful tumble. And 
while  monetary  policy  may  be  a  matter  for  experts  these  days,  it  is  very  far  from  being  a  precise 
science. 
Any honest assessment of the economic outlook comes with very large health warnings. That’s why, in 
its quarterly Inflation Reports the MPC discusses at some length the main economic risks that may 
knock its central projection off course. These tend focus on events beyond our control - the state of the 
world economy for example - or gaps in our understanding of key economic relationships - such as the 
link between house prices and household spending. The minutes of our policy meetings reflect a lively 
awareness of the range of possible outcomes which need to be factored into decisions taking. 
But  few  subjects  consume  more  of  our  time  and  energy  than  another,  more  insidious,  source  of 
uncertainty: one with which the MPC does daily battle - the data. As the last Governor liked to remark, 
“There  are  three  kinds  of  economists  -  those  who  can  count  and  those  who  can’t”.  The  MPC  is 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
emphatically  in  the  first  group;  we  agree  with  Sherlock  Holmes,  “It  is  a  capital  mistake  to  theorise 
before one has data”. Indeed, as Lord Peston, Chairman of the House of Lords Select Committee on 
Economic  Affairs,  recently  observed,  referring  to  our  foot  high  data  pack:  “Statistics  seem  to  be 
[the MPCs] life blood”. 
Why should this be so? 
The MPC sets interest rates in response to its assessment of the outlook for economic activity: the key 
question  is  whether  the  level  of  aggregate  demand  is  above  or  below  the  economy’s  capacity  to 
supply. The difficulty - and it is a fundamental one - is that we cannot observe the true values of many 
key macroeconomic variables, such as aggregate demand. 
Of course, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) produces estimates of such variables. These are 
derived  from  comprehensive  surveys  of  firms  and  households,  and  provide  the  most  authoritative 
available guide to macroeconomic developments. But measuring economic activity across the whole 
of the UK is a hugely complex and difficult task, and 100% accuracy is simply not feasible. 
And producing reliable estimates takes time. If the ONS waited two or three years before publishing 
their first estimates, they would have reasonably complete information. But it would be of rather limited 
value for policy purposes. We need more timely indicators of economic activity, even though these will 
tend to be less accurate than later estimates. 
That  is  why  the  ONS  publishes  preliminary  estimates  of  key  data  a  few  weeks  after  the  month  or 
quarter  to  which  they  refer,  derived  from  sub-sets  of  their  overall  samples.  As  time  passes,  more 
information is processed and estimates are revised, making them progressively more accurate. 
But the fact remains that the data that give the timeliest read on economic activity are also the ones 
that are measured least accurately. So there is always a risk that the official data will give a misleading 
view of the current economic situation.  
Reading the economy is difficult 
And indeed there have been times when economic policy has been led astray by misleading data. For 
example, in the second half of the 1980s economic policy was founded on the view - indicated by the 
official data at the time - that the pace of recovery from recession had been relatively modest, and 
there was considerable spare capacity in the economy. 
But a sequence of data revisions proved that view to be wrong. Nigel Lawson, who was Chancellor at 
the time, recalled that revisions to the trade figures in 1988 made it clear to him that “demand in the 
economy was pressing against the limits of capacity to a much greater degree than I had previously 
realised”.  The  GDP  figures  were  also  heavily  revised.  For  example,  growth  in  1986  was  initially 
estimated  at  2.4%  (in  early  1987)  -  close  to  economists’  view  of  trend  growth.  Three  years  later  - 
in 1990 - this had been revised up to 3.6%. The latest (2004) estimate is that growth was actually 4% - 
a long way above trend. 
As Robin Leigh-Pemberton, then Governor of the Bank of England, said 
“we  put  the  brakes  on  when  the  speedometer  indicated  we  were  doing  60mph.  Some 
time later it was revealed we were doing 55. When the tachograph was opened, however, 
it revealed that we had actually been doing 70, when the speedometer read 60… more 
brake pressure was therefore entirely appropriate.” 
This episode marked a low point for the UK’s GDP statistics in recent times. Since then, a number of 
methodological changes have been introduced, and data sources have been improved. Analysis both 
by  the  ONS  and  the  Statistics  Commission  indicates  a  dramatic  reduction  in  the  average  size  of 
revisions over the past fifteen years. Even so, measuring the economy remains a complex task, and 
data uncertainty is a fact of life. 
So what does the MPC do to ensure its judgements are as firmly grounded in reality as possible? 
We have a four pronged approach: 
• 
• 
• 
We monitor a very wide range of data 
We pay careful attention to data quality 
We talk to business people around the country 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 3
 We are working closely with ONS to transform the quality of official statistics 
Monitoring a wide array of indicators 
First,  we  critically  review  an  enormous  quantity  of  data.  The  MPC  regularly  monitors  more  than 
1,500 data series, of which around 1,000 are for the UK. The point of doing this is that often there are 
puzzles  and  questions  about  the  behaviour  of  the  economy  to  which  no  single  piece  of  data  can 
provide a complete answer. But we may build up a convincing picture by piecing together a range of 
indicators. 
The  housing  market  provides  a  classic  example  of  this  approach.  There  is  an  enormous  array  of 
indicators of housing market activity - data on mortgage approvals and lending, house price indices 
from the main lenders (the Halifax and the Nationwide), the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister and 
the Land Registry, and various surveys of estate agents and house builders. One approach would be 
to pick out a single indicator, and monitor that.  But experience shows that none of these indicators 
individually has consistently given a plausible indication of developments in the housing market; the 
indicators  provide  a  better  guide  when  taken  together.  So  we  monitor  a  full  set  of  housing  market 
indicators, and we have found that the clearest signals come when all of the indicators are pointing in 
the same direction. In economic assessment, there is safety in numbers. 
Awareness of data quality 
But looking at a large array of indicators can be bewildering without some way of narrowing the focus. 
So the second element of our approach is to recognise explicitly that data vary widely in their quality, 
and  hence  in  their  usefulness  for  policy  assessment.  Bank  staff  grade  data  series  on  a  number  of 
quality criteria, and we use this grading to make the best use of the available information. 
The basic principle is simple: a sensible approach to economic assessment takes a weighted average 
of all available indicators, where the weight placed on each reflects the quality of that indicator relative 
to other available data. Generally speaking, in terms of overall accuracy the highest quality data come 
from the ONS and other national statistical agencies. This is scarcely surprising, since they have a 
very comprehensive information base. For example, ONS data on manufacturing output are based on 
surveys of  10,000 of  the UK’s  160,000  manufacturers.  All  firms with  more  than  150 employees  are 
surveyed, supplemented by stratified random sampling of smaller companies. 
Some  private-sector  business  organisations  -  such  as  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Purchasing  and 
Supply, the CBI and the British Chambers of Commerce - also publish surveys of manufacturers. But 
these samples are typically less than one-tenth of the size of those used by the ONS. 
On  top  of  that,  the  private-sector  surveys  ask  only  whether  activity  has  risen  or  fallen,  rather  than 
recording exactly how much activity has changed. This can be a particular problem when sub-sectors 
of an industry are experiencing dramatic movements in output compared with the rest of the sector. 
For example, manufacturing output declined quite sharply between 1999 and 2002, driven by sharp 
falls in ICT output, as the strong growth in business spending on IT through the mid 1990s came to an 
abrupt halt. But the dip in the manufacturing survey balances in this period was much less pronounced 
than the ONS’s estimated fall in output. This was due in part to the qualitative nature of the surveys, 
which meant that ICT firms could record only that their output had fallen - and not that it had fallen off 
a cliff! 
In  principle  then,  the  ONS  data  should  provide  the  most  accurate  guide  to  developments  in  UK 
economic activity. But monetary policy decisions are made every month, and need to be informed by 
the best assessment of economic activity available at that time. That is why the MPC sets particular 
store on timely economic data - that is, data that are released soon after the period to which they refer. 
This  is  where  the  business  surveys  really  can  add  value.  For  example,  the  CIPS  surveys  for  the 
manufacturing and services sectors are released just a few days after the reference month. This is 
around one month before ONS manufacturing output estimates are available, and around two months 
before  the  ONS  releases  its  monthly  service  sector  data.  The  private  sector  surveys  may  be  less 
accurate than the ONS data; but so long as we bear that additional uncertainty in mind, they can be a 
valuable addition to the MPC’s armoury. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2004
In fact, recent work by Bank staff has shown that, even when preliminary ONS estimates are available, 
combining  these  with  the  information  from  the  business  surveys  can  provide  a  more  accurate 
assessment than if we were to throw the business survey information away and rely solely on the ONS 
data. 
This type of analysis is influencing our judgement at the moment. The ONS’s preliminary estimate of 
GDP growth in the third quarter was just 0.4%, suggesting a marked slowdown in growth driven by a 
sharp  contraction  in  industrial  output.  But  business  surveys  suggest  that  manufacturing  output 
continues  to  expand.  Taking  these  two  pieces  of  information  together,  the  MPC  judges  that  overall 
growth was a little higher in Q3 than the official data currently indicate. 
We talk to people 
A third way of reducing the risk of error is to talk to people on the ground. If the hard data are at odds 
with what they are telling us, that will give us pause for thought - about the likely economic outlook, or 
at least the risks around our central view. 
Back  in  the  early  90s  a  familiar  charge  against  the  Treasury  (which  at  that  time  had  primary 
responsibility for setting interest rates) was that they were out of touch - stuck in London, they missed 
early signs of the recession. The Bank has been careful to avoid this trap. It has built up a network of 
agencies to act as its eyes and ears around the country. 
That regional network has grown out of the Bank’s branches that were established in 1826 to deal with 
problems caused by the failure of local banknote-issuing banks. (The nearest branch to North Wales 
would have been in Liverpool, and like several of the sixteen branches which the Bank opened at that 
time it was located on land previously occupied by licensed premises - the old Queen’s Arms in Castle 
Street. Indeed the guiding principle seems to have been “If it works as a pub it will work as a bank”. 
The  Licensed  Victuallers  Association  has  taken  its  revenge  in  recent  decades,  as  old  banks  have 
been turned into pubs). 
Within  the  branches,  the  Bank  appointed  an  Agent  to  liaise  with  local  industry  and  commerce,  and 
since 1930 they have been sending regular reports on their economies to Threadneedle Street. During 
the 1980s and 1990s, most of the branches were closed as different schemes for guaranteeing the 
supply of bank notes were established. But the Agents remained, and the network was extended to its 
current line-up of twelve - including a new Welsh Agency located in Cardiff, now run by Adrian Piper. 
Between them, the Agents are in regular contact with some 8000 firms. This provides the basis for the 
Agents’  monthly  reports  and  presentations  to  the  MPC;  the  Committee  also  commissions  special 
surveys and asks for Agents’ help in understanding puzzles in the data. This information is currently 
published in summary form each quarter, alongside the Inflation Report. We are now looking at ways 
of making it available on a monthly basis, alongside the minutes of the MPC meeting. 
MPC  members  regularly  take  their  own  eyes  and  ears  on  visits  to  individual  businesses,  making 
around  60  visits  to  the  regions  a  year.  As  well  as  acting  as  a  reality  check  on  economic  statistics, 
talking  to  businesses  around  the  country  improves  our  understanding  of  longer-term  changes  in 
economic environment. These visits are a good opportunity to discuss issues as varied as the impact 
of migrant labour on skill shortages; or outsourcing to China; or the growth of buy to let housing; or the 
changing structure of the retailing sector; or even the impact of weather and public holidays on the 
pattern of consumer spending. 
And in unusual economic circumstances, the Agents’ network of contacts can give us information that 
is not available from any other source. The outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease in 2001 is a case in 
point. Our Agents helped us to identify in real time the wider effects on the non agricultural sectors of 
the  economy,  notably  of  course  tourism  -  and  that  gave  us  a  better  picture  of  the  underlying 
development of the economy. 
We support measures to improve the quality of official statistics 
Finally, and most important, our longer-term strategy for mitigating data uncertainty is to support the 
ONS in improving the quality of the national statistics. Bank staff maintain very close links with their 
ONS  counterparts  both  on  a  day-to-day  basis,  and  in  developing  their  ambitious  modernisation 
programme. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 5
This  was  already  in  hand  when  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  commissioned  Chris  Allsopp,  a 
former member of the MPC, to assess how well the ONS’s provision of statistics matched the needs of 
policymakers. The Allsopp Report, published earlier this year, has recommended some fundamental 
changes  to  the  way  that  key  economic  data  are  put  together.  These  concern  regional  and  service 
sector data; and the ONS’s capacity to respond to changes in the structure of the economy. 
First, Allsopp recommends that the national statistical system should be reoriented to produce better 
quality regional data. This is likely to involve, for example, establishing an ONS office in every English 
region – not dissimilar to the Bank’s Agency network. The ONS’s main business surveys are also to be 
expanded  to obtain  greater  regional coverage. For example,  the  Annual  Business  Inquiry -  a  major 
workhorse of economic statistics, which provides detailed information on, for example, employment, 
production and investment – is likely to be trebled in size. 
Monetary policy operates at the level of the whole economy, and cannot target particular regions or 
countries of the UK. But to the extent that better measurement and understanding of regional activity 
leads  to  improvements  in  the  quality  of  UK  national  statistics,  as  the  Allsopp  Report  expects,  this 
development will improve the information base on which monetary policy is founded. 
The second main focus of the Allsopp review is the stark imbalance between the coverage, timeliness 
and quality of statistics on the services sector relative to those on manufacturing. Suppose you were 
interested in studying the economic behaviour of the UK textiles industry - which accounts for around 
one-third  of one percent of  UK output.  The  good  news is  there’s  plenty  of coverage  in  the  national 
accounts, although you have some decisions to make. Are you interested in clothing, or carpets and 
rugs?  And  if  clothing,  are  you  interested  in  knitted  and  crocheted  garments…or  work  wear…or 
outerwear?…or indeed underwear? Each of these has its own data set: the array of sub-categories is 
truly impressive. 
However,  suppose  instead  that  you  were  interested  in  the  retail  sector,  and  wanted  to  know,  for 
example, how much the large supermarket chains have contributed to GDP in recent years, or what 
inroads  they  have  made  into  the  non-food  market.  No  dice.  Although  the  retail  sector  nowadays 
accounts for over 5% of UK output - so it is nearly 20 times the size of the textiles industry - more 
detailed data are not produced for the UK national accounts. 
The need for better service sector statistics goes well beyond any interest we might have in detail for 
its own sake. In the UK, early estimates of GDP rely heavily on measuring output. Since the service 
sector accounts for more than 70% of UK output, the quality of early GDP estimates is inextricably 
linked to the quality of service sector statistics. Over the past ten years, revisions to services output 
have accounted for more than half of the average revision to GDP growth; and around four-fifths of the 
variance of GDP revisions can be attributed to revisions to service sector growth. 
Indeed,  research  by  Bank  staff  has  indicated  that  the  private-sector  business  surveys  may  give  a 
better guide to the ONS’s estimate of service sector output growth two years or more after the event 
than  do  the  ONS’s  own  early  estimates.  (In  contrast,  the  ONS’s  early  estimates  of  manufacturing 
output growth clearly outperform the business surveys as a guide to later estimates.) 
The  ONS  is  well  aware  of  this  imbalance.  In  fact,  it  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  developing  and 
improving  measures  of  service  sector  output:  within  the  OECD  only  the  UK  and  Korea  produce  a 
monthly  Index  of  Services  production,  the  counterpart  to  the  well-established  monthly  Index  of 
Production for the industrial sector. The Allsopp Report should give further welcome impetus to this 
work. 
The third focus of the Allsopp Report is the capacity of the ONS to identify and respond to structural 
change in the economy. The make-up of UK economic activity is constantly changing. Fifty years ago, 
the manufacturing industry accounted for about one-third of UK output. The service sector made up 
less than one-half. Today, the corresponding shares are less than 16% for manufacturing, and over 
70% for services. 
Responding to this sort of change is challenging. ONS needs to be proactive in measuring activity in 
new  sectors,  even  if  it  is  not  straightforward  -  as  it  often  won’t  be.  For  example,  bricks-and-mortar 
retailing is tangible and growing rapidly, but how does it compare with developments in internet sales? 
People can now make some purchases via mobile phone text message. How can we measure that? 
Allsopp recommends a greater capacity within the ONS for considering these issues. Improving the 
quality of macroeconomic data is a first order issue for monetary policy makers. So Bank of England 
staff will play an active role in supporting these developments. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2004
But it is just as important for the ONS to maintain the quality of its current output during this period of 
major transition. Again, we will be working closely with the ONS to ensure that the transition is made 
with minimal impact on day-to-day policy.  
How well placed are we to respond to more challenging times? 
We live in highly uncertain times. This year rising oil prices and a significant slowdown in the housing 
market have awoken bad memories of the 1970s and 1980s. The MPC will be doing very well if it can 
achieve the same stability over the next decade as we have enjoyed over the past ten years. But an 
important legacy of the past decade is that policy makers enjoy a degree of credibility that would have 
seemed unimaginable a generation ago. This in itself reduces the risk that sharp shocks to activity or 
inflation will throw us off course. 
But there is no magic about monetary policy: good decisions depend on good information, and this 
continues to be a challenging area. Much of the MPC’s energies go into distilling the message from a 
battery of often conflicting data. We do not complain about this - it is what we are paid for - but it does 
complicate the task of explaining our decisions. Improving the quality of national statistics lacks some 
of  the  glamour  of  making  the  Bank  of  England  independent.  But  it  may  be  the  best  single  way  of 
ensuring that the MPC continues to respond effectively to challenging times ahead. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 7
