Rafael Buenaventura: Laying the foundation for a progressive financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  Rafael  Buenaventura,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines),  at  The  Asset  Forum,  ASEAN  Capital  Markets  Forum  Series,  Makati  City, 
20 October 2004. 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
 Introduction 
We  are  indebted  to  the  Asset  Magazine,  headed  by  its  dynamic  editor-in-chief,  Mr..  Danny  Yu,  for 
organizing this forum on Philippine capital markets. This is an issue that should be high in our agenda 
for reform. Clearly it is critical for the government to immediately deal with a looming fiscal crisis but 
that  should  not  distract  us  from  the  equally  important  task  of  accelerating  the  development  of  the 
domestic capital market. Indeed, these two reforms are closely linked. Fiscal stability is an important 
precondition to financial system stability. A well developed capital market enhances flexibility in fiscal 
management.  
BSP agenda 
The BSP, as the monetary authority and supervisor of the banking system, is firmly committed to the 
prioritization of domestic capital market development. First, well-functioning financial markets support 
the more effective conduct of monetary policy that is key to achievement of price stability. Second, a 
robust domestic capital market complements the banking system in financial intermediation and can 
even relieve pressure especially during times of crises by providing alternative means of financing to 
the economy. Third, the banking system has greater flexibility in managing and re-distributing its risks 
via the capital market particularly through securitization and hedging.  
An even more basic reason is the need to improve on the current low domestic saving rate. According 
to comparative data from ADB as of 2003, the gross domestic saving rate in the Philippines was only 
20.1%  of  GDP  compared  with  Hong  Kong  (31.6%),  Thailand  (33.1%),  Malaysia  (42.9%)  and 
Singapore (46.7%). Even Indonesia is slightly higher at 21.5%. A low domestic saving rate is a basic 
constraint  to  achieving  higher  levels  of  investment  needed  to  support  a  faster  pace  of  economic 
growth. To promote savings, the Philippine financial market needs to offer a broader array of financial 
instruments beyond bank deposits and equity.  
We are particularly keen on seeing the faster development of the domestic debt market. As of 2003, 
total  outstanding  domestic  bonds  accounted  for  just  around  40  percent  of  GDP,  compared  with 
85 percent  for  bank  assets  and  69  percent  for  equity.  Most  of  these  bonds  are  in  the  form  of 
government securities. In developed countries, where capital markets are deep, the bond market size 
ranged from 88 percent of GDP in Euroland and 151 percent in the united states.  
Our initiatives 
The BSP’s most fundamental contribution to the development of financial markets is fully consistent 
with its primary mission - price stability. A low and stable inflation environment is a major factor that 
supports  a  healthy  financial  system  that  is  less  vulnerable  to  crises.  Under  our  inflation  targeting 
framework  adopted  since  2002,  headline  inflation  is  being  kept  within  the  4-5  percent  range.  This 
range may be temporarily breached due to intense supply side pressures such as what we are seeing 
today  due  to  abnormal  oil  markets,  but  we  expect  inflation  to  eventually  revert  to  within  the  target 
range.  
However,  we  realize  that  achieving  price  stability  is  not  enough  if  we  are  to  help  fast  track  capital 
market development. More direct action is necessary. In this regard, our initiatives include advocacy of 
better  corporate  governance  and  transparency,  widening  of  investor  base,  and  promotion  of  sound 
market infrastructure.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
We  are  championing  better  corporate  governance  and  financial  transparency  so  that  investors  will 
have more confidence in placing their funds and have more reliable financial information to guide their 
judgments.  Although  our  natural  starting  point  has  been  the  banking  system,  the  impact  goes  well 
beyond  that  as  banks  themselves  enforce  better  standards  of  governance  in  their  corporate  clients 
that prepare them for the capital market.  
In  the  same  vein,  we  are  demanding  higher  standards  of  conduct  from  external  auditors  so  that 
reliable  financial  statements  can  be  properly  enforced.  We  are  complementing  the  governance 
initiative by developing a program to promote improved financial literacy so that investors can impose 
proper market discipline.  
You  will  also  note  that  we  have  been  enforcing  more  stringently  mark-to-market  regulations  and 
looking at their further strengthening. Our aim is not just to improve financial transparency but also to 
promote more active secondary market trading.  
In  a  further  move  to  improve  financial  transparency,  we  are  also  gearing  towards  aligning  local 
financial  accounting  standards  with  the  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS).  We  are  optimistic 
that  adopting  the  standards  will  help  promote  fairness,  accuracy  and  transparency  in  the  financial 
statements  of  banks  and  other  supervised  institutions.  This  would  help  in  strengthening  market 
discipline,  encouraging  sound  risk  management  practices,  and  stimulating  the  domestic  capital 
market.  
Other related initiatives aimed at improving transparency in the financial markets include the nurturing 
of domestic credit rating agencies and the establishment of a unified credit bureau. We expect to have 
the latter to be up and running by mid-2005.  
A  major  project  being  implemented  currently  is  the  institutionalization  of  a  system  of  independent 
securities custodians. This is primarily aimed at protecting investors from fraudulent acts of multiple 
securities sales and to discourage undocumented transactions. More positively, the custodian system 
will  support  the  eventual  growth  of  securities  borrowing  and  lending  that  will  help  promote  market 
liquidity.  
We  have  systematically  tightened  prudential  and  risk  management  standards.  This  will  definitely 
strengthen the banking system. In the process, risk-based capital requirements based on the Basle 
framework  have  stimulated  the  issuance  of  tier  2  subordinated  debt  as  part  of  the  recapitalization 
process. Down the road, as the stock market recovers, banks should be issuing more equity to bolster 
tier 1 capital.  
We intend to bring the banking system in compliance with Basle 2 by 2007. In preparation, we are now 
requiring  universal  and  commercial  banks  to  formally  set  up  a  minimum  internal  credit  risk  rating 
system  for  the  underwriting  and  ongoing  administration  of  corporate  credit  exposures.  This  is 
embodied  in  Circular  No.  439  which  also  requires  that  in  rating  corporate  clients,  banks  use  only 
financial statements audited by sec-accredited external auditors.  
Moreover,  in  quick  succession,  we  have  issued  tougher  standards  on  the  management  of  large 
exposures,  on  single  borrower  limits,  and  on  DOSRI  lending.  These  will  likely  spur  corporate 
borrowers to diversify their funding sources beyond the usual friendly banks and in the direction of the 
capital market.  
But not all regulatory initiatives have been towards tightening. We have also introduced changes to 
remove  obstacles  to  capital  market  development and  create  opportunities  for banks with  respect  to 
capital  market  related  business.  These  include  selective  lowering  of  reserve  requirements  for  repo 
transactions that meet certain standards as well as for other financial products. Over the medium-term, 
we hope to effect a phased generalized lowering of reserve requirements to be more competitive with 
low reserve requirement regimes found in most other countries.  
We have likewise allowed the introduction of new and innovative financial instruments in the domestic 
market, including complex structured products under appropriate regulatory arrangements.  
Recently, we have launched an initiative to reform the common trust fund (CTF) and replace it with a 
better product called the unit investment trust fund (UITF). It will be better in the sense that its assets 
will be marked-to-market daily so that investors will not be misled as to the real performance of their 
investments. These should avoid any residual risks to the bank as asset manager. As an investment 
product,  UITFs  will  be  more  competitive  as  it  will  no  longer  be  subject  to  reserve  requirements  as 
these  are  no  longer  effectively  considered  as  deposit  substitutes.  We  expect  UITFs  to  eventually 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
evolve into major institutional investors in the capital market competing against mutual funds and other 
collective investment schemes.  
We are also intensifying our coordination efforts with other financial regulators so that we can achieve 
a more level regulatory playing field. In July 2004, a Memorandum of Agreement was signed by the 
BSP,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the  Insurance  Commission  (IC)  and  the 
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC) to formally establish a Financial Sector Forum (FSF). 
This  further  enhances  coordination  arrangements  among  the  concerned  agencies,  particularly  with 
regard  to  more  effective  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates,  to  information  exchange,  and  to 
consumer protection.  
Aside from developing a more conducive regulatory environment, we are helping develop appropriate 
market infrastructure. In this regard, we are strongly supporting the private sector initiative, led by the 
BAP, to establish the fixed income exchange and its related infrastructure to ensure efficient and safe 
clearing and settlement of securities transactions.  
Finally, our reform initiatives are benefiting from the support of Congress which has decisively acted 
on certain vital pieces of legislation including the elimination of DST on secondary trading, the SPV 
Law  and  the  Asset  Securitization  Law.  All  of  these  measures  will  help  spur  the  domestic  capital 
market. The BSP has worked hard with other interested partners to get these laws enacted and we will 
continue to do so for other pending legislation that support capital market development.  
Although much progress has already been made, the work is still far from over. The BSP will continue 
to  push  for  more  reforms  in  the  financial  system,  specifically:  (1)  a  special  legislation  to  support  a 
strong  credit  reporting  system;  (2)  the  enactment  of  a  more  balanced  bankruptcy  resolution 
framework;  and  (3)  the  enactment  of  the  proposed  changes  to  the  BSP  Charter  to  strengthen  our 
ability to clean up the banking system and properly enforce prudential standards.  
We particularly attach great importance to the amendment of the BSP Charter. Unless we are able to 
properly  police  the  banking  system  with  sufficient  powers,  we  will  be  constantly  plagued  by  a 
vulnerable  banking  system.  A  vulnerable  banking  system  will  not  be  responsive  to  our  financing 
needs. And because banks play important roles in support of the capital market whether as investors, 
underwriters,  managers,  market  makers,  issuers  and  guarantors,  a  weak  banking  system  will  also 
hamper their development of the domestic capital market.  
Conclusion  
The financial sector reform agenda is a truly major task. We need to move boldly across a broad front. 
Neither the BSP nor the government as a whole can do the job alone. We need to work together, the 
public and the private sector, to build a truly progressive financial system. 
Thank  you  very  much.  I  hope  my  remarks  will  stimulate  a  lively  discussion  that  should  move  us  to 
action.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
