Caleb M Fundanga: Economic and environmental growth of Africa  
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 2nd
Forum, Rapolano, Italy, 3 
The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Zambia’s website. 
November 2004. 
  Green Accord Media 
 Introduction  
1. 
The  world  community  faces  unprecedented  ecological  challenges  in  the  twenty-first  century.  Many 
political  and  business  leaders  have  embraced  the  idea  of  sustainable  development,  calling  for 
economic  growth  without  destroying  the  natural  environment  or  depleting  the  natural  resources  on 
which future generations will depend. Yet the concept has remained controversial, and implementation 
has been difficult. The task for policy makers and corporate leaders will be to find ways to meet both 
economic and environmental goals in the coming decade, without sacrificing either (Post-Lawrence-
Weber,  1999).  In  Africa,  environmental  issues  are  also  frequently  sidelined  on  most  policy  makers’ 
agendas due to insurmountable economic and social problems that the continent continues to face. 
Notwithstanding  the  economic  and  social  hardships,  as  Africa  constantly  strives  towards  attaining 
economic  development,  environmental  sustainability  remains  a  key  area  of  concern  (UNEP,  2003) 
although usually remote to most economic policy makers. In addition, environmental sustainability is 
hardly seen by many in Africa as an underlying factor in economic development yet it is so critical that, 
if  adequately  and  promptly  addressed,  will  have  positive  secondary  effects  on  other  crucial  areas 
pertaining to economic development and people’s welfare.  
In  this  paper,  I  attempt  to  examine  the  interrelationships  between  environmental  growth  and 
sustainable economic growth from the African perspective. The paper is organised as follows; section 
2 examines the current economic disposition of Africa, and attempts to determine its relationship with 
environmental  developments.  Prominence  is  given  to  the  components  that  affect  environmental 
sustainability, namely (i) pollution and (ii) degradation. The latter will prove to present a relatively high 
risk to environmental sustainability in Africa. Section 3 presents a further analysis on the effects of the 
environment on economic growth, and that of economic growth on the environment. Section 4 tackles 
issues  of  Africa  in  the  world  economy  and  its  environmental  prospects.  Section  5  provides  current 
solutions  aimed  at  mitigating  and/  or  reducing  the  various  negative  externalities  related  to 
environmental  pollution  and  degradation  such  as  national,  regional,  and  international  environmental 
management  policies.  Recommendations  that  are  considered  necessary  to  foster  environmental 
friendly  economic  development  are  also  given  as  input  for  further  improvements  in  environmental 
management in Africa.  
Economic disposition of Africa  
2. 
With  an  estimated  total  population  of  835,479  thousand  people  representing  13%  of  the  world’s 
estimated 6,395, 557 thousand people,1 and spanning the 53 countries of Africa, the continent faces 
numerous  challenges  predominantly  on  the  economic,  social,  and  political  fronts.  Despite  these 
difficulties, Africa recorded a growth rate of 3.6% in 2003, an increase from 2.7% recorded in 2002. 
The increasing trend in economic growth is expected to continue into 2004 [African Development Bank 
(AfDB),  2003].  Yet  the  challenge  remains  to  meet  the  targets  set  by  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals  (MDGs)  aimed  at  reducing  the  number  of  the  world’s  poor  by  half  by  the  year  2015. 
Unfortunately, improvements in some economic indicators may not be sufficient enough to enable the 
majority  of  African  countries  to  meet  the  MDGs  targets.2  Specifically,  single  digit  economic  growth 
rates are not sufficient for tackling the widespread poverty in the continent. According to the African 
Development Bank, only Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, and Mauritius will attain the specified 
targets.  The  majority  of  the  population  of  Africa  is  located  in  rural  areas  where  agriculture  and 
dependence  on  natural  resources  remains  the  predominant  means  of  livelihood  [United  Nations 
                                                      
1   As of 10/22/2004, Source: Encyclopedia Britannica Book of the Year 2004. 
2   United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) Fact Sheet, Global Environment Outlook – 3, Africa, GEO 3, Nairobi, Kenya, 
2003. 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
Development  Programme  (UNDP),  2003].  Soil,  grasslands,  freshwater  sources,  and  oceans  play  a 
critical role to sustain crop cultivation, grazing land for livestock, and fisheries.  
The energy sector equally plays an important role in the African economy due to the dependence of all 
national economies on oil for their production activities. On one hand, significant dependence on oil 
exports  from  countries  such  as  Angola,  Chad,  Equatorial  Guinea,  Nigeria  and  Libya  is  becoming 
increasingly pronounced.  
Consequently, rising oil prices have contributed towards augmenting revenues of these oil-producing 
nations, while on the other hand threatening the revenues of the other nations that only use but do not 
produce oil. In spite of the energy obtained largely from hydro and some geothermal and solar sources 
in Africa, the population continues to lag behind the rest of the developing world in terms of access to 
electricity. Approximately 77.5% of the sub-Saharan population has no access to electricity, with the 
majority of the population relying on biomass (dung and firewood) for domestic energy needs (OECD/ 
ADB, 2003).  
To a large extent, economic growth in Africa is still largely driven by production of raw materials that 
are hardly subjected to meaningful industrial processing. This source of economic growth has a direct 
dependence  on  the  use  of  natural  resources  mainly  in  agriculture  and  mining.  The  lack  of  value-
adding processing largely underpins the historical low levels of economic growth.  
3. 
Effects of environmental growth on African economic growth  
 Environmental issues in African economic growth  
3.1 
Environmental issues ought to be an important area of concern for leaders and policy makers, when 
making  policy  decisions  about  human  development  and  economic  welfare,  especially  those  in  the 
developing world. Many growth sectors are in effect directly or indirectly related to the environment. A 
study  by  Jha  and  Whalley  (1999)  argues  that  the  main  environmental  issue  generally  affecting  the 
developing world is degradation, as opposed to the common belief that pollution is the principal factor 
of  environmental  decay  which  is  predominantly  applicable  to  industrialised  countries.  Degradation 
comprises  of  the  following  key  areas;  soil  erosion,  declining  soil  quality  due  to  pesticide  residue, 
exploitation  of  open  access  resources  due  to  ill-defined  property  rights,  and  congestion  and  traffic. 
Other perverse forms of degradation are deforestation and desertification. 
While  Africa  continues  to  suffer  economic  stagnation,  the  factors  that  result  in  environmental 
degradation are continually on the increase. Some of the factors, such as burning of fossil fuels which 
release  carbon  dioxide,  are  possible  causes  of  global  warming,  although  to  a  lesser  extent  when 
compared  to  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  by  industrial  activities.  Specifically,  the  predominant 
ways that these factors affect the ecosystem are as follows;  
Soil  erosion  involves  the  washing  away  of  tracts  of  land  due  mainly  to  human  activities.  Such 
activities, while providing a source of livelihood for many, do not have safeguards to preserve the land 
for  long-term  use.  Typical  activities  include  clearing  of  land  for  crop  growing  and  animal  grazing. 
Related to soil erosion is the declining soil quality due to pesticide residue. This in turn leads to more 
clearing of virgin land once fertility reduces on existing land.  
Exploitation  of  open  access  resources  due  to  ill-defined  property  rights  presents  environmental 
management in Africa with tremendous challenges. Most of the natural resources in Africa tend to be 
viewed  as  a  common  good  for  the  entire  population.  As  a  consequence  there  is  open  access  to 
especially land under what is commonly referred to as traditional system of land tenure. It is because 
of this that rampant clearing of tracts of land go unrestricted hence resulting in degradation.  
In urban areas, ill defined land ownership is responsible for mushrooming of shanty compounds, illegal 
dumping of waste, etc.  
Congestion and traffic is related to the population growth rates and urbanisation. In most of Africa, 
modern economic activities are concentrated in urban centres. These tend to be the export enclaves 
that  support African  economies. With an  obvious  economic  tendency  for  the  population  to  gravitate 
towards points where they can maximise economic welfare, the urban areas have found themselves 
faced with congestion, which in turn overstretches utility service facilities resulting in poor sanitation 
and rampant epidemics such as respiratory diseases, cholera, etc. In addition, the general increase of 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
the population implies not only increased pressure on natural resources but also more carbon dioxide 
released through the human respiratory process.  
Deforestation  is  currently  a  serious  concern  for  Africa,  with  forests  being  lost  at  an  annual  rate  of 
more than 5 million hectares (United Nations Environmental Programme [UNEP], 2003). The growing 
demography of Africa has resulted in the clearing of land in order to accommodate for more houses 
and  areas  for  cultivation  due  to  the  significant  dependence  of  the  majority  of  the  population  on 
agriculture. According to UNEP 2003, 60% of the tropical forest areas that were cleared in Africa as a 
whole between 1990 and 2000 were converted to permanent agricultural smallholdings. The cutting 
and not replacing of trees contributes to global warming. Worse still is the burning of forests to clear 
land for grazing or agriculture which also releases carbon dioxide.  
Desertification  is  another  area  of  concern  for  the  continent.  Over  45%  of  Africa  is  affected  by 
desertification,  while  55%  is  at  high-to-very-high  risk  of  erosion  (UNEP  2003).  Desertification  is 
compounded by the other major environmental concern of deforestation. In fact, studies have shown 
that  mortality  rate,  maternal  health,  and  girl  child  education  in  the  region  are  directly  linked  to 
environmental  changes  such  as  deforestation.  In  rural  areas,  households  rely  on  females  to  fetch 
firewood,  therefore,  continued  deforestation  implies  longer  walking  distances  for  women  and  girls. 
These result in complications in pregnancy, other ailments, as well as less time for girls to do school 
work. Studies have also shown that women and girls in Africa spend an average of three hours a day 
fetching water, hence expending more than a third of their daily intake of food (UNDP 2003).  
Although  only  26%  of  the  oil  produced  in  Africa  was  used  locally  in  2003,  energy  consumption 
increased  by  44%  in  Northern  African  countries  (ADB  and  UNEP,  2003).  However  energy 
consumption of liquid fuels comes at a cost. The carbon dioxide (CO2) pollution as a result of energy 
consumption in Africa was approximately 3.5% of the global emission of CO2, (UNEP, 2003). 
Growth  in  demand  in  the  fishing  sector  has  ultimately  resulted  in  the  threat  of  the  sustainability  of 
particular coastal and marine populations. To-date the per capita fish catch worldwide has remained 
static since 1972, however, this measure for Southern Africa has declined significantly (UNEP 2003).  
Globalisation  has  resulted  in  the  specialisation  of  economies  in  areas  in  which  they  have  a 
comparative advantage. The prevalence of cheaper labour costs has led African countries to primarily 
move towards the role of producing goods in labour intensive sectors such as agriculture and mining. 
The demand for cash crop exports from African countries by the developed world has equally soared. 
However  the  use  of  pesticides  in  cash  crop  production  in  order  to  maintain  certain  international 
standards  has  the  potential  to  reduce  soil  quality  due  to  toxic  residue  build  up.  Future  population 
growth,  expansion  in  the  agricultural  sector,  and  general  economic  expansion  in  Africa  will  see 
heightened  competition  for  water  resources  among  these  sectors.  Competition  for  water  resources 
between households, industry, and agriculture is expected to increase in future, as currently 25% of 
the population is living in areas already facing severe water stress (UNEP, 2003).  
Although  Africa’s  exports  at  the  global  level  are  very  small  at  about  2%,  the  concentration  of  the 
exports in the extraction sector is cause for concern on the environment. It means that the more Africa 
is  integrated  into  the  global  economy  the  more  the  consequences  for  extraction  activities  on  the 
environment will become pronounced, unless mitigating measures are taken. In addition, multinational 
businesses are quickly realising the existence of less strenuous environmental standards in most of 
the African countries, which themselves are desperately seeking for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). 
As  a  result,  these  businesses  are  rushing  to  invest  in  these  economies  and  realise profits but  may 
never be available to attend to the possible redress of negative effects their business activities leave 
on the environment. 
In  this  respect,  as  African  policy  makers  and  other  stakeholders  pursue  economic  growth,  it  is 
important to appreciate the benefits presented by the natural ecosystems and diverse forms of wildlife 
and  other  species.  Despite  the  economic  benefits  of  constructing  roads,  mining  areas,  and  farming 
blocks, there exists a real threat of the destruction of large areas of natural habitats.  
The emergence of industries and the effect of urbanisation in Africa, has largely contributed towards 
increased air pollution in many towns and cities. The incidence of smog and respiratory diseases in 
these areas has increased (UNEP, 2003), and is set to continue this trend in the foreseeable future.  
Africa does not contribute significantly to the emission of pollutants arising mainly from combustion in 
complex chemical processes of industries. This is so because of the low industrialisation characteristic 
of  the  continent,  whose  economy  is  still  trapped  in  the  shackles  of  economic  stagnation.  Sadly  the 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
rate, at which industrialised nations are emitting especially greenhouse gases, implies that Africa will 
also soon begin to experience effects of global warming. The effects of global warming, which include 
floods,  hurricanes  and  general  weather  changes  that  can  also  affect  agriculture  production,  with 
prospects to damage material wealth and property will negate the little gains that African economies 
have attained thus far. To complicate the situation further, majority of African economies do not have 
buffer resources to enable them rebuild infrastructure that may be damaged from the effects of global 
warming. Consequently, in respect to effects of global warming, the tendency in most of Africa will be 
increased poverty, exacerbation in poor sanitation and outbreaks of epidemic.  
Ignoring  environmental  sustainability,  even  if  doing  so  leads  to  short-run  economic  gains,  can  hurt 
poor  people  and  undermine  long-run  poverty  reduction  (UNDP,  2003).  The  two  areas,  economic 
growth  and  the  environment  are  interrelated.  Therefore  developments  in  one  coexist  with 
developments in the other. 
The exclusion of accounting for the value of nature in economic indicators such as the Gross National 
Product  (GNP)  and  the  Human  Development  Index  (HDI),  gives  a  subordinate  role  of  nature  in 
promoting  growth;  in  addition  to  this,  property  rights  to  natural  capital  are  frequently  difficult  to 
establish  (Dasgupta,  2002).  Dasgupta’s  analysis  of  World  Bank  estimates  of  genuine  investment  in 
countries, discovered that the accounts used were incomplete, as they did not include measures such 
as  water  resources,  air  and  water  pollution,  and  biodiversity  among  other  measures.  In  addition, 
Dasgupta  pointed  out  that  shadow  pricing  strategies  aimed  at  measuring  the  social  worth  of  goods 
and services in an economy were questionable. Despite these setbacks, the author was appreciative 
of  the  pricing  model.  Dasgupta  further  stated  that  GNP  and  the  Human  Development  Index  as 
measures  of  economic  growth  at  times  provide  contradicting  evidence.  Evidence  supporting  the 
findings  of  Dasgupta  is  shown  by  the  change  in  the  Sub-Saharan  net  savings  rate  from  positive  to 
negative  in  most  years  between  1976  and  2000, when  the  costs  of  environmental  degradation  and 
natural resource depletion were taken into account (UNDP 2003). Another measure of environmental 
deterioration  in  this  case  pollution,  is  the  UNDPs  Global  Environment  Monitoring  System  (GEMS), 
however this system does not take degradation into account (Jha and Whalley, 1999).  
The relationship between economic growth and its impact on the environment is ably demonstrated by 
the Kuznets Curve. The Kuznets Curve states that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between 
economic  growth  and  the  environment.  Negative  environmental  externalities  increase  steadily 
proportionately  to  economic  growth  up  to  a  turning  point  during  the  initial  stages  of  economic 
development (see Chart below). Once the turning point is reached, the economy then begins to place 
more  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  the  environment,  by  devoting  resources  to  negate  further 
negative  effects  on  the  environment.  As  a  consequence,  environmental  pollution  and  degradation 
begin  to  decline  since  the  country  has  the  capacity  to  invest  in  environmental  friendly  technology. 
Similar results were found by Grossman and Kruger (1995). 
Source:  Robert  T.  Deacon  and  Catherine  S.  Norman*,  Does  the  Environmental  Kuznets  Curve  Describe  How  Individual 
Countries Behave? University of California, Santa Barbara April 5, 2004  
 4 
 BIS Review 74/2004
However  critics  of  the  model  [Common,  1995,  Shafik  1994,  Selden  and  Song,  1994,  and  Lopez, 
1994],  argue  that  there  may  be  irreversible  environmental  damage  before  the  top  of  the  curve  is 
reached, the model does not hold for all environmental indicators. Elasticity of substitution between 
factors of production, pollution and consumer utility must be taken into account.  
Empirical  evidence  from  South  Korea  (Lim,  1997)  shows  that  the  relationship  between  economic 
growth and environment cannot simply be explained by a trade-off or inverted U-shape relationship. 
The result can be attributed to the worsening (increase) in indicators such as CO2 and industrial waste 
as  per  capita  income  increases  in  contrast  to  other  indicators  such  as  water  quality  and  domestic 
waste which experience a U-shaped relationship. Other factors such as pollution due to transportation 
were found to possibly be lower when people live closer together (Selden and Song, 1994).  
Globalisation has resulted in the spill over of technology and knowledge from developed countries to 
several middle-income and many industrialising economies via Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and 
Research  and  Development  (R&D)  efforts,  thereby  leaving  developing  countries  lagging  behind 
(Panayotou, 2000). Panayotou further notes the failure to provide evidence that the occurrence of lax 
environmental standards in emerging economies leads to FDI, on account of the fact that investment 
decisions by manufacturing plants and other multinationals to invest in countries is based on factors 
such as political stability, favourable economic policy, labour quality, and infrastructural developments.  
It  is  therefore  clear  that  economic  development  is  not  without  costs.  In  fact,  the  much  desired 
economic  growth  if  not  carefully  balanced  with  the  need  to  protect  the  environment  may  result  in 
permanent adverse effects on the environment for a country and the world.  
Specific to Africa, the application of these models and research findings lends itself to further caution. 
With  the  continental  economy  still  facing  numerous  problems  to  the  extent  that  most  national 
economies are yet to provide sufficiently for their nationals, it is unlikely that a point would soon be 
reached in Africa’s economic growth, at which adequate resources become available for commitment 
to environmental concerns. In other words, thought needs to be given to the social background against 
which  utilisation  of  resources  from  economic  growth  will  depend.  The  various  human  and  social 
challenges such as poverty and epidemics confronting the continent may well explain the relatively low 
emphasis by policy makers on environmental concerns when compared to their western counterparts. 
That  said,  however,  it  must  be  recognised  that  in  respect  to  the  ecosystem,  the  globe  is  one  and 
benefits that accrue to one corner due to environmental preservation, accrue to the entire globe. In 
this regard, measures need to be developed to quickly put Africa’s high potential economic growth on 
a  path  that  is  environmentally  sustainable.  Deliberate  actions  need  to  be  taken  in  successfully 
transferring  environmentally  friendly  technologies  to  Africa.  A  case  in  point  is  the  use  of  solar 
technology,  for  which  achievements  thus  far  are  promising.  Most  of  Africa  is  endowed  with  solar 
energy,  and  transforming  it  into  usable  energy  would  substitute  the  widespread  use  of  wood  fire 
energy by the majority of the continent’s population. In addition, because this is proven technology no 
more resources need to be devoted to Research and Development. Further, solar energy circumvents 
the  costs  related  to  the  generation  and  distribution  of  yet  another  clean  source  of  energy,  hydro-
energy.  In  addition  to  generation,  distribution  of  hydroelectricity  presents  Africa  with  a  unique 
challenge of supply network or grids due to the vast landscapes that constitute the rural setting where 
majority of the population resides. This is part of the wider infrastructural constraint that the continent 
is yet to overcome.  
Africa and the world economy  
4. 
In  the  real  sector,  a  number  of  African  exports  experienced  an  overall  increase  in  prices  in  2003. 
International gold prices increased, much to the benefit of the continents top producers, South Africa 
and  Ghana.  Likewise,  oil  prices  increased  during  the  same  period  leading  to  higher  revenues  for 
countries such as Nigeria, Equatorial Guinea, and Chad (ADB, 2003). The developments in the Middle 
East, Iraq in particular have resulted in soaring oil prices reaching highs of about US$50 per barrel, 
due to the insecurity and uncertainty pertaining to the global oil supply. Both gold and oil prices are 
expected  to  maintain  high  prices  throughout  2004.  Increased  foreign  assets  obtained  from  export 
earnings from the real sector will in effect improve the capability of oil exporting African countries to 
release more funds towards the achievement of their environmental goals. 
In  line  with  the  expectations  of  the  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Country  (HIPC)  initiative,  many  heavily 
indebted African states have cut their fiscal expenditure and are focussing on staying within their set 
targets.  Attainment  of  the  HIPC  initiative  completion  point,  will  lead  to  the  much  needed  debt 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 5
cancellation  by  Paris  Club  members  resulting  in  an  overall  improved  financial  position  of  these 
economies. Failure to reach the target will however prolong reduced fiscal expenditure. Despite the 
long-term  economic  benefits  of  the  HIPC  initiative  in  achieving  the  MDGs,  short  and  medium-term 
growth strategies of development concerning the environment and other areas will be constricted.  
Prospects of economic growth  
4.1  
The prospects for economic growth in Africa remain bright. The African Union (AU) is currently making 
efforts  towards  ensuring  political  stability  in  the  continent  aimed  at  promoting  both  foreign  and 
domestic investor confidence. International support of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
(NEPAD) had led to some increase in aid in 2002; the trend was expected to continue in 2003 (OECD, 
ADB). The future outlook in the performance of the real sector is set to improve due to:  
• 
• 
• 
low production costs (labour, electricity, and water, among other inputs);  
comparative advantage in areas such as specialised agricultural production;  
Numerous investment opportunities are available in the mining sector, which remains largely 
untapped, despite the richness and variety of minerals in Africa. The scope for improvement 
of environmental sustainability in Africa, hence economic growth is extremely vast;  
Expansion of markets through regional integration within Africa with necessary networks will 
facilitate 
increased  capacity  utilisation  among  existing  and  potential  productive 
businesses; and  
Additional areas of improvement include the expansion of hydroelectric power facilities along 
the major rivers such as the Nile, Congo and Zambezi to provide a viable source of clean 
energy to the majority of the population, which presently primarily relies on biomass fuel.3 
  for 
For  the  African  continent  to  embrace  the  potential  benefits  of  globalisation,  it  is  vital  for  African 
countries to implement supportive fiscal and monetary frameworks that promote investment. Prudent 
policies in these areas provide an important contribution to macroeconomic stability, a key prerequisite 
for economic growth. In addition, African countries must now commence the process of adding value 
to their export products as they compete and interact with a global market.  
Environmental protection  
5. 
Due  to  the  high  dependence  of  rural  communities  on  common  property,  it  is  necessary  for  local 
governments to implement environmental policies in order to protect the rights of the poor, who are the 
most affected when the quality of the environment worsens. Data from villages in Zimbabwe estimate 
the proportion of household income from common property as high as 40% (Dasgupta, 2002).  
A  number  of  environmental  protection  campaigns  are  currently  being  executed  in  several  African 
countries.  One  such  campaign  is  the  National  Soil  Fertility  Action  Plan,  which  is  currently  being 
prepared  in  23  countries.  In  addition  to  this  development,  15  National  Action  Plans  have  been 
submitted  within  the  United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification  (UNCCD).  Natural 
resources  need  to  be  maintained  in  order  to  provide  a  livelihood  to  largely  communal  rural 
communities, which for the most part depend on forests, and other open natural resources for their 
survival. It has been shown that in Tanzania the poor derive as much as half of their cash incomes 
from the sale of forest products, such as charcoal, honey, firewood and wild fruits (UNDP 2003). This 
is true for most Sub-Saharan African countries In addition, most methods used to purify minerals such 
as gold by most small-scale rural people involve pollution of rivers with toxic chemicals.  
Regional institutions in Africa have worked towards the implementation of development programmes 
aimed  at  reducing  pressure  on  natural  resources  in  the  various  areas  of  the  continent.  General 
concerns for all regions in Africa primarily encompass the problems of deforestation, scarcity of water 
resources,  access  to  clean  water  sources,  and  access  to  non-pollutant  energy  sources  such  as 
electricity.  Primary  concerns  of  the  northern  and  some  parts  of  the  eastern,  western,  and  southern 
                                                      
3   The  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  (Rio  +10),  African  Preparatory  Conference  for  the  World  Summit  on 
Sustainable Development Nairobi, 15-18 October 2001. 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2004
sub-regions  however  include  the  effects  of  desertification  on  human  development  and  economic 
growth.  
Regional government policies in Tanzania, have led to implementation of environmental management 
policies aimed at promoting waste management, urban planning, and impact assessments for large 
projects.  Government  authorities  have  created  designated  protected  areas  aimed  at  conserving 
forests  as  well  as  supporting  community-based  income.  This  initiative  is  also  being  implemented  in 
Zambia. Africa now has a total of 1,254 protected areas, or 7% of the landmass.  
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) plays an important role in the implementation 
of programmes aimed at improving the environmental sustainability of the region. Acknowledging the 
importance  of  water  in  development,  the  SADC  Water  Sector  Coordination  Unit  was  established  in 
1996. Prior to the formation of this Unit a Protocol on Shared Water Course Systems was ratified by 
the majority of the SADC Member States. This Protocol aims to promote the availability of fresh water 
resources in the region. In addition, a Forest Policy and Development Strategy, was implemented in 
1997 by the SADC forest sector to address the issue of forest protection in the region.  
In  order  to  protect  marine  life,  agreements  such  as  the  Oil  Spill  Contingency  Plan  have  been 
developed. The sustainability of fisheries resources is also now monitored by control agreements, and 
a Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme has been developed in West Africa. 
Other regional Protocols adhered to by some African states include cooperative efforts to implement 
programmes that aim to combat desertification by the Arab Magreb Union (AMU), the Common Market 
for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), 
Economic  Community  of  West  African  States  (ECOWAS), 
Intergovernmental  Authority  on 
Development (IGAD), Inter-State Committee to Combat Drought in the Sahel (CILSS), and Southern 
African Development Community (SADC).  
International Agreements such as the Vienna Protocol, which called for the formation of a co-operative 
framework and policy structure aimed at protecting human health and the environment from adverse 
 
effects of human activity which modify, or are likely to modify the ozone layer4
are also observed. The 
Vienna  Protocol  was,  effectively  signed  by  46  African  countries.  The  Montreal  Protocol  which  was 
signed by 47 African countries called for the implementation of cost effective alternatives to ozone-
 
depleting substances, and the Kyoto Protocol which was signed by 4 African countries5
out of a total of 
84 countries globally, aims to curb greenhouse gas emissions that result in global warming. Despite 
the ratification of these protocols by some African countries, it is worth noting that rich countries with 
16% of the world population emit 51% of the worlds green house gasses (UNDP, 2003). The Kyoto 
Protocol  is  yet  to  be  implemented  due  to  non-ratification  by  some  key  developed  countries,  who 
happen to be the emitters of substantial amounts of the worlds greenhouse gases (Russia ratified the 
Protocol in September 2004).  
A  United  Nations  Forest  Forum  (UNFF)  was  established  in  2000  to  promote  the  management, 
conservation,  and  sustainable  development  of  forests.  The  institution  effectively  serves  to  monitor 
national, regional, and global developments of forests. United Nations Organisations such as United 
Nations  Environmental  Program  (UNEP),  United  Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP),  United 
Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification  (UNCCD),  and  the  World  Bank  have  done  a 
commendable job in implementing multiple projects that aim to promote environmental sustainability in 
Africa. These organisations provide both financial and technical support to programmes designed to 
promote  environmental  sustainability  in  Africa.  African  governments  have  pledged  to  support  such 
programmes.  
Recommendations  
6. 
From  the  foregoing,  it  is  clear  that  environmental  protection  goals  should  be  realised  in  order  to 
achieve sustainable economic growth. Effective environmental protection policies relating primarily to 
the effects of degradation and depletion of the environment need to be implemented and maintained 
by institutions and individuals at all levels of society namely, local governments and national, regional, 
                                                      
4  Environment  Canada,  International  Relations,  International  Agreements,  1998  http://www.ec.gc.ca/international/multilat/ 
ozone_e.htm
5   Kyoto Protocol, Status of Ratification, Last Modified 29th July 2004, http://unfccc.int/resource/kpstats.pdf 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 7
as well as international institutional bodies. This is even more critical for Africa which is also faced with 
unique  constraints  such  as  rapid  urbanisation,  poverty,  poor  legislation  and  inadequate  capacity  to 
implement and enforce legislative controls where they exist.  
The  trend  of  population  growth  in  developing  countries,  estimates  that  95%  of  the  total  world 
population growth will occur in Africa, Latin America, and Asia over the next 30 years (Post-Lawrence-
Weber,  1999).  The  resulting  increasing  strain  on  natural  resources  due  to  the  imminent  population 
boom in Africa if not checked, will cause many setbacks to economic growth and human development. 
It is therefore advisable that stricter environmental policies be implemented in these countries so as to 
offset encounters with such negative developments.  
The  anticipated  future  demographic  pressure  on  urban  areas  due  to  a  shift  of  the  expanding 
population  to  the  cities  and  towns  in  search  of  jobs  will  ultimately  result  in  increased  levels  of  air 
pollution, and pressure on transportation facilities, urban sanitation, access to clean water supply, and 
waste disposal. The total population of Africa is projected to reach 1,941 million by the year 2050, from 
approximately  885  million  in  2004  (Ashford,  2004).  According  to  statistics  collected  by  UN-Habitat 
2002 and UN 2002, they indicate that out of a world total of 923,986 thousand urban slum dwellers, 
869,918  thousand  (94.1%)  were  from  developing  countries,  with  Africa  accounting  for  187,563 
thousand or 20%  (UNDP,  2003).  It  is  important  for local governments  to  ensure adequate  planning 
policies in order to accommodate the predicted rising population. Local governments must also ensure 
the implementation of effective policies meant to regulate the activities arising from globalisation on 
the African economy such as the expansion in the number of urban industries, and the need for land 
for cultivating  commercial crops,  as well  as  to support  the need  for  increased areas  of subsistence 
farming.  
Another fundamental aspect that needs urgent attention is the issue of collecting more accurate data 
on environmental pollution and degradation and related statistics on the environment. Items such as 
farming  methods  employed,  the  pace  of  clearing  of  land  for  settlements,  and  charcoal  burning,  are 
presently  not  included  in  existing  statistics.  Appropriate  measurements  will  provide  a  more  precise 
indicator  of  the  weight  and  quantitative  value  of  negative  environmental  externalities  on  economic 
development  in  Africa.  Chinese  policy  makers  have  now  adopted  the  use  of  “green  GDP”  (The 
Economist,  August  21st  2004),  which  takes  into  account  the  environmental  costs  on  economic 
development. A well-defined weighting system of the role of the environment on economic growth will 
ultimately result in more attention being conferred to environmental sustainability and development of 
appropriate  policies  necessary  for  effective  environmental  management  to  support  sustainable 
economic growth.  
Conclusion  
7. 
While  pollution  largely  affects  developed  countries,  environmental  degradation  is  a  more  pertinent 
feature  for  developing  nations.  Studies  have  shown  that  environmental  sustainability  is  linked  to 
factors  of  economic  development.  Therefore  advancements 
in  one  cannot  occur  without 
advancements in the other. Environmental degradation in Africa is exacerbated by poverty due to the 
reliance of the majority of the poor on natural resources. In the world today, about 900 million people 
live  in  absolute  poverty  in  rural  areas  and  depend  on  the  consumption  of  natural  products  for  their 
livelihood (UNDP, 2003). Unfortunately, most of the activities and methods used in deriving economic 
value from natural resources are not environmentally sustainable. Moreover, the resultant economic 
benefits, in most instances, only accrue to current consumption and not sustainable development from 
which resources for addressing negative consequences on the environment could be drawn. In Africa, 
most  activities  include  unplanned  quarrying,  spontaneous  trench  digging  for  small-scale  mining, 
shifting  cultivation,  indiscriminate  cutting  of  trees  for  energy,  inappropriate  small-scale  mineral 
processing using water and poor waste management, including indiscriminate killing of wild animals 
(poaching) in game parks.  
The way forward in addressing these issues relates to the implementation of supportive government 
policies  regarding  environmental  management  and  environmental  sustainability.  Regional  and 
international  policies  on  environmental  management,  governance,  and  conservation  have  an 
important role to play in this area, as environmental decisions of one economy may adversely affect 
other  economies.  The  achievement  of  environmental  goals  will  facilitate  the  achievement  of  other 
MDGs.  Equally  important  are  transfers  of  technology  that  is  friendly  to  the  environment  as 
globalisation takes root.  
8 
 BIS Review 74/2004
