Hermann Remsperger: Research matters – SDGE models and the financial 
sector 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a workshop entitled “SDGE models and the financial sector” hosted by the Technical 
University of Darmstadt and Deutsche Bundesbank, Eltville, 26-27 November 2004.  
 I am often asked what role the Deutsche Bundesbank will be playing - in five or ten years’ time - not 
just in the Eurosystem but internationally as well. My answer is always the same. Over the longer term 
the importance of the Bundesbank will to a large extent depend on how we position ourselves in the 
field of research.  
I am not saying that because so many distinguished researchers are gathered here today. Nor am I 
saying it because I am responsible for our research centre.  
No, I want to emphasise the role of research because in the field of monetary policy, we are faced time 
and  again  with  new  questions  which  call  for  theoretically  and  empirically  founded  answers.  At  the 
same time there are the familiar old problems such as the stability of the demand for money, which 
have to be continually re-analysed.  
This strive for knowledge is gaining importance also because the influence of National Central Banks 
within the Eurosystem depends predominantly on the weight of their arguments.  
The  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  are  not  a  debating  club  for  doves  and  hawks  where 
everyone knows in advance what the others are going to say about interest rates. It is precisely at 
monetary policy meetings that one has to have a very good idea of where the wind is blowing from in 
terms of research.  
So it comes as no surprise that two focal points of our research agenda are closely tied to monetary 
policy considerations. One is dedicated to “Goals and effects of monetary policy”. In the context of the 
monetary transmission process, for instance, we examine the influence of corporate heterogeneity on 
the effects of monetary policy. In addition, we concentrate on the role of output gaps, exchange rates 
and monetary aggregates in monetary policy.  
The other focal point is concerned with analysing how monetary policy is influenced by several long-
term  developments  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy.  Globalisation  of  production  is  one  of  many 
examples in this area. Research papers on labour and capital supply as well as on potential growth 
are further important examples.  
However, I do not want to create the impression that central banks are only concerned with monetary 
policy or with the next interest rate decision. As a rule, central banks direct their attention to both price 
stability  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  both  subjects  are  very  much  intertwined.  In  my 
opinion,  this  simple  observation  has  far-reaching  implications  for  a  central  bank’s  research 
programme.  
If a central bank’s research is to develop on well-organised lines, it has to be “ from the top down”, with 
the objectives as the primary focus. You all know, that price stability has long been established as the 
first objective of central banks and therefore price stability has been and will remain the first objective 
of  central  bank  research.  As  I  see  it,  financial  stability  has  now  become  the  second  top  issue  for 
central bank research.  
Alongside and in cooperation with other departments, our research centre takes an active role in this 
field. For example we look at the implications of changes in the German financial system for financial 
stability, the implementation of lending of last resort functions and the link between the soundness of 
the banking system and its credit supply.  
In addition, other projects are dedicated to the role of financial intermediaries in the business cycle in 
Germany  .  Furthermore,  we  investigate  the  best  framework  for  implementing  stress  tests  for  the 
financial system in Germany . On top of this there is no doubt that the financial stability issue has a 
very important international dimension, which is a big challenge for further research.  
Last but not least our research concentrates on the refinement of econometric models and forecast 
methods.  In  this  regard,  we  are  particularly  interested  in  promoting  the  development  of  “dynamic 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
stochastic  general  equilibrium  models”  for  the  use  within  the  Bundesbank.  These  models  have 
become a backbone of theoretical as well as empirical analysis.  
In  modern  economic  research  these  approaches  provide  a  consistent  framework  which  connects 
theoretical foundation with empirical evidence. We at the Bundesbank are aware of the necessity to 
include these methods in our tool box of economic methods.  
Consequently, our research programme contains several projects which will use general equilibrium 
models. As an example, based on earlier papers by Jana Kremer, Giovanni Lombardo and Thomas 
Werner, the interaction between monetary and fiscal policy, is to be illustrated in more detail. Another 
project will deal with the cyclical behaviour of beliefs in DSGE models.  
The  sheer  scope  of  these  research  topics constitutes  a  major  challenge  for  research  management. 
Essentially, this is a matter of how research within a central bank is to be organised. I believe research 
centres like ours at the Bundesbank are essential for creating synergy effects.  
But let me also emphasise how much we appreciate the support of our external research professors. 
They  are  Professor  Jörg  Breitung  of  Bonn  and  Professor  Harald  Uhlig  of  Berlin.  We  have  already 
benefited a lot from their advise and hope for further fruitful collaboration. And we also benefit from our 
research council which follows our work with a critical eye and makes valuable recommendations.  
Among  the  members  of  the  research  council  are  Jürgen  von  Hagen,  Martin  Hellwig  and 
Manfred J M Neumann. Both Peter Kugler and Axel Weber have now left the council. Peter Kugler’s 
successor  is  Professor  Jürgen  Wolters  of  Berlin  .  And  our  President  has  been  succeeded  on  the 
research council by Charles Goodhart. Given this council membership I am sure you will agree with 
me when I end by saying that research really matters at the Bundesbank.  
Against this background, I am very pleased to welcome you to this workshop on dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium models and the financial sector. The workshop is being hosted by our Economic 
Research Centre together with economists from the Technical University of Darmstadt.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
