Wu Xiaoling: An innovative and inspiring experience - micro credit supported 
poverty reduction and women’s development in China 
Special address by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Citigroup-
INSEAD Women’s Financial Education Summit 2004, Hong Kong, 2 November 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  speak on  this  important  Forum  on  Women’s  Financial 
Education.  In  China,  women  are  lauded  as  can  hold  “half  of  the  sky”  and  thus  are  deemed  an 
important  force  in  fostering  China’s  economic  growth.  A  proverb  also  says,  “a  good  wife  is  a  great 
protection against misfortune for the husband”. Put in other words in today’s environment of market 
economy,  it  means  men  would  become  more  sensible  in  risk  taking  if  their  wives  and  daughters 
possess good command of financial knowledge, because they could benefit from the ‘half sky’s’ good 
investment  advice.  If  so,  financial  risks  will  become  more  controllable  and  efficiency  of  resource 
allocation will be much improved, resulting in a strengthened rather than a weakened social stability. 
Keeping in mind that the Chinese women can hold half of the sky, the All China Women’s Federation 
has introduced micro credit supported poverty reduction projects to assist women in the poor areas. In 
1989, taking advantage of a grant of US$ 70,000 by the UN Children’s Fund and the government’s 
financial support for poverty reduction totaling RMB 135,000 yuan, the Women’s Federation in Luliang 
region  of  Shanxi  Province  introduced  micro  credit  scheme  to  support  household-based  production 
activities  of  poor  women.  This  project  was  later  proved  to  be  quite  successful.  Based  on  this 
successful  experience,  the  All  China  Women’s  Federation  started  in  1994  to  expand  this  project 
nationwide. For the time being, with the help of relevant government departments, micro credit support 
has been provided to benefit poor women in the rural areas in 28 provinces (regions). In recent years, 
on the basis of the model in applying micro credit to reduce poverty in the rural areas, the Women’s 
Federation at various levels has further advanced the micro credit scheme to assist business start-up 
and re-employment of women in the urban areas. Now, micro credit support has been introduced to 
assist poor women in the cities in 24 provinces (municipalities). 
The Women’s Federation enjoys a unique advantageous position to involve itself in the micro credit 
scheme as it is basically a grass-root organization closely connected to women and households. So 
far,  the  scheme  has  been  running  quite  successful  as  evidenced  by  the  wide  access  of  the  poor 
households to the credit support (98 percent of the credit funds was used to help the poor families), 
the  high  success  ratio  of  projects  (over  90  percent  of  micro  credit  recipients  benefited  from  the 
support)  and  high  ratio  of  loan  recovery  (nearly  95  percent  of  the  loans  were  recovered  except  for 
situations when natural disasters or catastrophic accidents fall). 
Micro credit directly provides funds for the poor and employed women to start up production activities, 
thus  creating  a  favorable  condition  for  them  to  shake  off  poverty  through  reemployment  and 
engagement in new business. Micro credit scheme has also transformed the perceptions of the poor 
and employed women about jobs and contributed to their improved understanding of self-development 
based on dignified living. Micro credit has generated technical services and training opportunities for 
the poor women to increase their production knowledge and skills, strengthen their perceptions about 
commodity  economy  and  market  competition,  resulting  in  their  broadened  horizon  and  improved 
adaptability  to  the  changing  environment.  Apart  from  the  above-mentioned  economic  gains,  micro 
credit has also benefited women on the political front. It has improved reliance of women in the rural 
areas  on  local  political  organizations  which  have  helped  awaken  their  sense  of  involvement  in  the 
course  of  economic  construction  and  self-rule  by  the  villagers.  So  far,  4860  women’s  economic 
cooperatives have been established in the poor areas in Shanxi Province with the support of micro 
credit scheme, and a large number of capable women have been elected into the “two committees” in 
the  rural  areas  (the  villagers’  committee  and  the  local  party  committee),  promoting  development  of 
political civilization in rural China. In today’s situation when massive men and women aged young are 
floating out from the rural areas to the cities, it is of profound significance to strengthen micro credit 
support for those women remaining in the fields. 
In Mainland China, apart from the micro credit support under the initiatives of the Women’s Federation, 
the  government  has  also  applied  relevant  international  experiences  to  help  reduce  poverty.  For 
example, in 1993, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences started to introduce micro credit schemes 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 1
on a pilot basis in certain poor areas in China by referring to the experiences of Bangladesh in poverty 
reduction.  So  far,  micro  credit  business  has  already  conquered  the  following  three  stages  of 
development in Mainland China. 
First, business launching on pilot basis (from early 1994 to October 1996). At this stage, micro credit 
business was mainly funded with financial sources such as international donations and soft loans, with 
little involvement of government financial support. Efforts were focused on the feasibility of introducing 
into China the micro credit scheme developed by Bangladesh under the initiative of ‘village banking’. 
in Mainland China. And all the micro credit business was conducted by the semi-government or private 
institutions. 
Second,  business  expansion  (from  October  1996  to  2000).  While  continuing  to  benefit  from  the 
international financial assistance, the Chinese government stepped in to provide financial support with 
fiscal  funds  and  poverty-reduction  interest  subsidy  loans  to  strengthen  policy-based  micro  credit 
business  operated  jointly  by  government  bodies  and  financial  institutions  (the  Agricultural  Bank  of 
China), aimed at realizing the targets set for poverty reduction by the year of 2000. 
Third,  institution  building  and  full  engagement  of  rural  financial  institutions  (from  2000  till  now). 
Promoted  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  rural  credit  cooperatives  (RCCs),  as  the  formal  financial 
institutions, fully launched and explained micro credit business. In this period, based on the initiative of 
‘building credit households and villages’, micro credit was extensively granted to farmers by the RCCs 
with financial support of the central bank. Starting from 2002, on the basis of the RCCs experience in 
the  rural  areas,  the  Chinese  government  has  introduced  micro  credit  scheme  to  support  the 
reemployment and business start-up of the laid-off workers in the state-owned enterprises. 
Micro credit scheme designed to promote poverty reduction and development is an effective way to 
widen access of the small and medium-sized enterprises farmers to credit in China. It also contributes 
effectively  to  the  growth  of  labor-intensive  enterprises  and  employment.  Under  the  steering  of  the 
State Council, the People’s Bank of China will coordinate closely with other relevant departments to 
further develop micro credit business. 
I. 
Skills training will be strengthened for vulnerable groups so as to enable them make 
more effective use of micro loans. 
Micro  loans  may  not  prove  effective  for  people  without  production  skills  and  entrepreneurial 
knowledge, and sometimes could even turn to be a disadvantage by plunging them into deep debt. 
We  have  come  across  such  cases  in  our  survey  conducted  in  poverty-stricken  areas.  The  local 
government  extended  poverty  reduction  loans  to  a  farmer  and  helped  him  buy  dozens  of  goats  of 
improved breeds. However, due to the lack of breeding skills, the goats finally all died and the farmer 
was  hence  burdened  by  a  debt  of  RMB  7,000  yuan,  which  aggravated  his  poverty.  Therefore,  the 
Chinese government nowadays very much emphasizes on reducing poverty supported by technology, 
and efforts have been made to help farmers locate good investment projects and learn skills before 
the  extension  of  loans.  In  this  regard,  the  experience  in  granting  micro  credit  to  promote  extensive 
application  of  the  greenhouse  techniques  in  agricultural  production  and  the  development  of  the 
agricultural  industry  based  on  the  production  structure  called  ‘leading  enterprises  plus  farmers’  has 
been quite rewarding. In 2004, the People’s Bank of China launched a micro credit scheme named 
‘skills training plus self-employment loan’ jointly with the Ministry of Labor and Social Security in more 
than 100 cities where laid-off workers are concentrated, so as to provide credit support on the basis of 
enhanced quality of the workers. 
II. 
Financial knowledge will be promoted across the whole society to foster the 
development of credit culture and the building of credit community so as to create a 
favorable environment for the extension of micro credit. 
Low-income people often find themselves trapped in illegal financial activities and hence suffer great 
loss of their hard-earned income due to the lack of financial knowledge. And for the same reason, they 
don’t know how  to  approach  the  financial  institutions  and  how  to benefit  from  the  financial services 
offered. They often fail to secure loans from the financial institutions due to lack of credit record and 
proper  collateral  or  guarantee.  To  solve  these  problems,  starting  from  2000,  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China has instructed the RCCs to promote credit households and credit villages in the rural area and 
the  concept  of  integrity  and  creditworthiness  among  the  farmers,  aimed  at  creating  favorable 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2004
conditions  for  micro  credit  extension.  This  experience  will  be  introduced  in  the  cities  this  year,  with 
credit communities to be fostered jointly by the People’s Bank of China and the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security to publicize financial knowledge and policies related to the extension of re-employment 
micro credit, in the hope that more low-income people could benefit from the micro credit support to 
grow business and improve living standard. 
III. 
Favorable conditions will be created for the sustainable development of micro credit 
business, including giving a full play to the role of fiscal leverage in the course of loan 
extension. 
Based on international experiences over the past twenty years, pricing loans appropriately to cover the 
underlining risks is the precondition for the sustainable development of micro credit business. People 
used to have a misperception about the loans issued to targeted low-income groups, i.e. they should 
only  bear  low  interest  rates,  which  has  produced  negative  consequences  in  Mainland  China.  First, 
many borrowers take the interest-rate subsidized loans merely as relief funds, which they don’t bother 
to repay. Second, loan coverage has been restricted by the government’s inability to grant subsidies 
indefinitely.  Third,  loan  risks  are  not  fully  covered,  resulting  in  weakened  financial  viability  and 
incentives  of  the  financial  institutions  in  extending  micro  credit.  In  fact,  for  the  low-income  people, 
when facing a business opportunity, they tend to care more about the access to credit rather than the 
cost of borrowing. If their loan request is denied by the regular channels, they may have to pay a much 
higher  price  to  finance  from  the  underbanking  sources.  Therefore,  encouraging  regular  financial 
institutions to provide micro credit and charge interest rates adequately to cover the risks is a good 
way to help the low-income people. In cases that people in extreme poverty cannot afford the interest 
rates, the government may subsidize them directly. Separating fiscal support from credit support will 
be conducive to creating a sound credit environment. Moreover, in order to support low-income groups 
in  the  society,  the  government  should  cut  profit-seeking  investment  and  instead  increase  public 
spending,  develop  infrastructure  facilities  and  improve  education  in  the  rural  areas,  protect  natural 
environment  and  raise  the  effectiveness  of  loan  projects.  Besides,  the  government  should  also 
establish  guarantee  fund  to  disperse  risks  loaded  on  financial  institutions,  encouraging  them  to 
increase micro credit extension to support the vulnerable groups in the society. Direct fiscal subsidy 
and  guarantee  fund  could  serve  as  an  important  leverage  in  fostering  the  growth  of  micro  credit 
business. 
IV. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Financial innovations and suitable supervisory approaches will be explored to 
produce a favorable external environment for the sustainable development of micro 
credit business. 
Efforts  should  be  made  to  explore  and  formulate  relevant  rules,  regulations  as  well  as 
supervisory approaches to guide and support the growth of pilot-based micro credit business 
so as to promote the healthy development of micro credit scheme and make it integral part of 
the broad framework of China’s financial reform. 
Different  policies  need  to  be  applied  to  the  existing  micro  credit  institutions,  taking  into 
consideration  of  each  specific  situation.  Those  qualified  institutions  that  survive  the 
adjustment or reconstructing should be allowed to stay in the market and continue to receive 
financial  support.  In  the  meantime,  more  market-based  financial  institutions  specializing  in 
micro credit business should be cultivated. 
Competition  should  be  introduced  among  the  micro  credit  institutions  to  enhance  their 
business  performance.  Government  intervention  will  be  reduced  and  the  micro  credit 
institutions will be granted more independence in loan extension so as to guide a market-
based development of the micro credit business. 
Training will be intensified for both the managers and working staff involved in micro credit 
business to enhance their effective technical support to the loan projects. Meanwhile, efforts 
will be made on a continuous basis to foster a sound credit environment. 
With only a short history of successful development, micro credit business remains in its infant stage in 
the  global  sense,  facing  risks  and  challenges  of  various  kinds.  However,  in  our  opinion,  the 
introduction of micro credit scheme marks a revolutionary transformation of China’s poverty reduction 
policy from relying on relief support to that focusing on development and serves as an important way 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 3
to aid the vulnerable groups in their strive to achieve prosperity. Micro credit scheme has inspired the 
whole society to be involved in the effort of poverty reduction and is warmly received by the vulnerable 
groups as well. Therefore, I am confident of the success of micro credit business in China as it enjoys 
both solid policy support from the government and wide participation by the society. 
We firmly believe that micro credit business will have a promising prospect in China, and will continue 
to develop in a rapid and healthy way. 
We are also looking forward to more participation by the private sector in foreign countries and the 
multilateral institutions in China’s efforts to reduce poverty, by helping us improve the organization and 
management of micro credit and explore useful experiences to promote its sustainable development, 
thus making valuable contributions to poverty reduction in China and in the world. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2004
