Zhou Xiaochuan: Overview of the Chinese economy against the background of 
the global recovery 
Statement  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Joint  Annual 
Meeting of the IMF and the World Bank, Washington DC, 3 October 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman, Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
We  are  very  pleased  to  see  increasing  evidence  of  the  global  recovery,  with  growth  rates  in  most 
regions exceeding original expectations. While this is apparent in the world’s major economies - the 
United  States,  Europe,  and  Japan  -  economic  growth  rates  in  the  developing  countries  and  many 
regions  have  also  been  remarkable.  Undoubtedly,  countries  can  take  advantage  of  these 
developments  to  resolve  inconsistencies  and  imbalance  problems  in  their  economic  operations  by 
making  structural  adjustments,  while  at  the  same  time  creating  sound  conditions  for  the  developed 
countries to carry out their obligations in promoting global sustainable development. 
However,  we  cannot  ignore  the  risks  and  challenges  to  sustained  growth  of  the  global  economy. 
Complex  geopolitical  issues  and  terrorism  pose  threats  to  global  peace  and  development.  The 
economic  structural  problems  of  the  major  developed  countries  are  having  a  potentially  negative 
impact on global economic development, exchange rates, and even financial market stability. Affected 
by the geopolitical situation and the dynamics of supply and demand, the rise in international oil prices 
has triggered widespread concern, with a marked correlation between financial market volatility and 
changes in oil prices. The new round of interest rate increases not only will narrow the long- and short-
term interest rate spread and squeeze the profitability of financial institutions, but will also increase the 
financing costs of developing countries. Emerging markets’ resilience to external shocks is still weak, 
and  the  many  low-income  and  developing  countries  have  a  formidable  task  in  revitalizing  their 
economies through structural reform. In addition, the unfair trade system and lack of external financial 
assistance are seriously hindering development in these countries. 
Over the past year, China’s economy has maintained the momentum of rapid growth. In the first half of 
2004, GDP growth was 9.7 percent y-o-y, 0.9 percentage points higher than the growth rate last year. 
Foreign  trade  continued  to  grow,  with  total  imports  and  exports  for  the  first  eight  months  of  2004 
reaching US$ 722.1 billion. Fiscal revenue increased significantly to RMB 1.4307 trillion yuan in the 
first half of 2004, up 30.6 percent y-o-y. 
Since 2003, China has introduced a series of macroeconomic management measures in response to 
over-investment  in  certain  sectors  of  the  economy  with  the  result  that  the  unstable  and  unhealthy 
factors in the economy have been curbed. Based on updated statistics, the growth of money supply 
slowed  in  August,  with  all  intermediate  targets  for  monetary  policy  lower  than  expected  at  the 
beginning of the year. The consumer price index rose by 5.3 percent, due mainly to rising food prices 
compared  with  the  same  period  last  year.  Inflation,  which  excludes  food  and  oil  prices,  remains 
relatively  low,  demonstrating  that  China’s  macroeconomic  management  measures  have  played  an 
important role in lowering credit and investment growth, leading to brighter prospects for a soft landing. 
The Chinese government is firmly resolved to curb over-investment in certain economic sectors and to 
promote economic and financial reform. We will pay close attention to macroeconomic developments 
and  remain  prepared  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  consolidate  the  gains  in  macroeconomic 
management. 
In 2004, we have taken important steps to reform state-owned commercial banks and capital markets. 
Learning from international practice, we have begun to restructure two state-owned commercial banks 
as share holding companies, which are scheduled to be listed in 2005. Furthermore, reforms are also 
underway  at  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  -  including  the  two  other  state-owned 
commercial  banks,  joint  stock  commercial  banks,  urban  commercial  banks,  and  rural  credit 
cooperatives. We have also introduced the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors scheme, allowing 
the investment of foreign capital in China’s security markets. Through these reforms, we will build a 
strong financial system able to support the sustained, stable, and rapid growth of China’s economy. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
The  recovery  of  the  Hong  Kong  SAR  economy  continues.  For  the  first  half  of  2004,  real  GDP 
registered  robust  growth  of  9.5  percent.  Growth  was  broadly  based,  supported  by  further 
implementation of the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement between Hong Kong SAR and the 
Mainland  and  gradual  expansion  of  travel  deregulation  to  more  mainland  cities  and  provinces. 
Consumer confidence continued to recover, putting an end to almost six years of deflation. 
Driven by service exports, real GDP in Macao SAR grew by 36.0 percent for the first half of 2004, and 
the  unemployment  rate  dropped  to  4.9  percent.  The  further  strengthening  of  economic  cooperation 
between the Mainland and Macao SAR contributed not only to the continued growth momentum in the 
tourism industry and strengthening the role of its trade platform, but also to the development of the 
financial sector and new industries. 
We believe that the global recovery combined with  the stable growth of the Mainland - with the full 
support  of  the  central  government  -  will  help  the  economies  of  Hong  Kong  SAR  and  Macao  SAR 
maintain the momentum of strong growth. 
We appreciate the Fund’s efforts to promote global economic and financial stability by strengthening 
surveillance. Nevertheless, we believe that the Fund should place greater focus on surveillance of the 
major  developed  countries  that  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  global  economy.  These  countries 
should be encouraged to better coordinate their economic policies, maintain exchange rate stability for 
the  major  currencies,  increase  financial  aid  to  the  developing  countries,  and  open  their  markets  to 
them. 
While  we  support  the  efforts  of  the  international  multilateral  institutions  to  develop  standards  and 
codes  and  introduce  them  to  facilitate  global  economic  and  financial  development  on  a  voluntary 
basis, we suggest that the Fund and the World Bank should fully consider countries’ different stages of 
development  and  their  specific  circumstances.  In  developing  and  introducing  these  standards  and 
codes, the Fund and the World Bank should listen more to the voice of the developing countries while 
adhering to the voluntary principle and the gradual approach. As the number of international standards 
and codes increases, the Fund and the World Bank should be more selective, focusing on those that 
are closely related to their core areas of expertise, avoiding those areas that are not. 
After  many  years  of  effort,  the  international  community  has  made  considerable  progress  in 
development  matters;  however,  the  developing  countries  still  face  serious  bottleneck  constraints. 
Many  developing countries  lack  development  funds and can  hardly  achieve sustained  and effective 
structural  reform.  Therefore,  we  hope  that  the  developed  countries  can  implement  the  Monterrey 
Consensus as soon as possible, increase their development aid funds, and reach at an early time the 
ODA level of 0.7 percent to GNP, set by the United Nations. Promoting fair trade will not only help the 
developing  countries,  but  will  also  benefit  the  developed  countries.  The  developing  countries  have 
long  faced  an  unfair  trade  environment.  We  are  pleased  that  the  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  are 
promoting the Doha Round of trade negotiations and advocating an open and fair multilateral trade 
mechanism. At present, the Doha Round of trade negotiations has made some progress. We hope the 
international community will continue their efforts. We urge the developed countries to lower their trade 
barriers  and  reduce  their  subsidies  on  agricultural  products,  so  that  the  Doha  Round  of  trade 
negotiations can achieve substantive progress. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
