Michael C Bonello: Fiscal reform - an imperative for sustainable growth and 
development 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Institute of Financial 
Services Annual Dinner, St Julians, 11 November 2004. 
 I should first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to your annual dinner and for the 
opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  once  again  with  such  a  distinguished  audience.  I  must  also 
congratulate you on your recent election as President of IFS - Malta and wish you and your Committee 
every  success  in  your  endeavours  to  ensure  that  the  Institute’s  educational  programmes  remain 
relevant  in  today’s  complex  financial  services  environment.  As  you  rightly  pointed  out  in  your  first 
message to your members, in a situation which is rapidly evolving, “we must be prepared to embrace 
change.”  
I have a similar message to convey tonight. Inspired by the words of George Washington that “There 
is  no  practice  more  dangerous  than  that  of  borrowing  money”, mine  is  essentially  an  appeal  to  the 
country to leave behind its spendthrift ways and to learn to live within its means. I shall therefore make 
a case for fiscal reform. 
Now some might wonder why a central bank governor should be so concerned about the state of the 
country’s  public  finances.  Put  simply,  the  reason  is  that  a  persistent  excessive  deficit  situation 
represents  a  potential  threat  both  to  price  and  financial  stability,  which  are  key  objectives  of  most 
central  banks  today.  The  Central  Bank  of  Malta  seeks  to  achieve  these  objectives  through  the 
operation of an exchange rate peg. The Bank’s ability to maintain the peg in an environment where 
capital  flows  freely  across  borders,  however,  depends  crucially  on  financial  market  perceptions 
regarding the effectiveness and sustainability of macroeconomic policy, particularly fiscal policy. In this 
context, the present deficit scenario is not helpful and, if not corrected, could oblige the Bank to raise 
interest rates. 
The role of governments 
How and why have fiscal deficits become a problem? In the first decades after the Second World War, 
governments  came  to  play  a  key  role  in  promoting  economic  growth  and  social  development.  In 
today’s free-market economies, moreover, they provide indispensable support to the activities of the 
private sector and also play an important role in curbing its excesses. Another function of governments 
concerns  economic  stabilisation.  They  can  intervene  to  stimulate  aggregate  demand  in  periods  of 
recession and to restrain it at times when the economy is booming. Under appropriate demand and 
supply conditions, such intervention can contribute to a more favourable investment environment and, 
in turn, to growth. 
Perhaps the most important tool Governments use to pursue these objectives is public expenditure. 
Taxation and borrowing may be viewed as ways of financing such expenditure, but they also constitute 
important tools in their own right. 
Effectiveness of government intervention 
Government intervention in the economy has important implications not only for competitiveness and 
growth,  but  also  for  the  promotion  of  the  social  dimension  of  development.  It  is  thus  essential  to 
ensure that society obtains full value for the resources devoted to public sector activities, both in terms 
of the quantity and the quality of the outputs produced. 
Now whereas in the private sector failure to deliver value for money eventually results in bankruptcy, 
there exists no such effective sanction in the public sector. This is partly because expenditures are 
typically financed through general taxation and borrowing, and the funds thus raised are not directly 
earmarked  for specific  expenditures.  Inadequate enforcement  of accountability  standards  is  another 
reason.  It  is  also  the  case  that  industrial  relations  and  human  resource  management  in  the  public 
sector are often undertaken without sufficient consideration for budget constraints, while job security 
and tenure are taken for granted irrespective of performance or productivity levels. A further dimension 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
of this problem is the fact that the success of government spending tends to be measured more in 
terms of its potential to produce electoral dividends than in a longer-term growth perspective. All of 
these factors reduce the incentive to use resources efficiently. 
Similar arguments apply to the welfare system, where the size of the expenditure can easily exceed 
that required to maintain social cohesion and the focus be diverted away from genuine needs. This 
situation has  materialised  in  a  number  of  countries,  including  the  more  advanced  economies  in  the 
EU, which are now facing hard choices regarding the future of health and pension systems. Invariably, 
the most difficult challenge in implementing reforms in these areas is to convince people that services 
which were hitherto provided by government for free, or at a subsidised cost, are no longer affordable 
by the country. 
There are, therefore, a multitude of pressures to increase government expenditure over time. And as 
tax revenues often prove unable to keep pace with such commitments, fiscal deficits emerge leading 
to an accumulation of debt. In turn, this produces a growing debt-servicing burden, creating a vicious 
circle in which unproductive outlays effectively crowd out the scope for productive expenditure. 
Fiscal deficits are also the result of inadequacies in the design and implementation of tax structures. In 
this  regard,  supply-side  economics  advocates  shifting  the  focus  of  taxation  from  income  to 
consumption in order not to discourage work effort, saving and investment. Tax systems should also 
be  simple  and  transparent  so  as  to  facilitate  their  implementation  and  enhance  compliance.  When 
these norms are ignored, the end result tends to be pervasive tax avoidance or evasion, resulting in 
lower levels of revenue. 
Continued  fiscal  deficits  and  increasing  public  debt  levels  are  thus  a  symptom  of  inefficiency  or 
inappropriate policy choices. This is the reason why modern market economies are advised to contain 
their fiscal deficits and debt within prudent levels by subjecting their policies to critical review and by 
raising  the  efficiency  of  public  sector  operations,  rather  than  through  new  taxes  or  short-term 
palliatives such as one-off revenue inflows.  
A further reason for tackling the problem at its roots is that the inefficient use of resources in the public 
sector  can  have  serious  long-term  repercussions.  At  best,  these  include  a  growth  rate  below  the 
economy’s potential because the private sector is deprived of resources it could use more profitability; 
and, because of the persistence of the deficit, the loss of fiscal policy as a counter-cyclical stabilisation 
mechanism. At worst, the inefficient use of resources can threaten the viability of the economy itself. 
Many a financial crisis has been sparked off by the behaviour of profligate and inefficient governments. 
In today’s globalized financial markets, the retribution for such excesses is quick and unforgiving.  
Implications for fiscal management 
It would appear that, like all human endeavours, the benevolent, interventionist role of governments 
was  developed  with  the  best  of  intentions  but,  as  often  happens,  something  went  wrong  along  the 
way.  Judging  by  the  present  state  of  its  public  finances,  Malta  is  no  exception.  For  a  start,  fiscal 
deficits have become a permanent feature of the economic landscape, which suggests that they do 
not  reflect  temporary  slippages  or  cyclical  downturns,  but  rather  fundamental  policy  choices  and 
inefficiencies. Since 1990 the annual shortfall between revenue and expenditure has averaged 6% of 
GDP, or Lm1 out of every Lm16 earned by the economy.1 There were periods when the deficit tended 
to  fall,  but  these  were  not  sustained.  This  year,  as  explained  in  Malta’s  Convergence  Programme 
2004-2007, the general government deficit is expected to fall to just above 5% of GDP, which is still, 
however, one of the highest ratios in the EU.  
The persistence of the fiscal deficit has resulted in a rapid accumulation of government debt, which as 
a  percentage  of  GDP  trebled  between  1990  and  last  year  to  around  70%.  There  is  clearly  no 
alternative to the fiscal consolidation envisaged in the Convergence Programme because, if the deficit 
is left unchecked at this year’s level, the debt to GDP ratio would exceed 80% by 2010. The fact that 
this heavy burden of debt has been accumulated to a large extent to finance recurrent spending rather 
than to build up income-generating assets is a matter of some concern.  
                                                      
1   Except where otherwise specified, fiscal data refer to the Consolidated Fund. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
A further undesirable consequence of this behaviour is an increasingly unmanageable debt-servicing 
burden. This year the Government is spending Lm1 out of every Lm8 of tax revenue merely to service 
its  debt.  Put  differently,  the  fiscal  deficit  would  be  just  one-tenth  of  its  actual  level  were  it  not  for 
debt-servicing costs, which now amount to around 95% of expenditure on health and 90% of that on 
education.  
This is not a healthy state of affairs. Not only does interest on the debt increase the fiscal deficit, but it 
also  crowds  out  those  expenditures  which  should  be  receiving  priority.  If  the  deficit  were  left 
unchanged at this year’s expected level of Lm95 million, it is estimated that debt service costs would 
rise from Lm85 million today to almost Lm120 million by 2010. In other words, the Government would 
have to register a surplus on its recurrent operations and borrow money just to service the debt. 
This  unsustainable  situation  is  a  symptom  of  another  feature  of  our  economy,  the  high  level  of 
government expenditure. At 51% of GDP, this is the sixth highest in the EU. Government, moreover, 
employs  27%  of  the  labour  force,  which  is  somewhat  higher  than  the  EU  average,  while  the  entire 
public sector absorbs over one-third of Malta’s labour supply. 
This is not to say that nothing has been done. Fiscal consolidation and structural reform have indeed 
in recent years become key features of the Government’s drive to enhance the productive potential of 
the  economy.  This  awareness  is  reflected  in  the  Convergence  Programme,  which  targets  a  fiscal 
deficit  of  1.4%  of  GDP  by  2007,  compared  to  5.3%  this  year.  This  improvement  is  to  be  attained 
mainly  through  a  reduction  of  about  six  percentage  points,  to  44%,  in  the  ratio  of  government 
expenditure to GDP.  
What does this target mean in terms of the savings that need to be made? During the past five years 
government expenditure has  been  increasing by  an  annual  average of  Lm55  million.  At  this  rate,  it 
would exceed Lm1.1 billion in 2007. But the total contemplated in the Convergence Programme for 
that year is about Lm950 million. In other words, the average annual increase in expenditures during 
the next three years must not exceed Lm5 million, which is just one-tenth of the present growth rate. 
This  implies  that  measures  must  be  put  in  place  now  that  would  by  2007  reduce  expenditures  by 
Lm150 million.  
Required expenditure and taxation reforms 
The  attainment  of  this  objective  clearly  requires  extensive  reforms.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to 
propose some policy orientations which would help to reduce the deficit to the planned level. For this 
purpose, it is useful to look at government expenditure from two perspectives. The first is in terms of 
what it is buying. The second focuses on what such expenditure is achieving. 
The first of these approaches helps to identify the potential for savings. This year over 20% of total 
spending, some Lm200 million, will go towards wages and salaries and another 10% will go to public 
sector  bodies,  again  largely  to  finance  human  resource  costs.  In  short,  the  public  sector  wage  and 
salary bill absorbs close to one-third of total budgetary expenditures.  
Against  this  background  it  is  imperative  that  the  current  negotiations  for  the  renewal  of  collective 
agreements  in  the  civil  service  and  in  the  public  sector  recognize  the  need  to  cut  spending.  It  is 
important that any wage increases be matched by measurable productivity improvements. It is equally 
necessary  to  make  better  use  of  the  human  resources  available  by  strengthening  both  the 
management  culture  and  work  practices.  It  must  also  be  accepted  that  the  public  sector  cannot 
continue indefinitely to carry the cost of employees who are effectively redundant. A time limit must be 
set  beyond  which  this  burden  will  no  longer  be  carried,  and  training  and  redeployment  schemes 
should be strengthened in the meantime to facilitate the transition.  
Another third of government expenditures is absorbed by social security benefits, a category whose 
growth  over  time  is  conditioned  by  increases  in  wages  and  prices,  demographic  pressures  and  the 
need to preserve the social fabric. Along the way, however, the original priorities seem to have been 
lost  sight  of.  As  a  result,  Malta  has  a  welfare  system  which  is  certainly  generous,  but  which  is  not 
socially just in the sense that it does not allocate the relatively larger share of resources to those who 
are most in need.  
The  time  has  clearly  come  for  a  radical  welfare  reform  which  reconciles  the  objectives  of  social 
cohesion  and  intergenerational  equity  with  financial  sustainability.  Non-essential  transfer  payments, 
especially those which are of a universal nature and which do not represent a response to a proven 
need, should be cut. Means-testing in the provision of social benefits should not be ruled out on the 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 3
grounds  of  possible  abuse  -  rather,  the  information  technology  available  today  should  be  used  to 
ensure  effective  implementation.  Consideration  should  also  be  given  to  indexing  all  benefits  to 
inflation, including those currently linked to wages. The system for granting certain benefits should be 
reviewed to prevent abuse, especially in the case of invalidity pensions. This will also help to retain 
older  workers  in  the  labour  market.  It  is  furthermore  essential  to  speed  up  a  review  of  the 
unemployment  benefit  system  to  transform  it  into  an  effective  instrument  of  employment  creation 
rather than of social dependence. Finally, the range of services offered by the public health system 
should  be  critically  assessed  in  the  light  of  budget  constraints.  Beneficiaries  should  be  required  to 
shoulder  part  of  the  costs  involved.  Free  medicines  and  free  medical  services  induce  waste  and 
abuse. 
So  far  we  have  seen  that  outlays  on  wages  and  salaries  and  on  social  security  benefits  together 
account for fully two-thirds of government spending. A further tenth is absorbed by the interest on the 
public debt. Here it is well to recall that this cost is currently restrained by the prevailing low level of 
interest  rates.  With  a  global  recovery  under  way,  however,  this  favourable  interest  rate  scenario  is 
unlikely to last much longer. And since a one percentage point rise in the rate of interest is estimated 
to increase debt-servicing costs by some Lm3 million, it is clear that slowing down the pace of debt 
accumulation should be a priority. Any receipts from the privatisation programme should be used for 
this purpose. 
Under  present  conditions,  therefore,  the  only  elements  of  government  expenditure  which  are 
susceptible  to  a  measure  of  discretionary  control  are  capital  outlays,  operational  expenditures  and 
other  programmes,  mainly  consisting  of  Malta’s  contribution  to  EU-funded  projects.  Indeed,  the 
Convergence Programme indicates that around one half of the required cost savings during the next 
three years will come from a reduction in capital expenditure. This, however, still leaves the need for 
expenditure cuts by 2007 of around Lm70 million. This is more than one third of what the Government 
spends  on  operational  expenditures  and  programmes.  And  while  economies  should  be  sought  in 
these areas too, it is unrealistic to expect that these can produce all the required savings. Unpalatable 
as it may sound, the truth is that difficult but crucial decisions must be made without delay regarding 
the size and the cost of both the public sector and the welfare state.  
In this context, I propose to examine government expenditures from the perspective of what they are 
achieving  as  a  guide  to  understanding  whether  the  allocation  of  resources  resulting  from  choices 
made in the past is optimal in today’s circumstances. Let us first look at how recurrent expenditure, 
which this year amounts to almost Lm740 million when the interest on the public debt is excluded, is 
distributed.  Education,  health  and  activities  related  to  the  promotion  of  economic  growth,  such  as 
co-financing  of  EU  projects  and  expenditure  on  tourism,  information  technology,  infrastructure  and 
communications account for some 39%. Outlays on welfare benefits will absorb a further 43%, more 
than  the  combined  amount  dedicated  to  the  three  crucial  areas  just  mentioned.  The  remaining 
18% represents the cost of general administration. 
The imbalance evidenced by these shares raises serious questions about the rationale governing the 
use of public funds, a fair proportion of which are borrowed not earned. We need to ask, for example, 
whether  the  allocation  of  such  a  substantial  budget  to  social  security  is  promoting  a  culture  of 
dependence rather than self-help, and of reliance on the State rather than the kindling of economic 
initiative. And this within the context of an educational system which, despite its merits, continues to 
produce one of the highest early school leaving rates in the EU and one of the lowest rates of science 
and technology graduates, and which dedicates a substantial portion of its budget to a subsidy system 
with  questionable  educational  value.  One  could  also  ask  whether  enough  resources  are  being 
allocated to priority areas such as tourism, IT and the development of industrial areas, which are vital 
for the creation of jobs and wealth that would in turn lessen the dependence on welfare payments and 
subsidies.  
Returning  Malta’s  public  finances  to  a  sustainable  basis  also  requires  careful  consideration  of  the 
revenue generation mechanisms. The ratio of taxation to GDP stands at around 32%, which is one of 
the lowest in the EU. This can of course be viewed as one reason for the relatively high fiscal deficit. 
On the other hand, it can also be interpreted as evidence that the fiscal burden is relatively low, which 
would be conducive to economic expansion. 
It is, however, probable that the moderate tax ratio does not reflect low fiscal pressure as much as the 
use of inappropriate mechanisms which yield insufficient revenues. One reason for this is that direct 
taxation is rather progressive, which creates a disincentive for work, or at least for work in the formal 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  common  knowledge  that  tax  evasion  is  still  widespread.  These 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2004
phenomena may well be compounded by distortions inherent in the system, among them the charging 
of a minimum national insurance contribution on part-time work. All of this suggests that the taxation 
system should be further refined in order to enhance the degree of compliance and to shift the tax 
burden away from productive activities.  
Conclusion 
On  this  same  occasion  five  years  ago  my  analysis  of  the  country’s  economic  condition  led  me  to 
conclude that the status quo was not sustainable. I expressed the view that the time had therefore 
come for us as a nation, not as followers of narrow sectoral interests, to revisit the choices made in the 
past  and  to  establish  new  priorities  commensurate  with  the  prevailing  economic  realities,  with  the 
limited resources available to us and with our core values. 
The situation we face today compels me to reiterate this appeal with greater conviction. For we have 
clearly  not  done  enough.  Speaking  in  April  2002,  a  year  after  the  collapse  of  the  high-technology 
boom  and  looking  ahead  to  the  next  upturn  in  the  economic  cycle,  I  observed  that  when  the  tide 
eventually rose, it would not necessarily raise all boats. Countries which benefited most would likely be 
those who made the greatest effort to adapt to evolving market conditions. 
The tide has risen, even higher than expected. Global GDP is likely to increase by up to 5% this year, 
its strongest pace for a generation. This growth is being largely led by robust consumer spending in 
the  United  States  and  booming  corporate  investment  in  China,  but  Japan  is  also  growing  fast  and 
even the euro area is showing signs of recovery, while emerging economies as a group are enjoying 
their fastest growth for at least twenty-five years. In sharp contrast, the Maltese economy is again this 
year likely to post one of the slowest growth rates in the EU. 
Returning the economy to a sustainable growth path closer to its potential rate must, therefore, be a 
priority objective. How should it be pursued? In today’s highly competitive global economy, there are 
no quick fixes or painless options that will produce greater economic efficiency, enhanced welfare and 
higher living standards. We must simply work harder and longer, and give more value for money. 
The  temptation  to  postpone  decisive  action  must  be  resisted.  We  should  be  encouraged  by  the 
knowledge that other countries have succeeded in overcoming similar, even tougher challenges. In all 
cases, an indispensable ingredient of success has been an honest acknowledgement of the problem 
accompanied by the genuine desire of all the social partners to work out an effective solution in the 
national interest. 
In the current circumstances, sitting on the fence is not a responsible option. Not only does it become 
an uncomfortable position to maintain, but it also becomes less credible with time. There is indeed the 
danger that anybody who is not willing to be part of the solution will be perceived to be part of the 
problem. I, therefore, feel obliged to call on all the social partners to adopt a long-term perspective and 
sign  up  to  a  substantial  reform  package  which  would  lay  the  foundations  for  renewed  growth  and 
sustainable development. A thriving economy is the best social policy. 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 5
