T T Mboweni: Monetary policy and inflation - the next decade  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Conference of the 
Bureau for Economic Research, Stellenbosch, 18 November 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Chairperson, ladies and gentleman, I have been asked to share my views with you today on what will 
happen  with  monetary  policy  in  the  next  ten  years.  Looking  into  the  future  is  always  a  hazardous 
undertaking. It requires a careful analysis of what has changed already and what likely changes will 
occur in the coming years. Such an analysis cannot only concentrate on what has happened in South 
Africa, but must also take into account the structural changes in the rest of the world and how these 
developments could perhaps affect South Africa. This is indeed a formidable task. In the next thirty 
minutes I will do my best to give you my view on these matters. 
Structural changes in the world’s financial sector 
2.  
World War I and the great depression of the 1930’s left the world with highly regulated capital markets 
and  a  disintegrated  international  financial  system.  The  highest  priority  was  therefore  attached  to 
restoring  multilateral  payments  and  current  account  convertibility  towards  the  end  of  World  War  II, 
which led to the Bretton Woods Agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. In the 
period after the war, the emphasis shifted to the liberalisation of trade and payments. Progress with 
these  reforms  was  relatively  slow  and  at  first  concentrated  on  the  currency  convertibility  of  current 
account  transactions.  In  the  1980’s  the  authorities  of  the  industrialised  countries  began  liberalising 
financial  systems,  which  were  later  followed  by  a  number  of  emerging-market  economies.  The 
convertibility  of  the  capital  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  gained  further  momentum  with  the 
negotiations in the World Trade Organisation to liberalise transactions in financial services. 
This financial liberalisation was accompanied by a process of globalisation, i.e. a growing economic 
interdependence  of  countries  became  discernible  through  the  increasing  volume  and  variety  of 
cross-border  transactions  and  through  the  rapid  and  widespread  diffusion  off  technology.  New 
technological  advances  reduced  transportation,  telecommunication  and  computation  costs,  thus 
greatly increasing the ease with which national markets may be integrated at the global level. 
The  liberalisation  and  globalisation  resulted  in  a  growing  interdependence  of  national  financial 
markets.  Although  these  markets  still  do  not  form  a  single  global  market,  the  degree  of 
interdependence is already strong enough to have altered the environment in which monetary policy is 
conducted. In particular, it has affected the volume of international financial transactions. International 
transactions  in  goods  and  services  have  become  considerably  less  important  than  financial 
transactions.  The  closely  linked  financial  markets  have  changed  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism, and shocks that occur in one country can easily have an impact on other countries. 
As a transition phase of or perhaps as an alternative to globalisation, considerable emphasis has been 
placed on closer international co-operation, convergence and integration since the end of World War 
II. Many regional economic co-operation arrangements have been formed or are under consideration. 
The  aim  of  these  regional  arrangements  is  to  free  international  trade  and  financial  transactions 
between  a  group  of  countries.  But  many  of  them  also  want  to  encourage  the  movement  of  labour 
across  domestic  frontiers  and  the  eventual  attainment  of  political  unions.  The  establishment  of  the 
European Union is, of course, the best example in this regard. This regional arrangement has created 
the largest government bond market in the world and led to the development of the euro into a major 
international currency. 
Another  important  structural  change  in  the  world’s  financial  market  has  been  the  achievement  of 
greater price stability. Over the past twenty years the rate of inflation has declined dramatically in most 
countries of the world. The disinflation process was at first mainly concentrated in the industrialised 
countries. According to the International Monetary Fund the average annual inflation rate in the major 
advanced  countries  already  started  to  decline  from  the  early  1980s  from  12,3  per  cent  in  1980  to 
1,7 per cent in 2003. By contrast, the average inflation in emerging-market and developing countries 
continued to increase from 25,0 per cent in 1980 to 107,7 per cent in 1992, before declining sharply to 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 1
6,1 per cent in 2003. These developments brought the average rate of inflation in the world as a whole 
down to only 3,7 per cent in 2003. 
This disinflation process has been so strong that some countries even experienced declines in their 
average  price  indices.  Consumer  prices  have  actually  been  declining  in  Japan  and  Hong  Kong  for 
quite a while, while some other countries such as China recorded decreases for a short period. As 
could  be  expected,  disinflation  to  low  positive  values  has  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding 
decrease in short-term interest rates to low levels. 
Finally the financial sector, just like all other activities in the world, has been severely influenced by the 
revolution  experienced  in  information  technology  and  telecommunication.  In  central  banking  the 
advances  made  in  information  technology  and  telecommunication  have  particularly  led  to  a  more 
efficient  payment  system  catering  for  real-time  gross  interbank  settlement.  New  developments  in 
commercial banking include automated teller machines, credit and debit cards, telephone and inter-net 
banking,  intelligent  cards  and  card  reading  devices.  In  the  1990s  a  further  advance  in  technology 
made it possible to store monetary value on a silicon chip embedded in a plastic card or in a personal 
computer. This was the first step in the development of electronic money or e-money. Initially it was 
believed that this development would lead to a quick and dramatic change in the way that payments 
are  made.  Such  a  change  would  have  required  large  investments  in  infrastructure  and  the  general 
acceptance of this new payments method by the public. It is thus not surprising that it did not take off 
in the way predicted by some analysts. However, initial setbacks to new innovations are a common 
experience and it is quite possible that the public could eventually be more willing to accept this new 
innovation. 
Effects on South Africa’s financial structure 
3.  
These changes in the rest of the world did not affect South Africa’s financial sector to any great extent 
during the 1980s, i.e. in a period in which the country became increasingly isolated from the rest of the 
world as a result of trade boycotts, embargoes and financial sanctions. The subsequent transition to a 
new  political  dispensation  and  the  normalisation  of  the  country’s  international  relations  completely 
changed this situation. These circumstances forced the South African financial sector to move from a 
relatively isolated position to a world that had changed in many ways from the time when our financial 
institutions were still actively involved internationally. 
To cope with the challenges faced in this new environment it was important to improve the functioning 
of  the  domestic  financial  markets  and  to  reintegrate  them  in  the  world  economy  in  an  orderly  way. 
Great efforts were accordingly made to bring the rules and regulations applying to financial institutions 
in line with international norms and standards. The re-entry of South Africa in an integrated financial 
community  also  made  it  important  to  reconsider  the  strict  exchange  control  rules  applicable  at  that 
time.  The  country’s  limited  foreign  exchange  reserves  prevented  the  immediate  removal  of  all 
exchange control measures, which caused the authorities to opt for a policy of a gradual relaxation of 
capital account transactions. 
From  1994  South  African  financial  institutions  started  operating  on  an  increasing  scale  in  major 
international financial centres and opened branches or subsidiaries in other African countries. At the 
same time foreign financial institutions were encouraged to conduct business in South Africa by the 
creation of a level playing field between local and foreign service providers. In addition, the regulatory 
authorities  actively  encouraged 
settlement, 
ownership-transfer  and  market  information  systems,  and  proper  intra-market  and  cross-market  risk 
management systems. 
This restructuring led to a sharp increase in the involvement of foreign banks and other non-residents 
in  domestic  financial  markets.  In  particular  their  transactions  on  the  Bond  Exchange  and  the 
Johannesburg Stock Exchange increased considerably. This participation of non-residents contributed 
to the increase in the turnover of these two markets. It also caused more volatility in long-term interest 
rates  because  investors  quickly  altered  their  positions  with  changes  in  domestic  and  international 
conditions,  while  prices  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  became  even  more  susceptible  to 
changes in the prices on the stock exchanges of major financial centres. 
Moreover,  the  normalisation  of  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  world  led  to  a  turnaround  in  the 
international financial flows of South Africa from a net outflow of about R45 billion in the period from 
1985 to 1993 to a net inflow of nearly R204 billion since 1994. At the same time the volatility in these 
financial flows increased. Although the country generally experienced an inflow of capital from the rest 
the  development  of  appropriate 
clearing, 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2004
of the world, the magnitude of these inflows varied considerably from year to year. For example, a net 
financial inflow of about R29 billion in 1998 was followed by inflows of just more than R7 billion in each 
of the next two years, before these inflows increased again to about R30 billion in 2002 and R63 billion 
in 2003. 
Most  emerging-market  economies  now  seem  to  experience  large  and  volatile  capital  movements. 
Despite considerable  efforts  to  make  South  Africa  a  more  investor-friendly country,  it  can safely  be 
assumed that fluctuations in capital movements will continue to be a feature of our economy in the 
future. This volatility will not only be influenced by domestic developments, but also by events in the 
rest of the world. 
The volatile capital movements brought about large swings in the exchange rate of the rand not only 
against individual currencies but also on a trade weighted basis. For instance, in 2000 and 2001 the 
nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  declined  by  13  percent  and  39  per  cent,  respectively, 
before it increased again by 24 per cent in 2002 and by 44 per cent in 2003. These fluctuations have 
complicated the implementation of monetary policy. In particular, monetary policy was dominated in 
2002  by  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  the  substantial  depreciation  in  the  external  value  of  the 
rand in late 2001, combined with a sharp rise in international oil prices as well as in domestic food 
prices. These external shocks were responsible for a surge in the twelve-month rate of increase in the 
CPIX  from  a  low  of  5,8  per  cent  in  September  2001  to  a  peak  of  11,3  per  cent  in  October  2002. 
Subsequently, the appreciation of the rand from the beginning of 2002 again had to be carefully taken 
into consideration in the formulation of monetary policy. 
The fluctuations in the exchange rate of the rand clearly illustrated the need for structural adjustments 
in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  South  Africa.  The  Reserve  Bank  accordingly  concentrated  on 
eliminating  its  negative  net  open  foreign  reserve  position  and  its  oversold  forward  book.  With  the 
success  achieved  with  these  objectives,  the  focus  of  the  Bank  has  now  shifted  to  a  gradual 
strengthening  of  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Since  the  end  of  2002  the  official  foreign 
exchange reserves of the country have increased from US$7,6 billion to US$13,0 billion at the end of 
October 2004. The higher foreign exchange holdings should help to stabilise the external value of the 
rand. 
Implications for monetary policy 
4.  
Taking these changes in the world and more specifically in South Africa into consideration, we now 
come to the crucial question on how will monetary policy be affected or what will happen to monetary 
policy in the next ten years. More in particular I want to concentrate on three questions in this regard, 
namely: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Will monetary policy still be effective? 
What should the primary objective of monetary policy be? 
What monetary policy framework should be applied? 
 The effectiveness of monetary policy 
4.1 
As in the rest of the world, e-money has not really taken off in South Africa. Although several potential 
products  have  been  evaluated  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  no  roll-out  on  a  significant  basis  has  yet 
occurred. The failure of e-money to meet expectations can possibly be ascribed to the fact that cash 
remains a trusted and very convenient payment mechanism, debit and credit cards are widely used 
and  e-money  products  generally  do  not  allow  for  person-to-person  payments.  However,  it  is 
conceivable  that  this  could  change  in  the  future  and  that  e-money  could  to  an  increasing  extent 
become a substitute for banknotes and coin. As Benjamin M. Friedman (1999) has pointed out it is 
possible, albeit at present highly unlikely, that e-money could be used as a means of payment as well 
as settlement and therefore erode the role of currency and reduce banknotes and coin in circulation. 
Friedman also stated that the size of base money (currency in circulation plus the balances of banks at 
the central bank) could decline in future because of the declining role of banks in advancing credit to 
the non-bank private sector. If bank credit extension to the private sector decreases, less deposits are 
created.  The  reserves  that  banks  are  required  to  hold  at  the  central  bank  are  then  smaller,  which 
reduces base money. 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 3
Securitisation and the liberalisation and globalisation of South Africa’s financial markets have led to a 
declining  role  of  banks  in  the  advancement  of  credit  to  the  non-bank  private  sector.  As  already 
indicated, South African organisations are now more easily able to obtain financing from abroad than 
they were before 1994. Many private sector companies have also started to make increasing use of 
the bond market to raise funds for development purposes. Although this disintermediation has not led 
to a decline in reserve requirements of banks, it has affected the growth of base money. 
Friedman  further  indicated  that  private  bank  clearing  mechanisms  could  be  developed  that  would 
further  reduce  base  money.  Mervyn  King  (1999)  also  pointed  out  that  there  is  a  possibility  that  the 
demand  for  settlement  balances  could  eventually  be  eliminated  by  the  development  of  electronic 
networks allowing payments to be settled without the involvement of the central bank. 
These arguments led Friedman to the conclusion that the central bank in the future will become “an 
army with only a signal corps”. Central banks will only be able to indicate to the private sector how 
they believe monetary conditions should develop, but will be unable to do anything about this if the 
private sector has a different view. 
It  nevertheless  seems  highly  unlikely  that  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  will  decline  in  South 
Africa  in  the  next  ten  years  because  of  the  increased  use  of  e-money,  the  liberalisation  and 
globalisation of our financial markets or the development of private banking clearing mechanisms. At 
most  these  factors  should  only  have  a  limited  impact  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  As 
Woodford (2000) stated, the effectiveness of monetary policy is not dependent “upon a mechanical 
connection  between  the  monetary  base  and  the  volume  of  nominal  spending,  which  is  then 
presumably dependent upon a need to use base money as a means of payment”. In fact, in South 
Africa the supply of money is endogenously determined. The repo rate is the operational variable of 
the Reserve Bank and this rate is not affected by the size of base money. 
The primary objective of monetary policy 
4.2 
Having determined that monetary policy should remain effective in the coming ten years, what should 
the primary objective of monetary policy be in South Africa? 
It is now generally accepted all over the world that the central bank’s responsibility is to ensure price 
stability.  As  already  indicated,  considerable  success  has  been  achieved  with  the  attainment  of  this 
objective and in the advanced countries of the world price stability has been maintained for a relatively 
long period. As a consequence, many of the central banks of these countries seem to have become 
less  engrossed  with  combating  inflation  and  have  again  moved  somewhat  in  the  direction  of  fine 
tuning  economic  growth.  Many  economists  are  of  the  opinion  that  this  is  the  right  approach.  For 
example, in a recent article of Carl Walsh (2003) he states that modern central banks must “recognise 
that  achieving  and  maintaining  low  inflation  cannot  be  their  only  objective.  Monetary  policy  has 
important short-run effects on real economic activity and there is, therefore, a role for monetary policy 
to play in conducting stabilisation policy”. The danger of such an approach is, of course, that central 
banks could concentrate too much on expansionary policies at the cost of maintaining price stability. 
Despite the fact that South Africa has only been able to maintain low inflation over a relatively short 
period, it can be argued that the Reserve Bank should now give more attention to the promotion of 
economic  growth.  It  is  true  that  short-term  interest  rates  do  have  some  affect  on  long-term  interest 
rates which, in turn, is an important determinant of the growth in investment and production. However, 
it must be realised that reductions in short-term interest rates do not always lead to a reduction in the 
cost of capital. If it is generally expected that lower levels of short-term interest rates will lead to higher 
inflation, long-term interest rates are bound to rise. Monetary policy may therefore be less effective in 
having the desired impact on real economic activity over the short term than generally believed. At the 
same time it must be admitted that the actions of central banks do have some affect on the growth of 
domestic product over the short term. 
Although  monetary  policy  measures  affect  real  economic  activity  over  the  short  term,  long-term 
economic  growth  can  only  be  achieved  if  production  capacity  and  productivity  increases.  Besides 
increases in employment, the expansion in production capacity requires additions to capital stock in 
the  form  of  net  fixed  investment.  Productivity  refers  to  the  efficiency  with  which  labour,  capital  and 
other inputs are combined and used to produce goods and services of a specific quality in order to 
satisfy the needs of the market. Technological progress, improving the quality of the labour force and 
the more productive utilisation of resources are among the factors needed to increase productivity. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2004
Monetary policy measures cannot directly influence the factors on which long-term economic growth 
depend. Monetary policy has the most control over changes in the overall price level and therefore on 
the  long-run  impact  of  inflation  on  economic  growth.  But  it  should  at  least  not  discourage  and 
preferably rather encourage domestic saving, investment and the inflow of foreign capital to promote 
economic  growth.  Monetary  policy  should  also  not  stand  in  the  way  of  the  optimal  allocation  of 
resources and the most efficient utilisation of these resources in business enterprises, because this 
could lower the potential growth in output. All in all, monetary policy should therefore not add to the 
risks that normally confront private business or dampen technological innovations. 
The South African Reserve Bank believes that the best way that monetary policy can contribute to the 
important  objective  of  sustained  economic  growth  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  The 
maintenance of price stability should continue to be a major objective of monetary policy particularly 
now  that  we  have  achieved  some  success  in  bringing  the  inflation  rate  down  within  our  inflation 
targets. If we are unable to do this, the credibility of monetary policy will be questioned, which could 
have a severe affect on the effectiveness of monetary policy measures in the future. As Carl Walsh 
(2003)  has  indicated  “the  three  most  important  ingredients  to  a  successful  monetary  policy  are 
credibility, credibility and credibility”. 
There  are  many  convincing  arguments  why  price  stability  should  be  regarded  as  a  prerequisite  for 
sustainable  economic  growth.  All  modern  market-orientated  economies  are  based  on  the  extensive 
use  of  money  as  a  unit  of  account,  as  a  means  of  exchange  and  as  a  store  of  value.  Money  that 
deteriorates  in  value  all  the  time  cannot  fulfil  these  functions  effectively.  High  inflation  discourages 
savings and foreign investment, on which economic growth is highly dependent. 
Not only is the supply of funds for investment reduced by high inflation, but the flow of existing saving 
to risk capital is distorted. The finance that do become available is invested in such a manner where 
they can provide the best protection against inflation, and not necessary where they could be the most 
productive  and  lead  to  employment  creation.  In  the  past  when  we  experienced  high  inflation,  large 
amounts  of  investment  in  South  Africa  were  made  in  the  construction  of  office  blocks,  shopping 
centres and expensive housing, which cannot be regarded as the most productive forms of investment 
and which probably lowered the growth potential of the economy. Inflation accordingly undermines the 
efficiency of the pricing system and does not lead to the optimum allocation of production resources. 
The monetary policy framework 
4.3  
In the pursuit of price stability the South African Reserve Bank and the central banks in many other 
parts of the world have found that the inflation targeting monetary policy framework has proved to be 
highly  effective.  In  particular,  inflation  targeting  has  led  to  a  better  co-ordination  between  monetary 
policy  and  other  economic  policies  than  with  other  monetary  measures  applied  in  the  past.  This  is 
largely owing to the fact that the Government is responsible for the determination of the inflation target 
in  South  Africa  in  co-operation  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  This  target  is  therefore  determined  in  a 
structured manner, and taking into consideration the other economic objectives of government. After 
the determination of the target it is the Reserve Bank’s responsibility to see that it is achieved, i.e. the 
Reserve  Bank  has  instrumental  independence  but  not  goal  independence.  It  is  therefore  surprising 
that the Bank is sometimes criticised of being over obsessed with the attainment of the target at the 
detriment of economic growth. Since the target is established in a co-ordinated way, it should in theory 
form part of the government’s objectives for economic growth and employment creation. Even more 
importantly,  after  the  target  has  been  established,  it  is  the  Reserve  Bank’s  task  to  see  that  it  is 
achieved. 
Inflation targeting has the further advantage that it provides a nominal anchor to inflation expectations 
if monetary policy is perceived to be credible. This facilitates a reduction in inflation and should form 
the basis for future price and wage setting. It is a transparent policy framework, because the target is 
publicly announced. This announced target provides the basis of accountability of  the central bank. 
This disciplines the actions of the central bank and leads to a better understanding among the public 
why monetary policy decisions are made. 
In  view  of  these  advantages  of  inflation  targeting  in  comparison  with  other  monetary  policy 
frameworks,  there  seem  to  be  little  reason  to  start  applying  a  new  framework.  The  authorities  will 
accordingly continue to apply inflation targeting as the monetary policy framework of South Africa in 
the next ten years and at most probably only refine the system further to ensure that it continues to 
function efficiently. 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 5
Conclusion 
5.  
My general conclusion is therefore that the recent major structural changes in the world and in South 
Africa will have little effect on the determination and implementation off monetary policy in the coming 
years.  It  is  true  that  vast  developments  have  taken  place  in  information  technology  and 
telecommunication and that we could probably expect further significant changes in the next ten years 
which will have a major impact on our lives. The process of liberalisation, globalisation and integration 
is  also  bound  to  change  our  lives  even  further.  It  seems  unlikely  however,  that  these  changes  will 
affect  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  expected  changed  world  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank will continue in its quest for the achievement and maintenance of price stability by applying an 
inflation targeting monetary policy framework. 
References 
Friedman, Benjamin M. 1999. “The Future of Monetary Policy: The Central Bank as an Army with only 
a Signal Corps”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 7420 
King,  Mervyn,  1999.  “Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy;  New  and  Old”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly 
Bulletin 39 
Walsh,  Carl.  E.  2003.  “Modern  Central  Banking:  An  Academic’s  Perspective”,  Central  Bank  of  the 
Republic of Armenia, Anniversary Celebration 
Woodford, Michael. 2000. Monetary Policy in a World without Money”, World Bank Conference 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2004
