T T Mboweni: The state of the South African economy 
Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual Dinner in 
honour  of  the  Ambassadors  and  High  Commissioners  to  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  Pretoria, 
7 December 2004.  
 Your Excellency, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps 
Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
Your Excellency, the Chief of State Protocol 
Your Excellencies, Heads of International Organisations represented in the Republic of South Africa 
Deputy Governors of the South African Reserve Bank 
Senior Management of the South African Reserve Bank and their spouses/partners 
Media representatives 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Welcome once again to this annual dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
accredited to the Republic of South Africa. My colleagues and I always look forward with bated breath 
to this evening at the end of every year. This dinner represents for us the highlight of every year as we 
gather with you to break bread and discuss issues of common interest and relevance to our various 
countries. 
2004 has indeed been a momentous year for the global economy. One of the distinguishing features 
of this year has been the oil price. When I joined the central bank in 1998, the north sea brent crude oil 
price was $9 per barrel. Since then, the oil price has shot up quite considerably. The price of north sea 
brent crude oil is now around $38 per barrel and indications are that it might not come down to the 
OPEC target levels of $22 - $28 per barrel in the near future. The futures price also indicates that the 
oil price will stay near the $40 per barrel level. 
The behaviour of the oil prices has changed the global economic outlook in a real way. Estimates by 
the International Monetary Fund researchers is that if the oil price averages $37 per barrel in 2004, 
global  growth  will  slow  down  by  some  ½  percentage  point,  inflation  for  the  advanced  countries  will 
increase by about 0.3 percentage point and the trade balance of advanced countries will deteriorate 
by some 0.3 per cent of gross domestic product. The estimates for South Africa are that economic 
growth  might  decline  by  some  0.6  percentage  point,  inflation  will  increase  by  some  1.6  percentage 
point and the trade balance will worsen by some 1.4 per cent of gross domestic product. 
Clearly there is cause for concern all-round. 
At  the core  of  these  oil  price developments seems to  be concerns  about  supply  constraints.  These 
arise, in part, as a result of supply problems from Iraq, uncertainties about possible tensions between 
the United States and Iran, production uncertainties in Nigeria, the continuing problems experienced 
between the Russian government and the Yukos oil company, management and trade union tensions 
in Norway and the damage to production which was caused by hurricane Ivan in the Gulf of Mexico. 
Although some of the developments mentioned above are significant, it would, however, seem to us 
that the oil market players are running ahead of themselves in terms of pricing. Time and again, the 
largest producer of oil in the world, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, has made it known that there are 
sufficient reserves and capacity to ensure that global supply meets demand. On many occasions, the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has actually increased supply by no less than a million barrels per day. They 
have indicated that there are sufficient reserves for the next 50 years. And as stability returns in any 
troubled oil-producing country, supply surely should be guaranteed. It is maybe time for the market to 
pause and reflect on the perceived supply constraints. Certainly, the global economy expects no less 
from the oil market. 
Despite these risks for the global economy now and in the recent past, substantial global economic 
growth has been recorded in 2003 and prospects for the whole of 2004 look promising. The global 
economy recorded an impressive 3.9% growth in 2003, with the United States, Japan, India, China 
and  many  emerging  market  economies  making  the  most  impressive  contribution  to  global  growth. 
   1/5 
Growth  rates  in  China  and  India  remained  the  envy  of  all  countries  in  2003.  Although  the  Chinese 
authorities attempted to slow down growth in their country, at growth rates of around 9%, this country 
continues to amaze. 
It is forecast that global growth in 2004 is likely to be in the region of 5%, slowing down somewhat in 
2005 to 4,3%. Based on these forecasts, we can safely say, without any fear of contradiction, that the 
world economy is still in a good state of growth. 
The  oil  price  notwithstanding,  the  global  economy  has  shown  itself  to  be  resilient  in  the  face  of  so 
many other constraints. 
There  remain,  however,  a  number  of  challenges  to  be  tackled  if  the  world  economy  is  to  improve 
further  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  At  the  most  recent  G20  meeting  in  Berlin  on  20  and 
21 November 2004, the challenges to global growth were summarised as follows: “the United States 
needed to urgently address its fiscal and current account deficits which are resulting in major negative 
adjustments in other parts of the world; Latin American countries needed to continue with broad based 
structural reforms and pursue prudent fiscal policy whilst at the same time continuing with policies to 
encourage investment; Argentina in particular was urged to continue strengthening its banking sector 
and reviewing its fiscal system; the European Union member countries were urged to continue with 
structural reforms, in particular reforming their labour markets, consolidating their fiscal positions and 
reforming their pension systems; the Russian Federation was urged to “create foundations for more 
broad  based  and  sustainable  growth  at  a  high  rate”;  the  Russian  Federation  was  further  urged  to 
introduce “reforms of the banking sector and the judiciary systems”; South Africa was urged to focus 
on  infrastructure  investment,  increased  savings  and  skills  development;  Saudi  Arabia  was  urged  to 
diversify  its  economic  structure,  support  private  sector  development  and  improve  the  business 
environment for foreign investment; South and Southeast Asia were urged to improve the climate for 
investment, in particular through regulatory reform; India was encouraged to “reduce the budget deficit 
while  raising  sufficient  resources  (ie  reforming  the  tax  system)  for  infrastructure  and  rural 
development”; Australia was urged to improve flexibility in workplace relations to expand employment 
options,  improve  the  tax  and  income  support  systems  and  make  progress  more  generally  with 
microeconomic  reforms;  Japan  was  encouraged  to  continue  with  its  reform  agenda,  including 
measures  to  promote  further  reform  of  the  financial  system,  foster  privatisation  and  address  more 
vigorously  the  problem  of  fiscal  sustainability;  China  was  encouraged  to  continue  deepening  the 
reforms  of  the  state  asset  management  system  and  the  state  owned  enterprises,  to  promote  the 
development  of  the  non-state  sector  of  the  economy,  to  consolidate  and  strengthen  the  position  of 
agriculture, to carry forward the reforms of the financial system, the fiscal and taxation systems and 
the investment climate, to push forward the employment and income distribution system, to improve 
the social security net and strengthen the reforms of the administration management system and the 
legal system”. The G20 concluded by committing to “strengthening the above-mentioned framework 
for the global economy”. The G20 encouraged 'trade ministers to work together in good faith to enable 
the WTO negotiations to succeed as quickly as possible”. 
Based on the G20 global economic reform agenda, referred to as the G20 Accord, one is encouraged 
to  observe  the  serious commitment  from  these  leading  countries  to  ensure  that  the  world economy 
continues to grow and prosper. It is indeed heart-warming that a common global agenda for growth is 
beginning  to  emerge  amongst  the  world’s  20  largest  economies  outside  the  traditional  Washington 
consensus. 
Coming back to developments in South Africa, it is also pleasing to note that the hard work which has 
been put into policy formulation and planning in the past decade is beginning to bear fruit.  
I know that you are more than familiar with the economic situation in South Africa and I therefore only 
wish to highlight some of the key features of the recent economic and financial developments. 
Statistics SA has recently rebased and revised the economic growth numbers. This is an acceptable 
international best practice. The South African Reserve Bank endorses this endeavour. As a result of 
their extensive exercise, the developments mentioned below have been observed. 
Firstly, the South African economy is larger than was previously thought. Previously, the level of the 
gross  domestic  product  was  estimated  at  R888  billion  (2000),  R983  billion  (2001),  R1  121  trillion 
(2002) and R1 209 trillion (2003). The revised figures show that the level of GDP was much higher at 
R922  billion  (2000),  R1  020  trillion  (2001),  R1  165  trillion  (2002)  and  R1  251  trillion  (2003).  These 
revisions are fairly substantial! The Statistician General commented that “the level of the revised GDP 
at  current  prices  is  between  0.5  and  3.9  percent  higher  than  the  previous  estimates  for  the  period 
   2/5 
1998 to 2003. The GDP for the year 2003 is 3.5% higher than previously reported”. In summary, this 
means that the level of economic activity in South Africa is indeed very significant. 
Secondly, the GDP per capita at current prices has improved significantly based on these revisions 
and if one makes use of the latest available 2001 population estimates. Previously, it was thought that 
the GDP per capita was R20,3 thousand (2000), R22,1 thousand (2001), R24,5 thousand (2002) and 
R26,2  thousand  (2003).  The  revised  figures  mean  that  we  are  much  better-off  than  was  thought, 
R21,1 thousand (2000), R22,9 thousand (2001), R25,5 thousand (2002) and R27,1 thousand (2003). 
Thirdly,  these  revisions  confirm  the  observations  which  many  people  had  made  about  the 
South African economy. It was clear to many that this economy was larger and growing much faster 
than the official data from Stats SA had previously suggested. 
The challenge ahead is to maintain the momentum by focusing amongst others on what the G20 has 
urged South Africa to do. Of particular importance here will be the absolute fully dedicated focus on 
education and skills development in South Africa for a higher growth path. 
Although employment creation is still at low levels, it is nonetheless encouraging to see that there has 
been a pick up in the numbers of people employed. According to the latest official data available in 
March 2004, total employment in South Africa was 11 984 million, which was a marked improvement 
from the total of 11 652 million in September 2003. The number of unemployed people remains high in 
South Africa despite this improvement. According to Stats SA, the total unemployed was 4 611 million 
in March 2004 as compared to the 4 627 million in September 2003. So a lot of work still lies ahead as 
far as employment creation is concerned. But it is encouraging that the number of people unemployed 
is coming down. 
As  we  have  indicated  in  the  past,  South  Africa  introduced  inflation  targeting  in  the  year  2000.  The 
inflation target was specified as the Consumer Price Index less mortgage cost, the co-called CPIX. 
The  numeral  target  was  for  CPIX  to  remain  on  average  between  6  and  3  percent.  Now,  there  has 
been a little change to specify that the target must be met on a twelve-month continuous basis. We 
are happy here at the central bank to report to you this evening that since September 2003, we have 
been inside the target range. This achievement has also begun to influence inflation expectations in a 
positive  way.  The  expectations  of  business,  trade  unions  and  households  are  now  well  within  the 
target levels. This is important for inflation outcomes going forward. 
In  an  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy  framework,  it  is  important  that  we  are  committed  to  the 
inflation  target  and  not  target  any  other  intermediate  variable.  So  whilst  variables  such  as  the 
exchange  rate,  monetary  aggregates,  unit  labour  cost  and  oil  prices  play  an  important  part  in  the 
inflation  process,  these  should  not  become  intermediate  targets  but  must  however  be  watched 
carefully and systematically by the central bank.  
The exchange rate of the rand is determined by the supply and demand developments in the foreign 
exchange market. The central bank does not target any level of the exchange rate but takes the rate 
as  given  by  the  forex  market.  Due  to  the  importance  which  attaches  to  the  exchange  rate  in  the 
inflation process, a competitively priced exchange rate is the preferred outcome for the central bank. 
We  neither  prefer  a  weak  rand  nor  an  overvalued  exchange  rate.  We  prefer  a  competitively  priced 
exchange rate. 
From time to time, exchange rates have a tendency to over- or undershoot in the market. This can be 
the case if, for instance, global imbalances lead to a depreciation or an appreciation in some of the 
more  significant  currencies  such  as  the  American  dollar.  Indeed  the  current  level  of  the  dollar  is 
occasioned in the main by the large American current account deficit on their balance of payments. 
For as long as the rest of the world is willing to finance this deficit by buying American assets, the 
current account deficit is easily financed but the market seems to have become somewhat doubtful 
recently.  We  do  not  share  the  view  that  the  American  dollar  will  collapse.  Yes,  there  will  be  some 
gradual adjustment as a result of the current account deficit but our hope is that these adjustments 
should  be  measured  and  orderly  and  not  be  disruptive  to  the  global  currency  markets.  Extreme 
volatilities in the forex markets are not helpful to all of us. 
One should therefore expect that in the current period and in the near term, the rand will show some 
strength  against  the  dollar.  But  the  rand  is  not  alone  in  this.  Indeed  the  Euro,  Australian  dollar, 
Japanese Yen and many other significant currencies are showing signs of strengthening against the 
American dollar. This should be expected. 
   3/5 
But our central bank is not losing focus. And indeed it should never lose focus. We are in the business 
of targeting inflation and not any other intermediate variable. 
We  have  taken  advantage  of  the  current  conditions  in  the  forex  market  to  purchase  significant 
amounts of foreign currency in the market as part of the process of building up our foreign exchange 
reserves. You might recall that in 1998 we had a negative net open foreign currency position of some 
$23  billion.  That  was  a  difficult  time  for  us  here  at  the  Bank.  Through  some  carefully  planned 
processes,  we  have  eliminated  the  negative  net  open  foreign  currency  position  and  now  we  have 
some positive $14,4 billion in our gross gold and foreign exchange reserves account. The building of 
reserves is seen as fundamental to the stability of the foreign exchange market. We therefore hope to 
see a much more stable exchange rate going forward. I know that a stable foreign exchange market is 
also of significant importance to the Diplomatic Corps as it brings about stability and certainty in your 
budgeting  processes.  We  are  glad  that  by  eliminating  the  negative  NOFP  we  could  be  of  some 
assistance to you. 
The competent macro-economic management, including fiscal and monetary discipline, has led to the 
country’s  improved  economic  outlook  as  well  as  to  the  enhanced  sound  economic  fundamentals. 
International investors have recognised the progress achieved and have in recent years changed their 
sentiment  towards  South  Africa.  The  positive  sentiment  towards  the  country  and  the  high  level  of 
confidence in its future progress has also been supported by numerous ratings upgrades from major 
international  rating  agencies  over  the  last  few  years.  These  ratings  are  supported  by  a  stable  and 
transparent macro-economic policy framework; a record of fiscal prudence resulting in moderate public 
debt levels; and a much improved external liquidity position after the closure of the forward book.  
The credit ratings continue on an upward path. Currently Moody’s is reviewing the country for a further 
upgrade, which could see South Africa’s foreign currency rating move from the current Baa2 (lower 
investment grade) to Baa1 (higher investment grade). Towards the end of October 2004 Fitch revised 
their outlook on South Africa’s BBB rating from stable to positive.  
Inflows  into  South  Africa’s  bond  and  equity  markets,  which  were  largely  elusive  in  2002/2003, 
witnessed  a  significant  turnaround  in  2004.  Faster  economic  growth  combined  with  a  low  inflation 
environment  and  interest  rates  at  multi-decade  lows  has  seen  non-residents  return  to  the  equity 
market. For 2004 to date, the equity market has enjoyed inflows to the value of R25,9 billion. While on 
a  net  basis,  the  bond  market  has  experienced  outflows,  these remain small  in  comparison with  the 
outflows  experienced  in  2003  (-R1,7bn  when  compared  to  -R8,1bn)  .  In  fact,  the  bond  market 
registered  an  inflow  of  R3,9  billion  in  November  alone,  as  yields  on  domestic  government  bonds 
continued to move to fresh lows during the month. These capital inflows do not only reflect lower risk 
perceptions  justified  by  improved  credit  ratings,  but  clearly  indicate  a  high  level  of  confidence  in 
South Africa’s macro-economic future.  
Positive  sentiment  is  also  reflected  in  the  spreads  of  South  Africa’s  foreign  currency  denominated 
bonds in relation to US Treasuries. The spreads on the South African sub-index over US Treasuries 
narrowed  significantly.  For  the  first  time  since  its  launch,  this  sub-index  closed  below  the 
100-basis-points level, ie at 94 basis points, on 4 November. The improvement was supported by the 
country’s  positive  credit  rating  outlook,  the  performance  of  the  rand  and  other  sound  economic 
fundamentals. At these levels, South Africa compares favourably with Poland, Malaysia and Thailand, 
whose credit ratings are at the upper level of investment grade. On 30 November, the South African 
sub-index  narrowed  further  to  92  basis  points  over  US  Treasuries.  The  spreads  of  South  Africa’s 
US-dollar denominated bonds maturing in 2009 and 2012 narrowed to 102 and 72 basis points over 
US Treasuries respectively between 14 October and 30 November 2004. The 10-year US dollar global 
bond issued in May this year similarly tightened from 195 basis points over US Treasuries at its launch 
in May to currently around 103 basis points. 
A ratings upgrade by Moody’s would put South Africa on the same scale as Thailand whose ten-year 
US-dollar denominated bond spread is currently trading around 52 basis points over US Treasuries. 
This suggests that South Africa’s ten-year US dollar denominated bond, which is currently at 85 basis 
points above US Treasuries, could rally further. 
Another clear indication of South Africa’s improving creditworthiness can also be seen in increasingly 
narrower  margins  paid  on  our  international  syndicated  loans.  Whereas  in  2001  we  were  paying 
85 basis  points  p.a.  over  LIBOR  for  a  three-year  loan,  by  2003  the  margin  had  come  down  to 
67.5 basis points p.a., and earlier this year we were able to improve the terms further and negotiate a 
margin of 47.5 basis points p.a. over LIBOR.  
   4/5 
The relations between South Africa and so many countries in the rest of the global village, evidenced 
by the number of embassies and high commissions stationed in South Africa, bears testimony to this 
confidence. 
My colleagues and the senior management staff at your tables will hopefully clarify and amplify some 
of the remarks I have made during this evening. Meanwhile, welcome once again and thank you for 
accepting  our  invitation  to  this  Annual  Dinner  in  honour  of  Ambassadors  and  High  Commissioners 
posted to the Republic of South Africa. Your friendship is not taken for granted, it is highly valued. 
Thank you very much.  
   5/5 
