Jean-Claude Trichet: The new EU Member States - convergence and stability 
Concluding remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Third 
ECB Central Bank conference on “The new EU Member States: convergence and stability”, Frankfurt, 
22 October 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honour and pleasure to draw some conclusions at the end of the third ECB Central Banking 
Conference on “the new Member States: convergence and stability”. I hope that you found the last two 
days  inspiring  and  stimulating.  The  road  from  EU  enlargement  to  the  euro  is  indeed  a  fascinating 
challenge for policy makers, academics and economic agents. During these two days we engaged into 
in-depth discussions about the past, present and future paths of the new Member States joining the 
European Monetary Union and the challenges that these countries are confronted with. Let me briefly 
elaborate on the main arguments and issues that were raised at the Conference. I would then also like 
to  take  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the  ECB’s  view  about  the  main  challenges  for  the  new 
Member States on their way to the euro. 
In his presentation, Gerard Roland raised some key institutional and structural questions concerning 
the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union.  First,  how  have  institutions  of  the  new  Member  States 
changed  during  the  last  decade?  Second,  what  role  has  the  European  Union  played  during  the 
transition phase and finally how will EU enlargement affect the functioning of the EU-25 in the future? 
As expected, institutions matter. The idea of the European Union acting as an “external anchor” for 
most of the new Member States has played a major role and incentives to meet the entry conditions 
set  by  the  EU  have  worked  well  for  the  new  Member  States.  According  to  many  indicators  which 
Gerard  Roland  presented  yesterday  the  new  Member  States’  performances  have  been  good;  for 
example,  price  and  trade  liberalisation  have  been  fully  adopted,  competition  policy  has  been 
successful  and  most  importantly  individuals  live  in  democratic  societies.  This  success  can  also  be 
seen in how these countries have adopted and implemented the acquis communautaire. 
Taking stock of the progress made so far the paper stresses that more work still needs to be done. 
Reforms  and  progress  especially  in  the  banking  and  other  financial  sectors  should  be  continued  to 
create a solid and sustainable base for the economies of the new Member States, which can also be 
seen  as  important  requirements  for  joining  the  euro  area.  I  agree  with  discussants  that  the  new 
member states will be active and will contribute positively to the functioning of the EU. 
Jürgen  von  Hagen’s  presentation  complements  Gerard  Roland’s  presentation.  His  findings  also 
support the macroeconomic stabilisation achieved by the new Member States. On top of that most of 
the new Member States have undertaken major reforms to restructure their public sectors. Spending 
ratios  have  fallen  remarkably  and  public  sectors  operate  in  a  much  more  efficient  manner  than 
previously, but there still seems to be room for improvement. A well structured public sector and sound 
fiscal policy are necessary ingredients for a successful participation in a monetary union today and in 
the  future.  Jürgen  von  Hagen  also commented  on the  future  adoption  of  the  euro  and  I  will  shortly 
touch upon this topic later in my speech. 
Doug Laxton and Michael Kumhof’s presentation today dealt with the macroeconomic performance of 
the new Member States, or more specifically the performance of the Czech Republic, from a different 
angle  than  the  two  other  presentations.  It  is  an  extremely  challenging  task  to  utilise  a  modern 
structural Dynamic (Stochastic) General Equilibrium model to study the pros and cons for a country to 
join EMU. I think the authors have done a good job in their brave attempt. Because of the nature of the 
model, in theory, one is able to get a coherent picture about the costs and benefits of joining EMU. In 
the  analysis  the  authors  concentrate  on  the  trade  sector  where  trade  is  determined  endogenously 
between  the  two  countries.  The  results  from  their  exercise  are  intuitive  and  mostly  convincing.  A 
reduction in trade costs creates a significant long-term increase in trade and most importantly the main 
winners  will  be  the  joining  members.  The  single  currency  will  lower  uncertainties  and  costs  of 
transferring money. Eventually this will lead to welfare gains. I share the view of commentators that the 
exact  values of  outcomes are not  that  important  because  of  the uncertainties involved  in  numerical 
exercises  utilising  macro  models.  What  is  important  is  to  show  the  basic  outcomes  and  most  likely 
scenarios.  I  also  share  the  point  raised  by  the  commentators  that  inclusion  of  analysis  of  financial 
integration’s effect on welfare would be beneficial. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
In his speech, my colleague, Otmar Issing, talked about EU enlargement and monetary integration. 
The adoption of the euro by the New Member states will be the final step in monetary integration. As 
Otmar mentioned, a sufficient degree of economic and financial integration is necessary for adopting 
the euro successfully. Fulfilling the Maastricht criteria is a sign that sustainable convergence has been 
reached and countries are on the right path. Monetary authorities also play an important role in this 
process by conducting a credible policy which leads to price stability and thus creating an environment 
where entering into ERM II will be smooth and credible. 
Most of the results presented here are broadly in line with the ECB’s view that EU enlargement has 
positive implications for economic growth and welfare in both the “previous” and “new” Member States; 
unfortunately, these benefits have often been set aside in the public debate. Already the prospect of 
the countries joining the EU had positive implications. As trade and capital movements have been to a 
large  extent  liberalised  well  before  accession,  the  degree  of  integration  had  already  reached  a 
significant level between the new and previous Member States. In fact, at the eve of EU enlargement 
the  euro  area  directed  around  11%  of  its  total  exports  and  imports  to  the  new  Member  States,  an 
increase of almost 50% in 10 years; the 10 new Member States as a group represent one of the main 
trading partners of the euro area, exceeding trade with Japan by far (8%) and being only somewhat 
lower than the European trade with the United States (14%). Similarly, the share of the EU-15 total 
foreign direct investments that was orientated towards the new Member States was also around 12% 
and tripled since 1999. While these figures are still low compared to the FDI flows directed to the US, 
they  are  considerably  higher  compared  to  those  flowing  to  Japan.  In  addition,  the  prospect  of 
EU enlargement  has  significantly  sheltered  the  new  Member  States  from  adverse  spill-over  effects 
coming  from  other  emerging  markets.  With  EU  enlargement  now  in  place,  economic  and  financial 
integration will advance further. With the extension of the Single Market to the new Member States all 
remaining barriers to trade and capital flows have been removed by now, thereby supporting further 
integration. It is already observable that small and medium-sized enterprises from the EU-15 countries 
are  becoming  significantly  more  active  in  the  new  Member  States,  as  the  economic  and  legal 
environment has become more stable upon accession. Let me stress that enlargement has also led to 
higher competition in the EU and enhanced the scope for economies of scale following the increase in 
the  market  size.  By  this,  productivity  will  rise,  thereby  contributing  to  an  increase  in  the  potential 
growth rate of the EU. It is important to note that also the “previous” 15 Member States will be affected 
by higher competition in the EU, which could accelerate structural reforms in these countries. In fact, 
the new Member States seem to be overall rather competitive and have already made large progress 
in implementing structural reforms in some areas, which in turn is an incentive for the EU-15 to embark 
actively on their reform agenda, as Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa stressed it yesterday evening. 
As you know, accession to the EU is only the beginning of the process, which ends with the eventual 
adoption  of  the  euro,  given  that  these  countries  have  no  opting-out  clause.  The  path  towards  euro 
adoption is embedded in a well-defined multilateral institutional framework. To guide the process of 
joining EMU the Governing Council of the ECB released a comprehensive policy position on relevant 
exchange rate issues in December 2003. Given its importance, I would like to speak about the main 
implications  of  the  various  phases  of  joining  EMU.  Upon  EU  accession  and  before  joining  the 
exchange rate mechanism (ERM II), the new Member States are required to treat their exchange rate 
policies as a matter of common interest and pursue price stability as the primary objective of monetary 
policy. With respect to ERM II participation, there are no formal criteria to be met prior to the entry. 
Nevertheless,  a  successful  and  smooth  participation  in  the  mechanism  requires  that  major  policy 
adjustments - such as sound fiscal policy frameworks and price liberalisation - are undertaken before 
joining the mechanism. Depending on the monetary and exchange rate strategies in place, ERM II can 
help orient macroeconomic policies to stability and anchor inflation expectations. At the same time, the 
mechanism allows for a degree of flexibility, if needed, through the wide standard fluctuation band and 
the possibility of adjusting the central parity. Eventually, the countries are expected to join the euro 
area. Their readiness to adopt the euro will be examined on the basis of a deep and precise analysis 
of their performance with respect to the Maastricht convergence criteria. This examination will be done 
in  the  so-called  Convergence  Reports,  which  are  regularly  prepared  by  both  the  European 
Commission and the ECB. As you probably know, the 2004 Convergence Report has been published 
two days ago, including for the first time the ten new Member States. 
The process of monetary integration with the euro area is based on a number of general principles, 
which  are  defined  by  the  Treaty  and  other  key  documents.  One  principle  is  that  there  is  no  single 
trajectory towards the euro that can be identified and recommended to all new Member States at all 
times. This principle reflects the fact that the new Member States differ substantially with respect to the 
size and structure of their economies, the present state of their fundamentals, and the monetary and 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
exchange rate regimes that are currently in place. The wide diversity across the new Member States 
implies that the economic situations and strategies of countries will have to be assessed on a case-by-
case  basis.  Against  this  background,  it  is  natural  that  ERM  II  entry  and  the  preferred  length  of 
participation in the mechanism will differ across countries. In fact, three new Member States, namely 
Estonia, Lithuania and Slovenia, joined ERM II with effect from 28 June 2004, while others have not 
specified a date when they intend to join. Another key principle is the principle of equal treatment. This 
means  that  comparable  situations  and  cases  will  be  treated  in  a  comparable  manner,  both  across 
countries  and  over  time.  With  respect  to  the  examination  of  nominal  convergence  in  the  ECB 
Convergence  Report  2004,  this  implies  that  the  same  convergence  criteria  laid  down  in  the  Treaty 
have been applied as was the case in the past. Thus, no new criteria were added, while the existing 
criteria were not relaxed. 
The process of monetary integration with the euro area should be accompanied by overall consistent 
and  stability-oriented  economic  policies.  Moreover,  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and 
progress  in  structural  and  fiscal  reforms  are  also  essential  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  benefits  of 
EU enlargement. In my view, the most pressing challenges for the new Member States are to maintain 
price stability and to advance with fiscal consolidation. 
With  respect  to  price  stability,  the  new  Member  States  will  be  confronted  with  the  challenge  to 
complete the disinflation process and/or to contain increases in inflation rates in a controlled fashion, 
without substantial  adverse  effects on  inflation  expectations  and wage  developments.  Besides solid 
macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  and  prudent  wage  policies,  progress  with  structural  reforms  is 
conducive  to  price  stability.  With  respect  to  fiscal  consolidation,  it  is  clear  that  this  is  a  demanding 
challenge  for  most  of  the  new  Member  States,  as  they  are  confronted  with  competing  expenditure 
demands.  And  it  is  the  reason  why  policy-makers  have  to  design  and  implement  a  credible 
consolidation path based on durable and growth-enhancing structural reforms. 
Ladies and Gentleman. 
It  is  time  for  me  to  close  the  third  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference.  We  had  very  intensive  and 
inspiring discussions. While there are still a number of open questions and issues, I am sure that we 
will all go home with some new thoughts and ideas in our minds. 
Let me take the opportunity to thank the authors of the papers for their remarkable work. My thanks 
also are going to the discussants, chairpersons and participants for their personal contributions, which 
were  enlightening  and  ensured  that  this  conference  was  a  success.  Let  me  also  express  my  deep 
gratitude to all the staff of the ECB that has been involved in the organisation of the conference. 
Dear friends, I wish you all a safe trip back home. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
