Jens Thomsen: How does the individual member state design an appropriate 
stabilisation policy in a monetary union? 
Panel statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of 
Denmark, at the 3rd ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, 22 October 2004. 
 Having  pursued  a  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  for  many  years,  Denmark  has  gained  extensive 
experience in this area. The present central rate was fixed in January 1987. Some of this experience is 
also relevant in relation to the new EU member states’ participation in ERM II. In my contribution, I will 
focus not only on ERM II, but also on the broader question: how does the individual member state 
design an appropriate stabilisation policy in a monetary union? This means that the conclusions drawn 
will be applicable to both new and old EU member states. 
In EMU, there is obviously no national monetary policy. The national stabilisation policy must therefore 
be based on alternative instruments. 
ERM II is an integral part of the EMU process. For as long as the broad fluctuation band is utilised, 
monetary policy may still form part of a country’s stabilisation policy. However, it cannot stand alone. 
As I will describe, its impact will diminish as the date of EMU entry approaches. All new EU member 
states have stated that they want to be in ERM II for as short a period as possible. 
This means that fiscal and structural policies - the only national policy instruments in EMU - should 
already be appropriately designed within ERM II. This will ensure, among other things, that the terms 
of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact are  met  or are, at  least,  immediately  in  sight.  This  is a simple  but 
important point to always keep in mind. 
Denmark has decided to stabilise its exchange rate close to the central rate. On account of the high 
degree  of  convergence,  the  stability  of  the  Danish  krone  in  the  market,  and  the  sustained  stability-
oriented  economic  policy,  Denmark  participates  in  ERM  II  with  a  narrow  fluctuation  band  of 
+/−2.25 per cent. This band is, however, far from utilised. In other words, fiscal and structural policies 
are the only stabilisation-policy instruments available to Denmark - as will also be the case in EMU. 
This  means  that  the  exchange  rate  -  and  the  exchange  rate  alone  -  determines  the  interest-rate 
spread.  Intervention  in  the  foreign-exchange  market  is  also  an  option,  for  brief  periods  of  time,  to 
counter adverse exchange-rate movements. Intervention cannot stand alone, however. 
Organisationally,  this  also  implies  that  we  must  be  able  to  adjust  our  interest  rates  when  required, 
without being tied down by the meeting schedule of a monetary-policy committee. This is a well-known 
fact in the market and thus highly transparent. Alternatively, one could say that our monetary-policy 
committee convenes every day and as required. 
Central  bank  independence  is  a  prerequisite  in  this  respect.  Without  it,  the  implementation  of 
necessary measures can be endangered. 
We have a clear division of work regarding intra-marginal interventions. The Board of Governors, in 
collaboration with Market Operations, establishes a strategy based on current market conditions. The 
Board of Governors has access to real-time information on any interventions, but is not consulted in 
advance. Interventions within one day are never capped, but subject to ongoing assessment in order 
to  establish  whether  strategy  adjustments  are  called  for.  The  ECB  is  kept  informed  on  an  ongoing 
basis. 
In principle, one might ask whether the design of our stabilisation policy is appropriate? 
Theoretically, there are two arguments for acting as we do. 
Firstly, the institutions are designed to be in compliance with EMU participation and thus also with the 
provisions of the Treaty. At some future point in time we expect Denmark to enter EMU, and when it 
does, we will not have to alter our fiscal policy, since it is already based on government finances in 
surplus or close to balance. There is strong political support for this rule-bound division of labour in 
economic policy. The awarding of this year’s Nobel Prize in Economic Science demonstrates that the 
design of institutions is also considered to be of great theoretical importance. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
Secondly,  we  know  from  the  “impossible  trinity”  that  in  a  world  of  free  capital  movements,  it  is  not 
possible  to  set  interest  and  exchange  rates  independently  of  one  other.  The  central  bank  has  one 
instrument, and one instrument only, at its disposal: the short-term rate. Any attempts to stabilise the 
exchange rate while at the same time meeting other targets, are thus futile in theory. In practice, they 
spawn a number of problems which are aggravated the closer one seeks to stabilise the exchange 
rate. 
A  number  of  central  banks,  including  several  from  new  EU  member  states,  currently  base  their 
monetary policy on inflation targeting. In principle, the central bank seeks to approximately meet not 
only one, but two targets, an inflation target and an output-gap target, using just one instrument: the 
short-term rate. The reason that this is viable is that usually the targets work together. The problem in 
supplementing these targets with an exchange-rate target is that the need for internal stabilisation may 
easily conflict with the exchange-rate target. 
Spain formally continued its inflation targeting up to its EMU entry. This was, however, also a period in 
which  the  interest-rate  spread  to  Germany  progressively  narrowed,  and  never  widened,  while  fiscal 
policy was put in place. Meeting the convergence criteria was the central aim of the overall economic 
policy - irrespective of how monetary policy was classified. 
Theoretically, inflation targeting in ERM II presents an additional complication in that the impact of the 
national interest rate diminishes relative to domestic activity and future inflation rates as the date of 
EMU accession approaches. 
If the country is expected to enter EMU in, say, one year, the national interest rate will exist for only 
one  year.  The  closer  the  date  of  entry,  the  greater  the  interest-rate  changes  needed  to  influence 
activity. 
If the inflation-targeting country is expected to enter EMU with a specific exchange rate, there is, on 
the other hand, a risk of wide exchange-rate movements in the run up. With a known entry rate, the 
spot rate has to move in order to fulfil the interest-rate parity. 
This issue, trivial as it may seem, is rarely mentioned in the literature. 
This means that, in practice, new EMU members need to abandon inflation targeting well before EMU 
entry and rely on fiscal and structural policies. 
In Denmark’s experience, this is no hindrance to appropriate economic performance. 
Monetary policy is reserved for keeping the exchange rate stable and close to the central rate within 
ERM  II.  In  conjunction  with  sound  public  finances,  this  has  ensured  an  anchoring  of  inflationary 
expectations in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. 
We  have  used  structural  improvements  and  symmetric  fiscal  policy,  in  compliance  with  the 
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact, to achieve sound public finances. Our clear medium-
term objective is to reduce the government debt. 
The fiscal policy stance is determined annually in connection with the Finance Bill for the coming year 
and  allowing  for  the  expected  cyclical  development.  Discretionary  fiscal  policy  measures  are  rarely 
used in the course of the year and have typically included structural improvements. 
In the long term, the structural policy is most important. As the world keeps turning, structural reforms 
in principle never end. The most appropriate speed and sequence of reforms e.g. depend on whether 
the  output  gap  is  positive  or  negative.  This  makes  it  difficult  to  draw  a  clear  distinction  between 
structural and fiscal policy. 
In  international  terms,  including  countries  that  apply  best  practice  inflation  targeting,  Denmark  has 
seen very moderate volatility in inflation as well as output in recent years. We attribute this, in large 
measure, to the use of stabilisation policy as described above. In the 1970s and early 1980s, a very 
activist  fiscal  policy  was  pursued,  as  opposed  to  the  current  situation.  Our  government  debt  rose 
steeply and the exchange-rate policy was anything but consistent. In those years, Danish volatility was 
high by international standards. 
Danish experience thus speaks against fiscal as well as monetary fine-tuning of the economy. Efforts 
to stabilise the economy often end up rocking the boat. Our experience, in the main, corroborates the 
focus on structural economic factors theoretically established by Kydland and Prescott. 
I want to make one final point: 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
It is appropriate that drivers practise and qualify for a driver’s licence before getting behind the wheel. 
Similarly, it is appropriate that a country documents that it is ready for EMU prior to entry. Part of this 
documentation is ERM II membership 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
