Philipp M Hildebrand: From monetarism to the inflation forecast - 
30 years of Swiss monetary policy 
Public  lecture  by  Dr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the University of Berne, Berne, 23 November 2004. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, the Swiss National Bank, in 1974, was one of the 
first central banks to adopt a monetary policy with monetary aggregates as intermediate targets. The 
monetarist  phase  of  the  National  Bank  lasted  until  1999.  During  this  phase,  the  National  Bank 
repeatedly changed its monetary targets. In the course of time, it adopted an increasingly pragmatic 
monetary policy and paid more attention to the development of the exchange rate. In December 1999, 
the SNB introduced its current monetary policy concept, which uses an inflation forecast as the basis 
for monetary policy decisions.  
On  the  whole,  monetarist  ideas  had  a  positive  influence  on  Switzerland’s  monetary  policy.  They 
brought the realisation that price stability is important, thus furthering the process of disinflation in the 
1970s  and  1980s.  Moreover,  monetarism  caused  the  SNB  to  make  its  monetary  policy  more 
transparent and rule-based. The use of monetary aggregates as intermediate targets, however, was 
more  problematic.  With money  demand  proving  to  be  too  instable,  simply  controlling  money  supply 
growth was not sufficient to achieve price stability. In addition, the monetary situation of a small and 
open economy - like the Swiss economy - depends heavily on the development of the exchange rate. 
The  crisis  of  1978  and  the  overheating  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  showed  clearly  that  a  pragmatic 
monetary  policy  approach  that  takes  exchange  rate  developments  into  account  is  better  suited  to 
Switzerland.  
As in the monetarist phase, the National Bank today also considers price stability as the primary goal 
of  monetary  policy.  To  achieve  this  goal,  the  current  concept  provides  a  systematic  scheme  of 
analysis. The advantage of this concept (as compared with the monetarist strategy) is that it considers 
all factors which can influence the development of prices in the medium term and that it allows greater 
flexibility in the implementation. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
