Thomas Jordan: Structures of a new financial system 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Volkshochschule  Zürich,  University  of  Zurich,  Zurich,  15  April 
2010.  
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch).  
 Well-functioning  financial  systems  are  fundamental  for  long-term  economic  growth.  They 
enable capital to be allocated efficiently and facilitate trade in goods and services. However, 
financial systems also harbour major risks. The recent financial market crisis clearly revealed 
the vulnerability of our globally integrated financial system. Wrong turns taken in the past few 
years  together  with  government  rescue  measures  have  led  to  a  situation  that  is,  from  a 
liberal  perspective,  untenable.  All  this  underscores  the  urgent  need  to  make  financial 
systems  more  robust  and  to  minimise  the  risks  faced  by  governments  and  by  national 
economies as a whole.  
It will not be possible to banish crises forever, since we cannot be sure what the origins of 
the next crisis might be or when exactly it will occur. Building a more robust financial system 
therefore  represents  a  major  challenge.  The  key  role  that  banks  play  in  the  economy 
combined with their high level of vulnerability clearly underline the necessity of effective bank 
regulation. Greater stability and security, however, do not automatically mean less efficiency 
or growth. On the contrary, the creation of an intelligent and stabilising framework is a basic 
prerequisite  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  To  achieve  this,  systemic 
risks need to be more clearly identified and kept in check by means of better regulation. This 
involves, among other measures, the introduction of additional systemic capital and liquidity 
requirements,  countercyclical  buffers  and  provisions  regarding  risk  concentrations  in 
interbank  positions.  The  financial  markets,  for  their  part,  need  more  standardisation  and 
greater transparency. It is important, for example, that products are increasingly traded and 
settled through stock exchanges. Moreover, a market economy can only function efficiently if 
companies – including banks – can be allowed to fail and disappear from the market as a 
consequence of poor decision-making. The aim of such reforms is not to prevent banks from 
taking risks, but to ensure that, in future, the banks themselves fully bear the risks they take. 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
