José Manuel González-Páramo: Re-starting securitisation 
Keynote speech by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Association  for  Financial  Markets  in  Europe/European 
Science  Foundation  (ESF)  and  Information  Management  Network  Global  ABS  (Asset-
Backed Securities) 2010 Conference, London, 16 June 2010. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
I. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  in  London  to  participate  again  at  the  AFME/ESF  and  IMN 
Global  ABS  Conference.  Today,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  the 
restarting  of  the  ABS  markets,  in  the  light  of  the  important  role  that  it  should  play  from  a 
macro-financial point of view.  
More  precisely,  I  shall  first  outline  the  role  which  securitisation  should  play  in  the  financial 
system and why this role is important. Then, I shall assess in more detail the current situation 
of the securitisation markets. Finally, I would like to make some considerations on the way 
forward for the restarting of the ABS markets. In doing so, I shall assess what has been done 
and what still needs to be done to reach a sustained rebound of the securitisation markets.  
Current financial market conditions 
II. 
To  set  the  stage,  I  shall  refer  to  the  ECB’s  latest  Financial  Stability  Review,  published  on 
4 June, which analyses in detail the so-called large and complex banking groups (LCBGs), 
and  the  findings  of  which  may,  with  some  caution,  be  extended  to  the  euro  area  banking 
sector as a whole.  
Thus, we noted in our latest Financial Stability Review that many LCBGs from the euro area 
have  returned  to  a  modest  profitability  in  the  course  of  2009,  and  that  their  financial 
performance  has  strengthened  further  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  At  the  same  time,  de-
leveraging  has  continued,  while  banks  have  further  reduced  their  reliance  on  wholesale 
funding  in  favour  of  an  increased  share  of  more  stable  funding  sources,  such  as  retail 
customer deposits and equity.  
Notwithstanding  this  slightly  positive  note,  over  the  next  few  years  the  euro  area  banking 
sector will face large funding needs, as most of you are aware of. In particular, the 20 largest 
euro area banking groups have about EUR 800 billion of long-term debt outstanding that will 
need to be refinanced between May 2010 and end-2012. This figure represents almost half 
of their outstanding debt with a maturity of over one year.  
In addition, the need for banks to issue medium to long-term debt is likely to increase as a 
result of new regulatory requirements on stable funding ratios that would come into force at 
the end of 2012.  
Against this background, securitisation can potentially play a vital role, and thereby strongly 
support the financing of the economy, in two main respects:  
 
First, in order to mitigate the potential funding challenges that I have just mentioned, 
securitisation  may  contribute  to  the  broadening  of  the  funding  base  –  both  inter-
temporally and geographically –, by transforming illiquid assets into negotiable long-
term securities (even if these may not necessarily be very liquid). It may thus help to 
unblock credit supply constraints in an environment of continued de-leveraging by 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
 taking  regionally  or  sectorally  concentrated  credit  risk  off  bank  balance  sheet  and 
distributing it to a wider investor base.  
Second,  a  proper  use  of  financial  engineering  techniques,  such  as  securitisation, 
may provide a better match between the preferences of borrowers and investors in 
terms  of  cash  flow  structure,  type  of  interest  rate,  degree  of  risk  and  currency 
denomination. This is particularly relevant when the securitisation pool is composed 
of loans to borrowers who cannot have access to the capital markets on their own, 
i.e. households and Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs). In other words, 
securitisation may function as a bridge between these types of borrowers and those 
investors who cannot easily access these types of exposures otherwise.  
To  summarise,  if  the  ABS  markets  work  satisfactorily,  they  may  contribute  to  the 
completeness of the financial system by distributing the risks and returns associated with a 
large range of non-marketable financial assets to a more diversified set of holders, with at 
least an equal or better capacity to bear these risks. This can contribute to enhancing the 
efficiency of the economic system. This is why I believe that a rebound of the securitisation 
market  on  a  sounder  footing,  including  a  stable  issuance  activity  of  marketable  assets 
remains crucial from a macro-financial point of view.  
What is the current state of the securitisation markets?  
III. 
Of course, the state of the securitisation markets is connected with the general situation of 
financial  markets,  and  we  all  know  that  the  current  financial  environment  remains 
challenging. Financial markets had experienced some sort of improvement in 2009 and the 
early part of 2010. However, in early May adverse market dynamics took hold again across a 
broad range of financial markets, including several debt securities markets in the euro area, 
in  an  environment  of  diminishing  market  liquidity.  As  a  result,  most  funding  markets 
deteriorated rapidly.  
As you know, to help restore a normal market functioning again, the Governing Council of the 
ECB  decided  to  take  additional  non-standard  measures  on  9 May 2010,  including  the 
conduct of purchases of euro area public and private debt securities in secondary markets, 
the reactivation of fixed-rate full-allotment long-term refinancing operations (LTROs), and the 
resumption of US dollar liquidity-providing operations.  
Nevertheless, even abstracting from the impact of the adverse developments in the financial 
markets, the securitisation markets themselves have not satisfactorily developed in the last 
years,  both  in  terms  of  broadening  the  investors’  base  and  of  achieving  stable  issuance 
volumes. 
In both 2008 and 2009, the share of new issuances distributed in the market accounted for 1 
or  2  percent  of  all  new  issuance. This  is  of course  in sharp  contrast  with  the  percentages 
observed  in  the  years  preceding  the  crisis.  For  instance,  in  late  2006  and  the  first  half  of 
2007 1 or 2 percent was the share of retained (as opposed to distributed) issuance.  
Since securitisation techniques were nevertheless still used substantially in 2007 and 2008 
despite  the  lack  of  market  participants  being  able  or  willing  to  absorb  the  newly-issued 
securities, most of this paper ended up being used as collateral with central banks. In the 
case of the euro area, this process started off indeed already in 2007 and increased more 
significantly in 2008 when ABS constituted 28 percent of all assets being used as collateral 
with  the  Eurosystem.  This  share  decreased  moderately  to  23  percent  in  2009.  These 
developments  reflect  an  important  switch  in  the  business  model  of  securitisation,  from  the 
“originate-to-distribute” model up to the summer of 2007 to some form of “originate-to-repo” 
model. 
To  make  things  worse,  the  “originate-to-repo”  transactions  that  took  off  when  the  turmoil 
started in July 2007 have often little in common with the “originate-to-distribute” assets that 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
were marketed before mid-2007. Thus, the “originate-to-repo” securities do not aim at being 
attractive  to  investors,  but  serve  a  different  purpose,  namely  to  generate  collateral  buffers 
with the central bank. So, the significantly large volumes of retained issuance are effective 
indicators of the scale of the continuing dislocation of the ABS market and the vanishing of 
private markets.  
However,  it  should  be  obvious  to  everyone  that  the  issuance  of  ABS  only  to  serve  as 
collateral with central banks cannot be a sustainable strategy for the ABS market. In normal 
times central bank operations are intrinsically of a short-term nature and of a limited size, and 
are  designed  to  implement  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  By  contrast,  ABS  transactions 
backed by residential and commercial property loans have much longer maturities and must 
cover a very sizeable market. In other words, in normal times central banks tend to have a 
very  limited  involvement  in  financial  intermediation  and  only  private  investors  have  the 
capacity and the need to offer long-term funding to originators.  
What  are  the  more  recent  trends?  Some  developments  in  the  last  few  months  may  be 
interpreted as showing tentative signs of a recovery as new ABS issues were distributed and 
placed  with  private  investors  .  Moreover,  the  volume  of  placed  assets  during  the  first  five 
months of 2010 outpaced the combined placed volumes in 2008 and 2009.  
These  tentative  positive  signals  are  confirmed  by  the  European  ABS  Investor  Confidence 
Index by JP Morgan, which has remained in positive territory for the last nine months. Our 
own  Bank  Lending  Survey  indicates  that  for  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  banks  generally 
reported that their access to wholesale funding became easier.1 In addition, after a broadly 
neutral evaluation of true-sale securitisation access for corporate and housing loans in the 
fourth  quarter  of  2009,  banks  assessed  the  situation  as  significantly  more  positive,  in 
particular for the securitisation of housing loans. It should be noted, however, that this survey 
was conducted before the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis.  
While all these indications may suggest that demand for ABSs is re-emerging, we still need 
confirmation  from  the  data  over  the  next  months.  Moreover,  the  latter  developments 
represent  an  improvement  but  are  still  far  from  normal  market  conditions,  or  even  from 
suggesting that we may be moving towards such conditions. 
How do we bring back investors’ confidence?  
IV. 
Taking the stock of the latest information, one should recognise that euro area securitisation 
markets remain dysfunctional, mainly for demand-side related reasons. And, of course, the 
malfunctioning of the market has implications also for the supply-side.  
 
On the demand side, the investor base has been and remains severely eroded and 
many  earlier  active  investors,  such  as  SIVs  and  money  market  funds,  are  not 
expected to return to the market anytime soon. Europe in particular suffers from a 
lack of a significant real-money investor base that could step in.  
On  the  supply  side,  concomitantly,  the  profit  generating  potential  of  securitisation 
remains  insufficient,  since  spreads  for  various  ABS  still  exceed  the  break-even 
levels from the issuer’s perspective. At the current levels of spreads, securitisation 
does not make economic sense for originators in most cases. At the same time, it 
would  appear  that  current  yields,  with  some  exceptions,  are  not  attractive  to 
compensate for the perceived risks in the view of many investors.  
 Therefore, although there are some signs of improvement, the current situation in structured 
finance  continues  to  impose  market  funding  constraints  on  banks  and to  hamper  banks  in 
                                                 
1   See “The Euro Area Bank Lending Survey”, April 2010, ECB. 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
providing credit to the economy. In this sense, securitisation is still certainly unable to fulfil 
the objectives that I highlighted at the beginning of my speech. 
Going  forward,  the  key  question  is  therefore:  how  do  we  bring  back  investors  to  the 
securitisation  markets?  This  is  tantamount  to  asking:  how  can  investor  confidence  in 
securitisation be restored?  
I  believe  that  the  development  of  transparent,  comparable  and  simple  securitisation 
structures,  based  on  high  quality  standards  of  underlying  assets,  and  with  at  least  some 
market segments characterised by high liquidity, is a sine qua non condition for a return to 
self-sustaining securitisation markets.  
Indeed, investors need to be able to exercise the required due diligence and to assess the 
assets that are on offer, with the support of the credit rating agencies, which in turn should 
have  the  information  and  the  analytical  capacities  required  for  this  purpose.  This,  in  turn, 
calls  for  a  careful  definition  of  the  information  that  should  be  shared  among  market 
participants.  
The  issue  of  liquidity  is  even  more  complex  because  of  the  cumulative  nature  of  the 
conditions  underpinning  it.  Enhanced  secondary  market  liquidity  will  make  the  entrance  of 
new  investors  more  likely.  A  more  liquid  market  may  come  as  a  result  of  better  price 
disclosure,  standardisation  and  less  complex  structures.  However,  without  institutional 
investors, liquidity will not reappear. There is some circularity problem here since at the same 
time, it is more likely that institutional investors return to the market when market liquidity is 
proven  to  be  there  or  strongly  expected  to  be  back.  Finally,  less  sophisticated  and 
specialised  investors  may  also  enter  the  market,  but  this  would  require  an  even  more 
material  increase  in  the  simplicity,  standardisation  and  transparency  of  securitisation 
markets. 
The Eurosystem’s contribution to restoring the ABS markets 
V. 
Let me dwell on the requirement of enhanced transparency of the underlying asset pools. I 
would like to elaborate on the Eurosystem’s contribution to enhanced disclosure through its 
initiative to make loan-by-loan level data on ABS transactions widely available. Let me say 
from  the  start  that  this  initiative  alone  will  not  suffice  to  re-open  the  market,  but  it  would 
become  an  important  building  block  along  the  path  towards  standardisation,  simpler 
structures, and better post trade price transparency. 
As you will remember, in December 2009 the ECB launched a public consultation in order to 
gather  market  and  public  feedback  on  a  proposal  to  introduce  requirements  on  loan  level 
data  in  ABS  transactions  and  make  this  an  explicit  eligibility  criterion,  should  the  ABS  be 
used as collateral with the Eurosystem.  
This  initiative  may  trigger  a  structural  change  in  the  way  the  different  market  participants 
interact  within  the  securitisation  markets.  By  increasing  the  transparency,  availability  and 
quality of the information on the underlying assets, and by ensuring a regular updating of the 
information,  market  participants  will  have  a  sounder  base  on  which  to  build  valuation,  risk 
and surveillance models.  
The public consultation included six questions on the general advisability of the initiative as 
well as on technical details of the implementation. At the end of the consultation period on 
26 February 2010, 53 responses from different investors, market data vendors, credit rating 
agencies,  financial  service  providers,  audit  firms,  stock  exchanges,  law  firms,  public 
authorities, and central securities depositaries, had been received. The responses revealed a 
strong  support  from  market  participants,  mainly  because  of  its  potential  contribution  to 
increasing  transparency,  which  is  seen  as  an  essential  ingredient  for  more  informed  risk 
assessments and to restore weakened confidence in ABS markets. In addition, respondents 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2010
issued a number of recommendations to the Eurosystem regarding specific implementation 
aspects that should contribute to a smoother introduction of the loan by loan level data. 
From a timing perspective, the Governing Council of the ECB will assess during the autumn 
the results of the final technical preparatory phase that has already started, also taking into 
account  the  recommendations  put  forward  during  the  public  consultation,  before  deciding 
whether  to  proceed  with  the  final  phase  of  the  introduction  of  ABS  loan  by  loan  data 
requirements.  This  decision  is  envisaged  to  take  place  during  the  fall  2010.  In  case  it  is 
decided to proceed, a twelve-month phasing-in period – in line with the feedback received in 
the public consultation – would be sufficient for originators and issuers to adapt their systems 
to provide the required data.  
It  should  be  noted  that the  Eurosystem’s  initiative  on  loan  level  data  is  in  line  with  certain 
amendments  introduced  by  the  Second  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (“CRD II”)  that  will 
enter into effect on 1 January 2011. Amongst other things, CRD II provides that the sponsor 
or the originator must ensure that investors and prospective investors have readily available 
access  to  all  materially  relevant  data  on  credit  quality  and  performance  of  the  individual 
underlying  exposures.  Thus,  CRD  II  views  information  on  individual  underlying  exposures 
(i.e.  loan-level  data)  as  necessary  for  investors  to  be  able  to  make  reasoned  investment 
decisions. 
However, I want also to make clear that, along with policy initiatives, the structured finance 
industry has an essential role in restarting the European securitization markets and setting 
them  on  a  sounder  footing.  The  industry  cannot  realistically  expect  that  the  return  of 
investors’  confidence  will  be  just  a  question  of  time  and  implementing  regulatory  action. 
Likewise,  certainly  confidence  will  not  be  restored  by  introducing  minor  changes  to  the 
instruments and the functioning of the markets. On the contrary, confidence in securitization 
will return among private as well as public stakeholders only if market participants and their 
associations are able to materially enhance market standards and practices.  
Let  me  stress  also  that  the  industry  cannot  expect  public  authorities  to  accept  merely 
cosmetic  changes  to  the  instruments  and  the  markets.  This,  for  example,  applies  to  the 
Eurosystem’s collateral framework. In a context in which outstanding ABS represent almost 
25% of the total collateral deposited by counterparties with the Eurosystem, it is imperative 
for  the  Eurosystem  to  be  prepared  to  perform  a  proper  assessment  of  risks  whenever 
needed.  In  this  context,  loan-level  information  will  enable  ratings  agencies  to  produce 
meaningful surveillance reports, which could in turn help the Eurosystem to diligently assess 
the risks implied by the collateral accepted in our refinancing operations. 
Industry-led initiatives aimed at revitalising the European securitisation market are inspired 
by  high  level  principles,  which  typically  meet  immediate  consensus.  However,  when  these 
principles  are  transposed  into  specific  provisions  in  some  market  convention,  consensus 
becomes less easy to reach. In fact, aligning all the stakeholders’ incentives often proves to 
be difficult and there is the risk of only reaching a very low minimum common denominator. 
Certainly, this would not be sufficient to win back the confidence of public and private players 
in securitization. I therefore invite the industry to continue and to strengthen its efforts in this 
vital area of work. 
Concluding remarks  
VI. 
Let me conclude by saying that, if managed in good order, securitisation should be a welfare-
improving tool, because value is created by secured funding that is correctly structured and 
allows  to  adequately  distribute  financing  and  funding,  and  the  related  risks  among 
households,  enterprises,  banks  and  investors.  When  it  works  properly,  securitisation  may 
represent  a  significant  step  towards  more  complete  credit  markets,  thereby  contributing  to 
enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  economic  system.  The  revival  of  securitisation  markets  is 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 5
needed in many countries to support the provision of credit to the real economy, particularly 
to households and small business.  
While it is essential to define new market standards in terms of simplicity and transparency, 
more actions may be needed to re-start the securitisation market. There does not seem to be 
one single and simple solution that can unlock the securitisation market. This is natural since 
structured  finance  is  a  combination  of  manifold  features  such  as  different  asset  types,  a 
variety of interest rate products with diverse maturity profiles and structures, and a variety of 
legal regimes and market arrangements. Thus, restoring the securitisation markets requires 
a combination of initiatives, both from the private and the public sector.  
The  Eurosystem  is  contributing,  first  of  all,  by  accepting  structured  finance  assets  as 
collateral.  This  proved  and  still  proves  a  great  support  to  this  market  segment  during  the 
crisis, as it helped and continues to help to avoid a sudden and disruptive unavailability of 
funding to originators of ABS. Second, as mentioned earlier, by introducing a loan level data 
requirement  to  our  set  of  eligibility  criteria,  we  may  contribute  to  increasing  the  disclosure 
standards  for  the  market  at  large.  However,  more  needs  to  be  done,  as  many  of  those 
required steps, for example enhancing secondary market liquidity, go beyond the scope for 
direct action by the Eurosystem.  
Looking ahead, a self-sustained revival of the ABS market requires fundamental changes. It 
is high time to raise to the challenges of transparency, standardisation and product simplicity. 
This is where the industry has to step up its efforts in order to help decisively in restoring 
confidence in the securitisation markets. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2010
