Caleb M Fundanga: Innovation for leadership excellency 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Eastern  and 
Southern  African  Management  Institute  (ESAMI)  launch  of  MBA  Alumni  Zambia  Chapter, 
Lusaka, 12 February 2010.  
 The Eastern and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI) Director General, 
Prof. Bonnard Mwape; 
The President, ESAMI MBA Alumni Zambia Chapter, Mr. Christopher Mulenga; 
The Ecobank Zambia Limited Managing Director, Mrs Charity Lumpa; 
ESAMI Alumni; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  officiate  at  the  launch  of  the  ESAMI  MBA  Alumni  Zambia 
Chapter. I wish to take this opportunity to welcome Prof. Bonnard Mwape and other ESAMI 
staff that have travelled from Arusha to come and witness this important occasion.  
I  am  particularly  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  launch  because  my  first  interaction  with  the 
ESAMI MBA alumni members was during the recent summer school event held in Arusha, 
Tanzania, where I was invited to present a paper on “The  Effects of the Global Economic 
Crisis on Zambia”. Indeed my memories of that lively interaction are still very fresh and that is 
why I graciously accepted to officiate at this function when I received the invitation from the 
President of the association.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  allow  me  to  congratulate  the  President  and  his  team  for  this 
excellent  initiative  of  bringing  together  individuals  with  a  common  academic  background 
under the Alumni umbrella. I am informed that one of the objectives of the Association is to 
utilise  the  acquired  scholarly  knowledge  and  experience  to  add  value  to  society  through 
leadership in various projects and initiatives.  
I know that alumni associations world over have existed for centuries and most of them have 
one basic principle, that of benefiting members wherever they may be and for free. However 
I am told that your association other than just carryout activities for the benefit of members 
will  go  a  step  further  to  do  benevolent  activities  for  the  benefit  of  society  at  large.  This  is 
commendable and I am looking forward to see what initiatives you have outlined to advance 
welfare in our society.  
Mr President, the theme for this launch this evening “Innovation for Leadership Excellency” 
is indeed very timely and appropriate to the norms and beliefs that I am told your association 
espouses. It is innovations such as yours that gives us the comfort that you are indeed giving 
back to society following the huge resources that were invested in making it possible for you 
to  acquire  this  very  important  qualification  the  Masters  in  Business  Administration  from 
ESAMI.  
You  have  been  schooled  as  business  managers  and  therefore  it  is  inevitable  that  what  is 
expected of you is nothing short of leadership excellence. We shall all be looking up to you to 
offer  solutions  to  the  business  and  economic  challenges  that  your  institutions  and  the 
economy as a whole are faced with.  
As some of you may recall, during my presentation in Arusha, I did indicate that our economy 
had  shown  some  resilience  in  the  midst  of  the  global  economic  crisis.  I  am  delighted  to 
inform  you  that  following  the  presentation,  we  have  seen  further  improvements  in 
macroeconomic indicators with GDP growth for 2009 estimated at 6.3% while inflation edged 
downwards to 9.9% in December 2009 and 9.6% at end January 2010. The exchange rate of 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 1
the  Kwacha  against  major  international  currencies  has  also  shown  some  stability  in  the 
recent  months.  This  is  no  mean  achievement  and  credit  must  go  the  Government  for 
providing a stable macroeconomic environment.  
However,  the  recent  crisis  has  exposed  clear  gaps  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  order  to 
create wealth and reduce the high levels of poverty in our country. There is need to have 
innovative  solutions  to  the  problems  that  our  economy  faces  today.  These  innovative 
solutions  are  expected  to  come  from  various  stakeholders  including  associations  such  as 
yours. For us to make a significant dent on poverty, the economy should record growth rates 
of 8% and above. This can only be achieved by innovation and competitiveness on the world 
market.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  despite  the  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  we  have  not 
reaped full benefits from the international trade arena. There is need for Zambian products to 
penetrate  into  various  markets  such  as  the  USA  under  the  Africa  Growth  and  Opportunity 
Act,  (AGOA)  the  European  Union  under  the  Everything  but  Arms  Initiative,  as  well  the 
Chinese,  Canadian  and  other  markets.  Access  into  the  regional  markets  through  regional 
arrangements such as COMESA and SADC should also be promoted. We also need to take 
full  advantage  and  actively  participate  in  the  manufacturing  sector  through  the  established 
Multi-facility Economic Zones (MFEZ).  
As  educated  and  hard  working  Zambians  with  MBAs,  it  is  imperative  that  you  are  able  to 
apply some of the relevant skills and knowledge gained in your studies to everyday situations 
in  businesses.  The  challenge  is  for  you  to  steer  your  organisations  and  businesses  to 
success  and  to  progress  in  a  way  that  will  lead  to  economic  advancement  of  the  country. 
That  in  my  view  is  what  “Innovation  for  Leadership  Excellency”  means.  As  educated 
Zambians, we need to offer business solutions where there are none. I am happy that today 
we are witnessing the launch of this association whose, among other objectives is to offer 
business solutions.  
Mr President, allow me as I conclude to advise you and your new association to ensure that 
all members demonstrate high ethical standards and values in your businesses as well as 
places of work at all times. I urge all of you gathered here today to take ethics seriously in 
order  to  enhance  efficient  and  effective  delivery  of  services.  A  robust  and  strong  level  of 
ethics  can  be  achieved  by  providing  ethics  training  and  sensitisation  as  a  component  of 
continuous professional development. Although you are well qualified and are competent in 
your respective fields, it is vital that you have continuous training including advancement in 
ethical knowledge. Equally there is need to promote and ensure that your members exercise 
high levels of Integrity in whatever they do. As a country, we need professionals with high 
levels of social and moral awareness so that all of us are aware of the moral obligations and 
potential impact of our thinking, decisions and actions. We need to be good role models for 
others  in  behaviour,  attitude  and  relationships.  Let  us  endeavour  to  act  in  a  way  that  is 
professional and that retains the confidence of others at all times.  
With these few remarks, it is now my honour and privilege to declare the ESAMI MBA Alumni 
Association Zambia Chapter officially launched.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2010
