Caleb M Fundanga: Improving school infrastructure in Zambia 
Remarks  by  Mr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Handover 
Ceremony of computers to Mumbwa High School, Mumbwa, 4 February 2010. 
 The Board Chairperson, Mr Gracious Hamatala  
Board Members Present  
The PTA Chairperson, Mr Mwila Kabange  
The Headmaster, Mr Kizito Kalonga  
Distinguished Teachers  
Students  
Members of the Press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It is an honour and privilege for me to be with you today as the Bank of Zambia makes this 
humble donation of 5 computers to Mumbwa High School. I am also glad because in some 
small way we are making a contribution towards ensuring a brighter future for the students.  
Chairpersons,  I  am  informed  about  the  numerous  challenges  and  difficulties,  the  school 
continues to face in its quest to produce high quality education to students. For instance, I 
am aware that there is a critical low level of books compared to the population of students in 
the  school.  Further,  having  been  established  40  years  ago,  the  School’s  infrastructure 
urgently needs to be rehabilitated. The refurbishment of infrastructure is not an easy task but 
in the able leadership of the Board Chairperson, I have no doubt that a solution will be found 
in good time. As we grapple with the ways and means of improving the school infrastructure, 
let me reiterate that the school need to maintain and protect the little infrastructure available. 
It  is  of  paramount  importance  that  the  school  put  in  place  measures  to  avert  rampant 
vandalism.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me also mention here that the challenges I have just outlined are 
not  only  common  to  Mumbwa  High  School,  but  are  experienced  in  many  Government 
schools. We also realize that the Government has limited resources and cannot attend to the 
problems  of  every  school  in  the  country  at  one  time.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Bank  of 
Zambia has continued to donate used computers to several schools around the country. In 
2009, the Bank donated a total of 60 computers to various schools including Mumbwa High 
School, David Kaunda Technical High School, Information and Communications Technology 
Ladders, and St Francis of Assisi in Lusaka. We are hoping that through these donations the 
beneficiary  schools  will  sustain  and  improve  the  academic  performance  while  bridging  the 
digital divide.  
Further, a number of schools including our own Mumbwa High School do not have internet 
access to enable teachers carry out their research activities. In order to improve performance 
in  class,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  enhance  the  capacity  of  our  teachers.  We  must 
recognise  that  computers  alone  are  not  magic  and  neither  should  they  replace  chalk  and 
blackboards,  but  they  should  and  can  be  used  as  a  tool  to  aid  learning.  Providing  more 
computers  at  schools  will  do  little  without  providing  the  tools  that  enhance  teaching  and 
research like internet. It is also pertinent that teachers obtain quality and professional training 
to  harness  and  effectively  utilise  computers.  I  therefore  urge  you  to  consider  enhancing 
computer literacy amongst your staff.  
In an information age, knowledge and effective use of computers along with sound education 
will be the cornerstone of a vibrant, modern society. This is why our teachers are absolutely 
critical  to  the  future  of  our  economy.  I  have  no  doubt  that  supporting  our  schools  in  the 
manner that the Bank of Zambia is doing today will lead to stronger motivation and morale 
amongst our students and teachers alike. I am certain that we all desire a country where our 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 1
teachers  and  students  are  proficient  in  using  computers  and  extract  immense  value  from 
them. This should be the vision that we should all aspire.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, In conclusion, I would like to urge all students present here today 
take an interest in using computers. Computers will assist you in your studies and make your 
lessons  more  effective,  easier  and  enjoyable  but  they  will  not  automatically  make  you  a 
genius.  The  computer  will  open  doors  to  communication,  research  and  opportunities. 
Remember that the goal of computer literacy is for the user to become an explorer, and an 
active seeker of information which I hope you will be, with this donation. Seize what you have 
been  bestowed  with  today.  Guard  against  vandalism  and  use  the  computer  facilities  to 
ensure a brighter future for yourselves. This is important because in future while computer 
knowledge will perhaps not immediately get you a job, it will ensure that you are one step 
closer to being employed.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I also recognize the efforts of the former Students Association who 
have been soliciting for donations from various organizations. As former students we all have 
the responsibility of helping the school that has played a key part to what you are today. Let 
us continue to support our beloved school.  
I thank you. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 2
