José Manuel González-Páramo: Globalisation, international financial 
integration and the financial crisis – the future of European and 
international financial market regulation and supervision 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Institute  of  International  and  European  Affairs,  Dublin, 
19 February 2010. 
 Introduction1  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Institute  of  International  and  European  Affairs  for  organising  this 
conference  and  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished 
audience. I am particularly glad to be able to participate in the Institute’s series of speeches 
dedicated to the theme of “Fixing finance”. Both the prominence of the subject and the high 
quality  of  past  contributions  have  made  this  series  of  speeches  an  important  source  of 
interesting  ideas  and  proposals  on  how  to  render  our  financial  systems  more  stable  and 
resilient.  
Following  the  nature  and  objective  of  the  series,  I  will  dedicate  part  of  my  address  to  the 
issue  of  the  future  framework  for  European  and  international  financial  market  supervision 
and,  in  particular,  to  the  role  of  the  ECB  in  macroprudential  supervision  in  the  European 
Union,  but  first  let  me  briefly  discuss  the  relationship  between  international  financial 
integration and the financial crisis. 
intense 
International financial integration and the financial crisis  
Over  the  past  decade  or  so,  financial  crises  seem  to  have  become  more  frequent  and 
perhaps more disruptive than in the past. They also seem to propagate more rapidly. This 
experience  has  spurred 
in 
understanding the link between financial integration and crises, and in better assessing the 
merits of financial integration in general.  
The  debate  on 
uncontroversial:  
• 
interest  among  academics  and  policy-makers 
One  extreme  opinion  sustains  that  integrated  financial  systems  improve  the 
allocation of productive resources, foster entrepreneurship and innovation, enhance 
market discipline, and help countries to insure against macroeconomic fluctuations.  
At the other extreme, it is argued that the free flow of capital widens the wealth gap 
between rich and poor countries and exposes domestic financial systems to the risk 
of instability.2  
is  certainly  not 
the  benefits  of 
international 
integration 
financial 
 More recently, the financial crisis of 2007–08 and its aftermath have shown that increased 
geographical  interconnection  among  financial  markets  and  the  deepening  of  cross-market 
integration,  when  coupled  with  the  under-regulation  of  securitisation  and  other  banking 
activities  as  well  as  with  significant  complexity  in  the  design  of  financial  instruments,  may 
I am grateful to Frank Dierick, Alex Popov and Marco Protopapa for valuable inputs. 
                                                 
1  
2   Fecht,  F.,  Grüner,  H.  and  Hartmann,  P.,  and  M.  Lo  Duca,  2009.  “Financial  globalization  and  stability”,  in 
Evanoff,  D.,  Hoelscher,  D.,  and  G.  Kaufman  (eds.),  Globalization  and  Systemic  Risk  (World  Scientific 
Publishers), 53–84. 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 1
contribute to undermine market efficiency, fuel systemic risk and exacerbate the cross-border 
transmission of financial shocks.  
Pros and cons of financial integration  
In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  debate  in  policy  and  academic  circles  on  how  to  enhance  the 
resilience of the global financial system has gained momentum, while retaining the benefits 
of free, integrated, and competitive financial markets. Indeed, it is important not to forget that 
financial  integration  can  potentially  yield  many  benefits  to  our  economies,  particularly  by 
rendering them more stable and resilient.  
Indeed,  one  key  channel  through  which  financial  integration  improves  the  resilience  of  the 
global financial system is risk sharing.  
Academic  research  has  established  beyond  doubt  that  financial  openness  enhances  both 
consumption  and  income  risk-sharing,  and  reduces  volatility  of  consumption  growth.3  The 
same is true for banking integration, which has been shown to lead to more synchronised 
business  cycles  (as  measured  by  GDP,  employment,  and  income  growth)  at  the  country 
level, the evidence of which stems from both Europe and the US.4  
In  general,  improved  risk-sharing  opportunities  allow  economic  agents  to  smooth  their 
consumption  and  investment  patterns  better  over  time.  And  while  this  is  mostly  true  for 
developing countries, the risk-sharing provided by financial integration and increased foreign 
capital flows have also benefited relatively developed countries, for which the integration of 
the central and east European countries since 1989 has served as a prime example.  
Besides, improved risk-sharing enhances in turn the ability of countries to specialize in their 
most productive sectors, leading to increased economic efficiency.5  
Furthermore, pre-crisis research had suggested that the cross-border diversification of large 
banks improves the soundness of the banking system by making individual bank failures less 
likely.  On  a  related  issue,  we  should  recall  that  a  primary  role  of  interbank  markets  is  to 
provide banks with an efficient risk-sharing tool.  
Another  channel  through  which  financial  integration  improves  macroeconomic  stability  is 
allocative efficiency and economic diversification. Cross-border banking, for instance, tends 
to improve overall economic performance by ensuring that productive capital is channelled 
towards  the  most  efficient  firms,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  of  crises  stemming  from  the 
mispricing of investment risk.6  
Financial  integration  in  general  assists  domestic  financial  systems  in  allocating  resources 
across industrial sectors in a way which improves the overall diversification of the economy 
and  lowers  its  volatility.  As  a  result,  an  optimally  diversified  economy  is  less  prone  to 
recessions, and so its real sector responds less to the same shock than an economy which 
relies on just a few sectors.7 While not directly, this result gives some grounds to one popular 
                                                 
3   Bekaert,  G.,  Harvey,  C.,  and  C.  Lundblad,  2006.  “Growth  volatility  and  financial  liberalization.”  Journal  of 
International Money and Finance 25, 370–403. 
4   Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Papaioannou, E., and Jose-Luis Peydro, 2009. “Financial integration and business cycle 
synchronization”, NBER Working paper 14887; Morgan, D., Rime, B., and P. Strahan, 2004. “Bank integration 
and state business cycles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1555–1585. 
5   Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., and O. Yosha, 2003. “Risk sharing and industrial specialization: Regional 
and international evidence.” American Economic Review 93, 903–918. 
6   Giannetti, M., and S. Ongena, 2009. “Financial integration and firm performance: Evidence from foreign bank 
entry in emerging markets.” Review of Finance 13, 181–223. 
7   Manganelli, S., and A. Popov, 2010. “Financial markets, diversification, and allocative efficiency: International 
evidence.” ECB Working paper (forthcoming). 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2010
Does financial integration increase the likelihood of a financial crisis?  
Does integration exacerbate the impact of a financial crisis?  
claim  these  days,  namely  that  countries  with  excessively  reliance  on  specific  sectors 
(whether the construction sector or the financial industry) may suffer more during large-scale 
economic crises.  
So much about the stabilising effects of financial integration. However, the recent crisis has 
also sharpened our understanding of the destabilising potential of financial integration. Two 
separate questions beg for an answer in this regard:  
• 
• 
The crisis has added to our knowledge of the circumstances under which the answer to both 
questions is “yes”:  
First, while financial integration is not a destabilizing force per se, stability risks may arise if 
the  driving  forces  underlying  stronger  international  financial  integration  reflect  global 
economic  imbalances.  It  is  reasonable  to  argue  that  the  pre-crisis  boom  in  US  real  estate 
and securitisation markets reflected to some extent high foreign demand for safe US assets 
resulting from “excess world savings” in the context of persistent global imbalances.  
Consequently, foreign asset demand not only pushed down the US risk-free interest rate, but 
also compressed the risk premia on risky assets. The low cost of financing fostered in turn an 
increase in the level of leverage of the domestic financial sector which exacerbated systemic 
risk.8 This interpretation of the events makes an important point, namely that increasing the 
stability  of  the  global  financial  system  should  not  be  done  by  pushing  back  financial 
globalization, but by first addressing the problem of the global imbalances.  
A  second  example  of  the  nuances  involved  in  assessing  the  destabilising  potential  of 
financial integration is banking integration. While in principle it is associated with enhanced 
efficiency,  certain  circumstances,  such  as  regulatory  arbitrage  and  lack  of  transparency  in 
transactions, can exacerbate information problems associated with cross-border banking and 
lead to misaligned incentives, excessive risk-taking, and underestimating the social cost of 
contagion.  
It  has  also  been  observed  that,  while  banking  integration  benefits  efficient  firms  through 
lower  cost  of  external  finance,  very  rapid  integration  induces  firms  to  take  on  excessive 
leverage, exacerbating the effect of financial crises on the corporate sector.  
Finally,  in  the  context  of  this  crisis,  cross-border  banking  integration  has  been  associated 
with the transmission of financial distress from banks’ balance sheets to the corporate sector 
of countries which were not the origins of the shock.9 However, this effect has mostly worked 
through  banks  which  relied  predominantly  on  wholesale  funding,  rather  than  on  a  strong 
deposit base.10  
And so again, we are left to ponder over a subtle point: it is not integration per se that is to 
blame for financial instability and its impact on the real economy, but lack of transparency, 
wrong incentives, sub-optimal regulation, and certain flawed banking business models – all 
of which may, but certainly must not necessarily accompany financial integration.  
                                                 
8   Caballero,  R.,  and  A. Krishnamurthy,  2009.  “Global  imbalances  and  financial  fragility.”  American  Economic 
Review 99, 584–588. 
9   Popov, A., and G. Udell, 2010. “Cross-border banking and the international transmission of financial distress 
during the crisis of 2007-08.” ECB working paper (forthcoming). 
10   Puri,  M.,  Rochol,  J.,  and  S.  Steffen,  2009.  “The  impact of  the  U.S.  financial  crisis  on  global  retail  lending.” 
Duke University working paper. 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 3
Given  this  picture,  it  is  clear  that  the  challenge  of  the  day  is  how  to  strengthen  financial 
stability  without  reducing  long-term  growth.  The  current  academic  and  policy  debate  has 
already given us some guidance as to which measures could serve this purpose best.  
Among  the  critical  issues  under  consideration,  I  would  like  to  mention:  (1)  shortening 
securitization  chains  and  making 
(2)  promoting  greater 
standardisation  of  the  various  credit  risk  transfer  instruments;  (3)  moving  over-the-counter 
derivatives  trading  –  in  particular  that  of  credit  default  swap  markets  –  to  central  clearing 
counterparties; (4) demanding greater transparency of the assets, liquidity and leverage of 
non-bank  financial  intermediaries;  and  (5)  improving  frameworks  for  the  resolution  and  re-
capitalisation of large cross-border financial groups. 
The  ongoing  reforms  of  supervisory  and  regulatory  institutions,  both  at  the  European  and 
international level, are one vital step in this direction. 
them  more 
transparent; 
Policy responses to increased international financial integration  
In response to the extraordinary global impact of the financial crisis, the G20 has forcefully 
taken the leadership in advancing the agenda for reforming the international regulatory and 
supervisory framework. In an unprecedented way, the G20 has become the global forum for 
international  coordination  and  has  agreed  on  a  broad  set  of  measures  to  be  followed  by 
national authorities and international standard setters.  
In  order  to  further  advance  the  process,  the  newly  established  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB)  has  been  entrusted  with  the  task  of  overseeing  concrete  regulatory  steps  and 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  reform  agenda.  The  participation  of  the  main 
international  fora  and  institutions  –  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  Bank  of 
International Settlements (BIS) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO) – in the FSB is also proving instrumental in ensuring cross-sectoral coordination.  
International coordination cannot be dispensed with when dealing with the additional layers 
of  complexity  posed  by  the  modern  integrated  financial  system.  Indeed,  the  decision  to 
switch towards the enlarged composition of the G20 (as opposed to the G7) and the parallel 
broader country representation in the FSB are themselves an acknowledgement of the forces 
of globalisation and financial integration. It can be safely argued that the current framework 
for decision-making at a global level explicitly recognises the fundamental role played by new 
countries  and  markets  in  the  global  economy  as  well  as  the  existence  of  a  complex,  if 
somewhat fragile, web of interconnections between economies, markets and institutions.  
The  challenges  posed  by  a  globally  integrated  financial  system  and  the  ensuing  need  for 
higher international coordination are therefore well recognised. The establishment of colleges 
of supervisors for all major cross-border financial institutions is a clear instance of enhanced 
co-operation among international authorities. In order to ensure international harmonisation, 
the FSB is also developing a system of peer reviews among member countries. These will 
comprise both single-country and thematic reviews to assess progress and convergence in 
the implementation of international financial standards and of policies agreed in the FSB.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  thrust  of  the  banking  reform  –  in  itself  a  major  overhaul  of  the 
prudential framework – put forward by the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision (BCBS), 
under the aegis of the G20. The Basel Committee has agreed on a package of measures 
which aim at increasing the resilience, safety and soundness of the banking system in a way 
consistent with long-term economic growth, without hampering the functioning of the market 
and the pending economic recovery.  
• 
First  and  foremost,  the  Basel  Committee  proposals  will  significantly  raise  quality, 
quantity,  consistency  and  transparency  of  capital,  to  ensure  permanent  higher 
capacity  to  withstand  losses.  A  common  international  definition  of  capital  and 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2010
appropriate  disclosure  of  its  components  will  contribute  to  increased  transparency 
and comparability.  
Second, in addition to a revised treatment of the trading book and securitisations, 
capital requirements for counterparty credit risk exposures arising from derivatives, 
repos  and  securities  financing  activities  will  be  introduced,  as  well  as  parallel 
incentives for the central clearing of over-the-counter derivatives.  
Third,  a  non  risk-based 
requirements and help to curb excessive balance sheet growth.  
Fourth,  a  framework  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers  above  the  minimum 
requirement coupled with more forward-looking provisioning rules will contribute to 
dampen  rather  than  amplify  the  financial  and  credit  cycles:  banks  will  adjust  their 
capital in such a way that capital is built up in good times and drawn upon in times of 
stress.  
Fifth, a harmonised treatment for liquidity risk will be introduced, requiring banks to 
hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to withstand episodes of financial stress. 
leverage  ratio  will  supplement  risk-based  capital 
    These proposals, currently under consultation, will be the object of an extensive assessment 
as  regard  their  impact  on  both  the  banking  sector  and  the  broader  economy.  This 
assessment should result in appropriately calibrated global standards, which will promote a 
more sustainable trade-off between financial stability and balanced long-term growth.  
Beyond the prudential framework, the relevant organisations are actively conducting work in 
other crucial areas where co-ordination remains key, most notably: (1) the development of a 
framework  for  macro-prudential  supervision,  (2)  devising  effective  mechanisms  to  address 
the moral hazard problem and the risks posed by “too big to fail” institutions, and (3) legal 
regimes to allow an ordered resolution of complex financial institutions. 
The  global  financial  crisis  requires  a  global  response  and  the  recent  initiatives  I  just 
mentioned are clear illustrations of this. At the same time, I believe that in Europe we have to 
go much further in our response, not in the least because the European countries are much 
more interlinked with each other than with the rest of the world. Economically, financially and 
institutionally  the  setting  is indeed very  different,  since  it  is  most  clearly  epitomised  by  the 
presence of the Single Market and the single currency.  
Fortunately,  policy  makers  in  Europe  quickly  realised  that  there  was  an  urgent  need  for 
quick, bold and coordinated responses. I want to single out two very important initiatives in 
this respect: 
• 
The adoption of the ECOFIN roadmap of 20 October 2009 on financial supervision, 
stability and regulation.  
The  proposals  for  a  new  supervisory  framework  in  the  EU  based  on  the 
recommendations  by  the  so-called  de  Larosière  Group  which  were  published  in 
September last year.11  
 The ECOFIN roadmap is an ambitious set of policy priorities adopted by the Council in the 
wake of the financial crisis, with the aim of strengthening financial supervision and regulation 
in the EU. The international initiatives I mentioned earlier fit well into the framework implied 
by  the  roadmap,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  latter  goes  significantly  further.  For  example, 
regarding the issue of the colleges of supervisors that I mentioned earlier, the Committee of 
European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS)  is  additionally  developing  common  operational 
                                                 
11   de  Larosière  Group, 2009, “Report of the  High Level Group on Financial Supervision in the UE chaired by 
Jacques de Larosière”, February. 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 5
guidelines and a common risk methodology. Indeed, in a single banking market, a common 
approach is a necessity to avoid inconsistencies and regulatory arbitrage.  
A mandate for financial stability for central banks  
A very important component of the roadmap is the revision of the EU supervisory framework 
covering both the micro and macro dimensions. The extraordinary nature and consequences 
of  the  global  financial  crisis  have  demonstrated  the  need  for  upgrading  the  regulatory 
framework.  A  broad  consensus  has  arisen  in  favour  of  a  macro-prudential  orientation  of 
supervision. 
Macro-prudential  oversight  focuses  on  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  involves  the 
monitoring, assessment and mitigation of systemic risk. Crucially, it recognises that systemic 
risk  is  partly  endogenous  as  it  depends  on  the collective  behaviour  of  financial  institutions 
and their inter-connectedness, as well as the interaction between financial markets and the 
macro-economy.  Macro-prudential  policies  aim  to  mitigate  the  build  up  of  financial 
imbalances and ensure that the financial system is able to withstand their unwinding and be 
resilient to shocks. 
In the EU, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be in charge of macro-prudential 
surveillance.  Its  task  will  be  to  identify  and  assess  risks to  the  stability  of  the  EU  financial 
system  and  issue  risk  warnings  when  the  identified  risks  appear  to  be  significant.  When 
appropriate, the ESRB could complement its risk warnings with policy recommendations for 
remedial action. 
As stressed by the de Larosière Group, central banks are especially well suited to take up 
the  main  responsibility  for  macro-prudential  supervision  because  of  their  expertise  and 
analytical capabilities in the fields of monetary and financial stability analysis, and because of 
their closeness to the money and financial markets.  
The  tight  interlinkages  between  the  financial  system  and  the  macro-economy  provide  a 
further rationale for entrusting the central banks with the responsibility for macro-prudential 
analysis and the formulation of relevant policy recommendations. Macro-prudential policies 
will help reduce the contribution to pro-cyclicality of various factors in the financial system. 
Since  policies  will  involve  regulatory  and  supervisory  action  to  a  considerable  extent,  they 
may  take  the  form  of  general  guidelines  or  concrete  recommendations  relating  to  the 
calibration of prudential tools. 
In the specific case of the EU, the ECB will provide analytical, statistical, administrative and 
logistical support to the ESRB. In particular, the ECB will assist the ESRB in the development 
and collection of new statistical data. The ECB will also assist the ESRB by developing and 
maintaining new analytical tools and methodologies for the identification and assessment of 
systemic  risks  and  the  issuance  of  risk  warnings.  This  task  poses  significant  challenges 
because  it  requires  special  skills  and  the  further  development  of  analytical  tools.  Models 
must be developed to help structure and analyse the vast amount of information collected for 
risk assessment. As financial stability and macro-prudential analyses are at a relatively early 
stage, it is advisable to employ a multiplicity of approaches. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  creation  of  the  ESRB  does  not  change  in  any  manner  the 
allocation  of  responsibilities  among  policy-makers  enshrined  in  the  Treaty,  notably  the 
unambiguous establishment of the maintenance of price stability as the primary objective of 
the ECB’s monetary policy. At the same time, the assignment of specific tasks related to the 
functioning  of  the  ESRB  to  the  ECB  actually  enhances  its  ability  to  fulfill  the  task  of 
contributing to the maintenance of financial stability, as foreseen by the Treaty. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2010
Conclusions 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  spread  across  the  world  at  an  unusual  speed  and  with 
surprisingly  strong  consequences.  The  fact  that  the  tensions  originating  from  a  relatively 
small segment of the international financial market (the US market for sub-prime mortgage 
loans) evolved over time into a global crisis of a magnitude unseen in decades – wreaking 
havoc on a number of economies and the lives of millions – may deceive some into thinking 
that  worldwide  financial  integration  has  gone  too  far  and  that  we  would  better  off  under 
financial autarchy. 
It is therefore worthwhile to recall what the benefits of financial integration are, especially in 
Europe. Integrated financial markets help to realise the full economic potential by increasing 
competition and expanding markets. This results in lower intermediation costs and a more 
efficient  allocation  of  capital,  which  in  turn  raises  the  potential  for  increased  economic 
growth.  
For those European Member States which have gone even further by adopting the euro as 
the single currency, there are added benefits in terms of price transparency, lower interest 
rates,  reduced  transaction  costs  and  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  These 
benefits are very substantial.  
At  the  same  time,  the  financial  crisis  has  been  a  rough  reminder  that,  although  financial 
integration  improves  the  access  to  financial  markets  and  the  opportunities  for  risk 
diversification, it may also increase the scope for financial contagion across countries. It is 
therefore paramount that the financial stability arrangements keep pace with the degree of 
financial integration. Such arrangements should be particularly ambitious in the EU and the 
euro area, which are characterised by a very high degree of financial integration. This is why 
it  is  important  that  we  fully  and  quickly  implement  the  reforms  of  the  European  and 
international  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  which  are  needed  to  enhance  the 
robustness of our financial systems. 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 7
