Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at a hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 21 June 2010. 
 the  beginning  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  To  address 
Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
Since our last meeting on 22 March, the euro area has faced one of the most challenging 
periods  since 
the 
unprecedented  pressures  in  financial  markets,  public  authorities  in  the  European  Union, 
including the European Central Bank, have taken bold and courageous steps. 
Die  wichtigen  Entscheidungen,  die  in  jüngster  Zeit  getroffen  wurden,  erfordern  fundierte 
Erklärungen und Antworten auf Fragen, die sicherlich auch in diesem Hohen Hause gestellt 
werden. Daher begrüße ich die Möglichkeit zum Austausch anläßlich der heutigen Anhörung 
ganz besonders. 
Je commencerai donc mon intervention par une évaluation de la situation économique. Je 
reviendrai  ensuite  sur  la  décision  annoncée  le  10  mai  dernier  de  procéder  à  des 
interventions sur les marchés obligataires de la zone euro. Dans une troisième partie, je me 
pencherai  sur  les  mécanismes  de  coordination  économique  de  la  zone  euro  et  les 
changements que la situation actuelle appelle. 
Economic and monetary developments 
I.  
Since the previous hearing in March, incoming data have confirmed a continuing recovery in 
the euro area in the first half of 2010. According to the latest estimates, the economy grew by 
0.2%  quarter  on  quarter  in  the  first  three  months  of  this  year.  Looking  ahead,  our  earlier 
expectations that the euro area economy would expand at a moderate rate this year and next 
have been confirmed. 
The  latest  projections  by  Eurosystem  staff  are broadly  in  line  with  this  assessment.  In  our 
view, the risks to this outlook are broadly balanced. Nevertheless, the recovery is likely to 
remain uneven over time and across economies and sectors, in an environment of continued 
uncertainty and with tensions in some segments of the financial markets. 
The annual rate of inflation in the euro area stood at 1.6% in May, up slightly from 1.5% in 
April, mostly because of higher energy prices. We may see some further slight increases in 
inflation in the second half of this year. Looking further ahead, we continue to expect price 
developments to remain moderate over the policy relevant medium-term horizon. 
Our monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures over the medium term should be 
well contained. This is reflected in particular in the overall weak growth of money and credit. 
The annual growth rate of loans to households is continuing to strengthen, but the growth 
rate of loans to enterprises has remained negative, as expected in the current phase of the 
cycle.  Suggestions  that  inflation  might  be  unanchored  are  entirely  unfounded.  On  the 
contrary, euro area inflation expectations appear to be remarkably well anchored, in line with 
our definition of price stability. 
Given  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  the  solid  anchoring  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations,  the  Governing  Council  regards  our  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  current 
level of key ECB interest rates as appropriate. In order to cope with tensions on the money 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
markets, the Governing Council has decided to reintroduce some of our previous non-standard 
measures.  In  particular,  we  have  gone  back  to  full  allotment  in  3-month  and  6-month 
operations,  so  as  to  facilitate  the  liquidity  planning  of  banks.  And  we  have  reactivated 
operations that provide liquidity in US dollars, in coordination with the Federal Reserve and a 
number of other central banks, to prevent possible liquidity tensions. 
in  markets 
increased  sharply  and 
II.   The ECB’s securities markets programme 
Let me now turn to the Governing Council’s decision to intervene in euro area debt securities 
markets,  announced  on  10  May  following  abrupt  and  very  severe  increases  in  financial 
market  tensions  throughout  the  world,  but  especially  in  Europe.  Those  tensions  were 
spreading  to  a  wide  range  of  financial  market  segments,  including  the  stock  market,  the 
interbank  market  and  the  foreign  exchange  market.  It  was  observed  that  the  epicentre  of 
these tensions lay in European debt markets, in particular those for government debt. 
Although  the  composition  of  the  shocks  that  triggered  the  intensification  of  those  tensions 
was different from that observed in October 2008 after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 
the United States, this situation was comparable in terms of the suddenness of the change in 
sentiment and the abruptness of the flight to safety by international investors. 
Overall  volatility 
liquidity  conditions  deteriorated 
significantly, not only in sovereign bond markets, but also to a critical degree in the money 
markets.  Transactions  within  the  interbank  market  declined  rapidly  and  uncertainty  among 
banks about counterparties’ creditworthiness increased. 
There  was  therefore  a  risk  that  the  normal  functioning  of  markets  and  the  first  link  in  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy between the central bank and credit institutions 
could  become  impaired.  This  would  have  meant  that  the  ability  of  banks,  which  are  the 
primary source of financing in the euro area, to provide credit to the real economy could have 
been seriously harmed. 
It is against this background that the ECB announced on 10 May not only the reactivation of 
previous non-standard measures, as well as the reactivation of the swap agreements with 
the  Federal  Reserve,  but  also  its  intervention  in  debt  markets  with  the  launch  of  the 
Securities  Markets  Programme.  The  single  reason  for  acting  is  that  it  is  crucial  for  the 
effective conduct of monetary policy that government bond markets function as properly as 
possible. 
The government bond markets are very important for three reasons. 
1.  
First,  interest  rates  on  government  bonds  usually  set  a  floor  for  the  interest  rates 
that  firms  and  banks  have  to  pay  when  issuing  their  bonds.  In  circumstances  of 
highly  disrupted  bond  markets,  the  short-term  interest  rates  of  the  central  bank 
would no longer be passed on to households and firms, and thereby to prices, to the 
appropriate degree. This is what we call the price channel. 
Second,  sharply  lower  bond  prices  implied  by  the  much  higher  interest  rates 
associated  with  disrupted  bond  markets  would  cause  significant  losses  in  the 
portfolios  of  financial  and  non-financial  sectors;  for  banks,  this  would  reduce  their 
ability  to  provide  loans  to  the  economy.  This  is  what  we  call  the  balance  sheet 
channel. 
Third,  abnormally  low  liquidity  for  government  bonds  would  reduce  their  role  as 
collateral  in  refinancing  operations,  thereby  also  hindering  banks’  supply  of  loans. 
This is what we call the liquidity channel. 
2.  
3.  
The  decision  to  start  intervening  in  bond  markets  was  therefore  taken  in  order  to  help 
maintain  the  appropriate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  in  the  euro 
area by addressing the malfunctioning of some segments of the securities markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
As the aim of the programme is not to inject additional liquidity into the banking system, we 
fully neutralise the bond purchases by means of specific reabsorption operations. As a result, 
the  prevailing  level  of  liquidity  and  the  money  market  rates  are  not  affected  by  the 
programme.  In  other  words,  our  monetary  policy  stance  is  not  affected,  and  there  are  no 
inflationary risks related to this programme. 
Let me emphasise that we took the decision to introduce the Securities Markets Programme 
fully  in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty,  only  operating  in  the  secondary  markets  for 
government bonds. We also took the decision in complete independence. 
We were aware of the commitments made by euro area governments prior to that weekend, 
on  the  evening  of  Friday  7  May.  In  particular,  the  Governing  Council  took  note  of  the 
statement by euro area governments that they “will take all measures needed to meet [their] 
fiscal targets this year and the years ahead in line with excessive deficit procedures” and of 
the  “precise  additional  commitments  taken  by  some  euro  area  governments  to  accelerate 
fiscal  consolidation  and  ensure  the  sustainability  of  their  public  finances”.  (Quotes  from 
statement by euro area Heads of State or Government, Brussels, 7 May 2010) 
This brings me to the third issue I would like to discuss. 
III.   Economic governance at a crossroads 
You have asked me to speak about enhanced economic coordination and surveillance in the 
euro area. 
The ECB believes that a true quantum leap is needed in the framework for surveillance and 
adjustment  of  fiscal  policies,  as  well  as  broader  macroeconomic  policies  concerned  with 
Europe’s competitiveness. 
“La solidarité de fait ” that Robert Schuman called for 60 years ago is reflected in the degree 
of  economic  integration  and  interdependence  already  achieved  in  Monetary  Union.  But 
solidarity is a two-way street. The benefits and protection that are derived from membership 
of Monetary Union bring with them responsibilities and obligations. This is the fundamental 
contract which forms the basis for our currency. We now have to turn it into a more effective 
structure for fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance and adjustment. 
In line with the topics addressed by the task force chaired by European Council President 
van  Rompuy,  let  me  focus  here  on  two  main  areas  of  reform.  A  third  area,  a  crisis 
management framework, is still to be examined at the level of the task force. 
First, it is of the essence that the surveillance of budgetary policies be strengthened. I am 
pleased  to  note  that  the  European  Council  confirmed  this  assessment  at  its  meeting  last 
Thursday. 
At  the  level  of  the  EU27,  and  in  particular  within  the  euro  area,  we  must  have  effective 
instruments to prevent – and, where necessary, correct – excessive deficits and debt levels. 
A more stringent implementation of rules and procedures is essential, among other things by 
increasing  the  automaticity  and  speed  of  procedural  steps.  The  initiation  of  sanctions  also 
needs to be quasi-automatic. 
Fiscal  surveillance  must  be  more  direct  and  effective.  It  must  also  be  based  on  more 
independent  monitoring  and  assessment.  We  may  need  a  differentiated  approach  to 
surveillance depending on the fiscal performance of countries. The Commission should have 
greater responsibility by making proposals, which can only be modified with unanimity in the 
Council, rather than mere recommendations under the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In the event of non-compliance, sanctions need to be applied much earlier and to be broader 
in scope. They should not only address excessive debt ratios, but also apply when countries 
are  not  making  sufficient  progress  towards  medium-term  budgetary  objectives.  A  wider 
spectrum  of  financial  sanctions  needs  to  be  considered,  along  with  non-financial  and 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
procedural sanctions, such as more stringent reporting requirements or even a limitation or 
suspension of voting rights. 
The second area may appear more novel, both at the level of the European Union and at the 
level of the euro area, but the ECB has in fact been stressing it in the Eurogroup since at 
least  2005:  the  surveillance  of  policies  to  maintain  Europe’s  internal  and  external 
competitiveness  –  policies  to  raise  productivity,  to  enhance  people’s  skills  and  to  improve 
firms’ competitiveness. These policies go well  beyond the  tradable sector. They  must also 
encompass the non-tradable sector, including the public sector, since it too is decisive for the 
competitiveness of an economy as a whole. 
Conscious management of wages and costs in order to maintain a healthy position for the 
economy within a competitive environment – this should be the core focus of such broader 
macroeconomic surveillance. The reason why competitiveness should be the main focus is 
not that countries should pursue export-oriented policies or boost international market share. 
The  reason  is  that  within  a  monetary  union,  the  relative  competitiveness  of  economies 
captures very well the sustainability of price and cost developments. 
I  am  pleased  that  last  Thursday’s  European  Council  confirmed  the  need  for  an  effective 
surveillance framework in this area. Experience has shown that persistent divergence in this 
regard is detrimental both for Member States and for Monetary Union as a whole. 
As  with  fiscal  surveillance,  this  framework  needs  to  allow  for  targeted  and  differentiated 
surveillance  and  follow-up  measures.  For  countries  that  experience  significant  losses  of 
competitiveness, surveillance should become increasingly deep and detailed. More ad hoc 
reporting  and  dedicated  country  missions,  policy 
recommendations,  compliance 
requirements,  public  peer  pressure  and  gradual  financial  steps  to  encourage  compliance 
could all be part of that process. 
For  this  to  work,  we  need  a  transparent  and  effective  trigger  mechanism  to  determine  the 
intensity  of  vulnerabilities  and  surveillance.  This  should  be  based  on  close  monitoring  and 
reporting  by  both  the  Commission  and  the  ECB.  Experts  are  currently  developing  ways  to 
best capture the complexity of the issue, as well as procedures by which indicators could be 
used in a surveillance and adjustment framework. 
If we can put in place effective surveillance and adjustment frameworks for both fiscal and 
competitiveness  policies  –  and  if  we  can  ensure  through  appropriate  regulation  that  our 
financial  system  serves  the  real  economy  and  not  the  other  way  around  –  our  European 
Union and our Economic and Monetary Union will exit this crisis much stronger than before 
and will be very well placed in the global economy. 
IV.   Conclusion 
Honourable Members, 
Let me conclude by saying that as we steer a course through these difficult times, we must 
clearly  all  work  hard,  but  we  must  also  maintain  our  ambition.  This  means  that  decisions 
need to be proportional to the importance of the Union. 
A single market of 500 million citizens and an Economic and Monetary Union of 330 million 
citizens  –  which  are  among  the  largest  and  most  advanced  economies  in  the  world  and 
which are built on solid foundations in terms of human and social capital – cannot and should 
not be measured according to the strengths or weaknesses of their individual components 
alone.  Particularly  as  regards  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  policy-makers  need  to 
internalise what it means to be part of a monetary union, in words and in deeds. 
I  therefore  very  much  welcome  the  calls  by  this  Parliament  for  ambitious  reforms.  The 
reaction  of  Europe  in  times  of  crisis  has  always  been  to  strengthen  European  cohesion.  I 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2010
would like to urge you, as Members of the European Parliament, as the representatives of 
Europe’s citizens, to continue to give your support to that course of action. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 5
