Duvvuri Subbarao: Harnessing technology to bank the unbanked 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banking 
Technology  Excellence  Awards  2009  at  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in 
Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, 18 June 2010. 
 1. 
It is always a delight to be here in this wonderful city of Hyderabad. The location of 
IDRBT  in  Hyderabad  is  not  an  accident;  it  is  a  reflection  of  the  growing  reputation  of 
Hyderabad as a premiere location for IT industry. Hailing as I do from this state, I know that 
we  came  from  behind;  twenty  five  years  ago,  there  were  several  other  cities  ahead  of 
Hyderabad  on  the  technology  scene;  today,  we  are  among  the  front  runners.  This 
remarkable  reinvention  of  Hyderabad  as  an  IT  hub  is  a  tribute  to  the  brain-power  and 
entrepreneurship of Andhra Pradesh. The location in Hyderabad of IDRBT, which has been 
spearheading the use of technology in banking, is a deliberate choice that has been informed 
by the synergies of the technology pool here.  
Pioneering efforts of Andhra Pradesh 
2. 
Andhra Pradesh has been in the forefront of financial inclusion efforts as well. The 
first grass root experiment towards financial inclusion based on technology, for direct transfer 
of government benefits to the beneficiaries’ bank accounts, started off a couple of years ago 
here in Andhra Pradesh in Warangal district. That small beginning has spun off a nation-wide 
campaign  today  for  financial  inclusion  by  harnessing  technology  for  storing  data  on  smart 
cards  and  for  biometric  identification  of  beneficiaries.  That pioneering experiment  has  also 
triggered  off  several  grass  root  experiments  towards  financial  inclusion.  It  is,  therefore, 
appropriate that we are recognizing innovations and achievements in the use of technology 
in banking in this pioneering state of Andhra Pradesh. 
Growing role of technology in banking 
3. 
The transformation of the financial sector and the payment systems in this country 
over the last decade has been remarkable. No doubt, the brick and mortar infrastructure has 
expanded; the number of bank branches has multiplied ten fold – from 8000+ in 1969 when 
the  first  set  of  banks  were  nationalized  to  80000+  today.  But  what  has  been  even  more 
striking has been the change in the manner of financial delivery. All of us present here will 
recall the agony we used to go through for outstation cheques to be realized and credited to 
our accounts. This used to take up to 45 days as the cheque had to physically travel across 
the country to the paying branch. There were even cases where the ultimate paying branch 
returned  the  cheque  to  the  originating  bank  since  it  had  been  defaced  by  multiple  postal 
stampings on its travel. Contrast that with the situation today. Outstation cheques normally 
get cleared in two days. And if people shift from paper to electronic modes, the transfer can 
be even faster. The RTGS allows funds transfer on a real time basis and the NEFT on a near 
real time basis. Keeping in view the safe, secure and efficient electronic payment modes now 
available, the Reserve Bank has also closed the system of high value cheque clearing.  
4. 
In his recent book, “Building Social Business”, Muhammad Yunus notes that – in the 
sixties, no one predicted that internet would take the world by storm; that laptops, palm-tops, 
blackberrys,  ipods,  iphones,  tablets  and  kindles  would  be  in  the  hands  of  millions.  Even 
twenty years ago, no one was predicting that mobile phones would become an integral part 
of life in every village of the world. Evidently, in 1990, we could not foresee the world of 2010; 
technology just outpaced our imagination. Similarly, in 2010, perhaps we are just unable to 
look  ahead  at  2030.  In  short,  how  technology  is  going  to  shape  our  world  and  our  world 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
views is quite unpredictable. What is predictable though is that as newer technologies are 
ushered  in,  banking  services  will  become  more  affordable  and  accessible.  Note  that  the 
global  financial  crisis  marked  failure  in  several  parts  of  the  financial  system;  but  the  one 
segment  that  remained  robust  amidst  failure  all  around  was  the  payment  and  settlement 
system – the most technology intensive part of the financial system. Harnessing this power of 
technology for making our banking system more efficient, and for financial inclusion, is going 
to be a big opportunity and a bigger challenge for us. I want to focus my remarks today on 
this topic. 
Why is financial inclusion important? 
5. 
Why is financial inclusion important? It is important simply because it is a necessary 
condition for generating and sustaining equitable growth. There are few, if any, instances of 
an economy transiting from an agrarian system to a post-industrial modern society without 
broad-based financial inclusion. As people having comfortable access to financial services, 
we all know from personal experience that economic opportunity is strongly intertwined with 
financial  access.  Such  access  is  especially  powerful  for  the  poor  as  it  provides  them 
opportunities  to  build  savings,  make  investments  and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to 
financial services also helps the poor insure themselves against income shocks and equips 
them to meet emergencies such as illness, death in the family or loss of employment.  
The size of financial exclusion 
Yet  the  statistics  on  financial  exclusion  in  India  are  disheartening.  Out  of  the 
6. 
600,000 habitations in the country, only about 30,000, or just 5 percent, have a commercial 
bank  branch.  Just  about  40  per  cent  of  the  population  across  the  country  have  bank 
accounts,  and  this  ratio  is  much  lower  in  the  north-east  of  the  country.  The  proportion  of 
people having any kind of life insurance cover is as low as 10 per cent, and the proportion 
having  non-life  insurance  is  an  abysmally  low  0.6  per  cent.  People  having  debit  cards 
comprise only 13 per cent and those having credit cards a marginal 2 per cent.  
7. 
These statistics, staggering as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial 
exclusion.  Even  where  bank  accounts  are  claimed  to  have  been  opened,  verification  has 
shown  that  a  significant  portion  of  these  accounts  are  dormant.  Very  few  conduct  any 
banking transactions and even fewer receive any credit. Millions of people across the country 
are  thereby  denied  the  opportunity  to  harness  their  earning  capacity  and  entrepreneurial 
talent, and are condemned to marginalization and poverty. 
8. 
But  there  is  a  brighter  side  to  the  story.  Remember  that  illustration  they  give  in 
business  strategy  courses.  A  business  executive  of  a  shoe  company  was  sent  to  a  large 
developing country to assess the market potential there. What he saw was millions of people 
going  without  shoes.  He  came  back  and  reported  to  the  management  that  there  was  no 
business potential there because no one wore shoes. A few months later, the strategist of a 
rival  company  went  and  saw  the  same  picture.  He  came  back  and  reported  to  his 
management  that  there  is  tremendous  business  potential  in  that  country  because  of  the 
number  of  shoes  they  can  sell.  Ultimately,  it  is  a  question  of  mindset,  and  it  is  only  the 
change in mindset of all concerned stakeholders that can make financial inclusion a reality.  
Is financial inclusion a viable business model? 
9. 
How  can  we  make  financial  inclusion  workable?  Contrary  to  common  perception, 
financial  inclusion  is  a  potentially  viable  business  proposition.  Take  the  success  story  of 
Dharavi, a bustling industrial-slum in Mumbai. Wikipedia reports that Dharavi exports goods 
worth $500 – $650 million every year. Ironically, even though Dharavi is situated right in the 
heart  of  Mumbai,  the  most  banked  city  in  the  country,  and  adjoins  the  Bandra-Kurla 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
Complex,  Mumbai’s  financial  district,  it  did  not  have  a  commercial  bank  branch  for  a  long 
time, notwithstanding its celebrated entrepreneurial spirit and export performance. The first 
commercial  bank  branch  was  opened  in  February  2007.  In  just  three  years,  the  bank 
registered business in excess of Rs. 44 crore. Enthused by this success, one more bank has 
opened a branch in Dharavi and many more are eager to do so. There are now 9 ATMs in 
Dharavi, all of them being actively used. 
How does the other half live? 
10. 
The reality is that money management is a well-understood part of everyday life of 
the poor, and therefore a key factor in determining their coping strategies. Some of you may 
have  come  across  this  recent,  thought  provoking  book,  “Portfolios  of  the  Poor:  How  the 
World’s  Poor  Live  on  $2  a  Day”  by  Daryl  Collins  et  al.  Most  books  on  poverty  and 
development, as we know, are “big picture” books that tend to take an aggregate view based 
on  anecdotal  evidence  or  at  best  statistical  work.  This  book  strikes  a  refreshingly  distinct 
path. What the authors have done is to zoom in on the basics of daily poverty to explore how 
poor people manage their money. Let me cite a paragraph from the review of the book in the 
New Yorker: 
Ten  years  ago,  the  authors  of  this  unusual  study  began  collecting  detailed 
yearlong  “financial  diaries”  from  households  in  Bangladesh,  India,  and  South 
Africa,  with  a  focus  on  those  living  on  less  than  two  dollars  a  day  per  person. 
They found, to their surprise, that none of the families lived hand to mouth; even 
the  poorest  relied  on  complex  combinations  of  financial  strategies,  including 
joining savings clubs, buying funeral insurance, and acting as “money guards” for 
neighbors.  These  people  did  things  that  might  seem  irrational  –  borrowing  in 
order  to  save;  paying  interest  on  savings  –  but  that  made  sense  given  their 
unpredictable incomes and limited options.  
11. 
The  Dharavi  example  that  I  cited  earlier  is  an  illustration  of  how  banking  the 
unbanked can be a win-win opportunity. This book is further evidence of the sophistication 
with which poor people think about their finances. It also demonstrates how bringing them 
within the fold of formal banking can “make a difference” to their coping strategies. 
In  order  to  further  financial  inclusion,  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  are 
Financial inclusion – efforts so far 
12. 
pursuing several initiatives. Let me recount some of them briefly. 
13. 
First,  to  improve  banking  penetration  in  the  north-east,  Reserve  Bank  has  asked 
State Governments and banks to identify centres where there is need for setting up branches 
that  are  full-fledged,  offer  forex  facilities,  handle  government  business  and  meet  currency 
needs.  RBI  will  then  fund  the  capital  and  running  costs  for  five  years,  provided  the  State 
Government concerned is willing to make available the premises and put in place appropriate 
security arrangements.  
14. 
Second, Government of India has set-up two funds – the Financial Inclusion Fund 
for  meeting  the  costs  of  developmental  and  promotional  interventions  towards  financial 
inclusion, and the Financial Inclusion Technology Fund for meeting the costs of technology 
adoption. Each of these funds has an overall corpus of Rs. 500 crore. 
15.  Third,  the  Finance  Minister  announced  in  his  latest  budget  that  every  village  in  the 
country  with  over  2000  population  must  have  access  to  banking  services  by  March  2012. 
Even as the brick and mortar branch presence will expand, the big driver going forward will 
be branchless banking based on the business correspondent (BC) model and leveraging on 
technology.  In  order  to  facilitate  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  enlarged  the  types  of 
entities that can be engaged as BCs.  
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
We are all aware of Aadhar (‚¸š¸¸£), the Unique Identification Number (UID) Project 
16. 
of  Government  of  India,  headed  by  Nandan  Nilekani.  Although  the  main  aim  of  UID  is  to 
provide a unique ID number for everyone in the country, Aadhar (‚¸š¸¸£) will be a powerful 
instrumentality  for  helping  the  poor  establish  their  identity  to  meet  the  banks’  KYC  norms. 
This will reduce cash and non-cash transaction costs both to the banks and to the potential 
customers. The UID is another powerful illustration of harnessing technology for the benefit 
of the poor. 
17. 
Fourth,  we  have  asked  every  domestic  commercial  bank  –  public  and  private 
sector – to prepare its own Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) and have it approved by its Board. 
Our  aim  in  this  respect  is  two  fold.  First,  each  bank  should  have  ownership  of  its  FIP. 
Second, we want each  bank to build on its comparative advantage.  We want banks to be 
innovative and entrepreneurial and try out their own models and experiments consistent with 
their business models.  
18. 
The FIPs are meant to be rolled out over the next three years and are required to 
include indicators for performance evaluation. RBI has held meetings with the chairmen of 
banks to review the FIPs prepared by them. These meetings, chaired by Deputy Governor 
Dr. Chakrabarty, have enabled a clearer understanding of issues in financial inclusion. The 
discussions revealed that the main challenge is to ensure that the no-frill accounts actually 
become operational. Because of dire poverty, the account or the branch services are rarely 
or minimally used. Banks agreed that, for the FIPs to succeed: 
 
 
 
scalable technology solutions should be in place; 
the RRBs should also be core-banking enabled; 
business  correspondent  model  coupled  with  biometric  technology  needs  to  be 
deployed;  
performance  criteria  of  staff  should  include  achievement  of  financial  inclusion 
targets; and  
connectivity issues need to be sorted out by service providers.  
  Role of technology 
19. 
Let me now revert to the role and importance of technology for financial inclusion. 
Financial  inclusion  efforts  to  date  have  been  driven  through  two  distinct  channels:  smart 
cards and mobile phones. One issue that often comes for debate in this regard is the need to 
ensure interoperability of technological solutions. I am told that efforts are afoot to achieve 
this. It is, however, important not to miss the wood for the trees. The priority clearly has to be 
to facilitate “inclusion” first. “Interoperability” is no doubt important but it can follow. Clearly 
inclusion cannot wait for interoperability to happen.  
20. 
The second issue relates to the choice of a model for mobile banking. World over, 
there  are  two  distinct  models  –  the “bank-led” model  and  the  “mobile  operator-led”  model. 
The Reserve Bank has a clear preference for the bank-led model. This is so for at least two 
important reasons. First, we want our financial inclusion to be more than just a remittance 
facility;  we  want  our  customers  to  get  minimum  services  like  deposit  insurance,  access  to 
affordable  credit  and  the  payment  system  which  only  banks  can  offer.  Second,  given  the 
growing concerns about money laundering and financing of terrorism, a bank led model is 
decidedly  safer  and  more  sustainable.  We  do  recognize  that  mobile  telephony  has  an 
important role in the value chain and we are keen that mobile service providers collaborate 
with banks to provide value added services.  
4 
 BIS Review 87/2010
Let me now look ahead and flag a few important issues in the use of technology in 
Technology in banking – the way forward 
21. 
banking and how it can be an aid to value creation.  
The deepening of the use of technology in banking requires that it be accompanied 
22. 
by good “IT governance” which is a sub-set of good corporate governance. Banks must put 
in  place  robust  risk  management  systems  encompassing  effective  infrastructure,  security 
policies,  incident  reporting  and  business  continuity  management.  Also,  these  management 
systems must be subject to regular review and monitoring. Needless to say, as businesses 
expand,  the  risk  from  a  failure  in  IT  systems  expands  disproportionately  faster,  reinforcing 
the need for good IT governance. There have been instances where some banks could not 
participate for more than a day in the NEFT/RTGS product offerings for several reasons – 
problems in the internet channel interface going unnoticed, data clean-up in the database not 
getting adequate attention, ignoring hardware sizing aspects, delaying the decision to move 
to the back-up site, and the like. Greater management attention can easily fix these flaws. 
That is why IT governance is important.  
23. 
The second priority issue on the way forward is the quality control of data and its 
use for improving banking efficiency. The hierarchy of transition is from data to information to 
knowledge  to  wisdom.  Technology  enables  banks  to  collect  voluminous  data  pertaining  to 
customers and transactions. As most bank branches, including those of RRBs, are coming 
under  the  core  banking  platform,  it  is  important  not  to  be  swamped  by  this  deluge  but  to 
process the data into useful information for management through robust MIS and decision 
support systems. This becomes particularly relevant in the context of internal rating models 
and fraud detection techniques where extraction of patterns from data is the sine-qua-non. 
The Reserve Bank attaches a lot of importance to ensuring the quality of data, its processing 
into useful information and the flow of that information to the appropriate level. To streamline 
this, the Reserve Bank has formed a group comprising experts from banks, IDRBT, IBA and 
RBI  to  study  the  information  reporting  system  of  banks  and  to  suggest  an  approach  for 
automated data flow in a straight-through manner from the source systems of banks to the 
Reserve Bank.  
24. 
The  next  priority  issue  on  my  list  is  protection  of  information  and  customer 
confidentiality.  There  are  growing  concerns  about  the  increase  in  cyber  crimes,  phishing 
related frauds, identify frauds and misuse of customer information and the like. Threats from 
skimming, sniffing, spamming, spoofing, etc., are all increasing. Some of you may be aware 
of recent instances of several people getting defrauded through the so called prize winning 
schemes where names of prominent institutions are being used to lure remittances of large 
amounts of money by promising millions in return. I am informed that these monies are often 
being  paid  into  banks’  accounts  by  gullible  people  and  then  siphoned  out.  Even  if  such 
accounts are opened after following KYC norms, the unusual pattern of these transactions 
can be easily discerned if banks use appropriate technologies for this purpose. It is in this 
context  that  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  2010–11,  we  proposed  setting  up  a 
working group on information security, electronic banking, technology risk management, and 
tackling cyber frauds. 
25. 
Next on my list is the several ways IT models can be used to improve the efficiency 
of banking – for example, for credit appraisal using the score card model, for determination of 
provisioning to be made against loans and for handling millions of low value accounts without 
compromising on underwriting and supervisory standards. 
26. 
Last,  and  possibly  the  most  important  on  my  list  of  priority  issues  is  the  need  to 
guard against what can be called a “technology barrier” between the bank and the customer. 
As  we  all  recognize,  technology  is  a  great  enabler  and  provides  us  huge  opportunities  for 
making banking more efficient and more inclusive. At the same time, it is also faceless, and 
this absence of a “human touch” can be quite intimidating, if not threatening, to those just 
entering  the  banking  network.  Banks  should,  therefore,  take  extra  care  to  ensure  that  the 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 5
poor are not driven away from banking because the technology interface is unfriendly. This 
requires training the banks’ frontline staff and managers as well as business correspondents 
on the human side of banking.  
 The Rangarajan Committee which had gone into the issue of repositioning IDRBT 
IDRBT as facilitator 
27. 
Before I close, I will be amiss if I do not acknowledge the impressive contribution of 
IDRBT to “techno-banking”, if I may use such a phrase now. IDRBT’s initiatives in developing 
the  INFINET,  its  contribution  to  the  establishment  of  a  messaging  platform  (SFMS)  and  a 
shared  ATM-network  (NFS)  have  added  immense  value  to  our  banking  sector.  IDRBT’s 
performance as a certification authority, as an R&D centre and as an institution for training 
and education have marked great advances in the Indian financial sector.  
28. 
for the next decade has since made valuable recommendations. These relate to: 
 
need  for  thrust  on  research  and  development  activities  with  a  clear  focus  on  the 
areas of research that should be taken up in the next 3 to 5 years time;  
revamping  education  and  training  activities  with  the  aim  to  develop  technically 
competent  and  in-house  expertise  in  banks  to  efficiently  supervise  and  manage 
technology-intensive resources like data centres, data recovery centres, corporate 
network, etc.;  
becoming a member of global technology standard setting bodies active in the area 
of banking; and  
developing a cadre of faculty focussing on technology requirements of the banking 
industry.  
We are working on implementing these recommendations. 
29. 
30. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  Indian  banks  have  come  a  long  way  in  using  technology  to 
improve the reach and efficiency of banking. What they have done is laudable because they 
have  adapted  the  best  international  technology  practices  to  the  Indian  situation.  I  want  to 
compliment them for what they have achieved and for their efforts towards addressing the 
challenges on the way forward.  
  Task for IDRBT 
31. 
We  are  gathered  here  today  to  recognize  outstanding  performance  in  the  use  of 
technology in banking. Hearty congratulations to the winners today. I hope these awards will 
encourage further innovations and competition towards improving efficiency. I also wonder if 
we can benchmark banks’ performance in the use and adoption of technology against some 
international standards, especially in the area of financial inclusion. I would urge IDRBT to 
work on this.  
32. 
Finally, I want to compliment Shri Sambamurthy and his dedicated team of faculty 
and staff at IDRBT for their important contributions to the financial sector. My thanks also to 
the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  Institute  whose  expertise  and  guidance  has 
been the backbone of IDRBT’s performance and achievements. 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2010
