Choongsoo Kim: Time for a new central banking paradigm 
Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 2010 Annual Bank of 
Korea International Conference, Seoul, 31 May 2010. 
 Honorable fellow governors, Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  2010  Bank  of  Korea  International 
Conference, which is also being held in celebration of our bank’s 60th anniversary. I wish to 
express  my  profound  appreciation  to  all  of  you  for  attending.  Let  me  also  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  particular  gratitude  to  our  esteemed  speakers,  presenters  and 
discussants, and to our conference orgaruzers.  
The theme that we have selected for this year’s conference is The Changing Role of Central 
Banks. This is one of the most critical issues that the recent global financial crisis has led us 
to consider.  
The global financial crisis and changing beliefs  
The  recent  global  crisis  has  shaken  many  of  our  beliefs  about  economics  and  economic 
policy. Prior to the crisis, many of us talked about the so-called “Great Moderation,” believing 
that macroeconomic volatility had declined substantially in most advanced economies over 
the past two decades. The declines in volatility of output and inflation were regarded as a 
remarkable economic achievement, which we attributed to improvements in macroeconomic, 
including  monetary,  policy.  Many  of  us  also  assumed  that  risk  management  at  financial 
institutions had improved greatly.  
But now we feel differently. Occurring as it did in such an optimistic environment, the sudden 
outbreak  of  the  crisis  has  very  seriously  challenged  our  confidence  in  macroeconomic 
management  and  financial  regulation.  It  has  motivated  us  to  carefully  evaluate  what  went 
wrong, and what we must do to avoid any future recurrence of such a destructive calamity.  
The  crisis  has  also  directed  attention  to  a  number  of  particularly  salient  issues  for  central 
banks, among them new challenges for monetary policy, the central bank’s role in financial 
stability, and management of volatile capital flows. I would like to discuss these issues a bit 
more now.  
Challenges for monetary policy  
First of all, bitter controversy over several key components of monetary policy has arisen, out 
of central banks’ dealing with the crisis.  
Central banks’ monetary policies have of course evolved over the years. In the mid-1970s, a 
large  number  of  advanced  economies  adopted  monetary  targeting,  to  address  the  high 
inflation  at  that  time.  As  the  relationship  between  the  monetary  aggregates  and  inflation 
subsequently grew less stable, however, monetary targeting was replaced in the 1990s by 
inflation targeting.  
Central bank independence has also been greatly strengthened over the last decade, as an 
institutional  safeguard  to  facilitate  more  successful  monetary  policy  by  mitigating  the  time-
inconsistency problem. It is, we can see, very natural that search for a new monetary policy 
paradigm  takes  place  when  economic  conditions  have  changed  or  novel  problems  have 
emerged.  
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
One of the most prominent issues in the present debate on monetary policy is the question of 
the desirability of the current modus operandi of inflation targeting, a core element of central 
bank monetary policy in many countries over the last decade.  
One  contentious  question  in  this  regard  is  whether  the  target  inflation  rate  should  be 
adjusted.  Olivier  Blanchard  and  some  others,  for  example,  have  proposed  moderated 
inflation  targeting  operation,  while  also  insisting  on  a  strengthening  of  macroprudential 
regulation by the central bank.1  
Meanwhile, more radical suggestions, of replacing inflation targeting altogether with a new 
policy framework, have also been proposed. Professor Carl Walsh, for example, the eminent 
presenter  in  the  second  session  of  this  conference,  suggests  price  level  targeting  as  an 
alternative to inflation targeting, arguing that under price level targeting inflation expectations 
can act as an automatic stabilizer.2  
The  crisis  has  also  pushed  to  the  center  stage  of  debate  central  banks’  recent 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  in  acting  as  lenders  of  last  resort  or  market-
makers  of  last  resort.  Principal  questions  in  this  regard  include  issues  such  as  when  the 
central bank should implement such measures, how effective they are, and when and how 
the bank should ultimately withdraw them.  
Our debate on all of these important issues at this conference is anticipated to help us very 
much in developing our monetary policy frameworks further.  
Increased demand for a greater central bank role in financial stability  
Another salient question posed to central banks by the crisis is that of the need for expanding 
their role into the area of financial stability – beyond their traditional roles of ensuring price 
stability and, in some countries, economic growth. There is especially strong demand that the 
central  bank  do  more  to  help  prevent  financial  instability.  This  issue  has  attracted  much 
public attention in Korea, in fact, as adding financial stability to our bank’s explicit objectives, 
in  addition  to  price  stability,  has  been  one  of  the  central  issues  related  to  the  recent  bill 
revising the Bank of Korea Act, which remains pending in our National Assembly.  
How to proceed in this regard is unclear, however. In particular, there is controversy about 
the policy instruments that the central bank can use to ensure financial stability. One critical 
question here is whether monetary policy, the key policy tool of the central bank, should be 
used to preemptively tackle developing financial imbalances.  
Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  majority  view  was  that  the  central  bank  should  not 
assume  responsibility  for  correcting  financial  imbalances  –  whether  through  its  monetary 
policy or any other tool. Given recent experience, however, the pendulum of opinion is now 
shifting in favor of preemptive central bank action. This “lean against the wind” view has in 
fact been long supported by Dr. William White, who is with us here today, and his colleagues 
at the Bank for International Settlements.3  
Strong  support  for  the  central  bank’s  preemptive  monetary  policy  to  address  financial 
imbalances is understandable. The crisis erupted despite low and stable inflation, and it has 
also shown us just how difficult ex post cleaning up after a burst bubble can be. All in all, this 
crisis  has  highlighted  for  us  the  desirability  of  ex  ante  prevention  of  bubbles  that  could 
eventually bring us face to face with crisis.  
                                                 
1   Blanchard et al. (2010). 
2   Walsh (2010). 
3   See, for example, Borio and White (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
Regarding  the  central  bank’s  role  in  preventing  financial  instability,  we  should  note  that 
before the recent crisis many macroeconomic models, including the conventional models of 
monetary  economics  used  by  central  banks,  paid  insufficient  attention  to  the  financial 
markets.  
The crisis has shown us quite clearly, however, how financial intermediaries can play a very 
significant  role  in  the  development  of  financial  imbalances.  For  proper  incorporation  of 
financial stability into the monetary policy framework, therefore, we must reconsider the role 
that the financial sector plays in our monetary economics.  
Another  important  issue  related  to  the  central  bank’s  contribution  to  preventing  financial 
crises is its role in macroprudential regulation.  
The  outbreak  of  the  recent  crisis  has  shown  financial  regulation  to  have  gone  seriously 
wrong in many countries. In particular, while focusing heavily on the soundness of individual 
financial institutions, attention was not adequately paid to systemic risks.  
We  accordingly  have  strong  agreement  now  that  our  macroprudential,  as  well  as  our 
microprudential, regulation needs strengthening. And central banks are widely said to be the 
best candidates for this task, given their expertise in assessing macroeconomic conditions 
and macrofinancial developments.  
Management of volatile capital flows  
So far I have talked about the new challenges for central banks with a focus mainly on the 
domestic side. Let me move on now to problems caused from external sources, in particular 
triggered by sudden capital outflows.  
As  we  have  witnessed  during  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  again  also  during  the  recent 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  when  an  international  financial  crisis  occurs  and  capital 
begins to flow toward safe havens, many emerging market economies, the international uses 
of  whose  currencies  are  highly  limited,  tend  to  experience  severe  exchange  rate  volatility, 
even though they are not the origins of the crisis.  
Foreign capital flows to emerging market economies tend, in fact, to be procyclical. And this 
is a big problem, as countercyclical macroeconomic policy is not available in many of them.4  
The  typical  means  that  many  emerging  market  economies  have,  since  the  late  1990s, 
adopted for dealing with abrupt foreign capital outflows has been the accumulation of large 
volumes  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  as  a  form  of  “self-insurance.”  Prior  to  the  recent 
crisis, there was even criticism that the volumes of foreign exchange reserves in emerging 
market economies, and especially in Asia, were “excessive.”  
However, the crisis has proven such criticisms of our so-called “excessive” reserve holdings 
to have been invalid, as reserves were in many cases still not sufficient for ensuring foreign 
currency liquidity. Some observers have also pointed out the reluctance of many emerging 
market economies to even use their foreign exchange reserves, despite their large volumes, 
out  of  fears  that  resultant  declines  in  their  reserves  might  be  perceived  as  signalling  their 
growing vulnerabilities.5  
And so we have problems. We have no clear idea how large a volume of foreign exchange 
reserves  is  sufficient  for  a  country.  It  can  be  very  enormous  during  a  systemic  crisis. 
Meanwhile, as we all know, the accumulation of large levels of foreign exchange reserves 
also entails substantial economic costs.  
                                                 
4   Kaminsky et al. (2004) and Kim and Chey (2010). 
5   Aizenman (2009). 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
Yet such problems of needing to “self-insure” can be resolved to a significant extent through 
inter-central bank cooperation, for example currency swaps among central banks. One good 
example case was that of South Korea during the recent crisis, when we benefited greatly 
from  currency  swaps  between  the  Bank  of  Korea  and  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  People’s 
Bank of China and the Bank of Japan.  
Those swap arrangements had some shortcomings, however, such as their ad hoc natures 
and  the  high  selectivity  of  the  counterparties  involved.  It  is  thus  worth  considering  greater 
broadening and institutionalization of such inter-central bank cooperation, to ultimately help 
establish a global financial safety net.  
In  this  respect,  East  Asian  countries’  inauguration  this  March  of  Chiang  Mai  Initiative 
Multilateralization, a multilateral currency swap arrangement covering all ASEAN+3 members, 
is  a  mark  of  significant  regional  progress.  I  am  delighted  to  note  as  well  the  recent 
agreement,  at  South  Korea’s  initiative,  to  discuss  global  financial  safety  net  improvement 
during this year’s G20 summits In Toronto and here in Seoul.  
Establishment of such an international institution is of course by no means easy. For it to be 
effective,  several  salient  problems  need  to  be  resolved,  including  the  “stigma”  effect  on 
countries needing assistance, on the one hand, and moral hazard on the other.  
Strengthening  of  macroprudential  regulation  is  also  likely  to  help  emerging  market 
economies manage volatile capital flows. Even if individual financial institutions are rational, 
their  behavior  can  generate  negative  externalities.  Indeed,  as  I  have  mentioned,  foreign 
capital flows to emerging market economies tend to be procyclical, heightening the need for 
countercyclical  policy  measures  through  which  these  countries  can  cope  with  such 
procyclical flows.  
Macroprudential  regulation  can  be  a  significant  help  in  this  respect,  by  changing  financial 
institutions’ incentive structures in ways that internalize the negative externalities caused by 
their own activities. It is, of course, important to prevent the possibility of regulatory arbitrage 
in  response  to  our  strengthening  of  macroprudential  regulations,  and  for  this  international 
cooperation  is  very  much  required.  All  of  these  issues  should  of  course  be  discussed  in 
harmony  with  our  efforts  to  build  a  better  international  financial  architecture.  And  at  this 
moment, I think the G20 may provide the ideal forum for effective international cooperation to 
this end.  
Concluding remarks  
I  have  until  now  briefly  discussed  some  major  challenges  that  central  banks  face  in 
overcoming  the  global  financial  crisis  and  afterwards.  Before  closing,  I  would  like  to  call 
attention to one final point.  
In our efforts to search for a new paradigm for central banking, we will naturally develop new 
economic  models  and  theories.  In  this  regard,  one  very  important  lesson  from  the  recent 
crisis  is  that  such  models  and  theories  must  face  up  to  reality.  The  real  world  does  not 
always work in the way economists would like it to work. And when we face such a situation, 
it  is  the  theories  that  need  to  be  twisted,  and  not  the  facts  that  they  are  supposed  to  be 
helping us understand.  
Especially, we should always keep in mind that we live in a globalized environment, in which 
all  of  our  individual  economies  are  now  closely  interconnected.  We  should  be  aware,  in 
addition,  of  the  increasing  influences  of  emerging  market  economies  in  world  economic 
activities.  
I believe that this conference will be a valuable opportunity for us to come together and pool 
our thoughts about what central banks must do to make this world a less risky place. It may 
of  course  be  difficult  for  us  to  obtain  all  the  necessary  answers  to  this  big  question  in  a  
4 
 BIS Review 101/2010
two-day conference. But I am confident that the debate during this conference will give us a 
big boost in that direction.  
Thank you very much. And now let the debate begin.  
References  
Aizenman, Joshua. 2009. Reserves and the Crisis: A Reassessment. Central Banking 19 (3): 
21–26.  
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’ Ariccia and Paolo Mauro. 2010. Rethinking Macroeconomic 
Policy. IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  
Borio,  Claudio  and  William  White.  2004.  Whither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The 
Implications  of  Evolving  Policy  Regimes.  Working  Paper  No.  147.  Basel:  Bank  for 
International Settlements.  
Kaminsky,  Graciela  L.,  Carmen  M.  Reinhart  and  Carlos  A.  Vegh.  2004.  When  It  Rains,  It 
Pours:  Procyclical  Capital  Flows  and  Macroeconomic  Policies.  Working  Paper  No.  10780. 
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Kim, Kyung Soo and Hyoung-Kyu  Chey. 2010. Some Salient Issues Raised by the Global 
Financial Crisis. Pacific Economic Review 15 (1): 1–10.  
Walsh, Carl E. 2010. Implementing Monetary Policy. Paper prepared for the 2010 Bank of 
Korea 
June  1.  Available  at 
http://imer.bok.or.kr/conference. 
International  Conference,  Seoul,  May  31 
to 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 5
