Hu Xiaolian: A managed floating exchange rate regime is an established 
policy 
Article by Ms Hu Xiaolian, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, 15 July 2010. 
 China’s has moved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market demand 
and  supply  with  reference  to  a  basket  of  currencies.  As  an  important  component  of  the 
socialist market system, this is a right choice based on China’s specific circumstances and 
development strategy and is also an established policy. 
A managed floating exchange rate regime has been in place since 1994 
I. 
1. 
The unification of dual exchange rates in 1994 marked the official beginning of 
the managed floating exchange rate regime. Establishing a managed floating exchange 
rate regime based on market supply and demand and a unified and well-functioning foreign 
exchange  market  is  stipulated  in  The  Decision  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee  on  Several 
Matters Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist Market Economic System adopted at the 
3rd Plenary Session of 14th CPC Central Committee in November 1993. On the first day of 
1994, with the unification of RMB’s official exchange rate and swap market exchange rate, 
the  single,  managed  floating  exchange  rate  based  on  market  supply  and  demand  was 
officially adopted. The unification of dual exchange rates into a single exchange rate regime 
is worth mentioning because it put an end to the coexistence of official exchange rate and 
the swap market exchange rate which traded foreign exchange in the retention system. 
In  1994,  the  exchange  rate  reform  marked  the  launch  of  the  foreign  exchange  surrender 
system where enterprises are required to sell to the banks their foreign exchange receipts 
and  buy  foreign  exchange  from  the  banks  when  necessary,  ended  the  practice  of  foreign 
exchange retention and submission, and simplified the procedures for banks and enterprises 
to use foreign exchange, thus giving exporting enterprises a lot of incentives to export and 
earn foreign exchange. Meanwhile, with a unified inter-bank foreign exchange market being 
established, China began a new stage where the RMB exchange rate was based on market 
supply and demand. The RMB, as an important price tool, started to play a fundamental role 
in the allocation of foreign exchange resources. In 1994, when the dual exchange rates were 
unified, the RMB to dollar exchange rate adopted the swap market exchange rate of 8.7 yuan 
to  one  dollar.  This  reflected  market  fundamentals  and  the  need  of  supporting  exports  to 
mitigate the shortage of foreign exchange reserve. The nominal RMB to dollar exchange rate 
appreciated to 8.3 yuan per dollar, or by about 5 percent between the beginning of 1994 and 
1997 when the financial crisis was at its worst in Asia. This proves that RMB exchange rate 
was  fluctuating  and  floating,  reflecting  the  characteristics  of  a  managed  floating  exchange 
rate regime.  
2. 
The Asian financial crisis in 1997 caused a slow down in the improvement of 
managed floating exchange rate regime. After June 1997, as the crisis deepened, some 
Asian  currencies  depreciated  by  a  large  margins.  With  Chinese  export  seriously  affected, 
there were strong domestic opinions calling for RMB’s depreciation. If it took place, it would 
be  understood  by  various  parties.  Yet,  almost  all  countries  and  international  organizations 
worried that a weaker RMB would be followed by a new round of competitive depreciation. In 
order  to  prevent  the  further  contagion  of  the  crisis,  and  preserve  economic  and  financial 
stability in Asia, China made the announcement that the RMB would be not be depreciated, 
its  floating  range  would  be  narrowed,  and  its  exchange  rate  would  be  kept  stable  around 
8.28 yuan to one dollar.  
BIS Review 96/2010 
 1
As  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  tided  over,  China  has  been  more  active  on 
3. 
resuming and improving the managed floating exchange rate regime at an opportune 
time.  Facing  new  situations  after  China’s  accession  into  the  WTO  and  sluggish  global 
economic growth after the 911 attack, the range for RMB exchange rate narrowed for a fairly 
long time to reduce uncertainties and maintain the continuity of RMB exchange rate policy. 
This measure, however, is ad hoc rather than a long-term institutional arrangement.  
4. 
The exchange rate regime reform in 2005 was the continuation of the reform in 
1994.  The  essential  role  of  a  stable  and  healthy  financial  system  in  preventing  and 
addressing crisis was fully recognized in the wake of the Asian financial crisis. Around 2003, 
when  financial  reform  in  China  was  at  a  critical  juncture,  the  country  was  faced  with  the 
urgent  task  of  launching  joint-stock  reform  in  large  state-owned  banks,  including  the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), Agricultural Bank of China (ABC), Bank of 
China and China Construction Bank (CCB). The reform would improve their ability to adapt to 
the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  and  to  provide  companies  with  better  risk  management 
services,  but  it  was  an  onerous  work.  In  this  context,  the  reform  was  first  started  in  large 
state-owned banks in the summer of 2003. The Bank of Communications, Bank of China and 
Construction Bank of China completing the joint-stock reform and went public. Following that, 
in  April  2005,  the  reform  in  the  ICBC  was  started,  and  reform  in  the  ABC  and  the  China 
Development Bank was put on agenda. Reform in this front went ahead in parallel with the 
pilot  reform  program  of  non-tradable  shares  in  listed  companies,  the  introduction  of  short-
term corporate financing bills and asset securitization products in the money market, and the 
progress in the reform of rural credit cooperatives. As a result, the deployment of reform in 
large  financial  institutions,  which  is  the  foundation  for  exchange  rate  regime  reform,  was 
completed by July 2005. 
Meanwhile, the domestic pricing mechanism of resources was gradually reformed; reform in 
enterprises, particularly in state-owned enterprises (SOEs) proceeded smoothly; a group of 
large enterprises were listed in domestic and overseas markets; restructuring efforts aiming 
at  better  resources  allocation  was  strengthened;  and  corporate  governance  and  finance 
management  were  enhanced.  Progresses  in  these  areas  reinforced  the  foundation  for 
exchange rate regime reform on the micro level. Because of all these developments, it was 
believed that it was the right time to further reform the exchange rate regime. On July 21, 
2005,  China  improved  the  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  by  moving  into  a 
managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference 
to a basket of currencies. 
II. 
The framework of the managed floating regime was enhanced and its content 
enriched 
The  mechanism  that  moves  the  exchange  rate  towards  the  adaptive  and 
1.  
equilibrium level has been gradually established. The RMB exchange rate first dropped 
and  then  climbed  up  in  general  over  the  past  three  decades.  Since  1978,  the  yuan 
depreciated from the initial 2.8 yuan per dollar, then moved downward to 8.7 yuan per dollar 
in early 1994, after which it edged up to 8.11 yuan per dollar in July 2005, and further rose to 
6.85  yuan  per  dollar  in  late  2009.  The  exchange  rate  has  been  allowed  to  move  within  a 
wider  band,  i.e.,  from  a  daily  band  of  0.3  percent  against  the  US  dollar  at  the  start  of  the 
reform in 2005 to 0.5 percent in 2007. As a result, market participants began to search for 
the adaptive and equilibrium exchange rate level by looking at balance of payments positions 
and foreign currency supply and demand.  
2.  
Market supply and demand has an increasingly important role in determining 
the exchange rate. Following the liberalization of the RMB current account in late 1996, and 
with increasing channels for capital flows such as direct investment, portfolio investment and 
cross-border  financing  since  2001,  foreign  exchange  supply  and  demand  has  improved, 
facilitating trade and investment, and making the holding and use of foreign currency more 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2010
convenient. The role of supply and demand is becoming increasingly important in the foreign 
exchange market. 
3.  
The foreign exchange market mechanism has improved. Before 1994, the RMB 
exchange  rate  was  determined  both  by  the  authority  and  the  swap  market.  Now  it  is 
determined  in  the  interbank  foreign  exchange  market  through  OTC  transactions  and 
supported  by  market  makers.  As  the  foreign  exchange  market  grows  rapidly,  the  role  of 
market participants in determining the exchange rate central parity has been increasing. In 
response to the diversified trade and investment structure, the exchange rate regime is with 
reference to a basket of currencies, rather than pegging to the US dollar. 
III. 
A managed floating exchange rate regime is in China’s long-term and 
fundamental interests and we will continue to implement the regime 
Adopting  a  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is  an  inevitable  choice  for  China  to 
deepen reform and opening-up, and adapt to the new pattern of development and opening-
up after China’s accession into the WTO. In line with the scientific approach to development, 
this is a choice consistent with China’s economic development level, improvement in market-
based  institutional  arrangements  and  financial  regulation  and  enhanced  resilience  of  the 
corporate sector. Continued efforts will be made to implement the regime. 
1. 
The  regime  is  essential  for  economic  restructuring  and  the  optimization  of 
resource  allocation.  Exchange  rate  represents  the  price  relations  between  tradable  and 
non-tradable  goods  and  services.  A  fixed  exchange  rate  may  make  accounting  and  risk 
management  easier  for  market  participants  for  some  time,  but  if  misaligned  with  the 
fundamentals of supply and demand for too long a time, such a regime will distort relative 
prices on domestic and foreign markets, undermine the efficiency of resource allocation and 
accumulate domestic and foreign economic imbalances. A managed floating exchange rate 
regime  will  enhance  the  efficiency  of  resource  allocation,  adjust  the  relation  between 
domestic and foreign prices in a flexible manner, channel resources to the sectors that are 
driven  by  domestic  demand  such  as  the  services  sector,  promote  industrial  upgrading, 
transform the pattern of economic development, reduce trade imbalances and over-reliance 
on export, enable domestic demand to play a more important role in economic development 
and thus promote sustainable and balanced economic growth.  
2.  We  need  such  a  regime  to  strengthen  and  improve  macroeconomic  policy-
making.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  reform  and  opening-up  and  especially  since  the  entry 
into the WTO, China has seized the historical opportunity of international industrial relocation 
and  improved  productivity  and  economic  strengths.  Nevertheless,  the  economy  has 
problems  such  as  large  BOP  surplus,  rapid  growth  of  foreign  reserves,  oversupply  of 
liquidity,  inflation  and  heightened  pressures  from  asset  bubbles.  Meanwhile,  growing 
magnitude  of  capital  flows  has  posed  challenges  to  the  independence  and  flexibility  of 
monetary policies. Given the impossible trinity of achieving monetary policy independence, 
fixed exchange rate and free capital flow in an open economy, a managed floating exchange 
rate  regime  will  help  enhance  the  proactiveness  and  capability  of  macroeconomic 
management and the effectiveness of monetary policy, curb inflation and asset bubbles and 
contain the macroeconomic risks.  
3. 
A  rigid  exchange  rate  regime  is  not  responsive  to  crisis  and  may  even  trigger 
monetary  and  financial  crises.  According  to  international  experiences,  prolonged  BOP 
imbalances and peg to a single currency by a medium- or large-sized economy can hardly 
sustain,  and  may  increase  its  vulnerabilities  to  crises.  A  rigid  exchange  rate  has  been  an 
important contributing factor to the Mexican financial crisis in 1994, Asian financial crisis in 
1997, Brazilian financial crisis in 1999 and Argentine financial crisis in 2001. Not much harm 
will be done to a small country if it links its currency with that of a large one, but this is hardly 
the case for large countries as they have larger interaction with global economy. In addition, 
a  fixed  exchange  rate  is  an  easy  excuse  for  trade  friction  and  protectionism.  Thus,  it  is 
BIS Review 96/2010 
 3
necessary for large countries to have flexible exchange rate policy. China has adopted and 
will  continue  to  improve  the  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  While  furthering  the 
exchange  rate  regime  reform  provides  a  great  deal  of  potential  for  future  benefits,  efforts 
would also be needed to minimize possible negative impacts. These measures help maintain 
a  facilitating  environment  for  free  trade,  achieve  long-term  cooperation  and  common 
development, facilitate China’s economic development at the juncture of strategic importance 
and foster a favorable international economic and trade environment.  
On  June  19,  2010,  the  PBC  announced  to  further  reform  the  RMB  exchange  rate  regime 
based on measures taken in 2005. According to the announcement, continued emphasis will 
be placed to reflecting market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies 
and the exchange rate floating bands will remain the same as previously announced in the 
inter-bank  foreign  exchange  market.  This  is  an  important  move  in  reforming  the  managed 
floating exchange rate regime and will help maintain RMB exchange rate basically stable at 
an  adaptive  and  equilibrium  level,  promote  a  balanced  BOP  account  and  financial  market 
stability and realize quality and rapid growth of the economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2010
