Thomas M Hoenig: Hard choices 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,  
at the Town Hall Meeting, Lincoln, Nebraska, 13 August 2010. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
These are trying times for the U.S. economy. The unemployment rate is almost 10 percent, 
our  financial  system  remains  under  stress,  community  bank  failures  have  become  weekly 
news and the central bank is printing money to such an extent that zero interest rates bring 
little return to those who choose to save.  
Not in decades has the Federal Reserve seen such challenges in how it conducts monetary 
policy. With this in mind, this morning I will give you my sense of the issues we face and the 
hard  choices  that  must  be  made.  I’ll  begin  by  focusing  on  financial  reform  legislation, 
including  my  observations  about  where  we  are  with  too-big-to-fail.  Then  I’ll  turn  to  the 
economy and monetary policy.  
Regulatory choices  
On  March  6,  2009,  I  gave  a  speech  in  Omaha  called  “Too  Big  Has  Failed.”  I  shared  my 
thoughts  about  the  financial  crisis  and  my  concern  for  the  long-run  effects  of  bailing  out 
investors of the largest financial institutions. That speech hit a nerve by stating what many 
considered a simple truth, which is that taxpayers should not subsidize our largest financial 
firms.  With  our  very  important  Federal  Reserve  Branch  office  in  Omaha,  I  have  been  in 
Nebraska many times since then, but this is my first trip back after the passage of financial 
reform  legislation,  so  it  seems  an  appropriate  time  to  review  some  of  the  implications  of 
enacting the 2,300-page law.  
Overall,  important  steps  were  taken  in  an  effort  to  strengthen  and  enhance  the  regulatory 
framework and accountability of financial institutions. However, the success of this legislation 
entirely depends on how well regulatory authorities implement the new requirements.  
There is, for example, a provision called the Volcker Rule, which will limit a large firm’s ability 
to set up speculative activities. So-called “proprietary” trading and the sponsorship of hedge 
funds  that  engage  in  higher-risk  activities  must  be  done  outside  of  commercial  banks  and 
bank  holding  companies,  away  from  direct  access  to  insured  funds  and  the  Federal 
Reserve’s discount window. This is an important provision. However, there are exceptions to 
the rule and, again, whether it works as intended will depend on how strongly the rules are 
written, and how well they are interpreted and enforced.  
The legislation also sets up a new consumer bureau to address the gaps in unregulated and 
under-regulated financial firms, including mortgage finance companies, payday lenders and 
credit  card  issuers.  Its  success  will  depend  on  whether  it  can  appropriately  identify  those 
institutions exploiting those gaps and bring them into accepted standards of behavior. If the 
new bureau merely directs its resources to the already heavily regulated community banks, 
its  beneficial  effects  will  be  minor.  A  targeted  implementation  program  is  critical  if  the 
consumer is to experience the hoped-for benefits.  
The  legislation  primarily  hoped  to  address  the  public’s  concerns  about  too-big-to-fail 
institutions – that is, those that are so large and interconnected that they will be bailed out by 
taxpayers  no  matter  what  risks  and  bad  decisions  they  make  because  they  are  too 
“systemically important” to be allowed to fail. Whether or not too-big-to-fail is addressed by 
this  legislation  depends  on  the  leadership  at  the  regulatory  agencies  when  the  next  crisis 
occurs.  The  law  now  requires  that  the  FDIC  take  into  receivership  an  institution  that  is 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 1
designated  as  “in  default  or  danger  of  default”  for  which  the  regular  bankruptcy  process 
would have systemic consequences. The process for taking this action is complex, requiring 
multiple  regulatory  parties  to  agree,  the  Treasury  Secretary  making  the  final  determination 
with  the  President’s  concurrence,  and  a  court  ruling  that  the  action  isn’t  arbitrary  and 
capricious.  This  will  be  an  incredible  challenge  for  the  regulatory  agencies.  Recent 
experience tells us that time is of the essence in a national liquidity crisis. It will be extremely 
difficult  in  practice  to  designate  the  largest  institutions  as  insolvent,  take  them  over  and 
liquidate. The simple truth is “too-big-to-fail” will not go away easily.  
Our  largest  institutions,  even  after  their  poor  performance  during  this  last  crisis,  remain 
financially and politically powerful institutions. It gives me pause, for example, that after the 
recent devastating experience of the global banking crisis, regulatory authorities are already 
backing off initial attempts to strengthen international capital requirements for these largest 
banks and financial firms. The Basel Committee just announced an agreement to establish 
for  our  largest  global  banks  a  Tier  1  capital-to-asset  ratio  of  3  percent.  This  is  a  33-to-1 
leverage  ratio.  Bear  Stearns  entered  this  crisis  and  failed  with  a  34-to-1  leverage  ratio.  It 
leaves a small cushion for error and is a level of risk that I judge unacceptable.  
As I consider the outlook for financial regulation, I am hopeful but realistic regarding whether 
next  time  things  will  be  different.  Regulatory  agencies  have  been  given  a  mandate  and 
authority  to  strengthen  oversight  of  the  largest  firms.  Success  will  depend  on  whether  we 
choose to make hard calls and to use the new authority with integrity, fairness and resolve.  
Monetary choices  
I want to spend my remaining time on monetary policy. I acknowledge that there are different 
perspectives on the array of economic data we receive and analyze, and therefore there are 
legitimate, differing views about what is best for the economy. The Federal Reserve has a 
dual  mandate  to  pursue  stable  prices  and  stable  long-term  growth.  The  entire  FOMC  is 
committed to pursuing those goals, but there are differing views on the causes and fixes to 
our current situation.  
I have been at the Fed through past swings in the business cycle. There is today a familiar 
theme as I listen to the media, various economists and “market experts.” They say we are 
entering the era of a “new normal” in which we have to accept high unemployment and low 
income growth and that interest rates will remain at zero indefinitely. They warn that deflation 
is a serious risk and that the U.S. could become another Japan, which must be avoided at all 
costs. Before this week’s FOMC meeting, The Wall Street Journal wrote that the Fed would 
add more stimulus into the economy – including the purchase of long-term treasuries. It turns 
out that reporter was remarkably prescient.  
I share these concerns about our economy. Economic conditions are far from satisfactory, 
unemployment is simply too high, and we want a stronger recovery. But as much as I want 
short-term improvement, I am mindful of possible longer-term consequences of zero interest 
rates and further easing actions. Rather than improve economic outcomes, I worry that the 
FOMC  is  inadvertently  adding  to  “uncertainty”  by  taking  such  actions.  Remember,  high 
interest rates did not cause the financial crisis or the recession. Let me summarize four key 
points that I judge relevant in choosing among monetary policy options.  
Trend data show modest recovery  
The recovery is proceeding as many economists earlier this year outlined that it would. It is a 
modest recovery, with mixed results. Yet, GDP is likely to expand at somewhere around a 
3 percent rate through the remainder of the year. Month-to-month data will be mixed, as is 
typical during recovery. For example, industrial production was down 0.3 percent for April, up 
1.3 percent for May, and up 0.1 percent for June. New orders for non-defense capital goods 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2010
excluding aircraft were down 2.8 percent in April, up 4.7 percent in May, and up 0.6 percent 
in June. Durable goods orders were up by 2.9 percent in April, down 0.7 percent in May and 
down 1.2 percent in June. Corporate profits are being reported as consistently strong, month 
after  month.  What  these  data  points  tell  me  is  that  volatile  monthly  data  should  not  drive 
policy actions.  
While monthly data may be mixed, the trend data are consistently positive. Private job growth 
has been less than hoped for but positive nonetheless. Private payrolls increased 630,000 
since  January  1.  In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  private  labor  income  increased  in  all 
components: hours worked, employment and wages. Hours worked have risen more rapidly 
than employment, which is typical for the early stages of an economic recovery. In fact, we 
are  experiencing  a  better  pace  of  recovery  this  time  than  at  this  point  in  our  previous  two 
economic recoveries.  
In  addition,  since  the  second  quarter  of  2009,  personal  income  growth  has  increased 
2.8 percent,  consumption  is  up  1.6  percent,  investment  in  equipment  and  software  is  up 
15 percent,  and  housing  is  up  5.3  percent.  Year-over-year,  industrial  production  is  up 
8.2 percent,  high  tech  is  up  20  percent  and  manufacturing  is  up  8.3  percent.  Corporate 
profits are up 57 percent since the fourth quarter of 2008. While we are not where we want to 
be, the economy is recovering and, barring specific shocks and bad policy, it should continue 
to grow over the next several quarters.  
Corrections take time  
We  are  recovering  from  a  horrific  set  of  shocks,  and  it  will  take  time  to  “right  the  ship.” 
Moreover,  the  financial  and  economic  shocks  we  have  experienced  did  not  “just  happen.” 
The financial collapse followed years of too-low interest rates, too-high leverage, and too-lax 
financial  supervision  as  prescribed  by  deregulation  from  both  Democratic  and  Republican 
administrations. In judging how we approach this recovery, it seems to me that we need to 
be careful not to repeat those policy patterns that followed the recessions of 1990–91 and 
2001. If we again leave rates too low, too long out of our uneasiness over the strength of the 
recovery and our intense desire to avoid recession at all costs, we are risking a repeat of 
past errors and the consequences they bring.  
Here are some important figures regarding just how out of balance our economy became and 
what might have contributed to these imbalances between the early ’90s and today:  
 
The real fed funds rate averaged 1.6 percent between 1991 and 1995, 0.37 percent 
between 2001 and 2005 and –1.0 percent from 2008 to the present, hardly a tight 
policy environment.  
Gross federal debt increased from 60 percent to 75 percent of nominal GDP  
Consumer debt increased from 63 percent to 94 percent of nominal GDP  
Nonfinancial  debt  increased  from  189  percent  of  nominal  GDP  at  the  start  of  the 
decade to 234 percent by December 2008.  
Between 1993 and 2007, the average leverage of the 20-largest financial institutions 
in  the  U.S.  (total  assets-to-tangible  equity  capital)  increased  from  18-to-1,  to  over 
25-to-1, reaching as high as 31-to-1.  
The U.S. increased its debt to the rest of the world dramatically from 4.87 percent to 
24.32 percent of nominal GDP.  
   Obviously,  the  effect  of  these  trends  on  our  economy  has  been  significant  and  we  must 
accept that they will not be corrected quickly.  
BIS Review 107/2010 
 3
It is not time for tight policy  
In my view, maintaining an accommodative monetary policy is necessary at this time, but a 
clear policy path toward a less highly accommodative policy will encourage a more sustained 
recovery.  Under  such  a  policy,  financial  deleveraging  will  evolve  slowly  and  many  of  the 
remaining  economic  imbalances  will  rebalance.  Under  such  a  policy,  the  economy  will 
expand at a sustainable moderate pace with similar moderate job growth, but job growth that 
will be stable and resilient. There may be ways to accelerate GDP growth, but in my view, 
highly expansionary monetary policy is not a good option.  
To  be  clear,  I  am  not  advocating  a  tight  monetary  policy.  I  am  advocating  a  policy  that 
remains accommodative but slowly firms as the economy itself expands and moves toward 
more  balance.  I  advocate  dropping  the  “extended  period”  language  from  the  FOMC’s 
statement and removing its guarantee of low rates. This tells the market that it must again 
accept risks and lend if it wishes to earn a return. The FOMC would announce that its policy 
rate will move to 1 percent by a certain date, subject to current conditions. At 1 percent, the 
FOMC  would  pause  to  give  the  economy  time  to  adjust  and  to  gain  confidence  that  the 
recovery  remains  on  a  reasonable  growth  path.  At  the  appropriate  time,  rates  would  be 
moved  further  up  toward  2  percent,  after  which  the  nominal  fed  funds rate  will  depend  on 
how well the economy is doing.  
If such a path were chosen, then how might GDP and important components perform? Let 
me start with consumption, which for decades amounted to about 63 percent of GDP. During 
the boom it rose to 70 percent. It seems reasonable that the consumer will most likely return 
toward more historical levels relative to GDP and then grow in line with income. If so, the 
consumer  will  contribute  to  growth  but  is  unlikely  to  intensify  its  contribution  to  previously 
unsustainable levels.  
To  view  the  role  of  the  consumer  from  another  perspective,  I  would  note  that  personal 
savings declined from nearly 10 percent of disposable income in 1985 to less than 2 percent 
in 2007. It is now closer to 6 percent, better in many ways, but still below historical norms. 
Assuming it stabilizes and personal incomes grows as it has so far this recovery, you get a 
clearer sense of how consumption will contribute to the economy’s expansion but also why it 
is unlikely to play a dominant role as it did in this past decade.  
While  businesses  need  to  rebalance  as  well,  they  are  essential  to  the  strength  of  the 
recovery.  Fortunately,  they  are  in  the  early  stages  of  doing  just  that.  Profits  are  improving 
and  corporate  balance  sheets  for  the  nonfinancial  sector  are  strengthening  and  are 
increasingly able to support investment growth as confidence in the economy rebuilds. Also, 
although credit supply and demand may be an issue impeding the recovery to some extent, a 
shortage of monetary stimulus is not the issue. There is enormous liquidity in the market, and 
it can be accessed as conditions improve.  
Finally, the federal government needs to rebalance its balance sheet as well. Federal and 
state budget pressures are enormous, and uncertain tax programs surely are a risk to the 
recovery.  This  adds  harmful  uncertainty  upon  both  businesses  and  consumers.  However, 
while  these  burdens  are  a  drag  on  our  outlook,  they  are  not  new  to  the  U.S.  and,  by 
themselves, should not bring our economy down unless they go unaddressed.  
I  believe  the  economy  has  the  wherewithal  to  recover.  However,  if,  in  an  attempt  to  add 
further fuel to the recovery, a zero interest rate is continued, it is as likely to be a negative as 
a positive in that it brings its own unintended consequences and uncertainty. A zero policy 
rate  during  a  crisis  is  understandable,  but  a  zero  rate  after  a  year  of  recovery  gives 
legitimacy to questions about the sustainability of the recovery and adds to uncertainty.  
4 
 BIS Review 107/2010
Market motives  
We were reminded of the critical nature of our financial markets when they locked up during 
the crisis. We need markets to function smoothly. However, market participants should not 
direct policy. When mixed data are reported as systematically negative results, and the more 
positive,  long-term  growth  trends  fail  to  be  adequately  acknowledged,  it  is  an  invitation  to 
hasty  actions.  Of  course  the  market  wants  zero  rates  to  continue  indefinitely:  They  are 
earning  a  guaranteed  return  on  free  money  from  the  Fed  by  lending  it  back  to  the 
government through securities purchases.  
The  current  recovery  in  its  first  year  saw  GDP  grow  an  average  of  3.2  percent.  The  GDP 
growth  rate  for  the  1991  recovery  was  2.61  percent;  and  for  the  2001  recovery,  it  was 
1.92 percent. We would all like to see a stronger recovery, but slow growth is not a decline in 
growth and we should not react hastily.  
The summer of 2010 has seemed strikingly familiar to me. I recently went back and looked at 
news reports for the spring and summer of 2003, just prior to when the FOMC lowered the 
fed funds rate to 1 percent, where it remained until 2004. I’ll provide just two examples. In 
June  2003,  one  prominent  economist  noted  in  USA  Today:  “The  Federal  Reserve  Board 
recently warned that America faces a risk of [deflation]. Japan has been suffering from it for 
more  than  a  decade.  Europe  may  be  heading  toward  it.  The  entire  world  economy  could 
succumb  to  it.  …This  could  be  the  first  round  in  a  deflationary  cycle.  The  Commerce 
Department  reports  orders  to  U.S.  factories  slipped  2.9%  in  April  from  March,  the  largest 
decline in  17  months. …With  fewer  jobs and  stagnant  wages,  Americans  won’t  be  able  to 
buy enough to keep the economy going.”  
Also in June 2003, a Boston Globe columnist noted: “On the surface, one can make the case 
that the Fed doesn’t have to do anything at all. Interest rates are incredibly low….Still, the 
Fed  will  not  sit  on  its  hands.  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  and  his  deputies  have  done 
everything but advertise the coming rate cut on the Goodyear blimp. Their motivation is to 
avoid deflation. …Another rate cut, even a cut of one-half point, doesn’t guarantee that there 
won’t be an economic collapse. But it makes that collapse less likely – hence the notion of 
rate  cut  as  insurance  policy.  As  insurance,  a  rate  cut  is  pretty  cheap.  Lower  rates  aren’t 
going to trigger a burst of inflation, and if they give the economy an extra boost, well, who is 
going to complain about that?”  
In  the  third  quarter  of  2003,  immediately  following  these  and  many  similar  articles,  GDP 
expanded  at  what  turned  out  to  be  nearly  a  7  percent  annual  rate,  yet  rates  were  left  at 
1 percent for several months. With the low rates very low for a considerable period, credit 
began to expand significantly and set the stage for one of the worst economic crisis since the 
great depression. In my view, it was a very expensive insurance premium. Unemployment 
today is 9.5 percent. I fully acknowledge that I was on the FOMC at that time. That’s why I 
believe that zero rates during a period of modest growth are a dangerous gamble.  
The  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s  was  a  traumatic  event.  We  need  to  be  aware  of  its 
lessons.  We  need  to  avoid  its  mistakes.  For  example,  the  Fed  should  never  again  double 
reserve requirements overnight. However, I urge us not to forget other more-recent lessons 
from the great inflation and the financial crisis of 2008: Real interest rates that are negative 
40 percent of the time create severe consequences.  
One final note about deflation: The consumer price index was a mere 18 in 1945 but was 172 
at the start of this century. Today, despite our most recent crisis, the CPI is over 219. Not 
once  during  more  than  half  a  century  has  the  index  systematically  declined.  I  find  no 
evidence that deflation is the most serious threat to the recovery today.  
BIS Review 107/2010 
 5
Conclusion  
I agree that the Federal Reserve needs to keep its policy rate accommodative. For a while 
longer, it should remain even below the long-run equilibrium rate. However, the economy is 
improving and is growing at a rate faster than the last two recoveries. Importantly, the recent 
financial  crisis  and  recession  was  not  caused  by  high  interest  rates  but  by  low  rates  that 
contributed to excessive debt and leverage among consumers, businesses and government. 
We need to get off of the emergency rate of zero, move rates up slowly and deliberately. This 
will align more closely with the economy’s slow, deliberate recovery so that policy does not 
lag the recovery.  
Monetary policy is a useful tool, but it cannot solve every problem faced by the United States 
today. In trying to use policy as a cure-all, we will repeat the cycle of severe recession and 
unemployment in a few short years by keeping rates too low for too long. I wish free money 
was really free and that there was a painless way to move from severe recession and high 
leverage to robust and sustainable economic growth, but there is no short cut. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2010
