Mario Draghi: Trade, competitiveness and Europe 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  2nd  EFIGE  (European  Firms  in  the  Global  Economy) 
Scientific Workshop and Policy Conference, Rome, 18 June 2010. 
 It  is  a  honour  and  a  pleasure  for  the  Bank  of  Italy  to  host  the  second  EFIGE  Scientific 
Workshop  and  Policy  Conference.  EFIGE  stands  for  “European  Firms  in  the  Global 
Economy:  Internal  Policies  for  External  Competitiveness”,  and  no  topic  could  be  more 
relevant for the policy debate today: we are in the aftermath of a global recession that may 
have redesigned the comparative advantages of nations; that is challenging the capacity of 
most European economies to maintain competitiveness.  
Foreign  trade  has  been  one  of  the  main  channels  of  contagion  in  the  global  crisis  since 
2008. The case of Italy is emblematic. Despite a financial structure with many strong points, 
from the stability of the banking system to the financial health of households and firms, Italy 
suffered greatly the international crisis. In 2009 Italy’s GDP contracted by 5 per cent, more 
than  the  whole  euro  area,  more  than  in  any  other  time  since  World  War  II.  Despite  some 
recovery  since  the  second  half  of  2009,  industrial  production  is  still  one  fifth  below  the 
cyclical peak recorded in the spring of 2008. 
The survey of Italian firms that the Bank of Italy conducts every year has allowed us to unveil 
the mechanisms through which the crisis propagated within the productive system. The large 
and sudden fall of demand in international markets led exporting firms to sharply cut back 
production, investment and purchases. These direct cutbacks have spread over through the 
supply chain: larger firms could offload a good part of the non-diversifiable risk due to the fall 
in  demand  on  small  suppliers.  This  effect  was  possibly  amplified  by  relocations  and  
re-internalizations of some production activities. Hence the crisis also hit firms less open to 
foreign  trade.  More  broadly,  the  increasingly  widespread  international  supply  chains  have 
contributed  to  the  universal  reach  of  the  crisis,  compounding  the  effects  of  distressed 
financial markets. 
It has been a big shock. Looking ahead, the point is now to understand to what extent trade 
flows and the geographical patterns of global production networks have been reshaped by 
the  crisis.  How  has  the  position  of  individual  firms  and  countries  changed?  What  can  the 
impact be of the necessary unwinding of global imbalances in the years to come?  
In  2008  and  2009  several  countries  undertook  trade-defensive  measures,  in  particular 
imposing discriminatory anti-dumping duties specifically targeted against low-cost exporters, 
such as China. In a number of cases, developing countries have also introduced new tariff 
and non-tariff barriers; advanced countries have instead often turned to measures in support 
of  the  domestic  sector  (such  as  the  bail-out  of  specific  domestic  industries  or  economic 
stimulus  packages  incorporating  discriminatory  clauses),  with  potential  indirect  anti-trade 
effects.  More  importantly,  lack  of  effective  political  support  has  continued  to  delay  the 
conclusion of the WTO Doha Round. 
Protectionism  remains  the  wrong  answer,  all  the  more  at  the  present  juncture.  Trade  is  a 
powerful engine of growth. It helps break down local monopolies, reduce prices to the benefit 
of consumers and firms. International competition favours productivity improvements through 
the  reallocation  of  resources  from  less  to  more  efficient  firms  and  by  spurring  firms  to 
innovate. 
This takes us to the second keyword of the EFIGE project: competitiveness. In a monetary 
union  the  lack  of  competitiveness causes  stagnation,  unemployment,  and,  in  the  long  run, 
budgetary  strains.  The  new  European  Strategy,  “EU2020”,  sees  in  competition,  human 
capital, innovation and R&D the crucial growth-enhancing factors. These factors also interact 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
with firm productivity and size to determine a firm’s success on international markets. In the 
manufacturing  sectors  more  severely  hit  by  the  crisis,  the  most  resilient  firms  have  been 
those that have been capable of shifting their sales to the most dynamic emerging markets, 
and  those  with  a  high  degree  of  market  power  warranted  by  their  ability  to  innovate  and 
satisfy their customers’ needs.  
The  EFIGE  project  has  a  third  important  facet  which  is  worth  mentioning:  its  European 
perspective.  In  Europe,  common  cultural  and  historical  roots,  common  goals  and  policy 
frameworks live together with a pervasive national heterogeneity. The diversity ranges from 
institutional  architectures  to  political  decision-making,  to  economic  agents’  choices  and 
patterns of behaviour. For analysts, this is a resource: they can compare countries and firms 
located  in  different  countries  to  isolate  the  relevant  differences,  to  learn  from  such 
differences, to identify the best practices. For policy makers it is a difficult challenge.  
We must reinforce the construction of Europe: the difficult times some European countries 
have had this year in coping with competitiveness and fiscal crises prove that beyond any 
doubt. We definitely need a stricter and more coordinated budgetary discipline, but what we 
need above all is progress on structural reforms in order to enhance growth potential, within 
a renewed European Pact. That should be our ambition. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
