Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Thoughts and visions on Islamic finance 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Malaysia Showcase Dinner, Manama, 3 May 2010. 
 I have the distinct honour today to welcome distinguished guests to the Malaysia Showcase 
Dinner, organized in conjunction with the 7th Islamic Financial Services Board Summit. Let 
me first of all express our appreciation to H.E. Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad for accepting our 
invitation to speak at this event, sharing his thoughts and vision on Islamic finance moving 
forward.  Tun  Mahathir  needs  no  introduction.  During  his  twenty  two  years  of  leadership, 
Malaysia experienced modernization and economic prosperity. Malaysia is today a forward 
looking nation that continues to sustain its economic performance. 
During  the  recent  unprecedented  international  financial  and  economic  crisis  in  2008  and 
2009, the Asian region has demonstrated remarkable resilience. The Asian economies have 
strong fundamentals with low public debt levels, providing flexibility to the governments in the 
region  to  implement  large  fiscal  stimulus.  In  addition,  strong  and  well  capitalized  financial 
institutions  prevented  disruption  to  credit  flows  to  the  private  sector.  In  addition,  the 
household  and  the  corporate  sectors  in  Asia  are  not  over  leveraged,  thus  are  in  a  better 
position  to  sustain  consumption  and  business  activity.  Asia  is  also  not  confronted  by 
widespread unemployment. 
Malaysia  is  very  much  part  of  this  strong  and  vibrant  region.  For  Malaysia,  the  economic 
recovery  is  expected  to  continue  to  gain  further  strength  in  2010.  In  this  environment,  the 
focus  of  our  policies  has  shifted  towards  building  the  foundations  to  transition  into  a  high 
value-added,  high  income  economy.  The  recently  announced  New  Economic  Model  is 
intended to further accelerate Malaysia’s development to realize these goals by 2020. The 
broad  thrust  of  the  strategies  is  to  provide  an  enabling  environment  that  will  generate  an 
economy that is characterised by high productivity, efficiency and innovation with the private 
sector  that  is  the  main  driver  of  growth.  Given  Malaysia’s  proven  record  of  economic 
flexibility  for  more  than  five  decades,  the  strategy  is  also  to  transition  to  new  areas  of 
comparative advantage to sustain our growth momentum. 
As a Central Bank, our attention has focused on ensuring the successful transformation of 
the Malaysian financial system that will facilitate our national economic development agenda. 
An  important  aspect  of  this  transformation  is  the  advancement  of  Islamic  finance  as  an 
integral part of the overall financial system in Malaysia that is fast becoming an international 
Islamic financial centre. 
Islamic  finance  has  continued  to  demonstrate  its  resilience  against  the  background  of  the 
current  challenging 
largely 
uninterrupted  expansion  of  the  global  growth  in  Islamic  finance  has  drawn  significant 
international interest. The interest in Islamic finance is no longer just from Muslim nations but 
also from non Muslim communities. Financial centers such as London, France, Hong Kong 
and Singapore are increasing their efforts to enhance the development of Islamic Finance in 
their financial centers. 
The  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  has  observed  the  strengthening  of  ties  between 
Asia and the Middle East in trade and investments in the recent years. The early trade ties 
allowed  the  Old  Silk  Road  to  flourish.  Today,  Islamic  finance  involving  financial  flows 
between  the  two  regions  has  revived  and  revitalized  these  economic  ties  that  generate 
mutually  reinforcing  growth  prospects  for  both  regions.  The  emergence  of  new  financial 
centres  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  and  their  increased  integration  has  strengthened  the 
foundations  for  a  New  Silk  Road.  It  has  also  opened  up  and  extended  this  potential  to 
financial  environment.  The  sustained  and 
international 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 1
developed economies to forge stronger financial linkages with the growth regions of Asia and 
the Middle East. 
Our  ties  with  Bahrain  have  long  been  cemented  with  the  signing  of  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  between  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  in 
2001 to jointly develop Islamic finance. There is a presence of institutions from Bahrain with 
interest  in  institutions  in  Malaysia  and  from  Malaysia  in  Bahrain,  since  2001.  In  Malaysia, 
they  have  become  part  of  more  than  150  entities  that  participate  in  our  Islamic  financial 
system that offers the spectrum of Islamic products and services. 
While  Islamic  finance  has  demonstrated  its  resilience  during  the  challenging  period, 
continuous efforts are being taken to further strengthen its resilience and facilitate effective 
liquidity  management  across  border.  The  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  in  collaboration 
with the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) has formed two taskforces – the Taskforce 
on Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability and the High Level Taskforce on Liquidity 
Management. An important recommendation of the Task Force on Financial Stability that has 
been now operationalised in 2010 is the establishment of an Islamic Financial Stability Forum 
(IFSF) to be held twice a year following IFSB Council Meetings. It forms a strategic platform 
for  productive  dialogue  to  promote  financial  stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  It  also 
has the potential to interface with the Financial Stability Board in the conventional system to 
serve the common aim of achieving global financial stability. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  An  important  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  is  not  only  its 
potential role and relevance in contributing to global financial stability but also its potential to 
support  overall  global  economic  growth.  More  importantly,  it  also  represents  an  important 
channel for greater connectivity among emerging economies to not only enhance trade and 
investment  flows  but  also  international  financial  flows  between  nations  and  in  so  doing 
contribute  towards  an  optimum  allocation  of  resources  across  borders.  These  combined 
efforts will contribute to the stability of the international financial system and global economic 
prosperity. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2010
