Zhou Xiaochuan: Development of China’s inter-bank market 
Address  by  Dr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  opening 
ceremony of the Shanghai Clearing House, Shanghai, 28 November 2009.  
 Mayor Han Zheng,  
Distinguished guests,  
Dear colleagues, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. 
Today, we gather here to celebrate the establishment of the Shanghai Clearing House. This 
is a milestone in the development  of China’s inter-bank market. On behalf of the People’s 
Bank  of  China  (PBC),  I’d  like  to  extend  warm  congratulations  on  the  founding  of  the 
Shanghai  Clearing  House.  I  also  thank  the  Shanghai  government  and  people  for  your 
gracious support. 
As  a  key  component  of  the  financial  market  system,  the  inter-bank  market  is  playing  an 
increasingly important role in macroeconomic management, fund allocation, pricing and risk 
management. The People’s Bank of China is committed to developing the inter-bank market. 
Over the past few years, efforts have been made to enhance financial innovation, improve 
the  market-based  mechanism,  and  expand  institutional  investors  on  the  market.  The 
inter-bank market has grown in both depth and width. In 2008, the turnover in the inter-bank 
borrowing  market  and  the  inter-bank  bond  market  totaled  114  trillion  yuan,  an  increase  of 
560  percent  from  that  in  2003.  Nominal  turnover  of  interest  rate  derivatives  recorded 
924.32 billion  yuan,  6.56  times  that  in  2006,  while  nominal  turnover  of  exchange  rate 
derivatives  registered  US$917.9  billion,  7.07  times  that  in  2006.  Transactions  on  the 
inter-bank foreign exchange market also multiplied.  
The rapidly developing inter-bank market needs more efficient and secure clearing services. 
In  June,  the  PBC  launched  the  net  value  clearing  service  for  spot  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
transactions  in  the  inter-bank  foreign  exchange  market,  which  effectively  reduced  bilateral 
credit sizes and lowered clearing costs. The centralized clearing of OTC transactions is an 
international  issue.  Centralized  clearing  systems  for  over-the-counter  spot  trading  and 
derivatives transactions of foreign exchange and interest rate products have been set up in 
advanced  countries  and  in  emerging  market  countries  such  as  Brazil  and  India.  More 
importantly,  following  the  financial  crisis,  countries  have  reached  consensus  on  controlling 
financial  transactions  risks.  Countries  agreed  that  lowering  counterparty  risk  and  ensuring 
effective supervision and regulation are the key to ensure secure and orderly development of 
the  OTC  derivatives  market,  which  can  be  best  achieved  through  centralized  clearing.  In 
April,  the  G20  agreed  to  introduce  centralized  clearing  for  Credit  Default  Swap  (CDS) 
transactions, and efforts to do this are already under way in U.S. and EU.  
Building an efficient financial system that is resilient to systemic risks is the focus throughout 
China’s  financial  reform  and  development.  It  is  also  the  expectation  from  the  central 
government. The inauguration of this professional and independent inter-bank clearing house 
represents a significant effort made by the PBC to address the global financial crisis, deepen 
financial market reform, enhance financial infrastructure and to promote Shanghai’s evolution 
to an international financial center in line with the arrangement of the central government. We 
believe that, with its comprehensive centralized clearing service to the central counterparty, 
the clearing house will provide efficient and cost-effective clearing service, and will provide 
technological support to advance financial innovation. The clearing house is also expected to 
help  foster  the  philosophy  that  transactions,  clearing  and  settlement  are  independent  from 
one another. It will enhance market transparency, improve the availability of information on 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
transaction  and  participant  exposures,  better  guard  against  systemic  risks,  and  safeguard 
financial stability.  
As  an  important  intermediary  that  serves  the  inter-bank  market,  the  Shanghai  Clearing 
House  is  expected  to  focus  on  providing  services,  and  develop  a  strong  sense  of  risk 
prevention.  It  should  work  to  build  itself  into  a  well  managed,  market-based,  international, 
and  professional  institution  to  better  meet  the  demand  for  ever  increasing  and  diverse 
services.  It  is  important  to  improve  various  arrangements,  including  membership,  security, 
mark-to-market on a daily basis, and risk provisioning, and to enhance risk management to 
ensure secure, efficient, and stable functioning of the clearing system. The establishment of 
a  sound  corporate  governance  and  a  strong  professional  team  are  also  critical  for  the 
clearing house to provide better services.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  made  significant  achievements  in  developing  China’s 
financial markets. The prospects are promising, yet our task is demanding. I hope that, with a 
keen awareness of responsibility and a spirit of innovation, the clearing house will provide 
secure, efficient, and low-cost clearing services for inter-bank participants. It is also my hope 
that the clearing house will have the support from all shareholders and market participants. 
Let us work together to make concerted efforts to promote the rapid and sound development 
of China’s financial markets.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
