Jean-Pierre Danthine: Calmer waters after the storm? 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 18 March 2010. 
 Looking back 
I. 
We  are  emerging  from  a  financial and  economic  crisis  of  major  proportions.  The  extent  of 
value destruction during the last two and a half years may well match the losses registered 
during the Great Depression. The lessons we will draw from this historical episode should 
leave us wiser. They will alter, in some fundamental ways, our understanding of finance and 
macroeconomics  and  hopefully,  as  well,  the  behaviour  of  economic  participants  –  with  a 
better designed economic system. Today I will begin by looking back and reviewing some of 
the main events that have occurred since the last Money Market Event which happened to 
coincide with the turning point of the financial crisis. I will then look forward and describe how 
the  SNB  perceives  the  immediate  future.  Finally  I  will  briefly  address  two  of  the  most 
pressing challenges confronting us – exiting from unconventional monetary policy measures 
and rethinking financial regulation.  
Let me turn my attention to where it all started, that is, the US real estate sector. During a 
long period of low interest rates, low risk premia, subdued volatilities and general economic 
optimism, US house prices increased in an unprecedented wave to the end of 2006, at which 
point  the  bubble  burst.  The  loss  in  housing-related  wealth  from  cycle  peak  to  trough  is 
staggering, something of the order of USD 7 trillion.1 Part of these losses are paper losses, 
since not everyone entered the market at its peak and a portion of these losses have been 
absorbed by households themselves; the rest must be borne by financial intermediaries. To 
this  day  the  worldwide  write-downs  by  the  financial  sector,  including,  but  not  limited  to 
recognised losses from the housing sector, are estimated at USD 1.7 trillion.2 However, we 
are  still  counting,  as  the  latest  results  published  by  some  of  the  world’s  major  financial 
institutes reveal. There have been many examples of real estate crises in the recent past, 
including one in Switzerland in the early nineties. What distinguishes the current crisis is its 
breadth  and  international  character.  These  two  characteristics  are  intimately  related:  the 
rapid expansion of subprime mortgages and the internationalisation of the mortgage-based 
financial instruments brought international capital to the US real estate sector. This capital 
helped inflate the property bubble in the first place; it also explains why the subsequent crisis 
turned into an international financial market event and then into a global economic crisis! A 
quick back-of-the-envelope calculation comes up with a figure for lost flow income of at least 
10%  of  world  GDP.  We  have  escaped  a  new  Great  Depression,  but in  the  end worldwide 
income  losses  have  probably  exceeded  the  income  losses  associated  with  the  Great 
Depression.  
Since  the  last  Money  Market  Event  a  year  ago,  the  international  financial  system  has 
emerged from the brink of collapse, financial conditions have improved on a broad front and 
a  hesitant  economic  recovery  has  been  initiated.  By  and  large,  the  trough  on  the  financial 
front was reached in Q1 2009 while the economic low point was probably attained one or two 
quarters later. Exceptional fiscal and monetary policy measures contributed without doubt to 
these  developments.  Representative  charts  for  last  year  show  a  strong  recovery  in  equity 
markets, a return to calmer  money  markets, a decrease in credit spreads, and a return to 
                                                 
1  Source: Fed Flow of Funds Statistics, Datastream. 
2  Source: Bloomberg. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 1
more  activity  in  corporate  bond  issuances.  Noteworthy  is  the  fact  that,  in  contrast  to 
developments in other countries, there was no credit crunch in Switzerland. 
In our country, as elsewhere, a very expansionary monetary policy has been a key element 
of  the  response  to  the  crisis.  From  October  2008  to  March  2009,  the  SNB  carried  out  a 
massive reduction in the Libor target range, pursuing a de facto zero interest rate policy. As 
of March 2009, the SNB adopted measures termed “unconventional” in order to loosen the 
monetary  reins  further  when  there  was  no  more  room  for  interest  rate  reduction.  These 
measures took three main distinct forms: longer-term repo transactions, purchases of bonds 
issued by domestic borrowers, and purchases of foreign currencies.  
Today,  viewed  from  an  international  perspective,  the  Swiss  economy  is  in  a  relatively 
favourable position. GDP has been growing for two consecutive quarters. Inflation is back in 
positive territory but without excessive upward pressure. Fears of deflation, which constituted 
one  of  the  major  risks  of  the  past  year,  have  not  yet  disappeared  but  are  receding. 
Employment  is  no  longer  falling  and  unemployment  may  be  stabilising.  The  Swiss  export 
sector was strongly hit by the crisis and is still fragile. Economic activity has been sustained 
by domestic consumption (both private and public) and by construction activity. Last year’s 
GDP  growth,  at  –1.5%,  constituted  the  worst  performance  for  the  Swiss  economy  since 
1975. Yet this figure is considerably better than the corresponding figure for most developed 
economies. Let us spend a moment examining the remarkable fact that private consumption 
growth  in  Switzerland  has  remained  positive  throughout  practically  all  stages  of  the 
downturn.  Immigration  and  precaution  are  the  two  key  words  that  explain  this  exceptional 
result  (with  a  third  contributing  factor  being  the  fact  that  disposable  incomes  have  stayed 
high in real terms, owing to a strong pre-crisis growth performance and a job market more 
robust  than  might  have  been  feared).  The  recent  immigration  has  been  a  positive 
contribution  to  consumption.  But  even  the  per  capita  figure  for  consumption  has  not 
decreased  during  the  crisis.  This  has  been  possible  because,  very  much  in  a  textbook 
fashion, Swiss consumers have been able, during times of crisis, to draw on savings that had 
been comfortably replenished before the storm arrived. This is not only exemplary, it is an 
important lesson we can learn from the crisis for use in the future, and it holds true not only 
for  households  but  for  companies  and  public  entities  as  well.  There  are  many  ways  to 
express this message, but allow me to refer to French classical literature and recall for you 
Jean de la Fontaine’s celebrated fable about the cricket and the ant: “La cigale et la fourmi”. 
In the fable, the cricket who had not accumulated surpluses during the plenteous summer 
days preceding the crisis, found herself “fort dépourvue quand la bise fut venue”, that is, she 
“found when the winter winds blew free, her cupboard bare as bare could be”. The fact that, 
in this situation, the ant of the fable was not eager to lend to the singing cricket lends further 
realism to the analogy.  
Current environment and short-term prospects 
II. 
What  now?  We  are  not  yet  ashore  and  the  relatively  positive  assessment  of  the  previous 
paragraph does not reflect a definitive evaluation. First, private consumption could be less 
robust should conditions on the labour market improve less than currently anticipated or even 
deteriorate  again.  Here  the  main  worry  is  the  ability  of  the  Swiss  economy  to  quickly 
reabsorb the 60,000 individuals working on a short-time basis. Recently, developments have 
been  encouraging.  In  turn,  the  situation  of  the  labour  market  depends  on  the  continued 
recovery of the 60% share of the economy that is geared to international markets. This view 
is  confirmed  by  the  apparent  difference  between  the  ongoing  recoveries  in  the  US  and 
Switzerland. While in the case of the US economy, the recovery is at the moment essentially 
focused on larger firms with smaller ones probably suffering from restricted access to credit, 
in  the  Swiss  case,  any  diverging  trend  between  big  and  small  firms  is  not  of  major 
importance.  Rather,  the  difference  is  more  accentuated  for  firms  that  are  predominantly 
export-oriented  as  opposed  to  those  oriented  towards  the  internal  market.  On  the  export 
side,  the  ability  of  Swiss  exporters  to  continue  redirecting  their  efforts  towards  the  more 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2010
dynamic  regions  of  the  world  economy,  in  particular  Emerging  Asia  may  be  a  crucial  test. 
This region is leading the world in terms of economic recovery from the crisis. It is clear here 
that the proponents of a reasonable version of the decoupling hypothesis are on the winning 
side of the intellectual debate.  
On a global level, inflation pressures are expected to remain subdued in most economies. In 
advanced  economies,  headline  inflation  is  expected  to  pick  up  from  near  neutral  levels  in 
2009, but remain low in 2010. For Switzerland, the path of inflation in the short term will be 
largely dictated by recent movements in oil prices and associated base effects. Inflation will 
nevertheless remain positive throughout 2010. This follows a negative rate of 0.5% in 2009. 
Assuming that monetary policy remains unchanged, the SNB’s forecast show that inflation 
will reach 0.7% this year. The SNB’s forecasts also show that inflation will begin to increase 
again from the beginning of 2011, to reach 2% in the first half of 2012.  
III. 
Policy challenges for the future 
Exit strategies 
1. 
For  the  SNB,  the  return  to  normality  does  not  pose  any  difficult  conceptual  problem.  The 
unconventional measures developed to combat the current crisis have in part modified the 
nature  of  the  liquidity  created.  Liquidity  resulting  from  repos  and  currency  swaps  is 
temporary: it flows back automatically when transactions are not renewed. Liquidity created 
by acquiring foreign exchange and Swiss franc bonds is more permanent. The issuance of 
SNB Bills routinely practiced since October 2008 has given the SNB a tool that can play a 
central  role  in  liquidity  absorption.  The  next  speaker,  my  colleague  Dewet  Moser,  will 
concentrate  on  the  more  technical  aspects  of  the  exit  strategy.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the 
toolbox is available. It is not a question of how, only of when. On the timing issue, because of 
the long and variable lags between monetary policy decisions and their impact on inflation, 
the decision to start tightening is a difficult one. It is necessary to balance the risk of moving 
too  soon,  when  the  economy  may  not  yet  be  fully  able  to  withstand  the  move,  against 
tightening too late and giving too much room to potential inflationary pressures. There is no 
magic  recipe.  All  the  more  so  because  we  are  reasoning  at  the  level  of  the  aggregate 
economy, that is, in terms of an average. This means, in particular, that for some parts of the 
economy  even  being  too  late  will  feel  as  though  it  is  too  soon.  What  is  certain  is  that  the 
current  expansionary  monetary  policy  cannot  be  maintained  indefinitely  without  incurring 
inflation  risks.  Therefore,  households  and  firms  should  prepare  themselves  for  a  return, 
sometime in the future, to a world of higher interest rates, with exchange rates being guided 
by market forces. This is the normal state of affairs, and all concerned should shake off bad 
habits learned in extraordinary times and remember that they are ultimately responsible for 
the long-run viability of their decisions and operations.  
Safer financial system: regulation 
2. 
It is here that we have most to learn from recent events, and here that we must adapt. There 
is a lot that could be said. However, I will be modest and confine myself to putting forward 
three simple ideas that are becoming part of the general consensus, as outlined in the G20 
and FSB agendas.  
Firstly,  it  should  not  be  a  game  of  us  (the  central  banks,  the  regulators,  the  government) 
versus  them  (the  banks  or  their  managers,  the  financial  sector).  What  is  at  stake  is  the 
design  of  an  economic  system  that  is  efficient,  compatible  with  the  rules  of  a  market 
economy and favourable to value creation. One essential lesson of the financial crisis is that 
the system was not properly designed. There is nothing bad per se about speculation, high 
risk  taking  or  even  high  levels  of  remuneration,  provided  the  principals  fully  assume  the 
consequences of their actions, and provided, in particular, that the tax payer remains out of 
the  picture.  It  is  clear  that  our  financial  system  did  not  satisfy  this  requirement.  In  the 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 3
advanced  G20  countries,  public-sector  capital  injections  to  the  banking  sector  so  far  have 
been estimated at 3.4% of GDP!3 This is a lower bound for the risks assumed by the public 
sector; the latter may have been closer to 25% of GDP for the major western economies, 
according to a recent estimate by J.C. Trichet.4 There is absolutely no economic, let alone 
moral, justification for situations where individuals enjoy high levels of remuneration or high 
returns when times are good, while the public sector has to come to the rescue when times 
are bad. In an ideal world, it should now be the responsibility of the financial sector – rather 
than  regulators  –  to  come  up  with  credible  proposals  for  change.  These  proposals  must 
inevitably imply that all the main players, in particular managers and creditors, have much 
more  at  stake  than  in  the  past.  Depending  on  how  creative  we  are  in  finding  solutions, 
financial institutions will have to be smaller and less prone to risk taking. For managers, at 
the very least, this must mean bonuses being tied to the long-run performance of their firm. 
Logically, one could envisage going further. The first real source of asymmetry is the very 
principle of limited liability. Beyond a certain level of remuneration and risk taking, one should 
ideally envisage a system which mimics that of partnerships or full personal liability. The fact 
that this is probably too ambitious justifies more ad-hoc complementary forms of regulation. 
Shareholders have by and large paid their dues in the crisis, but creditors typically have not. 
This is the level at which there is most to gain in both correcting the incentives (ultra-high 
leverage  should  worry  creditors  first,  and  regulators  only  afterwards)  and  protecting  tax 
payers. By definition banks rely a great deal on credit; it is conceptually clear that creditors 
should come into play before taxpayers when something goes wrong. This would naturally be 
the case via bankruptcy proceedings. If we cannot go that far because of the crucial role of 
banks and certain financial institutions, we must find other ways for creditors to step in before 
taxpayers are involved. This can be achieved through ways of anticipating part of bankruptcy 
outcomes  (living  wills)  or/and  through  some  form  of  automatic  conversion  of  a  significant 
proportion of bank debt into equity.  
Secondly, these considerations address the financial stability issue only through the lens of 
individual  institutions.  We  now  know  that  this  is  not  enough.  Microprudence  must  be 
supplemented  by  macroprudence,  i.e.,  a  system  design  that  encourages  well-managed 
individual  institutions  to  act,  in  particular  at  times  of  crisis,  in  ways  that  do  not  make  life 
harder for other institutions under stress. The issue is clear, the perfect solution less obvious. 
At  the  moment,  regulators  are  talking  about  dynamic  provisioning  or  capital  requirements 
conditional on the cycle phase. The key idea is that regulators may want to be more lenient 
in bad times so that individual institutions have more breathing room. If this is the case, the 
logical consequence is that the overall requirements (e.g. capital adequacy rules) should be 
tougher in good times. Of course Jean de la Fontaine would argue that this is simply good 
management and that regulation should be superfluous! 
Thirdly, it is important to realise that there is no perfect solution and no perfect design. This 
means that we need to be pragmatic and attack the problem from various angles. Some of 
the new regulation proposals are elegant and attractive because they go straight to the heart 
of  the  problem  (convertible  debt  or  contingent  capital),  others  are  less  pretty  (e.g.  size 
requirements), but we should accept this state of affairs until we have a clearer intellectual 
picture of this major issue.  
A final note on the issue of remuneration. There may or may not be some truth to the idea 
(not  very  popular  at  the  moment)  that  the  financial  sector  is  a  high  contributor  to  national 
value  creation,  and  that  this  explains  the  high  level  of  remuneration  in  that  sector.  But 
bankers have some convincing to do and doing so requires being honest about the source of 
income:  is  it  truly  high  productivity  or  is  it  leverage?  It  is  my  view  that  return  and  profit 
                                                 
3  Source: IMF (2010), “Lessons and Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis “, IMF Working Paper 
No. 10/44. 
4  Source: Jean-Claude Trichet, Interview with The Wall Street Journal, January 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2010
calculations should be made over the medium to long run and properly adjusted for risk and 
leverage.  As  an  example:  When  returns-to-equity  figures  are  used  to  boast  about  the 
efficiency of an institution they should be adjusted for leverage if the speaker does not want 
to be guilty of intellectual fraud.  
Conclusion 
IV. 
We have lived through several months of intense turbulence in the national and international 
financial  markets.  The  more  violent  storms  that  raged  in  2008  and  the  first  part  of  2009 
receded a little in the second half of 2009. A certain degree of calm has returned but the wind 
has not died down completely yet. The years ahead will be ones of transformation. A priority 
for fiscal as well as monetary policy will be a return to normality. Equally important will be to 
learn  the  right  lessons  from  these  turbulent  times  and  to  act  firmly  to  address  the 
shortcomings identified in the financial system.  
   5
BIS Review 33/2010 
   6 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 7
  8 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 11
  12 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 13
  14 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 15
  16 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 17
  18 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 19
  20 
 BIS Review 33/2010
  BIS Review 33/2010 
 21
 22 
 BIS Review 33/2010
