K C Chakrabarty: Strengthening co-operative credit institutions in India 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Review Meet on Implementation of Revival Package for Short Term Rural Cooperative 
Credit  Structure,  organised  by  the  National  Federation  of  State  Co-operative  Banks 
(NAFSCOB), New Delhi, 29 April 2010. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  R  C  Sarangi  and  Shri  K  Bhattacharya  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, President, NCUI & Chairman, KRIBHCO, Dr Bijender Singh, 
Chairman, NAFSCOB, Shri B. Subrahmanyam, MD, NAFSCOB, Smt Roshan R. Warjri, Vice-
Chairperson,  NAFSCOB,  Shri  P.  K.  Basu,  Union  Agriculture  and  Cooperation  Secretary, 
distinguished speakers and panelists, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Introduction 
1.  
At the outset, I congratulate the National Federation of State Co-operative Banks for 
organizing this review meet on implementation of revival package for short term co-operative 
credit institutions under the Vaidyanathan Task Force and I deem it a privilege to be present 
amidst this august gathering. I am sure, in these two days, you must have taken stock of the 
progress  made  in  this  regard  and  deliberated  on  the  benefits  accruing  to  the  co-operative 
institutions from the package. I am also sure that the few States which are yet to enter the 
MoU with the Government of India and NABARD and avail the benefits of the package are 
convinced about the advantages of joining the mainstream in the interest of the co-operative 
institutions in their States.  
2.  
The co-operative movement started in our country more  than 100 years ago. The 
co-operatives  are  the  oldest  rural  credit  institutions  in  India  with  widest  network  covering 
every  State  and  Union  territory  of  the  country  and  the  first  institutional  arrangement  for 
financial inclusion. These were virtually the only institution for rural credit in most of the areas 
until  the  nationalization  of  14  banks  in  1969.  Although  Regional  Rural  Banks  came  into 
existence in 1976, and commercial banks and RRBs have opened large number of branches 
in  rural  areas,  their  reach  in  the  countryside,  both  in  terms  of  the  number  of  clients  and 
accessibility to the small and marginal farmers and the poorer sections, is far less than that 
of co-operatives. Co-operatives continue to be the single most important institutions, which 
touch the life of villagers and rural farmers, most. While there are around 15400 branches of 
RRBs,  there  are  about  95000  Primary  Agricultural  Credit  Societies  (PACS).  Besides 
delivering credit to farmers, PACS also serve as outlets for distribution of agriculture inputs 
and food and other essential items to the villagers. Thus, PACS are in a far better position to 
further financial inclusion agenda than any other institution. There is, therefore, a compelling 
need to find ways for strengthening the cooperative movement and making it a well-managed 
and vibrant medium to serve the credit needs of rural India. 
3.  
When first conceived, PACS were expected to be rural thrift and credit cooperatives, 
dependent  primarily  on  member  savings  for  meeting  the  agricultural  credit  needs  of  their 
members.  However,  subsequently,  members  stopped  seeing  these  cooperatives  as  their 
own, and saw them as channels through which to access credit. They stopped saving with 
PACS. On their part, barring a few States like Kerala, PACS did not make effort to mobilize 
deposits but act as channel for disbursement of loans by availing refinance.  
BIS Review 60/2010 
 1
the  co-operative 
institutions.  However, 
the  recommendations  of 
Prof. Vaidyanathan Task Force 
4.  
Despite  serving  the  people  for  decades,  co-operative  credit  institutions  remained 
financially  weak  and  operationally  inefficient  and  ineffective.  Their  operations  have  been 
reviewed  by  various  Committees  in  the  past  and  recommendations  were  made  for 
strengthening  them.  Various  measures  were  taken  from  time  to  time  for  improving  the 
operations  of 
the 
Prof. Vaidyanathan Task Force and rolling out of revival package by the Government of India 
on the basis of the recommendations are likely to be part of the most important chapter in the 
history  of  co-operative  credit  institutions  in  the  country.  Implementation  of  the  package 
including  the  reforms  measures  in  letter  and  spirit  is  the  biggest  challenge  before  all 
stakeholders and same has to be met effectively. 
5.  
a. 
b. 
As you all are aware, the revival package seeks to: 
provide financial assistance to bring the system to an acceptable level of health; 
introduce legal and institutional reforms necessary for its democratic, self reliant and 
efficient functioning; and 
take measures to improve the quality of management. 
c. 
6.  
It  is  a  matter  of  satisfaction  that  25  States  have  signed  the  MoU  and  progressed 
towards  implementation  of  reform  agenda.  Although  the  time  period  prescribed  by  the 
Government  for  entering  into  MoU  has  lapsed,  the  remaining  States  may  approach  the 
Government in this regard, if they so like, and complete the process. The package was rolled 
out in January 2006 and it was envisaged that all regulatory actions including compliance to 
Section 11(1) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (as applicable to Co-operatives) should be 
kept in abeyance for three years. Three years have already passed. However, only 14 States 
out of 25, which have signed MoU have been able to amend the Co-operative Societies Act. 
This has resulted in slow implementation of the package. As the financial assistance under 
the package has to be released only on the implementation of legal and institutional reforms, 
as  against  total  estimated  financial  assistance  of  Rs.13,596  crore  envisaged  in  the  revival 
package,  NABARD  has,  so  far  (by  the  end  February  2010),  released  an  amount  of 
Rs.7,561.39 crore towards Government of India’s share for recapitalisation of 41,295 PACS 
in twelve States, while the State Governments have released Rs.688.82 crore as their share. 
It  is  imperative  for  all  the  States  that  have  executed  the  MoU  for  implementation  of  the 
package to carry out necessary amendments to the respective State Cooperative Societies 
Acts  without  any  further  delay.  Any  delay  only  delays  capitalization  and  make  the  system 
further weaker. 
7.  
Further, after amendment to the Co-operative Societies Act, all States should follow 
the  spirit  behind  the  amendment  whole-heartedly  so  that  the  rural  co-operative  credit 
structure  can  operate  in  a  healthy  way.  Legal  and  institutional  reforms  have  been 
recommended  under  the  package  to  bring  about  improvement  in  credit  discipline  and 
financial management of the cooperative credit structure. They are expected to enable and 
induce  rejuvenation  of  the  structure  by  promoting  voluntary,  democratic,  member-centric, 
self-governing  mutual  thrift  and  credit  institutions.  The  State  Government’s  role  in  this 
scenario is expected to be not one of intrusive patronage, but one of promoting good and 
skilled management. This process may be slower than one would wish, but it would certainly 
result in a stronger and healthier structure to serve the needs of the rural people. 
8.  
As  you  are  aware,  a  large  number  of  State  Co-operative  Banks  and  Central  Co-
operative Banks were functioning without a banking license for decades. The Committee on 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  recommended  that  no  unlicensed  co-operative  banks  should 
be  allowed  to  function  beyond  2012.  Reserve  Bank  took  a  decision  to  license  those  co-
operative  banks  which  have  Capital  to  Risk  Weighted  Assets  Ratio  (CARA)  of  4%  and 
above.  The  revival  package  also  helped  in  this  regard.  I  am  happy  to  share  with  you  that 
within  a  period  of  last  five  months,  we  have  issued  license  to  8  StCBs  and  105  CCBs. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2010
However,  9  State  Co-operative  Banks  and  191  Central  Co-operative  Banks  still  remain 
unlicensed. With recapitalization of these institutions, many of them would be eligible for a 
license. All co-operative banks should endeavour to become eligible to get a license before 
March 2012. 
Financial inclusion and co-operatives 
9.  
The  Financial  inclusion  agenda  being  pursued  vigorously  by  the  Government  of 
India and Reserve Bank of India cannot be accomplished without the involvement of rural co-
operative  institutions.  Rather,  they  have  the  biggest  role  to  play  in  this  regard.  Leveraging 
Information  technology  is  a  must  for  achieving  financial  inclusion  and  delivering  efficient 
service to the people. Full computerization of all tiers of the co-operative institutions along 
with  use  of  information  and  communication  technology  and  issue  of  biometric  cards  to 
members has to be achieved to enable to serve the people. 
ii. 
iii. 
Way forward 
10.  
You all are aware that all conceivable reform measures have been embedded in the 
proposed  amendments  to  the  Co-operative  Societies  Acts.  However,  I  want  to  highlight 
certain issues, which need to be addressed with urgency.  
i. 
PACS are at the base of the entire short-term co-operative credit structure and their 
health  affects  the  higher  tiers.  Efforts  to  be  made  to  make  them  efficient  and 
profitable. 
We  have  to  go  back  to  good  old  days  of  making  PACS  thrift  oriented institutions. 
PACS generally do not make an effort to mobilize deposits but act as a channel for 
disbursement of loans by availing refinance. They should make efforts to mobilize 
deposits from members in order to become self-sustaining. This would also promote 
savings habit among members. Increasing member stake through savings in PACS 
will result in better involvement of members and a much more alert membership and 
much better performance of PACS including higher loan recovery. 
Co-operatives should function in the true spirit of co-operation and managed by duly 
elected members. Elections should be held regularly. In order to improve the quality 
of  management,  Directors  and  CEOs  should  be  appointed  on  the  basis  of 
professional competence, integrity and merit. Administrative interference in day-to-
day management should be stopped.  
The reform package envisages freedom to all tiers of the structure to avail loan from 
any of the RBI regulated entities at competitive rates of interest. I am not sure, if any 
effort has been made in this regard. This must be tried to derive the cost benefit and 
profitability. Freedom should be given for pricing in a fair and transparent manner. 
Audits should be done timely and Audited Statements should be presented to the 
General body at the AGM. 
Full  computerization  of  all  the  institutions  under  the  three  tier  structure  should  be 
achieved  quickly.  This  will  improve  the  efficiency,  internal  control  system  and 
Management Information System. 
Training and capacity building of the personnel should be a focus area. NABARD 
and College of Agricultural Banking have to revamp the training system to prepare 
the  co-operative  personnel  to  meet  new  challenges  and  take  forward  financial 
inclusion agenda. 
11.  
It is an accepted fact that the rural co-operative credit institutions with vast network 
of PACS have a great potential to increase flow of credit to agriculture especially to small and 
vii. 
vi. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 3
marginal  farmers.  Total  financial  inclusion  is  not  possible  without  the  involvement  of  co-
operatives. In the past, they failed to deliver due to various weaknesses. It is the opportune 
time now make them vibrant medium to serve credit needs of rural India and at the same 
time mobilize deposits from rural people to become self-reliant. These institutions should run 
like  banks  with  professional  management  and  governance.  RBI  has  already  prescribed  fit 
and proper criteria for the Directors and Chief Executive Officers, which need to be followed. 
Over a period of time, all co-operative banks would be at par with commercial banks as far 
as  regulatory  norms  are  concerned  and  all  prudential  norms  would  be  made  applicable  to 
them.  A  beginning  has  already  been  made  in  this  regard  by  way  of  issuing  licenses  only 
those State and Central Co-operative Banks,  which have  Capital to Risk Weighted Assets 
Ratio (CRAR) of 4% and above. I hope, a new chapter will begin for the rural co-operatives 
and they will serve the people in the true spirit of co-operation.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2010
