Mark Carney: The coming thaw 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Winnipeg Chamber of 
Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 4 February 2010. 
 It is a pleasure to be here in Winnipeg. Today, I intend to elaborate on elements of the Bank 
of Canada’s economic outlook.  
After putting the recession in context and offering the Bank’s perspective on the shape of the 
recovery,  my  remarks  will  focus  on  Canada’s  corporate  sector.  A  focus  on  business  is 
appropriate in Manitoba. This province is not only the geographic centre of our country, but 
also  mirrors  Canada’s  economic  diversity.  Manitoba’s  distinctive  blend  of  primary, 
manufacturing,  and  service  businesses  represents  a  true  cross-section  of  the  Canadian 
economy. A focus on business is also appropriate at this stage of the economic cycle. A key 
determinant of the pace and sustainability of Canada’s recovery will be how investment and 
hiring intentions of businesses in all sectors evolve as policy stimulus begins to fade. 
My  message  is  relatively  straightforward:  the  thaw  is  coming.  That  may  sound  a  little 
premature to someone standing at the corner of Portage and Main in early February, but it 
broadly  captures  the  state  of  our  economy.  While  its  pace  will  likely  be  somewhat  muted 
(given the depth of the recession) and while there may be setbacks, the recovery has begun. 
After a brutal economic winter, spring is within sight.  
There is, however, a catch. The economic climate that Canadian business will face will be 
considerably different. Canada is entering this period of adjustment with many strengths, but 
the efforts required of us will be historic. 
The global recession 
In  the  fall  of  2008,  the  intensifying  financial  crisis  triggered  a  deep,  synchronous  global 
recession.  The  economic  shock  in  the  United  States  was  spread  –  and  in  many  cases 
amplified – through trade, finance, and confidence channels. We are just emerging from the 
worst economic downturn since World War II.  
The speed and virulence of the slowdown took business by surprise. Over the turn of last 
year,  there  was  the  equivalent  of  a  corporate  heart  attack:  inventories  surged,  production 
was  slashed,  capital  spending  budgets  eliminated,  and  employment  cut.  The  cascade  of 
collapsing  demand  through  global supply  chains  shook  widely  held  perceptions. Given  the 
shock of the downturn, many firms understandably have been waiting for confirmation of the 
recovery before acting.  
The Canadian recession in context 
Canada experienced a short, sharp recession. In its depths last year, with the exception of 
government  spending,  all  major  components  of  aggregate  demand  declined.  At  its  worst, 
industrial production fell 15 per cent. Canadian exporters suffered particularly, owing to the 
sharp  fall  in  the  components  of  U.S.  economic  activity  that  matter  most  for  Canada.  For 
example, U.S. demand for motor vehicles fell by more than half and housing starts by two-
thirds.1  In  response  to  this  new  profile  of  U.S.  demand,  major  Canadian  industries 
(particularly the automotive and forestry sectors) began deep restructurings, which continue 
to this day.  
                                                 
1   Overall, the Bank’s trade-weighted measure of U.S. activity fell by 22 per cent. In this light, the 20 per cent 
drop in Canadian exports is less surprising. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 1
The  recession  has  had  a  considerable  impact  on  employment.  At  its  depth,  400,000 
Canadians lost their jobs and the unemployment rate spiked by almost 3 percentage points 
to its highest level in more than a decade. Although the deterioration of the labour market 
appears to have stopped, too many Canadians who want to work are still out of a job, and 
many of those still employed are working fewer hours than they would like.  
As  painful  as  our  recession  was,  Canada  has  suffered  less  than  most  other  advanced 
economies. Domestic demand, fixed capital investment, and employment in Canada all held 
up substantially better than in the United States. Real GDP fell cumulatively by 3.3 per cent 
in Canada. That compares with declines of just less than 4 per cent for the United States, 
about 5 per cent for the Euro area, 6 per cent for the United Kingdom, and more than 8 per 
cent for Japan.  
Canada’s better performance can be explained by two factors. First, with a highly credible 
monetary policy and the strongest fiscal position in the G-7, Canadian policy-makers were 
able  to  respond  swiftly  and  effectively  with  extraordinarily  accommodative  measures.  The 
Bank of Canada began cutting interest rates in December 2007 and proceeded with a series 
of aggressive reductions until our key policy rate reached one-quarter of one per cent in April 
of last year, the lowest it can effectively go. Further, the Bank then provided extraordinary 
guidance on the likely path of interest rates necessary to achieve the inflation target in order 
to  maximize  the  monetary  stimulus  from  its  policy  rate.  Fiscal  stimulus  has  already  been 
substantial and will continue to have an important impact on growth this year. 
Second, Canada entered the recession with notable advantages, including a well-functioning 
financial system, strong corporate balance sheets, and relatively healthy household finances. 
In  addition,  our  economy  has  a  demonstrated  ability  to  adjust  quickly  to  changing 
circumstances.  
We will have to draw on these advantages as the world emerges from recession. While the 
downturn was synchronous, economic performance across markets and sectors is likely to 
be  increasingly  diverse.  For  some  Canadian  businesses,  the  recovery  may  prove  as 
challenging as the downturn. 
Global economic recovery 
The global recovery, which began in the second half of last year, can be characterized as 
multi-speed and policy-led.2 In the industrialized countries, growth is relatively sluggish and 
heavily  dependent  on  the  exceptional  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  stimulus,  as  well  as  the 
extraordinary  measures  taken  to  support  financial  systems.  In  emerging  markets,  where 
internal demand is already more robust, policy support is beginning to be withdrawn. 
Ultimately, the sustainability of the recovery depends on the private sector. As yet, there are 
few  indications  of  autonomous  private  demand  in  most  advanced  economies.  In  these 
countries, high unemployment rates, still-challenged financial sectors, and weak household 
balance sheets will slow the return to pre-crisis growth rates. In this regard, the strength of 
Canadian domestic demand (currently the strongest in the G-7) is noteworthy.  
In many economies, it will take time for real output to return to pre-crisis levels. For example, 
although the Bank expects that the Canadian economy will attain its pre-crisis peak by the 
third  quarter  of  this  year,  it  will  be  yet  another  year  and  a  half  before  the  European  and 
Japanese economies do the same. In contrast, many major emerging economies are already 
operating well above pre-crisis levels. 
This  is  just  one  illustration  of  how  the  nature  of  the  world  economy  has  changed.  Indeed, 
despite its brevity, this was the Great Recession. Recent events will likely have far-reaching 
repercussions.  Over  the  medium  term,  the  pattern  and  pace  of  global  growth  could  be 
                                                 
2   See World Economic Outlook Update, International Monetary Fund, January 2010. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 2
significantly altered. The rate of potential growth in the global economy has likely fallen and 
will take time to rebuild. The rotation of global demand and the restructuring of corporate and 
household  balance  sheets  are  generating  important  headwinds  to  economic  activity  in 
advanced  economies.  Conversely,  emerging  markets  are  becoming  more  dominant  in  the 
global economy.3 
Global growth may not only be lower in the future, but could also be more volatile as a result 
of  some  fundamental  vulnerabilities.  First,  fiscal  pressures  will  be  immense.  Once  the 
recovery  is  assured,  most  economies  will  need  to  make  concerted  efforts  to  restore  fiscal 
sustainability. But with the debt-to-GDP ratio in industrialized countries expected to rise from 
80 per cent, pre-crisis, to 120 per cent by 2014, this challenge should not be underestimated. 
Even abstracting from the difficult political decisions that will be required in many countries, 
policy-makers will have to balance the fiscal drag from reducing deficits against the dangers 
of crowding the private sector if they are not. 
Second and more immediately, capital inflows to emerging-market economies are  creating 
new  pressures.  By  both  resisting  exchange  rate  appreciation  and  forestalling  monetary 
tightening,  these  countries  are  increasing  the  risk  that  their  economies  will  overheat.  As  a 
stopgap,  some  of  these  economies  are  resorting  to  regulatory  measures4  of  unproven 
effectiveness. The net result could be higher growth in the short term followed by a sharp 
contraction later on.  
Third,  policy-makers  must  ensure  that  business  can  operate,  as  much  as  possible,  in  an 
open and stable trade and regulatory environment. We must live up to the G-20 commitment 
to  resist  trade  and  financial  protectionism.  It  is  also  essential  to  maximize  the  degree  of 
regulatory certainty and coordination across countries as we move forward on vital financial 
sector reforms. Further progress on this will be one of Canada’s priorities for this weekend’s 
G-7 meeting in Iqaluit.  
Securing strong, sustainable, and balanced global growth will require changes in behaviour 
and policy adjustments on several fronts.5 These include: a sustained fiscal consolidation in 
the  United  States  and  several  other  advanced  countries;  an  upward  adjustment  of  U.S. 
household  savings;  increased,  policy-induced  domestic  demand  in  China  and  other  major 
emerging-market economies; and a real exchange rate appreciation in countries with large 
current account surpluses.  
Should  these  conditions  fail  to  materialize  over  the  medium  term,  two,  equally  troubling, 
paths  for  the  global  economy  are  possible.  First,  a  return  to  the  large,  and  unsustainable, 
current account imbalances of the past cannot be discounted. This would only serve to build 
financial imbalances anew. Alternatively, the combination of fiscal contraction over a number 
of years and the real prospect of ongoing sluggishness in private consumption in some major 
economies creates the possibility of deficient demand, with sharp disinflationary pressures at 
a global level. This scenario can be avoided by the development of new sources of domestic 
demand in major emerging markets and some surplus industrial countries.  
Business outlook 
Against  this  backdrop  of  relatively  subdued  global  and  U.S.  growth,  domestic  factors  in 
Canada  will  prove  decisive  for  the  recovery  in  the  near  term.  Current  strength  in  housing 
                                                 
3   About three-quarters of global economic growth is represented by emerging-market economies this year and 
next, compared with two-thirds in the pre-crisis decade (1998–2007). 
4   Examples include changes to loan-to-value ratios, use of reserve requirements, and administrative guidance 
to lending standards. 
5   Among  the  changes  we  can  anticipate  is  greater  global  collaboration  and  coordination  in  the  oversight  of 
financial  markets.  The  G-20  reform  agenda  could  reshape  the  financial  services  industry.  The  fundamental 
objective is to create a resilient, global financial system that efficiently supports worldwide economic growth. 
The system must be robust to shocks, dampening rather than amplifying their impact on the real economy. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 3
demand  and  consumer  spending  will  provide  important  impetus  this  year.6  Owing  to  the 
improved financial and economic conditions, 2010 should mark the hand-off from growth that 
is  heavily  influenced  by  public  policy  to  growth  that  is  largely  determined  by  the  private 
sector. By next year, the private sector should be the sole contributor to domestic demand 
growth in Canada. 
Canada’s  corporate  sector  begins  with  a  number  of  advantages.  Domestic  demand  is 
expected  to  be  relatively  strong,  providing  a  base  of  support  for  some  sectors.  Corporate 
balance sheets are in outstanding shape, and margins have held up very well for this stage 
in the economic cycle. 
In  addition,  Canada’s  overall  financial  conditions  are  now  contributing  to,  rather  than 
retarding, the recovery. While net financing needs would be expected to be limited, given the 
stage  in  the  economic  cycle,  business  credit  has  started  to  grow  again.  In  part  due  to 
monetary stimulus, overall borrowing costs for Canadian businesses remain very low.7 
Taken together, results from the Bank’s latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business 
Outlook Survey suggest that, following a period of substantial tightening, credit conditions for 
businesses eased slightly in the fourth quarter of 2009, for the first time since the financial 
crisis began. The improvement in credit conditions mainly affected large firms, as some small 
and medium-sized entities continued to experience tightened conditions. 
It  is  in  this environment  that  the  first  signs  of  a  thaw  in  corporate  attitudes  have  begun  to 
emerge.  In  our  latest  Business  Outlook  Survey,  more  firms  said  they  are  now  planning  to 
increase investment spending and employment than did either last summer or fall.8 With the 
improvement  in  financial  conditions,  economic  activity,  commodity  prices,  and  growing 
confidence, business fixed investment should pick up in 2010. This recovery will be relatively 
modest; it is not until 2011 that we anticipate an acceleration of investment spending, as the 
excess supply in the economy is taken up.  
However,  given  the  external  environment,  the  question  is  whether  this  pickup  will  be 
sufficient.  The  significant  drop  in  investment  that  occurred  during  the  recession  included 
spending  on  new  technology,  which  could  have  helped  firms  address  coming  economic 
challenges.  The  relatively  slow  recovery  expected  in  our  most  important  trading  partner, 
along  with  ongoing  sectoral  adjustments,  means  that  firms  have  to  find  new  markets.  In 
doing  so,  they  will  face  increased  competition.  For  example,  due  to  exchange  rate  moves 
and  stellar  productivity  performance,  the  competitiveness  of  the  U.S.  corporate  sector  has 
improved  significantly.  The  need  for  capital  investment  by  Canadian  businesses  to  meet 
these challenges is clear.  
In short, Canadian companies are emerging from the recession to an altered world – one that 
may require deeper restructuring and bolder strategic initiatives than currently contemplated. 
New suppliers need to be sourced; new markets opened; a new approach to managing for a 
more  volatile  environment  developed.  To  recognize  this  reality  is  also  to  recognize  the 
opportunities available to corporate Canada.  
                                                 
6   For more detailed discussions of these components of domestic demand, see Mark Carney, “Current Issues in 
Household Finances,” remarks delivered to the National Forum (Canadian Club of Toronto and Empire Club of 
Canada) in Toronto, 2009, and Timothy Lane, “Canada’s Housing Sector in Recession and Recovery: Beyond 
Bricks  and  Mortar,”  remarks  prepared  for  delivery  to  the  Edmonton  CFA  Society,  2010.  Available  at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/. 
7   Borrowing spreads paid by households and businesses spiked in 2008, but fairly quickly dropped back and 
now  are  within  the  normal  range.  The  Bank  expects  these  spreads  to  return  to  their  longer-term  historical 
averages by early 2011 (although not as tight as they were pre-crisis), which is another factor that will help 
boost business investment. 
8   Nonetheless, while firms expect sales to grow at a faster pace over the next 12 months than over the past 
12 months, they still anticipate that the recovery will be gradual. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 4
in  Canada,  while 
The labour market 
One  of  the  most  important  questions  for  many  Canadians  is  what  the  coming  thaw  in 
business attitudes will mean for employment.  Through the recession, Canada experienced 
significant job losses. Some of these jobs are unlikely to come back. Moreover, substantial 
slack remains in the labour market in the form of underemployment – for example, people 
working part-time who prefer to work full-time. The duration of unemployment has also risen, 
which  raises  understandable  concerns.  When an  individual  is  out  of  work,  his  or her  skills 
tend to deteriorate, making reintegration into the labour market more difficult. The longer the 
period of unemployment, the more difficult it can be for the individual. For the economy as a 
whole, this can translate into higher structural unemployment.  
As I mentioned earlier, the deterioration in the labour market now appears to have ended, 
consistent with the resumption of GDP growth. Both employment levels and average hours 
worked bottomed out in the summer, and the unemployment rate has since been hovering 
around 8.5 per cent. Against this backdrop, how quickly can the labour market be expected 
to improve? Or, could Canada experience a jobless recovery?  
Conflicting forces are at play. On the one hand, history suggests that employment growth is 
relatively  coincident  with  economic  growth 
the 
unemployment rate lag the cycle, because the more positive economic climate tends to pull 
more people back into the labour market. 
On  the  other  hand,  labour  market  behaviour  has  been  somewhat  unusual  during  this 
recession. Employment  held  up  relatively  well,  while  hours  worked  fell  particularly  sharply. 
There is some evidence of what economists inelegantly call “labour hoarding” – the retention 
of  skilled  workers  even  if  they  may  not  be  immediately  needed.  This  suggests  that 
employment may grow relatively slowly. Indeed, the Bank’s winter Business Outlook Survey 
reports that the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages declined further, reaching its 
lowest level since the series began in 1998. With the scale of restructuring required, there 
may be reluctance to add personnel.  
Canada  is  not  the  only  country  with  large-scale  restructuring.  In  the  United  States,  the 
unemployment  rate  has  jumped  sharply,  higher  than  the  decline  in  GDP  would  have 
traditionally suggested, or by about 1 to 1.5 percentage points.9 At 10 per cent, it exceeds 
that of Canada – the first time this has occurred since August 1981.10 As in Canada, there is 
substantial  underemployment  and  rising  long-term  unemployment.11  In  addition,  American 
job losses are unusually high in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) while they have been 
proportionally  lower  in  Canada,  where  SMEs  have  been  supported  by  relatively  strong 
domestic demand. Unlike Canada, however, U.S. productivity growth has surged, and wage 
growth  has  slowed.  The  net  result  is  lower  unit  labour  costs,  which  have  boosted 
competitiveness and should, ultimately, encourage job creation.  
Canada’s productivity record is puzzling. The flipside of the apparent labour hoarding is that 
Canada’s productivity growth fell in the latest recession – something that has not happened 
in  any  recession  in  the  past  three  decades.12  Moreover,  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  United 
States,  Canada’s  productivity  performance  was  abysmal  over  the  decade  prior  to  the 
recession.  
improvements 
in 
                                                 
9   Kimberly Beaton, “Time Variation in Okun’s Law: a Canada and U.S. Comparison,” Bank of Canada Working 
Paper, forthcoming. 
10   Moreover,  when  the  Canadian  unemployment  rate  is  adjusted  to  match  U.S.  concepts,  this  would  typically 
lower the Canadian unemployment rate by about a percentage point. 
11   For  example,  the  U.S.  measure,  published  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  which  includes  discouraged 
workers plus marginally attached workers, stood at 11.4 per cent in December 2009. 
12   See  Philip  Cross,  “The  changing  cyclical  behaviour  of  labour  productivity,”  Canadian  Economic  Observer, 
January 2010, Statistics Canada. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 5
Some  of  this  undoubtedly  reflects  the  restructuring  of  industries  and  the  reallocation  of 
capital and labour to new industries. Some may reflect longer-tailed resources investments. 
There  remains  the  possibility  that  firms  have  not  yet  anticipated  intensifying  global 
competitive pressures.  
While the Bank does not entirely understand why productivity growth has been as slow as it 
has been, we do understand the consequences. Slower productivity growth means that the 
rate of potential growth – the speed limit, if you will – of the Canadian economy has fallen. 
This  has  implications  for  both  the  growth  of  Canadian  living  standards  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
To be more specific, the Bank’s working hypothesis is that trend labour productivity declined 
by 0.2 per cent last year, will rise by only 0.2 per cent this year, and by a still-modest 0.9 per 
cent in 2011. The combination of slower productivity growth and demographics could mean 
that the rate of potential growth for the Canadian economy will be closer to 2 per cent going 
forward than the more than 3 per cent average rate we enjoyed in the first half of the past 
decade and the latter half of the 1990s. 
If  this  differential  were  to  persist  over  a  decade,  the  cumulative  loss  of  income  would  be 
almost $30,000 for every Canadian.13 
Inflation outlook 
The performance of the labour market and productivity growth will be important influences on 
monetary policy going forward. In spite of the large amount of excess supply in the economy, 
core  inflation  has  remained  quite  close  to  2  per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  2009.  This 
stickiness  of  core  inflation  is  likely  related  to  the  resilience  in  wage  growth  relative  to  the 
underlying trend in productivity. Although wage growth in Canada remained high through the 
recession, it has decelerated in recent months, causing the gap between wage growth and 
measured productivity to begin to narrow. This slower growth in the cost of labour is a factor 
that should continue to moderate overall pressures on core consumer price inflation.  
With  wage  growth  expected  to  stay  at  the  more  moderate  levels  seen  recently,  and  with 
excess  supply  being  gradually  absorbed,  both  core  and  total  CPI  inflation  are  expected  to 
return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011. The Bank judges that medium- and longer-
term inflation expectations remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, recent events were a watershed. The global economy that emerges from the 
recession  will  be  different  than  the  one  that  led  into  the  crisis.  A  powerful  and  sustained 
restructuring of the global economy has begun. Canadian business will need to develop new 
markets as the traditional advantage of relatively open access to U.S. markets becomes less 
valuable. To seize new opportunities, our productivity levels must improve.  
In the face of these challenges and the ongoing uncertainties about the global outlook, the 
credibility  of  macroeconomic  policy  is  essential.  One  constant  is  the  Bank’s  unwavering 
commitment to price stability. The single, most direct contribution that monetary policy can 
make  to  sound  economic  performance  is  to  provide  Canadians  with  confidence  that  their 
money  will  retain  its  purchasing  power.  That  means  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable.  Price  stability  lowers  uncertainty,  minimizes  the  costs  of  inflation,  reduces  the 
cost of capital, and creates an environment in which households and firms can invest and 
plan for the future. 
                                                 
13   As expressed in 2009 dollars. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 6
