Njuguna Ndung’u: Agent banking 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
opening of the workshop on Agent Banking, Nairobi, 14 January 2010. 
 Chief Executives of Commercial Banks here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Allow me at the outset to thank you for accepting our invitation to attend this workshop. It is 
indeed important that this morning we are addressing the issue of Agent Banking, a concept 
we  are  keen  to  see  take  root  innovatively  in  Kenya.  The  Central  Bank  has  convened  this 
workshop for three critical objectives:  
• 
• 
The first objective is to demystify this new banking model and show how it works; 
Secondly,  to  showcase  how  it  has  worked  successfully  in  other  countries  as  a 
platform for financial reach, inclusion and financial deepening; 
Finally, to build consensus amongst market players on how Agent Banking can work 
in Kenya supported by regulatory framework. 
 As you are aware, the Finance Act, 2009 that became operational at the beginning of this 
month has amended the Banking Act to enable use of third party agents by banks. Banks will 
therefore  be  able  to  leverage  on  additional  cost  effective  distribution  channels  to  offer 
financial  services.  This  initiative  is  informed  by  the  need  to  leapfrog  access  to  financial 
services in Kenya. The National Financial Access Survey of 2009 shows that 32% of Kenya’s 
bankable  population  remains  totally  outside  the  orbit  of  financial  services  and  many  more 
being served by the informal financial system.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Vision 2030 is premised on a safe, efficient and inclusive financial 
system  where  savings  and  investment  rates  will  more  than  double.  The  financial  sector  is 
expected to play a pivotal role in mobilizing the substantial resources required to finance the 
envisaged  flagship  projects.  We  must  therefore  explore  and  implement  innovative  models 
that will deepen Kenya’s financial sector to support savings and investment growth.  
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  continues  to  support  innovations  that  will  broaden  financial 
inclusion  for  the  majority  of  Kenyans.  In  doing  so,  we  will  need  to  focus  on  safeguards  to 
ensure that the integrity and safety of the financial sector is not threatened. But above all, the 
cost  of  financial  services  should  decline  to  encourage  financial  inclusion  and  reach  at  all 
corners of the country. 
It is appropriate at this stage to highlight the key steps that the Central Bank has undertaken 
up to now with regard to Agent Banking:  
• 
Initially, extensive reviews of the knowledge base in this area were undertaken to 
enhance our understanding of this model.  
Secondly, a study was commissioned to review practices in other countries in Latin 
America,  Asia  and  Africa.  Bankable  Frontier  Associates,  an 
international 
consultancy firm that undertook the study will be presenting their findings shortly.  
Third,  to  uncover  some  practical  insights  on  the  model,  a  team  from  the  Central 
Bank,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  undertook  a 
knowledge  exchange  tour  of  Brazil  and  Colombia.  These  two  countries  have  to  a 
large extent successfully implemented Agent Banking.  
  BIS Review 5/2010 
 1
My colleagues will be sharing their insights from this knowledge exchange later today. Let 
me thank the Alliance for Financial Inclusion and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for 
supporting this exchange that we believe will transform the platform of financial services in 
Kenya, and to a large extent the lives of Kenyans.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: We have therefore so far gained invaluable insights on the Agent 
Banking  model.  These  insights  will  contribute  to  the  development  of  a  robust  regulatory 
framework for Agent Banking services in Kenya. Today’s forum offers an invaluable platform 
to  also  get  feedback  from  industry  practitioners  as  we  develop  implementation  plans  for 
Agent  Banking.  It  is  only  through  forums  such  as  this  that  epitomize  private  public 
partnerships that we are able to achieve the aspirations of Vision 2030. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I also want to address fears that the Agent Banking model in Kenya 
is inappropriate – that it will kill Microfinance Institutions and SACCOs. On the contrary, it will 
speed up their activities. Vision 2030 envisages an inclusive financial system with space for 
different players to serve the majority of Kenyans. They will develop their market niches in 
line  with  their  relative  comparative  advantages  and  strengths.  In  this  scenario,  the  Agent 
Banking  framework  will  play  a  complementary  role  for  all  players  in  the  market.  So  these 
fears are misplaced. But this forum will also serve to expound this line further.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I draw to a close, it is important to underscore that the Central 
Bank will continue to be guided in its financial sector policy initiatives by the following tenets:  
First, in conjunction with the Government, the creation of an enabling environment 
• 
for financial sector players.  
Second, public private partnerships will continue to be at the core of our initiatives. 
In the case of Agent Banking, today is just but the beginning of our dialogue. As we 
implement the model, we will continue to engage market players to ensure it works 
for the benefit of Kenyans. 
Third,  for  many  years,  the  banking  sector  could  not  reach  all  the  corners  of  the 
country – it was expensive to erect branches – now, with this new innovation, they 
do not have to – they only need to look out for the appropriate agent.  
Finally,  we  will  continue  to  promote  innovations  while  ensuring  that  there  are 
adequate safeguards to foster financial sector safety and soundness. 
   I am sure this workshop will expound on these important dimensions and provide the Central 
Bank with the richness of policy interpretation. 
It is now my distinct pleasure to declare this workshop officially open. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2010
