Svein Gjedrem: The central bank’s instruments 
Lecture by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  School  of  Management,  Oslo, 
6 September 2010. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  lecture  is  based  on  the 
assessments  presented  at  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  11  August  and  Monetary  Policy 
Report 2/10. 
 The  international  financial  crisis  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  and  put 
economic  policy  to  the  test.  In  order  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis,  central 
banks reduced key rates to low levels and increased liquidity supply sharply. In addition, a 
number of extraordinary measures were implemented.  
The economic situation 
The financial crisis had its origins in an abundant supply of credit, market participants who 
took increasingly higher risk and a lack of oversight on the part of banks, companies and the 
authorities. The crisis resulted in a sharp downturn in the world economy. Since the crisis, 
growth has been vigorous in emerging economies while the recovery in western economies 
has been moderate. Global economic growth at market prices is now expected to be about 
3½ this year, and 4½ per cent in purchasing power parity terms. There have been pressure 
tendencies in some emerging economies, with higher inflation in India and Brazil and rising 
asset prices in China. The question is whether continued high growth in parts of Asia can 
sustain activity in the world economy.  
Four conditions are limiting growth in the western world: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Debt among households and banks is high.  
Interest rates cannot be lowered further.  
Many countries have high public debt levels and several governments are facing a 
financial crisis. 
Real exchange rates are strong. 
4. 
The  combination  of  high  household  debt  and  expectations  of  weak  growth  is  pushing  up 
saving.  Low  interest  rates  are  not  sufficient  to  boost  investment  and  consumption  in  an 
environment  of  sharply  reduced  confidence  in  growth  ahead,  while  both  lenders  and 
borrowers are seeking to reduce their debt. Central bank interest rates cannot be lowered 
further, but it has been communicated that interest rates will be kept low for a long period. 
Central  banks  have  purchased  government  securities  and  private  bonds  in  order  to  keep 
long-term interest rates low and are of the view that these quantitative easing measures have 
been effective. 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 1
Sovereign debt to GDP in the G7 
 As a result of the fiscal policy measures, government debt in major advanced economies is 
now  as  high,  measured  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  as  in  the  wake  of  World  War  II  after  a 
period of debt-financed military spending. The high level of public debt limits the scope for 
further  fiscal  impetus  to  boost  economic  activity.  A  lack  of  confidence  in  some  countries’ 
debt-servicing  capacity  and  ability  to  boost  growth  capacity  led  to  a  flare-up  in  financial 
market  turbulence  last  spring.  A  number  of  countries  are  in  a  position  where  they  feel 
compelled to raise taxes and curtail spending.  
Exports from India, China and other Asian countries are expanding rapidly. Substantial trade 
deficits in the western world are partly being financed by an increase in reserves in Asian 
countries.  Real  exchange  rates  in  western  countries  are  most  likely  too  strong.  This  is 
reflected in pressure tendencies in China and a number of other emerging economies and 
high unemployment and low inflation in traditional industrialised countries.  
In western countries and Japan exchange rates react to news. Pessimism translates into a 
flight to safe havens. Positive news, however, reduces risk premiums and tends to lead to a 
strengthening  of  exchange  rates  in  commodity-based  economies  where  interest  rates  are 
somewhat  higher.  But  the  nominal  exchange  rates  of  many  Asian  countries  remain  fixed. 
Thus,  exchange  rates  are  not  allowed  to  fully  contribute  to  reducing  trade  imbalances, 
narrowing cost differentials and spreading growth impulses.  
Growth  in  the  world  economy  has  an  influence  on  the  Norwegian  economy.  Norway  is 
reaping  the  benefits  of  continued  high  commodity  prices  and  sizeable  investments  by  oil 
companies.  Moreover,  we  have  had  economic  policy  leeway  thanks  to  the  credibility 
associated  with  solid  government  finances  and  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations.  The 
Norwegian economy is experiencing a mild downturn and inflation is on the low side, while 
capacity utilisation now seems to have stabilised. The low interest rate level is facilitating the 
servicing of high household debt and house prices are high. Households in Norway are more 
confident about the future than households abroad.  
Since October last year, the key policy rate has been raised by a total of 0.75 percentage 
point to 2 per cent. The low interest rate level will in itself contribute to pushing up demand. 
Inflation expectations are probably stable and real interest rates are very low. At the same 
time, the krone exchange rate is very strong in real terms. The projections published in the 
June  Monetary  Policy  Report  suggest  that  the  key  rate  should  be  held  at  today’s  level  to 
around the end of the year and then gradually be raised to a more normal level.  
2 
 BIS Review 113/2010
In our Monetary Policy Report we present our own forecasts for the key policy rate ahead. 
The central banks in New Zealand and Sweden communicate their interest rate expectations 
in the same way. Some central banks use more qualitative statements, while others do not 
provide any indication as to future interest rate setting.  
Interest rate forecasts as a monetary policy instrument 
When preparing our interest rate forecasts, we give weight to the following main criteria:  
1. 
The interest rate should be set with a view to stabilising inflation at target or bringing 
it back to target after a deviation has occurred.  
Interest rate developments should at the same time be able to provide a reasonable 
balance between the path for inflation and the path for overall capacity utilisation in 
the economy. 
In the assessment, potential effects of asset prices, such as property prices, equity 
prices and the krone exchange rate, on stability in output, employment and inflation 
are also taken into account. The following additional criteria are also useful: 
The  interest  rate  should  normally  be  altered  gradually  and  in  line  with  the  Bank’s 
previous response pattern. 
Interest rate developments should result in acceptable developments in inflation and 
output  also  under  alternative  assumptions  concerning  the  economic  situation  and 
the functioning of the economy. It should be possible to explain any substantial and 
systematic deviations from simple, robust monetary policy rules.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The loss function 
 Analyses in the June Monetary Policy Report illustrate what the different criteria signify. The 
interest rate forecast is the interest rate path that satisfies the criteria above to the farthest 
possible extent. Expressed mathematically, and obviously not exhaustively, the assessment 
can be represented by a “loss function”: 
 The first term in the equation represents criterion 1, where the loss is higher the more actual 
inflation πt deviates from the inflation target π*. The second term represents criterion 2 and 
shows that the loss increases with the degree of fluctuation in the level of activity, measured 
as  the  gap  between  actual  output  yt  and  the  normal  level  of  output  yt*.  The  third  term 
represents  the  desire  for  gradual  interest  rate  changes  in  criterion  3,  i.e.  that  the  current 
interest rate it should not deviate too far from the rate in the previous period it-1. The fourth 
term represents criterion 4 and can be interpreted to mean that there is also a cost or risk in 
setting an interest rate it that deviates substantially from the interest rate implied by simple 
simple.  By  giving  some  weight  to  the  consideration  that  the  key  rate 
monetary  policy  rules  it
BIS Review 113/2010 
 3
should not deviate too far from simple rules, monetary policy may become somewhat more 
robust.1 
Key policy rate 
 A monetary policy that only takes into account the consideration of bringing inflation rapidly 
back  to  target  (criterion  1)  would  imply  that  the  interest  rate  should  rapidly  have  been 
reduced to below 1 per cent when we presented the latest Monetary Policy Report. In that 
case,  the  interest  rate  would  have  had  to  be  raised  rapidly  again  to  prevent  activity  and 
inflation from becoming too high further ahead. Such a strategy could be consistent with the 
desire  to  safeguard  against  inflation  expectations  becoming  entrenched  below  the  inflation 
target, but could on the other hand have a substantial impact on output and employment. 
Developments become more stable if weight is also given to stabilising output (criteria 1 and 
2). This would also imply an interest rate reduction first and then an interest rate increase 
further  ahead.  Giving  weight  to  output  implies  that  inflation  is  brought  back  to  target 
somewhat later.  
The  consideration  of  a  steady  interest  rate  course  suggests  that  small,  temporary 
disturbances  should  normally  not  result  in  abrupt  shifts  in  the  interest  rate.  If  this 
consideration is also given weight in interest rate setting (criteria 1, 2 and 3), the impact on 
the interest rate will be smaller.  
If we also give some weight to the interest rate given by a simple monetary policy rule – the 
Taylor interest rate rule (criteria 1, 2, 3 and 4), the key policy rate will remain at today’s level 
for a period and then be raised gradually. This results in a further small downward shift in the 
projections  for  inflation  and  the  output  gap  and  is  consistent  with  the  projections  in  the 
previous Monetary Policy Report. 
The projections for inflation and economic activity vary from one Report to the next. Hence 
interest rate prospects will also change. In our Reports we attempt to illustrate which factors 
have  influenced  the  changes  in  the  interest  rate  forecast  through  their  effects  on  the 
prospects for inflation, output and employment.  
                                                 
1   A simple rule can function well under alternative models for the economy. The type of uncertainty we want to 
be robust to will determine what the best rule will be. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2010
Change in interest rate forecast over time 
 The  interest  rate  forecast  is  an  expression  of  a  balance  between  various  monetary  policy 
considerations and a response pattern that households, firms and financial institutions can 
build on. The interest rate forecast is based on our understanding of the functioning of the 
economy.  The  uncertainty  surrounding  the  interest  rate  forecast  is  highlighted  in  our  fan 
charts with uncertainty intervals around the interest rate forecasts. 
The forecasts have shifted considerably over time. This reflects that the interest rate is an 
instrument that should react to all news that may influence the inflation outlook.  
Publication of interest rate forecasts – how does the market react? 
When we started forecasting the interest rate in 2005, we could refer to the experience of 
New Zealand2, which had just experienced pronounced shifts in the interest rate and interest 
                                                  
2   The  chart  is  from  Archer,  D.  (2005):  “Central-bank  communication  and  the  publication  of  interest  rate 
implementation, 
projections”,  presented  at  Sveriges  Riksbank’s  conference: 
targeting: 
communication and effectiveness”: http://www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=15814. 
“Inflation 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 5
rate forecasts. The chart illustrates that we were not able to anticipate the financial crisis in 
autumn 2008, but have otherwise been on track. 
Our  latest  interest  rate  forecast  suggests  that  the  interest  rate  will  remain  low  for  a  long 
period.  But  we  also  note  that  market  participants  believe  it  will  take  even  longer  for  the 
interest rate to move up to a more normal level. In autumn 2012 we expect an interest rate of 
close  to  3½  per  cent,  while  market  participants  expect  an  interest  rate  of  around  2¾  per 
cent3.  The  deviation  is  considerable,  but  not  exceptionally  large.  Our  interest  rate  forecast 
seems to have the greatest effect on market interest rates in the year ahead. The difference 
is  greater  slightly  further  out.  Differences  may  indicate  that  the  central  bank  and  market 
participants  at  times  have  divergent  views  regarding  developments  in  the  Norwegian 
economy.  
How does the market react to the publication of the  
interest rate forecast? 
 For example, market participants may believe that a higher interest rate level in Norway than 
in other countries will result in a stronger krone exchange rate because it may be profitable to 
invest in Norwegian kroner and borrow in other currencies. Our projections are based on the 
assumption that the exchange rate will over time adjust so that the return on investments in 
Norwegian  kroner will be the same as the return on investments in foreign currency – the 
so-called  uncovered  interest  rate  parity  assumption.  A  positive  interest  rate  differential  will 
then reflect that the krone is expected to depreciate over time. At the same time, we seek to 
take  account  of  the  fact  that  risk  premiums  on  investments  in  Norwegian  kroner may  vary 
over time. 
The interest rate forecasts have been useful – and it is an advantage, not a weakness, that 
the uncertainty surrounding the forecasts is well known. In 2005 and again in 2009, the key 
policy rate fell to very low levels. In both cases, our forecasts showed that economic agents 
would have to expect a higher interest rate level after a period and they illustrated how long it 
would take for the interest rate to return to its normal level. Moreover, it is our experience that 
it  has  become  easier  to  talk  about  monetary  policy  when  we  can  speak  openly  about  the 
future.  
                                                 
3   The deviation was measured on 23 June after the publication of Monetary Policy Report 2/10. 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2010
Liquidity instruments  
Central bank balance sheet – stylised 
 The key policy rate must have a clear impact on market rates if the key rate and the interest 
rate forecast are to be effective. Norges Bank provides central bank funding to achieve this. 
We provide loans to banks so that they have sufficient funding to settle their accounts each 
day. These loans result, in isolation, in higher central bank reserves, i.e. increased deposits 
from private banks in the central bank. In addition, the central bank reserves are affected by 
other  movements  on  our  balance  sheet,  such  as  government  account  transactions  or 
changes  in  demand  for  notes  and  coin.  Norges  Bank  takes  account  of  changes  in  banks’ 
liquidity  due  to  these  factors  when  determining  the  size  of  our  loans  to  banks  in  order  to 
maintain  the  intended  level  of  bank  liquidity.  Previously,  liquidity  was  also  influenced  by 
purchases and sales of foreign exchange to influence the krone exchange rate. This has not 
occurred for the past 11½ years. 
Banks  as  a  group  cannot  directly  influence  the  level  of  their  liquidity  in  Norges  Bank.  The 
level of banks’ liquidity is determined by the central bank’s liquidity supply and any changes 
in other central bank balance sheet variables. Changes in banks’ demand for central bank 
reserves lead instead to changes in market interest rates. For example, banks’ demand for 
more liquidity will be reflected in an increase in money market rates.  
Liquidity in the banking system 
 BIS Review 113/2010 
 7
Norges  Bank  determines  market  rates  by  providing  sufficient  liquidity  to  ensure  that  the 
shortest money market rates fall to a level close to the rate banks receive on their deposits in 
Norges Bank. Interest rates cannot fall below this “floor” as no bank will want to provide loans 
at a rate lower than the rate they can obtain from Norges Bank.  
Banks’ loans from and deposits in Norges Bank have been substantial and increasing over 
time. Demand for loans was particularly high during the financial crisis. It would appear that 
banks  have  grown  accustomed  to  dealing  directly  with  the  central  bank  instead  of 
redistributing  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market.  We  are  having  to  supply  more  liquidity  now 
than previously in order to hold down money market rates close to the floor. 
The floor system makes it easy to ensure that money market rates track key rate decisions.  
However, the system has proved to have undesirable side-effects. It makes banks passive. 
The  market  for  short-term  unsecured  liquidity  becomes  very  limited  or  disappears.  The 
pricing mechanism – or the rates set in the money market – contains information that will not 
emerge if a public actor such as the central bank takes the market’s place. 
Consequently,  we  now  need  to  set  clearer  boundaries  between  the  central  bank’s  role  as 
lender of last resort and settlement bank and the role of the market. 
In order to stimulate money market activity and reduce demand for central bank reserves, it 
should be more expensive for banks to hold substantial deposits in the central bank. We are 
therefore working on changes in our lending and deposit facilities.  
There are also other weaknesses in Norway’s money market. When setting household and 
corporate interest rates, banks not only take into account movements in the key rate, but also 
give weight to the money market rate, i.e. the Norwegian InterBank Offered Rate (NIBOR). In 
our opinion, there are shortcomings in the way this rate is set. The basis for setting the rate 
can be made more transparent for the benefit of other participants and it is calculated using 
information  from  only  six  large  participants.  This  group  does  not  include  Norway’s  largest 
saving banks or any international banks. We will take the initiative for improving the structure 
for setting NIBOR. 
Financial stability  
Our interest in stability and efficiency reaches of course beyond the money market itself. We 
have a broader interest in a robust financial system.  
The  transition  from  a  bank  requesting  liquidity  to  a  bank  with  longer-term  funding 
requirements,  and  perhaps  solvency  problems,  can  be  blurred.  Like  other  lenders,  Norges 
Bank has to decide on the collateral it is prepared to accept for the loans it provides and be 
qualified to evaluate the financial strength of borrowers. As lender of last resort, we must also 
be able to assess whether problems in individual banks could jeopardise the stability of the 
financial system as a whole.  
The  financial  crisis  has  revealed  major  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system.  Work  is  in 
progress  across  the  board  on  proposals  for  revising  the  regulatory  framework  and 
introducing  new  regulations.  It  has  become  increasingly  clear  that  supervision  must 
encompass  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  not  be  limited  to  the  individual  financial 
institution or the individual financial market. The term used to refer to this supervision of the 
financial sector is macroprudential policy, which has to be based on analyses of the financial 
sector as a whole. 
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) defines the objective of macroprudential policy 
as follows: 
“…The objective of macroprudential policy is to reduce systemic risk by explicitly 
addressing the interlinkages between, and the common exposures of, all financial 
institutions, and the procyclicality of the financial system.” 
8 
 BIS Review 113/2010
New rules regulating the financial sector have now been adopted in the US. A new council, 
the Financial Stability Oversight Council, will be established to monitor risk in the US financial 
system.  The  Council  can  propose  stricter  regulation  of  systemically  important  financial 
corporations, approve any proposals from the Federal Reserve to break up large banks and 
require  that  systemically  important  financial  institutions  other  than  banks  are  subjected  to 
supervision. 
In the UK, a proposal has been made to assign responsibility for supervision and regulation 
of  the  financial  sector  to  a  subsidiary  of  the  Bank  of  England  (the  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority). A Financial Policy Committee, similar to the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, 
will also be established within the Bank.  
In the EU, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be established and will probably 
be chaired by the president of the European Central Bank (ECB). 
We  can  distinguish  between  two  approaches  to  the  design  of  instruments  to  safeguard 
financial stability. One is to make the financial system more robust by, for example, reducing 
interdependency among financial corporations. The other is to curb procyclical behaviour in 
financial corporations. 
Limitations  on  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income  ratios,  which  are  applied  in  Norway,  are 
examples  of  rules  that  can  have  a  stabilising  effect.  Minimum  capital  requirements  for 
financial institutions and liquidity and funding structure requirements are other examples of 
rules that will make high credit growth more expensive for financial institutions, and thereby 
for customers. Rules to ensure that shareholders and creditors bear the cost if banks suffer 
substantial losses or have to be wound up will have a similar effect. 
Financial  vulnerability  can  build  up  more  quickly  in  periods  of  expansion,  partly  because 
financial institutions then have a stronger inclination to take risk. This implies that regulations 
should  be  countercyclical,  having  the  strongest  effect  when  the  risk  of  a  buildup  of 
imbalances is greatest.  
It is important that the rules function as automatic stabilisers in the economy. Discretionary 
use of instruments is considerably more demanding. 
But  it  may  nevertheless  be  advisable  to  introduce  such  instruments,  such  as  capital 
requirements that vary over time with the rise in debt and asset prices.  
The Basel Committee, which assesses new rules for financial institutions and which includes 
members from major countries, has proposed the introduction of a time-varying capital buffer 
requirement over and above the minimum capital requirement. Financial corporations with a 
capital buffer judged to be insufficient would be subject to restrictions on dividends and other 
payments to shareholders and employees. 
In order to dampen shocks in a country and mitigate the contagion effects on other countries, 
close collaboration between a financial corporation’s home country and the host country in 
which it operates is necessary. In its latest annual report, the BIS writes the following:  
“Close  cooperation  between  home  and  host  authorities  will  be  inevitable.  And 
some  responsibility  will  have  to  shift  to  host  authorities  for  deciding  on  the 
settings  that  apply  to  exposures  in  their  jurisdictions  and  for  advising  home 
authorities of local financial conditions.”  
Norwegian  banks  are  part  of  a  common  Nordic  banking  market.  The  rapid  expansion  of 
foreign banks in the Norwegian market in the growth period from 2004 to 2008 was trimmed 
back  during  and  after  the  crisis.  I  am  afraid  it  must  be  said  that  they  have  amplified 
fluctuations in Norway. However, we assume that the decline in their market share is due to 
the impact of the international crisis, which has generally been more severe for foreign banks 
than for Norwegian banks. 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 9
Under the Basel Committee proposal, the time-varying capital buffer requirement will apply to 
all  banks  operating  in  a  country,  including  branches  of  foreign  banks.  Home  country 
authorities  will  enforce  the  buffer  requirement  imposed  by  host  country  authorities.  This 
means  that  Norwegian  supervisory  authorities,  for  example,  can  impose  a  supplementary 
capital requirement in periods of high credit growth in Norway. The requirement will apply to 
Norwegian, Swedish, Danish and other banks that provide loans to Norwegian households 
and  businesses.  This  really  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  However,  the  host  country’s 
authority could have been strengthened further.  
One  of  the  Basel  rule’s  major  weaknesses  is  low  and  differing  risk  weights  for  residential 
mortgages. The risk estimate in the models used is too low for this type of loan. As a result, 
the effective capital requirement may be far too low, falling below 0.3 per cent of the loan. 
Host country rules should apply in these cases and the host country should settle the matter. 
Distortion  of  competition  may  easily  be  the  result  if  similar  loans  extended  in  the  same 
market by foreign and domestic banks have different risk weights.  
Allow me to conclude. The downturn in Norway was not self-inflicted – it was triggered by 
external shocks. But the financial crisis has also increased awareness here in Norway of how 
dependent sound economic developments are on financial stability. A better redistribution of 
liquidity in the interbank market and new macroprudential instruments are both important for 
a smoothly functioning financial system.  
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS Review 113/2010
