Ewald Nowotny: Central banking after the crisis – responsibilities, 
strategies, instruments 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewald  Nowotny,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the 
38th Economics Conference of the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 31 May 2010. 
 Dear Chancellor Faymann, 
Dear President Trichet, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  year’s  Economics  Conference  on  behalf  of  the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank.  We  are  especially  grateful  that  Chancellor  Faymann  and 
President  Trichet  are  here  with  us  this  morning.  Let  me  also  use  this  occasion  to  publicly 
thank the Austrian government under Chancellor Faymann and Vice Chancellor and Finance 
Minister Pröll for the excellent and respectful cooperation between the Austrian government 
and the Austrian central bank in these very challenging times. I would also like to use this 
occasion, President Trichet, to express my full admiration and trust in your leadership of the 
ECB during the years of crisis and especially also over the past few weeks. We all had to 
navigate, as you always say, in unchartered waters – and it was extremely important in this 
situation  to  have  such  an  experienced  captain  in  command.  My  own  life  experience  has 
taught me that we should never underestimate the human factor, also in big policy issues. 
Thus, it is essential for the ECB to have a President who, due to his experience and life-long 
achievements,  is  able  to  communicate  convincingly  that  the  ECB  is  and  remains  fiercely 
independent  and  inflexibly  attached  to  its  primary  mandate,  price  stability.  We  are  proud 
indeed that price stability has been fully maintained in the euro area since the inception of 
the euro more than 11 years ago. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This year’s Economics Conference is entitled “Central Banking after the Crisis: Responsibilities, 
Strategies, Instruments”. 
The  term  “after  the  crisis”  seems  somewhat  premature  and  obviously  needs  some 
clarification. It refers to the specific role of central banks and the lessons to be learned from 
the  experience  of  the  past  three  years.  But  we  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  crises  follow 
a typical  sequencing,  as  Professors  Reinhardt  and  Rogoff  have  shown  (again)  recently: 
A banking crisis tends to evolve into a general crisis of the financial sector, which may then 
trigger a crisis of the real sector of the economy via financing channels and wealth effects. 
And this, in turn, may lead to a crisis of public finances via automatic stabilizer effects and 
additional measures. 
The big challenge is to prevent a vicious circle in which a crisis of the public sector again 
leads  to  crisis  developments  in  the  financial  and  real  sectors  of  the  economy.  Preventing 
such  a  vicious  circle  was  indeed  the  main  motivation  for  the  actions  taken  by  European 
governments and by the ECB this month. 
At this conference, however, we do not intend to focus on actual crisis management but will 
try to gain some insights into – or at least a feel for – underlying longer-term developments.  
Those of you who know me from my academic profession know that I am a great believer in 
the  importance  of  knowing  economic  history,  and  especially  understanding  economics  as 
disequilibrium economics – to follow the approach of my academic teacher and friend, Kurt 
Rothschild. 
So please allow me to use these opening remarks to introduce some historical perspectives.  
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
I  will  give  you  two  quotes  and  let  you  guess  who  made  them  and  when.  Both  quotes 
comment  on  the  link  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  in  particular  on  how 
central  banks  and  monetary  policy  should  deal  with  financial  imbalances  and  ensuing 
financial crises. Here is quote number one: 
“[N]othing  short  of  a  sharp  increase  in  short-term  rates  that  engenders  a 
significant  economic  retrenchment  is  sufficient  to  check  a  nascent  bubble.  The 
notion that a well-timed incremental tightening c[an be] calibrated to prevent [a] 
bubble is almost surely an illusion. Instead, we […] need to focus on policies to 
mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next 
expansion.” 
And number two: 
“The  idea  that  central  banks  can  thwart  financial  crises  –  in  the  sense  of 
preventing  their  occurrence  –  is  absolutely  wrong;  however,  large  and  solidly 
governed  central  banks  can  contribute  crucially  to  a  milder  resolution  as  their 
strength  and  unquestioned  credibility  provides  a  safe  recourse  in  a  climate  of 
general unsteadiness and eases the return of confidence.”1 
Now for the solutions: 
The  first  quote  –  and  I  am  sure  many  of  you  have  got  this  one  right  –  is  from  Alan 
Greenspan. He made these remarks in his capacity as Chairman of the Federal Reserve in 
2002  during  a  speech  before  the  annual  central  bankers’  meeting  in  Jackson  Hole. 
Greenspan discussed the experience of the sharp increase in the price of technology stocks 
–  the  dot-com  boom  –  that  had  burst  two  years  earlier  in  2000.  Greenspan  argued  that 
central banks stand no chance when it comes to preventing bubbles. First, they would have 
to  be  able  to  recognize  a  bubble  when  everyone  else  was  still  thinking  that  prices  were 
driven  up  by  technological  progress  or  increased  future  earnings.  Second,  and  this  is  the 
point he makes in the quote I have just given, the central bank’s policy tool, the short term 
interest  rate,  is  very  blunt:  An  increase  in  the  interest  rate  is  either  too  small  to  affect  the 
targeted asset prices, or so large that it harms the entire economy. So what central banks 
should  do  instead  of  using  the  interest  rate  preemptively  is  to  mop  up  the  mess  after  the 
crisis, which is in fact what the Fed did after 2000/2001 by keeping the interest rate at very 
low levels for quite some time. 
The point made in the second quote sounds very much like Greenspan’s: Again it is argued 
that central banks cannot (and should not) prevent bubbles from arising. Instead they should 
throw  their  weight  behind  a  swift  restoration  of  stable  conditions  after  the  outbreak  of  a 
financial crisis. However, this quote is not from Greenspan. You might have suspected from 
the somewhat archaic wording – like for instance the “strength of the solidly governed central 
bank” or the “climate of general unsteadiness” – that it is older. This is true. In fact, it dates 
from  1870  and  is  drawn  from  a  testimony  of  the  then  Secretary  General  of  the  Austro-
Hungarian National Bank, Wilhelm von Lucam, to the Hungarian Parliament. Lucam was a 
widely  regarded  expert  in  economic  and  monetary  matters.  In  late  1869,  the  Hungarian 
Parliament called for a parliamentary commission on monetary reform. One of the subjects to 
be discussed was the Hungarian stock market crash of 1869. 
Following  the  “Ausgleich”  –  a  compromise  that  saw  the  creation  of  a  largely  autonomous 
Hungary  within  the  dual  monarchy  of  Austria-Hungary  –  the  newly  gained  political 
                                                 
1   “Die  Ansicht,  daß  Notenbanken  Krisen  entgegenwirken,  muß  ich  unbedingt  als  eine  unrichtige  bezeichnen, 
wenn  darunter  die  Verhütung  von  Krisen  gemeint  ist.  […]  Dagegen  können  große  und  solide  geleitete 
Notenbanken,  namentlich  auch  in  Handels-  und  Creditkrisen,  zu  einer  milderen  Abwicklung  der  Krisen 
wesentlich  beitragen,  indem  ihre  Kraft  und  ihr  unbezweifelter  Credit  in  dem  allgemeinen  Schwanken  einen 
sicheren Rückhalt bietet und die Wiederkehr des Vertrauens erleichtert.” Neue Freie Presse, May 22, 1870, 
p. 14. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
independence and a series of bumper harvests fuelled optimism. New banks, railroads and 
other companies sprouted in Budapest, the period was named the famous “Gründerzeit”, or 
“founder years”. And in fact, at the Ringstraße in Vienna and in the center of Budapest, you 
can still see the marvellous buildings that give testimony to the optimism of this period.  
However,  excessive  speculation  in  Budapest  led  to  a  crash  in  1869.  In  1870,  the 
disappointed  members  of  the  Hungarian  Parliament  were  looking  for  the  culprit,  and  the 
Austro-Hungarian National Bank (that issued money for both the Austrian and the Hungarian 
parts of the monarchy)  was among the natural candidates. It is in this context that Lucam 
testified  before  the  parliamentary  commission,  arguing  that  the  bank  had  neither  been  in 
there  for  the  creation  of  the  speculative  bubble  nor  was  it  responsible  for  its  eventual 
bursting. 
He also maintained that, not only in this specific case but as a matter of principle, a central 
bank  had  no  means  at  its  disposal  to  prevent  a  bubble  from  arising  but  could  only  do  its 
utmost in the period following the crash to restore confidence in the financial system and the 
economy at large. 
Note  one  last  interesting  parallel  in  terms  of  timing  between  the  statement  made  by 
Greenspan in 2002 and the one by Lucam in 1870: Both came one year after a sharp fall in 
the stock markets; in both cases, the much larger financial crisis was only to come a couple 
of years later. Greenspan advanced his ideas of “mopping up” after the burst of the dot-com 
bubble in 2001, but the true shock hit in 2007/2008. And it was the year 1873, three years 
after Lucam’s testimony, that saw the infamous May 9 – the Black Friday on the Vienna stock 
exchange – that ushered in a prolonged period of economic stagnation. 
I  hope  these  two  examples  have  convinced  you  that  the  interactions  between  monetary 
policy and financial stability are barely new questions for central bankers. In fact, the debates 
were  at  the  center  of  the  process  that  saw  the  emergence  of  modern  central  banking  in 
England in the early 19th century. 
At that time, monetary stability had a slightly different meaning from today, as it was mainly 
understood as a stable price of precious metal (silver, gold, or both) in terms of the domestic 
currency. When talking about price stability today, we look at a broader set of goods: in the 
euro area, for instance, the basket of goods used for the Harmonised Consumer Price Index 
(HCPI).  However,  both  then  and  now  has  monetary  policy  principally  aimed  at  achieving 
monetary stability, and the questions about the implications of monetary policy actions and 
their interaction with financial stability resemble each other quite a bit. 
Is monetary stability a necessary precondition for financial stability? That is, do we need an 
environment  of  stable  prices  for  a  healthy  financial  sector?  Or  to  put  it  even  stronger:  Is 
monetary  stability  sufficient  for  ensuring  financial  stability?  In  other  words,  is  a  monetary 
policy that successfully keeps prices stable by itself already a guarantee for stability in the 
financial system? 
Or  is  the  contrary  true:  that  monetary  stability,  instead  of  ensuring  financial  stability,  could 
lead  to  financial  instability  (a  point  made  by  BIS  economists  not  too  long  ago)?  At  first,  it 
might  seem  paradoxical  that  something  good  (stable  prices)  could  bring  about  something 
bad (financial instability). The idea here is that policies that narrowly focus on price stability 
might fail to consider arising imbalances in the financial area or even set in motion processes 
that put financial stability at risk. For instance, for the recent crisis, some have argued that 
low inflation rates, low interest rates and a general sense of confidence in the central banks’ 
ability to deal effectively with any shock to the economy that might come – all positive things, 
I would argue – have led economic agents to underestimate risks and to take positions that 
in the end turned out to be unsustainable. 
How were these questions answered in 19th century England? In the 1820s and 1830s, the 
English  economy  was  rocked  by  several  financial  crises.  In  1844,  the  Bank  of  England 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
received  new  statutes,  the  famous  Peel’s  Act,  that  put  severe  constraints  on  the  Bank  of 
England’s ability to issue banknotes. 
In  particular,  all  notes  issued  in  excess  of  a  fixed  amount  had  to  be  backed  1:1  in  gold. 
Compared  to  earlier  practice,  this  rule  was  extremely  strict.  The  authors  of  the  law  were 
hoping that the monetary stability brought about by strict limits on the amount of banknotes in 
circulation  would  also  prevent  speculation  in  financial  assets.  This  hope  was  disappointed 
only four years after the Peel’s Act was signed into law, when the severe financial crisis of 
1848 triggered a run on the Bank of England and forced the suspension of the convertibility 
of  bank  notes  in  metallic  coin.  The  episode  forced  central  bankers  to  recognize  that  the 
monetary  target  in  itself  was  not  enough  to  keep  financial  crises  at  bay.  Instead,  financial 
emergencies created a need for the central bank to take action over and beyond the simple 
and automatic rules of a metallic currency. In the second half of the 19th century, the Bank of 
England implicitly assumed this responsibility and became the de facto “lender of last resort” 
for the financial system, a concept explicitly spelled out by Walter Bagehot in his 1873 book 
“Lombard Street”. 
Central  bankers  today  are  therefore  in  good  company  with  their  predecessors.  Does  this 
mean that nothing has been learned since Lucam’s testimony in 1870? 
I  would  strongly  disagree.  What  it  means  is  that  there  are  some  constants  in  the  basic 
challenges  that  monetary  policymakers  face.  However,  the  possibilities  we  have  today  are 
quite different from those 150 years ago. The financial system has evolved significantly since 
then, and so have the resources available to policymakers. 
Lucam himself did not argue that speculative bubbles were benign and could be ignored. In 
his view, the inaction of monetary policy is rather grounded in helplessness. 
Central banks cannot prevent speculative bubbles from arising because – I quote again from 
the testimony before the Hungarian parliamentary commission – “the only means [to prevent 
the emergence of crises] would be to curtail the entrepreneurial spirit and we cannot count 
on such moderation, as the pursuit of quickly gained wealth will always be one of the prime 
moving  forces  of  mankind”.2  You  would  probably  agree  that  “the  pursuit  of  quickly  gained 
wealth”  is  still  one  of  the  “prime  moving  forces  of  mankind”  today  and  the  hope  for 
“moderation” is as elusive these days as it was as back in the 19th century. 
However, as economic policymakers today we do dispose of a set of tools that can be used 
to  moderate  or  guide  “the  entrepreneurial  spirit”  in  a  way  that  prevents  the  emergence  of 
financial  imbalances  and  ultimately  financial  crises.  The  regulation  and  supervision  of 
financial institutions and financial markets are powerful instruments that were unavailable to 
my predecessors 150 years ago. 
This brings me to what is a sort of leitmotif of this conference. The need for reform and a 
significant strengthening of financial regulation and supervision are generally considered as 
the prime lesson from the crisis experience of the past two years. Before the crisis, we had 
trusted in the discipline of financial markets combined with microprudential regulation, i.e. the 
regulation  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Both  failed  to  address  the  risks  arising  at  the 
systemic level, risks that could not be seen by looking at individual institutions and individual 
markets alone. 
There is broad agreement now that regulation needs to focus on the stability of the financial 
system as a whole, which is termed “macroprudential regulation”. 
                                                 
2   “Entstehen  Speculations-Krisen  und  in  Folge  derselben  vielleicht  acute  Geld-  und  Creditkrisen  durch 
Überstürzungen des Unternehmungsgeistes, so können solche Krisen nicht von vornherein verhütet werden, 
weil  das  einzige  Mittel  im  Maßhalten  des  Unternehmungsgeistes  läge  und  weil  auf  dieses  Mittel  insoferne 
nicht  gerechnet  werden  kann,  als  das  Jagen  nach  rasch  erworbenem  Reichthume  immer  eine  der 
Hauptleidenschaften des Menschen bilden wird.” Neue Freie Presse, May 22, 1870, p. 14. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2010
Macroprudential  policy  is  the  use  of  prudential  tools  (often  the  same  tools  as  in 
microprudential regulation, like capital requirements) with the explicit objective of promoting 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  not  necessarily  of  the  individual 
institutions  within  it.  To  be  able  to  do  so,  macroprudential  regulation  explicitly  takes  into 
account the interlinkages between financial institutions and financial markets as well as the 
procyclicality of the financial system. 
There  is  also  broad  agreement  that  central  banks  will  play  a  crucial  role  within  the  new 
regulatory framework, which is already evidenced in the central position that the ECB and the 
EU central banks will take in the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), a newly created 
body  set  up  to  assess  and  prevent  potential  risks  to  financial  stability  in  a  wide  range  of 
areas, ranging from the banks’ financial situation to the potential existence of asset bubbles 
or the smooth functioning of market infrastructures. 
But as we all know, the devil is in the details. What exactly should central banks be in charge 
of and how are they expected to fulfil their tasks? These issues are still very much open. In 
the next two days of the conference, we will have the occasion to look at the intersections of 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  from  various  angles.  As  the  title  of  the  conference 
indicates, we will do so at three different levels: responsibilities, strategies and instruments.  
The most general level is the question of responsibility. 
Clearly, central banks are – if not by intention then at least by necessity – also responsible 
for  financial  stability.  Yet,  unlike  in  the  domain  of  price  stability  (where  central  banks  are 
solely in charge), the duty of ensuring financial stability is divided up among a larger number 
of  agencies.  This  immediately  raises  the  question  how  to  delimit  the  central  bank’s 
responsibility from the responsibilities of other public bodies, like regulatory agencies. How 
can we ensure the free flow of necessary information? 
How can we ensure that if there is a problem, someone will be responsible for solving it and 
also in a position to act effectively? The issue of delimiting responsibilities between central 
bank, supervisors, regulation agencies and the government at the national level reappears 
on the international level. The crisis has clearly demonstrated the limits of national responses 
in  dealing  with  cross-border,  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  markets  and 
instruments. This is particularly evident in the European Union, where financial markets have 
integrated  rapidly  and  cross-border  entities  have  become  much  more  important  since  the 
introduction of the euro, while at the same time the EU’s supervisory framework has not kept 
pace and remained fragmented along national lines. 
The flipside of responsibility is accountability. Given their responsibilities for financial stability, 
what will be the criteria by which we judge the performance of central banks? This is very 
important  for  a  public  agency,  in  particular  an  agency  that  enjoys  a  high  degree  of 
independence from daily political influence and can therefore not be held accountable at the 
ballot box. Accountability is relatively straightforward for the price stability target, even though 
we might debate whether we should focus on headline inflation or core inflation or medium-
term  inflation:  A  quick  glance  at  the  official  statistics  is  enough  to  assess  the  success  of 
monetary  policy.  Such  an  assessment  becomes  much  trickier  with  financial  stability,  and 
even more so because the responsibility for financial stability – by its nature a much larger 
area than price stability – rests with several agents at once. 
Independence is a crucial ingredient to monetary stability, as the success of the Eurosystem 
in keeping inflation low and stable since the introduction the euro has well demonstrated. I would 
argue  that  independence  is  equally  important  in  the  area  of  financial  stability,  in  particular 
macroprudential regulation (as has been argued by some authors e.g. at the IMF for quite 
some time). Like in monetary policymaking, there will be occasions when it is necessary to 
take determined action that might in the short term hurt one or the other special interest in 
the economy. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 5
In  order  for  central  banks  to  hold  firm  in  this  situation,  independence  is  indispensable. 
Underpinning the independence of central banks is crucial for their success in achieving the 
objectives conferred upon them by law. And conversely, if central banks fail to achieve their 
objectives, their independence will be in question. And rightly so: Independence is not an end 
in  itself; it  is  a  political mechanism  to  make  sure  that  common  political  objectives such  as 
price stability are attained. Central banks have to earn their independence every day. The 
introduction of new objectives for central banks therefore creates a host of issues in terms of 
central  bank  credibility.  What  if  an  objective,  and  thus  the  benchmark  of  success,  are  not 
clearly  defined?  What  if  two  objectives  are  in  conflict?  What  if  failure  in  one  objective 
contaminates the credibility concerning another objective? 
We will surely do our best to avoid failure, yet the question remains what to do if – despite 
our  best  efforts  –  results  are  not  what  we  had  hoped  for.  We  will  discuss  central  bank 
independence this morning, and the issue is sure to reappear time and again throughout the 
conference. 
In light of the central banks’ responsibility for maintaining price stability and financial stability, 
what should be the strategies we employed and what are the instruments we need? 
Let  us  start  with  the  traditional  tool  of  monetary  policy,  the  short-term  interest  rate.  The 
Tinbergen  principle  states  that  one  tool  cannot  serve  two  purposes;  that  is,  interest  rate 
policy cannot deal with both macroeconomic and financial stability issues at the same time. 
Still,  events  over  the  past  few  years  have  implicitly  revived  the  discussion  about  the 
interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices.  For  many  years,  the  “mainstream 
view” was that monetary policy should not “lean against the wind” and/or should not include 
asset prices in the monetary policy objective function. This was also mainstream thinking in 
Austria in the 1870s. 
However, there are strong indications that monetary policy does – at least indirectly – play an 
important role for financial stability by affecting the measurement of risk, risk perception and 
risk tolerance and has done so in the run-up to the current crisis. 
Does  that  mean  that  financial  imbalances  should  be  considered  when  deciding  on  the 
appropriate  interest  rate  level?  Or  can  we  alternatively  try  to  weaken  the  link  between 
interest rates on the one hand and risk perception and risk taking on the other, for instance 
through  technical  improvements  in  the  way  risk  is  measured  for  regulatory  purposes  and 
constrained through regulatory rules? 
According to the Tinbergen principle, we need two tools to accomplish our two objectives of 
price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Macroprudential  regulation  is  this  second  tool.  In  the 
past, central banks shaped interest rate policy to achieve stable prices. When we decided on 
the appropriate level of the policy rate, we took the regulatory environment as a given. 
For  instance,  we  had  to  assess  the  impact  of  a  policy  rate  hike  or  cut  by  a  quarter 
percentage  point,  given  certain  regulation  on  capital  requirements  for  banks  and  on  the 
working  of  securities  markets.  The  mechanism  through  which  a  change  in  the  policy  rate 
influences  the  development  of  prices  and  the  real  economy  –  the  so  called  transmission 
mechanism – was seen as exogenous from the central bank’s point of view. This is in fact a 
sensible  approach  to  microprudential  regulation,  which  is  concerned  with  the  health  of 
individual  institutions.  Microprudential  rules,  once  agreed  upon,  are  not  altered  frequently 
and certainly not in reaction to macroeconomic developments. 
Macroprudential  regulation,  i.e.  the  use  of  prudential  tools  with  the  explicit  objective  of 
promoting the stability of the financial system as a whole, however, is by definition concerned 
with macroeconomic outcomes and much closer to the core monetary policy objective of the 
central bank. 
The  introduction  of  macroprudential  tools  is  a  game  changer  that  raises  very  complex 
questions of interaction between, and coordination of, monetary policy and macroprudential 
6 
 BIS Review 75/2010
use of (regulatory) instruments. I have already touched upon this interplay in terms of central 
bank responsibilities and accountability. 
In the daily handling of interest rate policy and macroprudential tools, the existence of two 
tools raises tricky issues. Let me give an example: Since monetary policy decisions may also 
affect financial stability, should central banks take into account the possible implications of 
their decisions on financial stability when making decisions targeted at future inflation risks? 
What would take precedence when both goals conflict? 
The ECB, as I mentioned at the beginning, has a clear priority for the statutory commitment 
to price stability. Therefore, the adequate strategy would be to avoid conflicts from arising by 
preemptive action. This involves having a strict regulatory regime that ex ante prevents the 
emergence of a financial crisis and that contains credible resolution mechanisms in case of 
need. 
More  fundamental  changes  will  be  needed,  however,  to  prevent  the  crisis  patterns  I 
mentioned  before.  Austria  fortunately  has  a  rather  conservative  banking  system  (although 
there  were  some  unfortunate  exceptions  with  which  we  had  to  deal  in  the  past).  But  on  a 
global scale it is obvious that the financial sector has over time become dramatically bigger 
and riskier. A striking example is the UK, with banking assets jumping from 50% of GDP to 
more than 550% over the past four decades – the main drivers being excessive leverage and 
often dubious financial innovations. 
The  introduction  of  new  macroprudential  tools  also  raises  the  question  of  how  these  tools 
should be employed in practice. In particular, is it better to have fixed rules, for instance a 
formula  linking  capital  requirements  to  loan  growth,  or  should  regulators  be  allowed  to 
exercise discretion when setting capital requirements or leverage ratios? 
Rules  simplify  life  and  resolve  some  of  the  problems  of  responsibility  and  accountability 
alluded to before: It is the rule that is responsible, not the regulator. On the other hand, we 
cannot predict nor determine the future. This is why the prevention of future financial crises 
might  necessitate  different  policies and  thus  significant  discretion  on  the  part  of  regulators 
and policy makers. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am afraid we have many open points here. But I believe it is the purpose of an event like 
the annual Economics Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank to provide the time 
and intellectual space to step back from the demands of everyday life and look at the more 
fundamental questions behind policymaking. This year we have slightly changed the format 
of  the  conference.  All  sessions  and  panels  combine  people  from  different  backgrounds, 
which  will  give  us  even  more  occasions  for  what  I  hope  will  be  fruitful  debates  between 
academics, central bankers, commentators, practitioners and the public. I am looking forward 
to  very  productive  discussions  of  these  and  other  issues  related  to  the  future  of  central 
banking over the next couple of days. 
Let me conclude: 
Over the last months, the dramatic events around the situation in Greece have reminded us 
that the crisis that began in 2007 is still far from over. Public finances in the entire euro area 
face  significant  challenges  from  unexpectedly  strong  declines  in  GDP,  leading  to  lower 
revenues  while  demanding  higher  public  expenditures,  coupled  with  structural  problems  in 
public  finances  that  predate  2007.  When  the  turmoil  in  government  debt  markets  reached 
unacceptable  levels  in  early  May,  the  ECB  together  with  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem  intervened  forcefully  to  stabilize  markets,  just  as  it  did  in  August  2007  and  in 
September 2008. 
Providing liquidity in a moment of general uncertainty is a key role of central banks. We are 
the  lenders  of  last  resort.  When  banks  stopped  trusting  each  other  in  the  wake  of  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, central banks stepped in to provide funds as long as it took to 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 7
sort out the problems. We have acted similarly in the last month, though this time less in the 
interbank market but principally in the market for sovereign debt. 
In  both  cases,  however,  the  important  point  is  that  while  central  banks  can  calm  liquidity 
crises, they cannot resolve solvency crises. For the banks after September 2008, this implied 
writing off bad loans and raising capital, either in private markets or with the help of the public 
authorities. The central banks did provide crucial temporary relief; the long-run adjustments 
had  to  be  made  by  the  banking  sector  itself.  In  the  current  situation  this  means  that  the 
Eurosystem can and will ensure that short-term volatility and speculation in financial markets 
do  not  derail  the  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  in  the  euro  area.  Again,  however,  it  is  the 
governments that have to ensure that their public finances become sustainable again in the 
long run. 
Within  this  context  of  uncertainty,  the  key  ingredient  to  successful  stabilization  of  the 
European economy is that the roles in economic policy remain clearly defined. The primary 
objective  of  the  Eurosystem  is  price  stability.  The  Treaty  of  Lisbon  is  very  clear  on  that. 
Confidence in the long-run stability of the euro is a crucial precondition of economic stability 
and growth and thus sustainable public finances. Be assured that the Eurosystem will stay 
the course. I wish you all a productive and successful conference. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 75/2010
