Bojan Marković: The use of hedging instruments by the National Bank of 
Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Bojan  Marković,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the 
FX Hedging Conference, Belgrade, 20 July 2010. 
 Let  me  start  by  quoting  a  few  newspaper  headlines  from  2000:  “S  čekom  po  kilo  mesa” 
(“Signing  cheque  for  two  pounds  of  meat”),  “Vrednost  marke  na  crno  i  dalje  raste”  (“The 
value of deutsche mark in the black market still rising”), “Marka obuzdana kineskim parama” 
(“Deutsche  mark  restrained  with  Chinese  money”).  I  guess  they  are  very  telling  about  the 
main concerns of the population at the time. For most people monetary policy means only 
two  things:  inflation  and  exchange  rate.  And  as  far  as  I  could  remember  both  had  always 
been a cause for concern in the past. 
Fortunately, things are changing. Inflation is no longer the main pre-occupation of the public. 
Since the end of 2008 it has been below 10% – firmly anchored around the NBS targets. The 
word inflation has all but disappeared from today’s headlines. 
Not so for the exchange rate. The exchange rate fluctuations still remain a major concern for 
the public and businesses. The purpose of my talk today is to explain that such fluctuations 
are a necessary backbone of stable and low inflation, and as such they must stay with us in 
the  foreseeable  future  (until  Serbia  enters  the  eurozone  following  the  harmonization  of 
business  cycles).  Nevertheless,  limiting  the  negative  implications  of  these  fluctuations  on 
households and businesses is possible through the use of financial derivatives and I would 
like to encourage a greater use of these techniques by banks and businesses. 
The flexible exchange rate brings many advantages for the economy as a whole. Today, the 
level  of  the  exchange  rate  is  not  determined  by  the  NBS  anymore  –  it  is  the  product  of 
market  forces.  Movements  in  the  exchange  rate  absorb  the  shocks  that  otherwise  would 
have gone to inflation or output. Not surprisingly therefore we are now enjoying a period of 
the lowest inflation volatility in our recent history. Moreover, the flexible exchange rate played 
a  major  role  in  sheltering  our  economy  from  the  impacts  of  the  crisis.  Thanks  to  dinar 
depreciation during the crisis, Serbia has performed much better in terms of output than most 
other countries in the Eastern Europe or the EU. In other words, the flexible exchange rate 
meant more business, more jobs. 
However,  for  ordinary  households  and  businesses  it  is  difficult  to  see  these  advantages. 
What people see is that fluctuations in the exchange rate are affecting their income – profits, 
payments for goods or a mortgage. And people don’t like this persistent reason for concern. 
Yet, a flexible exchange rate is the lesser of the two evils and we will need to learn to live 
with  it  without  such  concerns.  These  concerns  arise,  when  incomes  and  expenditures  of 
households and businesses are not in the same currency. For instance, a car importer has to 
pay in euros for the cars, but will receive dinars from the buyers. An exporter of local meat 
products receives euros, while most of its costs are in dinars. A household receiving wages 
and  pensions  in  dinars  has  to  pay  in  euros  for  a  mortgage.  Unless  a  balance  is  restored 
between the currencies of these incomes and payments, people will always watch exchange 
rate movements with anxiety. 
There  are  several  ways  of  restoring  the  balance  between  the  currencies  of  incomes  and 
expenditures – in other words hedging against the risks of exchange rate fluctuations. Some 
businesses or households are so called “naturally hedged”. An exporter who is importing lots 
of materials from abroad is not really concerned about the exchange rate. Nor is a household 
that is paying a mortgage in euros, but that is receiving enough income in FX from relatives 
abroad to cover for these mortgage payments. 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
Others  who  are  not  that  fortunate  are  trying  other  ways  of  hedging  against  the  currency 
fluctuations.  The  most  common  way  consists  of  quoting  the  price  in  euros  and  receiving 
dinars  according  to  the  exchange  rate  valid  at  the  payment  day.  Such  an  approach  is 
understandable,  but  from  the  perspective  of  the  NBS  and  macroeconomic  policy  is  not 
welcome. Such behavior makes our economy and its financial system vulnerable. 
Instead, we would like to encourage businesses to seek hedging of currency risks through 
their banks and their specialized hedging instruments. These instruments allow fixing future 
payments  in  any  given  currency  as  of  today.  For  instance,  with  a  simple  forward  contract 
concluded today one can buy or sell the euro in December 2010 for about 108 dinars with 
certainty – irrespective of what the actual dinar exchange rate is going to be in December. 
Sure, with such a contract buyers of Euros will be disappointed, if the actual exchange rate in 
December  turns  out  to  be  104  and  delighted  when  it  is  112.  But  the  contract  gives  them 
certainty. 
Such contracts greatly facilitate cash flow and liquidity management. At the same time, their 
price is very easy to compute – the future exchange rate depends on today’s exchange rate 
plus the differential between interest rates – the key policy rate of the NBS and refinancing 
rates of the foreign currency – over the duration of the forward contract. 
These simple contracts may be amalgamated into more complicated derivative instruments  
–  such  as  currency  or  interest  rate  swaps,  or  options  –  tailored  to  the  needs  of  particular 
businesses.  Although  these  products  are  less  straightforward  to  think  about,  the  banks 
should be working closely with their clients in providing adequate advice on how to use them 
as a means of effective hedging rather than speculation. 
Expanding on the use of hedging instruments is therefore a big challenge for the commercial 
banks.  Although  the  situation  is  improving,  only  14  out  of  34  banks  offer  derivative 
instruments to their clients today. Account managers in banks often do not understand how 
the derivative instruments could be used in helping the clients. Also the share of inter-bank 
FX forward trading remains very small – less than 5% of the overall market. This is surely 
less than the hedging needs of our economy. The lack of competition in providing hedging 
instruments among banks sometimes also implies that even the simple instruments such as 
forwards are overpriced, discouraging businesses from using them more often. 
And this is the challenge for the National Bank of Serbia too. We are committed to provide for 
a greater use of FX forward and derivative product both in the interbank market as well as by 
the  corporate  sector.  The  recently  introduced  FX  swap  operations  of  the  NBS  are  an 
example. We will also work with the banks in standardizing their offer of forward contracts to 
the clients. Our aim is that every bank offers such a standardized product so that the prices 
can easily be compared. We will set up a call center advising businesses on such products, 
provide a simple calculator of forward prices on our website and conduct other promotional 
and  educational  activities.  Besides,  we  will  be  actively  encouraging  banks’  account 
managers to develop and offer hedging strategies tailored to the needs of their clients. 
A  greater  use  of  hedging  instruments  will  have  many  benefits.  With  most  of  the  foreign 
currency  needs  covered  by  hedging  instruments,  companies  will  be  able  to  construct  their 
financial  plans  irrespective  of  currency  movements.  Higher  demand  for  such  instruments 
from  businesses  will  stimulate  more  competition  and  lower  prices  among  banks.  And  a 
greater use of forward instruments among banks will also reduce exchange rate volatility in 
the interbank market. 
But most importantly, by promoting the use of FX hedging instruments the NBS is hoping to 
contribute  to  a  situation  when  businesses  and  households  are  no  longer  scared  of  the 
exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Situation  when  prices  are  quoted  in  dinars  and  not  in  euros. 
Admittedly, it is a far reaching ambition, but expanding the use of financial hedging is the first 
important step. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
