Caleb Fundanga: The cost of capital – wither the Zambian financial 
markets? 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Caleb  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Zambia 
Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  Annual  Business  Conference  on  “Change  and  the 
Paradigm Shift in the Accounting Profession”, Livingstone, 6 August 2010. 
 The President of the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants; Mr Chintu Mulendema  
The  Chief  Executive  of  the  Zambia  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants;  Mr  Hapenga 
Kabeta  
Distinguished  members  of  the  Eastern,  Central  and  Southern  African  Federation  of 
Accountants 
Members of the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants  
Members of the Press  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
The  theme  for  this  symposium  portends  an  important  aspect  of  our  daily  lives,  either  at 
individual or corporate level. We are all, one way or the other, affected by developments in 
our financial markets. The role that finance plays in an economy is certainly an important one 
and you do not need to go far back in history for you to appreciate that role. You only need to 
make reference to the recent financial crises to appreciate the potency that finance has on 
economic activities.  
Chairperson, your choice of this topic therefore could not have been more appropriate. This 
topic is also timely given the current challenges that face many countries in the aftermath of 
the  recent  financial  crisis,  some  of  which  seem  to  be  just  unfolding  in  some  European 
countries. As you know, the crisis have arguably provided provocative questions regarding 
the management of financial markets, to which answers are now being actively sought. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  markets  provide  the  liquidity  necessary  to  facilitate 
transactions in assets. By pooling resources from a myriad of savers, financial markets play 
a critical role in directing resources to profitable investment projects. The ability of financial 
markets  to  effectively  contribute  to  economic  development  depends  on  the  availability  of 
affordable capital and its efficient allocation in the economy. For this reason, affordability of 
capital  is  an  important  input  in  any  economy’s  progress.  But  the  relevant  question  then  is 
“How Can We Make the Cost of Capital Affordable?”  
Distinguished Delegates, this question cannot be adequately answered without putting it in 
some  historical  context.  Most  of  you  will  recollect  that  two  decades  ago,  the  Zambian 
Government  embarked  on  an  ambitious  financial  liberalisation  programme  and  dismantled 
many forms of administrative controls, in general, to improve the efficiency of our economy. 
The  expectation  from  this  policy  shift  was  that  the  economy  would  score  efficiency  gains 
primarily  arising  from  increased  competition  in  the  financial  system.  Two  decades  on,  it 
would  be  hard  to  disagree  that  our  financial  system  has  certainly  faced  increased 
competition. Whereas the number of commercial banks at the end of the 1990s was 14 after 
the  failure  of  some  insolvent  banks,  Zambia  now  boasts  of  18  commercial  banks  who  in 
aggregate have a total of 263 branches. In the non-bank financial subsector, growth of non-
bank financial institutions offering bank-like products has also tremendously increased. As at 
end June 2010 there were 24 registered microfinance institutions while the number of leasing 
firms also increased to 12 over the years.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, apart from increasing the number of financial service providers, we 
have also scored some successes in the availability of credit to Zambians. In the period prior 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
to  the  2008  global  financial  crisis,  the  economy  was  experiencing  not  only  phenomenal 
growth  in  credit  availability  but  also  a  changing  pattern  in  the  distribution  of  credit.  Annual 
growth in credit peaked and averaged 131% between 2000 and 2008 before succumbing to 
the adverse effects of the global economic crisis. With regard to the direction of credit, it is 
heartening  to  note  that  bank  loans,  which  have  been  largely  a  preserve  of  corporate 
businesses for a long time, are finally within reach of our many working Zambian individuals.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  flow  of  credit  to  individual  workers  has  literally  exploded  in 
recent years. You may wish to know that personal loans, which stood at a paltry 6% of total 
bank  loans  at  the  turn  of  this  decade  now  account  for  26%.  You  may  also  remember  the 
aggressive  manner  in  which  commercial  banks  rolled  out  their  loan  products  in  the  period 
prior  to  the  2008  global  financial  crisis.  Although  the  degree  of  aggression  may  have 
somewhat subsided in the aftermath of this crisis, banks are still extending loans to persons 
they assess as creditworthy.  
Outside  the  banking  system,  credit  availability  by  non-bank  financial  institutions  has  also 
increased  in  many  forms  with  annual  growth  in  direct  loans  disbursed  by  microfinance 
institutions and leasing finance institutions showing a significant rise.  
Chairperson,  although  these  developments  are  encouraging  and  commendable,  I  do  not 
think we should be fully satisfied with them. It is not enough to merely increase the number of 
financial institutions, nor is it enough to concentrate on building consumer loan portfolios to 
salaried  workers  only.  In  my  view,  the  real  gains  should  arise  not  only  from  increased 
accessibility  to  financial  services  by  more  of  our  people,  but  also  the  cost  at  which  such 
accessibility  is  made  possible.  I  am  sure  you  will  readily  concur  with  me  that  access  to 
finance in Zambia is still relatively low at 37.3% as at end July 2009. This is hampered in part 
by the continued high cost of finance and the limited financing options available to the larger 
part of the Zambian business sector, particularly the small and medium enterprises (SMEs).  
One can attribute this state of affairs to several factors which broadly are influenced by the 
macroeconomic environment as well as micro-structure and practices of our financial system. 
Concerning  the  macroeconomic  environment,  most  of  you  will  remember  the  deadly 
combination  of  high  inflation  rates  and  low  or  negative  growth  that  characterised  our 
economy  from  the  mid-1980s  way  into  the  2000s.  Following  the  high  levels  of  inflation, 
suppliers of finance inevitably sought to obliterate negative real returns on their investments 
by raising interest rates to levels of inflation and in many instances above. Furthermore, the 
low levels of economic growth exacerbated the adverse perception of borrower risks in the 
economy  such  that  suppliers  of  finance  only  concentrated  on  servicing  their  existing  small 
blue-chip customer base that survived the harsh economic environment. This environment, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, has played a very critical role in cementing the high cost of finance.  
At a micro-structural level, a poor credit culture is also another venomous factor that has had 
its own share of supporting the high cost of credit. Bad borrowers, who regularly borrow from 
several institutions with little or no intention to repay their loans, have also been cited as one 
reason  for  commercial  banks’  relatively  high  non-performing  loans,  which  in  turn  fuel  high 
interest rates. Non-repayment of loans does nothing but muddying the waters for even good 
borrowers  with  profitable  projects,  and  in  order  to  stay  afloat  banks  have  responded  by 
maintaining their loan rates high.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  recognition  of  the  shortcomings  in  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets  and  the  obtaining  high  cost  of  finance,  the  Government  has  instituted  policy 
measures  aimed  at  correcting  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  restoring  macroeconomic 
stability.  The  benefits  of  these  measures  abound.  For  example,  the  fiscal  deficit  has  been 
constrained to within the allowable limits of below 3% of GDP. Lower fiscal deficit coupled 
with prudent monetary policy have contributed to current low and stable inflation rate. As you 
are  aware,  annual  inflation  stood  at  9.9%  at  end-December  2009  and  further  declined  to 
close  at  8.2%  at  end-July  2010.  The  growth  in  the  economy  has  also  been  robust, 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
underpinning the sustainability of policy reforms. Real economic growth has averaged above 
5% for most part of the past decade.  
Concern has also been raised that Government borrowing competes with the private sector 
for scarce funds thereby pushing up interest rates and perpetuating the high cost of finance. 
However,  in  recent  years,  the  Government  has  scaled  down  its  domestic  borrowing 
requirement in order to free resources for the private sector. On the other hand, due to banks 
appetite for risk free debt instruments, competition for government securities has intensified 
exerting a downward pressure on yield rates. Chairperson, these achievements attest to the 
importance  Government  attaches  to  reviving  this  economy  and  making  Zambia  a  middle 
income country by the year 2030.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, part of the reason financial intermediation has been 
limited has been because of the inadequate supporting financial and legal infrastructure. A 
well  developed  financial  infrastructure  is  essential  for  fostering  investor  participation  and 
expanded access to financial services. Accordingly, since 2004, the Government has been 
implementing the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) with a view to improving the 
functioning of financial markets and increasing accessibility to financial services. During the 
initial phase of the FSDP, numerous structural impediments to financial inclusiveness were 
identified and some measures have been instituted to correct them. The second phase of the 
FSDP is currently underway and focuses on enhancing the competitiveness of the financial 
services industry. It also focuses on establishing secondary trading of Government securities 
in an effort to enhance liquidity and price formation in the debt market. Without the liquidity 
provided  by  the  secondary  market,  the  primary  or  new  issues  market  would  be  seriously 
hampered in its function of helping productive entities acquire new capital at affordable price. 
These measures are expected to stimulate development of the capital and money markets 
necessary for attracting long-term financing in the economy.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  order  to  improve  risk  assessment  of  the  credit  worthiness  of 
Zambian  borrowers,  the  Government  also  came  up  with  relevant  legal  provisions  for 
establishing the Credit Reference Bureau (CRB). I am pleased to report that the CRB is now 
operational  and  compilation  of  the  database  on  borrowers  has  commenced.  However,  the 
progress of collating credit information on the state of the clients’ financial status has been 
rather slow. I wish to take this opportunity to once again appeal to commercial banks and 
other  financial  service  providers  to  expedite  the  process  of  building  the  data  base  on  the 
borrowers’  credit  profile.  All  stakeholders  stand  to  benefit  from  a  rich  database  as  credit 
providers will have a good basis to adequately assess the credit worthiness of their existing 
and potential customers with a view to providing properly priced products and services.  
Chairperson,  the  Government  has  also  created  the  Citizens  Economic  Empowerment 
Commission  (CEEC)  in  order  to  enable  small  businesses  with  viable  investment  projects 
have access to finance. I would personally like to see an increased flow of credit to our SMEs 
which, as many of you know, have been routinely found to be a major source of growth in 
any  market  economy.  This  is  more  so  as  the  larger  part  of  our  productive  population, 
particularly those in the informal sector, is in fact employed in one way or the other in these 
SMEs. It is therefore strategic for us in the financial advisory arena to support our brothers 
and sisters who run these SMEs. By ensuring that credit flows in that direction, we can then 
be assured that more and more of our people who are engaged in SMEs will certainly have 
access to financial services like everybody else. In the process, growth generated from the 
SMEs can sustainably offer the much needed respite from mineral dependency.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, for Government initiatives to be effective there is need to integrate 
them into the mainstream financial system. In this regard, financial reforms must continue to 
evolve  and  be  dynamic  in  order  to  address  the  main  challenges  still  facing  the  Zambian 
financial markets. Whilst the Government should take a leading role in creating an enabling 
environment  and  putting  in  place  an  effective  regulatory  framework,  the  financial  services 
industry,  to  which  you  all  here  belong,  can  also  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
reduction in the cost of capital. I therefore wish to encourage you, through this platform, to 
provide accurate, reliable and high quality financial information on all business activities. The 
availability  of  firm  level  financial  information  will  assist  financial  institutions  in  making 
informed decisions on granting capital to firms. This would in turn lead to a reduction in the 
level of risk premium loaded on the loan rates.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to conclude by stating that Zambia is a country in urgent 
need  of  investment.  However,  the  high  cost  of  finance  has  hampered  the  increase  in 
investment. Therefore provision of appropriately priced financing and policy incentives to our 
business firms are important triggers to investment opportunities and increased productivity. 
The recent survey by Government and its cooperating partners on the cost of doing business 
has highlighted the need to ignite the SMEs by allowing them to come out of informality and 
contribute to job creation and poverty reduction.  
Although  there  are  still  many  challenges  remaining,  I  am  particularly  encouraged  by  the 
increasing number of financial service providers in the Zambian economy. This is important 
for competition. As competition intensifies, banks and other financial institutions would start 
to reposition themselves by lowering the cost of finance. On the policy front, the central bank 
and Government in general will continue to pursue appropriate policies that promote financial 
sector growth so as to enable them to reduce the cost of financial intermediation and improve 
the  delivery  of  high  quality  financial  services.  On  its  part  the  Government  contributes  to 
reducing the cost of capital through lower deficit spending. This frees resources for private 
sector borrowing.  
Chairperson, I wish to strongly encourage the accounting profession to join hands with the 
central  bank  and  other  Government  organs  in  the  task  of  reducing  the  cost  of  doing 
business.  In  answering  the  question:  The  Cost  of  Capital  –  Wither  the  Zambian  Financial 
Markets?  –  I  would  say  that  Zambia  has  made  significant  achievements  in  making  the 
financial markets as properly functioning as possible. In its current state, the banking system, 
being  the  dominant  player  in  the  financial  sector,  should  embrace  competition  and  offer 
products and services that can spun growth of the entire economy. The capital market has 
the challenging task of mobilising small number of participants and limited range of long-term 
investment products. Despite these challenges I am optimistic that working together, we can 
reduce  the  cost  of  finance  in  Zambia.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  provide  the 
required  leadership  and  act  as  the  catalyst  for  the  emergence  of  viable  and  responsible 
markets to serve the interests of all investors.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you success in the deliberations of this conference and in the 
rest of your endeavours for 2010.  
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2010
