Philipp Hildebrand: Economic situation and monetary conditions in 
Switzerland 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2010. 
 is  maintaining 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB) 
its  expansionary  monetary  policy. 
Consequently,  it  is  leaving  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  unchanged  at  
0.00–0.75%  and  intends  to  hold  the  Libor  in  the  lower  part  of  the  target  range,  at  around 
0.25%.  
The recovery of the global economy continues and the Swiss economy is benefiting from it. 
Although  the  weakening  of  the  euro  with  respect  to  the  Swiss  franc  is  dampening  export 
activity, this activity is being supported by growth in foreign demand. The domestic sector is 
still performing favourably. For 2010, the SNB is now expecting real GDP growth of about 
2.0%. In view of these pleasing developments, the deflationary risk in Switzerland has largely 
disappeared. 
At the same time, uncertainty has increased since the last monetary policy assessment. The 
latest  tensions  on  the  financial  markets,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  public  finances  of 
some individual countries, have increased the downside risks. Should these downside risks 
materialise and, via an appreciation of the Swiss franc, lead to a renewed threat of deflation, 
the SNB would take all the measures necessary to ensure price stability. 
The  SNB’s  conditional  inflation  forecast  for  2010  and  2011  has  increased  slightly  since 
March. It remains unchanged for 2012. Assuming an unchanged three-month Libor of 0.25%, 
average inflation for 2010 is expected to amount to 0.9%, for 2011 to 1.0% and for 2012 to 
2.2%. This forecast shows that short-term price stability is guaranteed. It also shows that the 
current expansionary monetary policy cannot be maintained over the entire forecast horizon 
without compromising medium and long-term price stability. The forecast is still associated 
with very considerable uncertainties. 
Global economic outlook 
I would now like to take a closer look at the economic situation and at monetary conditions. 
The upturn in the global economy continues, supported by economic policies which remain 
very accommodating. The emerging economies, in particular, are recording high GDP growth 
rates. The US has seen a further recovery of domestic demand and the labour market. In 
Europe,  restrained  expenditure  on  the  part  of  households  and  companies  means  that 
economic  activity  remains  subdued.  However,  positive  movements  in  new  orders  and  the 
indices for European manufacturing suggest stronger economic growth. 
Global  growth  forecasts  for  2010  and  2011  have  been  revised  upwards.  The  smallest 
revision was that for the European economy. On the one hand, more restrictive fiscal policies 
are likely to hold back growth in Europe. On the other hand, however, growth is supported by 
the depreciation of the euro and low capital market interest rates in the major EU economies. 
However, further developments are associated with considerable uncertainties. The biggest 
risk  for  the  global  economy  is  the  continued  increase  in  tension  on  financial  markets, 
particularly due to the public finances of some individual countries. This could affect the real 
economy  via  a  loss  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  households  and  companies  as  well  as 
through  an  additional  burden  on  banks.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  upside  risks  for  the 
global  economy.  Domestic  demand  in  the  emerging  economies  and  the  US  could,  once 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
again, prove surprisingly robust. In Europe, export activity could increase more strongly than 
expected. 
Swiss economic outlook 
In Switzerland, the economic recovery has continued. In the first quarter of 2010, real GDP 
rose by 1.6% on an annualised basis, and was 2.2% above the year-back quarter. Economic 
activity was mainly driven by household demand and exports of goods and services.  
The firming of the economic recovery led to a renewed rise in the demand for labour, and 
short-time  work  fell  significantly.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  seasonally  adjusted 
unemployment  has  also  fallen  slightly.  Leading  indicators  for  labour  demand  are  pointing 
upwards.  The  SNB  anticipates  a  gradual  improvement  in  the  labour  market.  Despite  the 
uncertainties in connection with public finances in many countries, global economic activity is 
still  having  a  supportive  effect.  Consequently,  capacity  in  the  export  sector  is  likely  to  be 
increasingly  better  utilised.  Consumption  and  construction  investment  will  be  supported  by 
the improved labour market outlook and the expansionary monetary policy. 
The SNB expects real GDP to increase by approximately 2% for 2010 as a whole. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
The expansionary monetary policy is reflected in monetary conditions. Since last November, 
the three-month Libor had been held at the desired level of 0.25%. However, from mid-May it 
began sinking rapidly and is currently well below that level. The fall in the rate is a sign that 
the  banking  system  is  currently  holding  a  very  large  amount  of  liquidity.  My  colleague, 
Jean-Pierre Danthine, will talk about this in greater detail. 
Interest  rates  on  the  capital  market  have  also  fallen.  In  June,  yields  on  10-year  Swiss 
Confederation  bonds  fell  to  a  record  level.  The  low  capital  market  interest  rates  reflect  a 
higher  demand  for  Swiss  government  bonds.  In  addition,  long-term  inflation  expectations 
continue to be firmly anchored. 
Private companies are also benefiting from low interest rates on capital markets. Credit risk 
premia have fallen further and rates of interest on bank loans are also at a very low level. 
Since  the  last  monetary  policy  assessment,  the  Swiss  franc  has  appreciated  against  the 
euro. It has simultaneously depreciated against the US dollar. As a result, the trade-weighted 
external value of the Swiss franc has only slightly increased.  
The expansionary  monetary policy is also reflected in the monetary aggregates. Thus, the 
monetary  base  rose  to  a  record  CHF  128.6  billion  in  May,  and  growth  of  the  monetary 
aggregates is continuing at a high level. For example, M2 was growing at 10.2% in May and 
M3 at 7.1%. Credit growth also increased further. After slowing to 2.7% in September 2009, 
the  rate  of  growth  increased  to  4.1%  in  April.  This  acceleration  is  attributable  to  loans  not 
secured by mortgages, which have been growing since April. Mortgage loans grew at a rate 
of over 5% in April.  
There  are  still  no  signs  of  any  credit  crunch  in  the  survey  on  bank  lending  conditions 
conducted regularly by  the SNB. The survey even provides initial indications of a possible 
trend reversal. During the financial crisis, a number of banks had reported a slight tightening 
in their loan conditions. However, in the first quarter of 2010, a few banks (for the first time) 
reported an easing.  
We continue to observe a considerable increase in loan volumes for residential mortgages. 
This increase, along with movements in real estate prices, represents a risk that demands 
the full attention of the SNB. My colleague, Thomas Jordan, will discuss this topic in greater 
depth.  
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
the 
traditional 
interest  rate 
Development of the SNB’s balance sheet as a consequence of monetary policy 
In  my  following  remarks,  let  me  focus  on  the  extraordinary  development  of  the  SNB’s 
balance  sheet.  As  is  the  case  at  other  central  banks,  the  balance  sheet  has  undergone  a 
considerable  expansion  and  change  in  its  composition  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial 
crisis. By May 2010, it had nearly tripled in size to over CHF 300 billion.  
This  extraordinary  development  in  the  balance  sheet  is  a  direct  consequence  of  monetary 
policy.  The  SNB  had  lowered  interest  rates  sharply  during  the  financial  crisis,  but  by  the 
spring  of  2009, 
instrument  was  practically  exhausted. 
Consequently  –  with  an  incipient  threat  of  deflation  –  the  SNB  adopted  unconventional 
measures  to  loosen  the  monetary  conditions  further.  By  carrying  out  long-term  repo 
transactions  and  foreign  exchange  swaps,  acquiring  Swiss  franc  bonds  issued  by  private 
sector  borrowers  and  purchasing  foreign  currency,  the  banking  system  was  supplied  with 
large amounts of liquidity. In the past few months, foreign exchange purchases, in particular, 
have been an effective instrument for averting deflationary risks. While the liquidity created 
by purchasing foreign exchange and Swiss franc bonds is of a permanent nature, liquidity 
resulting  from  repos  and  currency  swaps  is  temporary.  It  flows  back  automatically  when 
transactions are not renewed. This has occurred to a large extent in the meantime.  
The considerable expansion in the SNB’s balance sheet is therefore primarily attributable to 
the increase in foreign exchange reserves. These have more than quadrupled to just over 
CHF  230  billion  as  a  result  of  the  interventions  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis. 
From  today,  the  SNB  will  also  be  publishing  information  on  current  foreign  exchange 
reserves on its website (www.snb.ch) at the beginning of each month.  
The high level of foreign exchange reserves will inevitably increase currency risk and mean 
that debtors are concentrated in a few major countries. These risks ultimately represent the 
burden  the  SNB  has  assumed  in  order  to  protect  the  Swiss  economy  from  the  threat  of 
deflation, in line with its mandate. Balance sheet risks have risen overall. The SNB is now 
reaping the benefits of having continuously increased its allocation to provisions in previous 
years. This gave it the room for manoeuvre it needed for measures in times of crisis. The 
higher allocation to provisions decided on recently has further strengthened the SNB’s capital 
base. The SNB has sufficient equity capital to withstand even large losses. 
In the long term, a large part of the liquidity that has been created is excess liquidity. As my 
colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will explain, the SNB has the necessary instruments at its 
disposal to withdraw this liquidity.  
Inflation forecast chart 
I would now like to comment on the new, conditional inflation forecast in more detail. 
The  (dashed)  red  curve  on  the  chart  represents  the  new,  conditional  inflation  forecast.  It 
covers the period from the second quarter of 2010 to the first quarter of 2013 and shows the 
future inflation development on the assumption of the three-month Libor remaining constant 
at 0.25% over the entire forecasting horizon. For purposes of comparison, the (dash-dotted) 
green  curve  shows  the  inflation  outlook  published  in  March,  which  was  also  based  on  the 
assumption of a three-month Libor of 0.25%.  
The  new  forecast  shows  unchanged  inflation  prospects.  However,  new  data  have  led  to a 
slight  upward  revision  in  the  inflation  forecast  in  the  short  term,  so  that  inflation  arrives  at 
nearly 1% in the second quarter of 2010. Since the oil price in the first half of 2009 was lower 
than in 2010, this level is due to a base effect attributable to oil prices. Thereafter, inflation is 
projected to remain below 1% until the second quarter of 2011. On the one hand, the base 
effect  attributable  to  oil  prices  weakens.  On  the  other  hand,  production  remains  below  its 
potential.  The  forecast  shows  that  –  should  the  Libor  remain  at  the  level  targeted  today  – 
inflation accelerates from the third quarter of 2011 onwards. At 2.2%, the inflation forecast for 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
2012 is the same as in the March forecast. The forecast shows that the current expansionary 
monetary policy cannot be maintained over the entire forecast horizon without compromising 
medium and long-term price stability. The forecast is still associated with very considerable 
uncertainties. 
  4 
    BIS Review 85/2010
