Philip Lowe: Recent economic developments 
Keynote speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at 
the Colonial First State Investment Forum, Sydney, 13 May 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Colonial  First  State  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  today’s  Investment 
Forum. It is a pleasure to be here this morning.  
Last  Friday,  the  Reserve  Bank  released  its  latest  quarterly  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy. 
What I would like to do this morning is to pick up on three of the interrelated themes of that 
Statement. The first is the nature of the recovery in the global economy. The second is the 
outlook for the Australian economy and the expected increase in Australia’s terms of trade. 
And the third is recent developments in inflation, particularly the divergent trends in the prices 
of tradable and non-tradable goods and services.  
The global economy 
The  week  since  the  Statement  was  finalised  has  been  a  turbulent  one  on  global  financial 
markets  due  to  concerns  about  the  fiscal  situation  in  Europe.  When  these  concerns  first 
arose,  the  focus  was  on  public  finances  in  Greece  and  there  were  limited  flow-on  effects 
outside  of  Europe.  While  the  problems  continue  to  be  focused  on  Europe,  more  recently 
there were signs of a rise in risk aversion globally. This saw equity markets fall and strains 
re-emerge  in  many  money  markets.  There  were  also  safe-haven  capital  flows  into  the  US 
dollar and the yen, as well as into government bonds in the United States and Germany. Left 
unchecked, these events had the potential to lead to a widespread retreat from risk-taking by 
investors, damaging the recovery in the world economy.  
In the face of this escalation in market instability, recent measures by the European Union 
and  its  member  states,  the  IMF,  and  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  have  provided 
investors  with  some  confidence  that  the  underlying  issues  are  being  addressed,  and  that 
support mechanisms are in place. Restoring confidence is clearly a necessary step in what 
will be a very difficult road ahead for a number of countries. These events again remind us of 
the  very  hard  choices  that  countries  can  be  forced  to  make  if  prudent  policies  are  not 
implemented in the good times. In a number of European countries, governments are being 
forced to cut back at the same time that private demand is declining. The obvious result is a 
very  weak  economy. In these countries, the capacity to use countercyclical fiscal policy to 
support  aggregate  demand  has  been  diminished  because  of  the  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  in 
more tranquil times.  
While financial markets have been turbulent, the recent data on economic activity suggest 
that the global economy is continuing to recover from the sharp downturn in late 2008 and 
early 2009. In its latest update, the IMF is forecasting that the world economy will expand by 
4¼ per cent in 2010 (Graph 1). This is a much better outcome than was expected 12 months 
ago, when the IMF was forecasting growth of just 2 per cent. At the time, the outcomes that 
we  have  seen  recently  were  viewed  as  a  possible  “upside  risk”,  although  most  observers 
thought the likelihood of this risk materialising was quite low. The main focus at the time, as it 
has been over the past week, was on the possible downside risks which were seen to be 
both very real and very serious.  
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
  
We now know that the various policy measures that were taken did help arrest the collapse 
of  confidence  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  These  measures  on  the  fiscal, 
monetary and financial fronts provided reassurance that policymakers would not stand on the 
sidelines. In doing so, they helped reduce the extreme risk aversion that was evident at the 
time. They also had the more traditional effect of directly supporting spending in the economy 
when many people were reluctant to spend.  
While the global economy is recovering, the recovery has been quite uneven to date. In Asia, 
it has been V-shaped, but in the countries of the North Atlantic, particularly those in Europe, 
it has been subdued (Graph 2). Output remains below the level it reached in 2008 and, in 
many countries, it will still be some time before that earlier peak is reached again.  
Graph 2 
2 
  BIS Review 67/2010
China continues to be at the forefront of the recovery. Growth over the first few months of 
2010  was  strong,  and  recent  indicators  suggest  that  this  momentum  has  continued. 
Investment in the manufacturing sector and in infrastructure has, if anything, surprised on the 
upside (Graph 3). The main issue continues to be the potential for the Chinese economy to 
run too hot, putting upward pressures on the prices of goods and services and on housing 
prices.  Recently,  the  Chinese  authorities  have  been  responding  to  this  risk,  especially 
through steps to rein in the property market.  
Graph 3 
  
The picture is broadly similar elsewhere in Asia, where there has been a sharp recovery in 
industrial production and exports (Graph 4). Policy settings in the region remain stimulatory, 
particularly  when  viewed  against  the  V-shaped  recovery.  Over  the  past  month  or  so,  a 
number  of  countries  –  including  India,  Malaysia  and  Singapore  –  have  taken  steps  to 
withdraw some of this stimulus. These are welcome developments given that one risk that 
has been getting some attention is the possibility that stimulatory policy settings remain in 
place for too long causing inflation pressures to build in Asia. If this risk were to materialise, a 
more pronounced tightening of policy, and perhaps a sharper slowdown in growth, would be 
likely to occur over the medium term.  
In the economies of the North Atlantic the challenges are very different.  
In many countries, financial systems have not returned to full health, consumer confidence is 
still  low,  housing  markets  are  yet  to  show  sustainable  signs  of  recovery  and  governments 
face  very  significant  medium-term  fiscal  challenges.  Conditions  in  Europe,  in  particular, 
remain  weak,  with  domestic  final  demand  still  not  growing  (Graph 5).  In  contrast,  in  the 
United  States,  domestic  demand  is  now  growing  again,  and  recent  economic  data  have 
generally been a bit better than earlier expected. Both consumption and spending on plant 
and  equipment  by  businesses  have  increased,  surveys  suggest  that  business  conditions 
have improved, and employment is growing again. However, as in Europe, the recovery in 
the  United  States  remains  dependent  on  stimulatory  settings  of  both  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy, and fiscal issues cloud the medium-term outlook.  
 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
Graph 4 
Graph 5 
  for  Australia.  There  are,  however,  downside  risks.  Despite 
 
This international environment is clearly a mixed one. Australia’s major export partners are 
growing strongly, and there are reasonable prospects that they will continue to do so. This is 
a  positive 
the  recent 
announcements  having  stabilised  confidence  in  Europe,  concerns  about  public  finances 
could build again. If they did, it would weigh on growth prospects for the countries directly 
concerned, and it could also weigh on prospects in Asia, particularly if it were associated with 
a  marked  increase  in  risk  aversion  globally.  At  the  same  time,  one  cannot  rule  out  further 
positive growth surprises for the global economy, particularly if confidence in Europe holds 
up  and  policy  remains  stimulatory  in  Asia.  As  usual,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  watching 
carefully  over  the  weeks  and  months  ahead  to  assess  how  the  balance  of  these  risks  is 
evolving.  
4 
 BIS Review 67/2010
The Australian economy and the terms of trade 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  Australian  economy,  which  continues  to  improve  from  the 
relatively mild downturn a year or so ago.  
As  is  the  case  for  the  world  economy,  the  recovery  in  Australia  has  been  stronger  than 
expected. In a very real sense, our experience has been much closer to that of many of our 
major trading partners in Asia, than it has been to that of the other advanced economies of 
the world. As a result, we are operating closer to full capacity than other developed countries, 
and the challenges we face are quite different to the ones that they face.  
In the Statement last week, the Bank published its updated forecasts for the next few years. 
The  central  forecast  is  for  the  Australian  economy  to  expand  by  around  3¼ per  cent  over 
2010, before growth picks up to be in the 3¾–4 per cent range over the next couple of years 
(Graph  6).  The  forecast  for  2010  is  unchanged  from  that  of  three  months  ago,  while  the 
forecasts for the following years have been revised up a little to above-average growth, partly 
reflecting above-average growth in both the labour force and the capital stock.  
Graph 6 
  
An important factor underpinning this positive outlook is the lift in Australia’s terms of trade, 
which are expected to regain their peak of a couple of years ago. This would bring them back 
to around the very high level they reached in the early 1950s when wool prices spiked at the 
time of the Korean War (Graph 7). Over the past six months, the prices of most commodities 
have  increased,  although  it  is  the  prices  of  iron  ore  and  coking  coal  that  have  risen 
particularly strongly. These commodities share the common feature that they are inputs into 
the production of steel.  
Looking  back  in  time,  global  steel  production  grew  strongly  in  the  1960s  and  early  1970s 
when Japan was industrialising, but then was relatively flat for about a quarter of a century 
(Graph  8).  Over  the  past  decade,  growth  in  global  steel  production  has  again  been  very 
strong, running well ahead of that in global industrial production. This strength largely reflects 
the very strong growth in manufacturing and infrastructure investment in China, both of which 
have been quite intensive in their use of steel.  
BIS Review 67/2010 
 5
Graph 7 
Graph 8 
   
If the industrialisation experience of the United States and Japan is any guide, strong growth 
in Chinese demand for steel could be expected for quite a few years yet. And over a slightly 
longer  horizon,  Indian  demand  for  steel  –  which  currently  is  relatively  low –  could  also  be 
expected to grow strongly. Of course, over time, a significant global supply response is likely 
to lead to less pressure on raw materials prices than is currently the case. Notwithstanding 
this, Australia does look to be well placed to benefit from strong global demand for the main 
inputs into the production of steel. The outlook for the LNG sector also remains very positive.  
This boost in the terms of trade this year will add significantly to national income. In putting 
together  the  Reserve  Bank’s  forecasts  it  has  been  assumed  that  more  of  this  boost  to 
income is saved than was the case in the earlier boom in the terms of trade. This reflects two 
factors. The first is the different position of the Federal budget and the second is the more 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2010
cautious approach to spending currently being displayed by the household sector. If this lift in 
saving does not occur, then demand in the economy could well be stronger than forecast, 
and this would put additional pressure on capacity.  
At the moment though, with the economy still emerging from the earlier downturn, there is 
still  some  spare  capacity  and  conditions  clearly  differ  across  sectors.  Retail  spending 
remains subdued following the large increase last year, and commercial construction is weak 
outside  of  the  boost  from  public-sector  infrastructure  spending.  In  contrast,  dwelling 
construction continues to pick up, the period of business-sector deleveraging looks like it has 
come to an end, and investment in the resources sector is at very high levels.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  these  differences  carefully.  Overall  though,  the  central 
scenario for Australia remains a positive one. Our major trading partners are growing solidly, 
commodity  prices  are  high  and  domestic  income  is  likely  to  grow  strongly  over  the  year 
ahead.  If  this  central  scenario  were  to  eventuate,  a  major  challenge  will  be  to  expand  the 
supply side of the economy so that demand can grow solidly without adding to inflation. At 
the  same  time,  we  need  to  be  aware  that  circumstances  can  change  quickly.  If  they  do, 
Australia  is  in  the  fortunate  position,  as  are  a  number  of  countries  in  Asia,  of  having  the 
policy flexibility to be able to respond.  
Inflation 
The third issue I would like to talk about is recent trends in inflation in Australia.  
The  March  quarter  CPI  confirmed  that  inflation  pressures  have  moderated  significantly 
(Graph 9). In mid 2008, underlying inflation was running at a little above 4½ per cent, a level 
that  was  clearly  too  high,  with  the  economy  pushing  up  against  capacity  constraints.  In 
contrast, over the past 12 months, the various measures of underlying inflation all suggest 
that it is now running at around 3 per cent – a marked reduction from rates two years ago.  
Graph 9 
 
This decline reflects two broad developments – the earlier slowdown in demand growth and 
the appreciation of the exchange rate. The downturn in the economy in late 2008, together 
with the elevated degree of uncertainty at the time, led to  a considerable slowing in wage 
growth  in  the  private  sector.  Weak  demand  growth  also  put  downward  pressure  on  firms’ 
 BIS Review 67/2010 
 7
margins, and the appreciation of the exchange rate has recently led to price reductions for 
many imported goods.  
Given  the  inevitable  lags,  these  factors  are  likely  to  see  underlying  inflation  in  year-ended 
terms  come  down  a  bit  more  in  the  near  term.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  outcome  for  the 
March quarter was slightly higher than we, and most market observers, had been expecting. 
One  clearly  needs  to  be  cautious  in  interpreting  a  single  figure.  However,  this  outcome  is 
consistent with the idea that the disinflationary forces in the economy are not quite as strong 
as previously expected, largely because the economy has performed better than previously 
expected.  
One other aspect of the recent data on inflation worth noting is the divergent trends in the 
prices  of  tradable  and  non-tradable  items.  Over  long  periods  of  time,  the  prices  of  non-
tradables – which are mostly services – have tended to rise more quickly than the prices of 
tradables – which are mostly goods. For example, over the past decade the average annual 
increase in the prices of non-tradables was 3¾ per cent, while the average increase in the 
prices of tradables (excluding food and fuel) was much lower, at just ¾ per cent. The primary 
reason for this difference is the faster rate of productivity growth in the production of goods 
than in services.  
Looking at the recent inflation data, we can see that this difference is currently quite large 
(Graph 10). One very concrete example of this can be seen in divergent movement in the 
price of health services – a non-tradable – which has increased by 6 per cent over the past 
year, and the price of clothing – a tradable – which has fallen by 3 per cent over the same 
period.  
Graph 10 
  
The recent decline in the prices of tradables reflects the appreciation of the exchange rate 
that I noted earlier, as well as tariff cuts at the beginning of 2010, and discounting by retailers 
in the face of subdued growth in retail sales over the past year. Looking ahead, these factors 
are likely to continue to contribute to low rates of tradables inflation for some time yet.  
For  non-tradables,  the  picture  is  somewhat  different,  with  year-ended  rates  of  inflation 
picking up recently. This is partly explained by a number of specific factors that have affected 
the  prices  of  individual  services.  But,  more  generally,  it  would  appear  that  demand  for  a 
8 
 BIS Review 67/2010
range of services has been strong relative to the economy’s current capacity to supply them. 
This pressure on capacity is, in turn, putting pressure on prices.  
One obvious example here is housing, with the rate of population growth recently exceeding 
the rate of increase in the number of dwellings for the first time in many decades. One result 
of  this  is  that  rental  vacancy  rates  are  generally  low  and  rents  are  rising  solidly,  although 
recent rates of increase are below the pace of a year ago.  
Another example is utilities, where prices have been rising very strongly recently (Graph 11). 
Over the past year, the price of electricity is up by 18 per cent, the price of gas is up by 9 per 
cent and the price of water is up by 14 per cent. These large increases follow an extended 
period in the 1990s when utilities prices increased by considerably less than the general rate 
of inflation, and the level of investment in infrastructure was relatively low. Recently, there 
has been strong growth in demand for electricity, especially in the peak periods, and this is 
requiring  further  expansion  of  infrastructure  to  expand  supply  capability  and  ensure  the 
reliability of the network in these peak periods. To fund this supply expansion, as well as in 
response  to  higher  raw  material  costs,  the  industry  regulators  have  approved  large  price 
increases.  Looking  ahead,  above-average  price  increases  are  likely  to  continue  for  some 
years, although below the current rate of increase.  
Graph 11 
  
Overall, the Reserve Bank’s central forecast is that underlying inflation will trough at around 
2¾ per cent later this year, before gradually picking up over the next couple of years. The 
inflation rate as measured by the CPI is expected to be higher than the underlying rate over 
2010,  partly  reflecting  the  recent  increase  in  the  excise  on  tobacco  which  is  likely  to  add 
around 0.4 percentage points to CPI inflation.  
Over the past couple of decades, low and stable inflation has clearly been one of the critical 
elements in Australia’s good economic performance. We need to make sure this continues. 
Sustaining  low  rates  of  inflation  requires  inflation  expectations  to  be  well  anchored  and 
growth in demand not to outpace the expansion of supply. With aggregate demand likely to 
be supported by strong commodity prices over the next few years, there needs to be a strong 
emphasis on improving the supply side of the economy. Here, well-targeted investment and 
improvements to productivity are obviously the keys.  
BIS Review 67/2010 
 9
While on the topic of inflation, I would like to touch on one final issue. You may be aware that 
the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) is currently undertaking one of its regular reviews of 
the CPI. In its submission to the review, the Reserve Bank has argued that there is a case to 
move  to  a  monthly  CPI.  While  the  current  CPI  provides  a  comprehensive  and  reliable 
measure  of  consumer  price  inflation  in  Australia,  more  frequent  data  on  prices  would  be 
helpful in assessing trends in inflation. This is particularly so around turning points and when 
unusual  factors  are  affecting  the  aggregate  CPI.  The  Bank  welcomes  the  open  and 
transparent manner in which the current review is being undertaken and looks forward to its 
completion.  
Conclusion 
We continue to live in turbulent times. Recently, concerns about the quality of public-sector 
balance  sheets  in  some  countries  have  overtaken  concerns  about  the  quality  of  private-
sector  balance  sheets.  While  recent  announcements  have  alleviated  these  concerns 
somewhat, the path ahead is likely to be a difficult one for many of the advanced economies. 
In  Asia,  the  outlook  is  more  promising,  although  challenges  also  lie  ahead,  particularly  in 
judging the appropriate timing to move to less expansionary policy.  
For  Australia,  while  the  international  environment  continues  to  be  a  challenging  one,  the 
central scenario for the domestic economy remains quite positive. Importantly, Australia has 
the  flexibility  to  respond  to  changing  circumstances  and  is  well  placed  to  benefit  from  the 
strong growth in Asia.  
Thank you for your time this morning. 
10 
 BIS Review 67/2010
