Tarisa Watanagase: The international monetary system 
Remarks  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Executives’ 
Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  (EMEAP)  –  Eurosystem  High  Level  Seminar,  Sydney, 
10 February 2010. 
 Liquidity challenges after the crisis 
While  advanced  countries  at  the  epicenter  of  the  global  financial  crisis  had  to  adopt 
unconventional measures, Asian economies did not face liquidity crunch, hence no need for 
unconventional  measures.  In  the  case  of  Thailand,  our  financial  institutions  have  relied 
entirely  on  local  deposits  and  not  encountered  any  liquidity  problem.  Nevertheless,  for 
contingency, the central bank expanded the list of collaterals that can be used to get liquidity 
from the central bank.  
As for the international liquidity, there are bilateral central banks swap lines readily available 
and IMF’s Flexible Credit Line was also a welcomed prompt response. As you know, Asia 
also  has  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  or  CMI,  which  serves  to  anchor  confidence  through  the 
psychology channel.  
On the broader global liquidity issue, there is the Triffin Dilemma view that the issuer of an 
international currency can take the advantage of such a special status to stimulate domestic 
demand  and  liquidity  in  the  global  market.  I  will  return  to  this  point  in  the  later  part  of  my 
remark.  
Lessons learned from the Asian crisis  
From my first-hand experience in dealing with the Asian crisis, I believe that it is important to 
go back to the origin of the vulnerabilities, be it liquidity or solvency problem.  
On  reflection,  I  think  that  the  latest  global  crisis  that  originated  in  advanced  economies  is 
very similar to that of the Asian crisis a decade ago, particularly the boom-bust cycle caused 
by excess liquidity. And, in the aftermath of this crisis, advanced countries are taking the path 
of responses that Asian countries took over the past ten years.  
Allow  me  to  put  into  perspective  this  similar  path  of  crisis  responses,  so  that  we  can  see 
more clearly what needs to be done individually and globally.  
Experience of Thailand and Asia  
In the Asian case, Thailand in particular, premature opening of the financial sector with the 
opening of offshore banking units led to excessive capital inflows that could not be effectively 
arrested by the high interest rate policy, given the fixed exchange rate regime and lack of 
effective  policy  tools.  The  macroeconomic  mismanagement  was  aggravated  by  lax 
supervision of financial institutions and the lack of adequate risk awareness by the public and 
private sectors. All these factors led to asset price bubbles that eventually burst.  
But, the Asian financial crisis has made Thailand a very different place a decade later with 
much  stronger  economic  resilience,  together  with  significant  progress  of  regulatory  and 
institutional reforms. Today, our macroeconomic policy framework has emphasized not only 
monetary stability but also financial stability with a broader and more in-depth surveillance 
that now covers household, financial, and real estate sectors.  
This  strengthened  surveillance 
take  pre-emptive 
macroprudential  measures  to  tackle  potential  imbalances  in  specific  sectors  before  they 
framework  has  allowed  us 
to 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 1
develop  into  significant  vulnerabilities.  In  parallel,  our  financial  sector  regulations  and 
supervision have been strengthened significantly, aimed at ensuring that financial institutions 
and markets take prudent risks and have enough buffer to cope with potential systemic risks.  
Countries in Asia have progressed on the same path I mentioned after the Asian crisis. In 
addition  to  the  individual  efforts,  another  important  development  is  the  regional  efforts  on 
precautionary  measures.  The 
Initiative 
Multilateralization  also  helps  bridge  the  gap  between  the  IFIs  and  emerging  market 
economies on the liquidity arrangement and timely disbursement.  
What is still ongoing is the establishment of a regional surveillance unit for ASEAN+3 that will 
facilitate  the  prompt  disbursement  of  these  liquidity  facilities  and  provide  us  with  a  better 
understanding of risk and vulnerabilities in the regional context.  
latest  development  of 
the  Chiang  Mai 
Global crisis: addressing root causes would be the same as the Asian crisis  
Looking back at how far Asia has come from the crisis has put into perspective the recent 
global crisis and policy responses.  
In  my  view,  this  past  crisis  was  also  caused  by  a  combination  of  excessive  liquidity,  and 
inadequate surveillance and supervision of both the regulated and shadow banking sectors 
in  advanced  countries.  Too  much  trust  was  placed  on  the  market  mechanism,  which  was 
proven to have failed. As in the case of sub-prime markets, risk awareness was not adequate 
by  suppliers  and  demanders  of  financial  instruments  and  no  preemptive  action  was  taken 
despite some very risky characteristics. 
The responses by crisis countries to prevent the next crisis were no different from what Asian 
economies did more than ten years ago. The calls made by the G-20 Leaders include putting 
more focus on financial stability, strengthening financial sector regulations and supervision, 
enhancing  surveillance  mechanism  at  both  individual  and  international  levels,  especially 
more effective surveillance role and liquidity support by the IFIs, particularly the IMF, just to 
mention a few important initiatives. Please allow me a few comments on a few issues that I’d 
like to highlight.  
What has been done and what more needs to be done  
Effective surveillance: being good global citizen  
One of the immediate responses to the crisis has been to strengthen effective surveillance 
capacity at national and international levels. We are of course on the right track in this effort 
to  create  a  more  robust  and  effective  surveillance  system  with  a  view  to  ensuring  timely 
policy actions. Tackling the problem at an early stage not only helps lessen the chance that 
micro shocks can adversely affect the macroeconomy, but also safeguards against spillovers 
from one country to the rest of the world.  
In  today’s  globalized  world,  this  spirit  of  good  global  citizenship  is  essential.  Hence,  on 
financial  sector  surveillance,  I  support  the  idea  that  all  systemically  important  economies 
need to participate in financial sector surveillance or FSAP, including the stress testing, to 
support the global surveillance objectives.  
As for the overall global surveillance, we need more effective role of the IFIs, in particular the 
IMF.  Effective  surveillance  means  the  capacity  to  ensure  right  policy  actions  by  the  public 
sector and sufficient risk awareness and management by the private sector so that policies 
and market responses generate positive feedbacks. Underpinning effective surveillance is of 
course the credibility and legitimacy of the governance structure of the IFIs. In this regard, I 
believe that we all need to be sincere in pushing for continued improvement of the IMF for it 
to be a truly credible and effective organization for surveillance.  
2 
 BIS Review 34/2010
Dealing with the inherent instability: developing deep and broad financial markets and 
a multi-currency system  
I’d like to emphasize that even if we have achieved all the above and embraced good global 
citizenship, it is almost certain that there will be the next crisis. But, hopefully, this will not 
happen  in  the  immediate  future,  and  it  will  perhaps  come  from  different  sources  of 
vulnerabilities. So, it is imperative that both the public and the private sectors remain very 
vigilant  and  risk-focused  in  identifying  the  changing  nature  of  risks  and  new  sources  of 
vulnerabilities.  
The  last  point  I’d  like  to  touch  upon  is  on  the  vulnerability  in  the  current  international 
monetary system. Let me return to the Triffin Dilemma discussion mentioned earlier. As the 
issuer  of  an  international  currency  can  take  advantage  of  its  special  status  to  overly 
stimulating  domestic  demand,  this  leads  to  excess  liquidity  in  global  market  and  can 
undermine the stability of the international monetary system in the end. However, whether 
the  current  vulnerability  in  the  international  financial  system  lies  in  the  Triffin  Dilemma  or 
policy blunder is an on-going debate.  
Regardless of the nature of the vulnerabilities, it is clear that there have not been enough 
high quality financial assets in relation to financial investors’ demand. This is a factor that no 
doubt  has  contributed  to  the  underpricing  of  risk  and  more  importantly,  a  high  degree  of 
concentration in US financial assets, which have the most liquidity.  
This point is especially important because when the global economy resumes its normal path 
and when emerging market economies further accelerate their growth and development, it is 
without  doubt  that  wealth  will  once  again  accumulate.  This  will  result  in  greater  global 
resources searching for investment in global financial markets.  
Therefore, I believe that there is a need to have more financial and capital markets that are 
deep and broad enough to have the acceptance of investors to help absorb the increased 
wealth  and  provide  alternatives  for  quality  investment  globally.  Looking  around,  some 
emerging market economies are certainly in a good position to further develop their financial 
markets in that direction. This is consistent with the concept of risk diversification.  
Over the longer term, the instability, whether inherent or not, would decline if we have more 
developed financial and capital markets and also, by default, a multi-currency system as they 
reduce the risk concentration on one individual financial market and currency.  
in  parallel 
including  surveillance, 
Conclusion  
In closing, I believe that policymakers over the world need to focus our effort on all aspects of 
policy  challenges 
financial  market  developments, 
regulations, and risk management. I strongly believe that market players respond to policy 
incentives  and  therefore  policymakers  have  the  responsibility  to  put  the  right  policy  and 
incentives in place.  
There is no quick fix and it will take a long time and painful adjustment before countries that 
were  at  the  epicenter  of  the  global  crisis  can  resume  normalcy.  In  Asia,  we  have  taken  a 
decade  to  strengthen  our  economic  resilience. Because  of our  past  efforts,  we  have  been 
able to weather this crisis relatively well.  
That said, our work in Asia is still ongoing to strengthen the policy framework and tools to 
deal with future crisis that will surely not be the same as the last. Importantly, we are mindful 
that the world will have much less fiscal space to cushion potential global contraction, should 
the next crisis hit.  
While  it  may  be  easier  to  advance  these  efforts  at  the  national  level,  achieving  policy 
coordination on the global level will be much more difficult. Time, spirit of cooperation and 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 3
good global citizenship, as well as maintaining policy and risk focus will be essential for all of 
us going forward.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2010
