Barry Whiteside: Increasing/enabling participation by all Fijians in the 
financial sector  
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Fiji 
Economy Update 2010, Lautoka, 22 July 2010. 
 Welcome 
Ladies and gentlemen – a very good morning to you all.  
Let me, at the outset, thank the organisers for the opportunity to speak at this forum on a 
very  relevant  topic  –  “Increasing  or  Enabling  Participation  of  all  Fijians  in  the  Financial 
Sector”.  
I  find  it  refreshing  to  move  away  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  traditional  monetary  policy  and 
economic  presentations  and  just  highlight  a  number  of  exciting  initiatives  are  being 
developed to bring more of our citizens into the financial sector fold. 
Introduction 
My intention is to approach this topic from the context of financial inclusion, which basically 
means the extension of financial services to all, including those persons commonly referred 
to as “unbanked” and in the remotest of areas.  
We all understand that the advancement of information flows, communications, technology 
and legislation, will allow us to overcome barriers to the penetration of financial services into 
most  areas.  We  are  witnessing  this  in  Fiji,  as  I  speak,  with  the  recent  launch  by  mobile 
network  operators  in  Fiji  of  their  mobile  money  services.  One  bank  has  also  launched  an 
SMS product for its customers. 
Such developments will make redundant the need for the establishment of brick and mortar 
banks  in  rural,  remote  and  maritime  areas  for  basic  transactions  to  take  place.  They  will 
definitely reduce operational costs for banks if they are partners in this exercise.  
One of the missions of the RBF is to build a reputable financial system. Part of this exercise 
is ensuring that the institutional infrastructure of the financial system contributes to reducing 
information  transmission  and  transaction  costs.  Enabling  this  to  happen  by  providing 
guidance and direction to all players in the financial system, will facilitate economic growth. 
Financial inclusion and literacy are critical parts of this process. 
The Reserve Bank firmly believes that increasing financial inclusion: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
will reduce the financial and economic vulnerability of individuals and households; 
will promote economic growth; 
will alleviate poverty; and  
will ultimately improve the quality of peoples’ lives. 
RBF initiatives 
Let  me  share  some  recent  initiatives  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  this  area,  and  other 
development work we are doing to complement Government’s efforts to grow the economy 
and reduce poverty and inequality. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
Enabling the participation of our people in the financial sector is a crucial part of development 
and an exciting challenge for the Reserve Bank. This may mean taking on development roles 
that may not necessarily be part of RBF’s core mandates.  
The question of whether such a role should be played by the RBF or someone else is not 
something  that  we  should  debate  about.  I  am  of  the  view  that  in  a  small  and  open  island 
economy like ours, the central bank can play a more influential development role aside from 
its  traditional  monetary  policy  role  to  influence  prices  and  ensuring  we  have  adequate 
reserves  to  pay  for  our  foreign  bills.  The  challenge  is  in  finding  the  right  balance  in  our 
interventions that will complement the efforts of others, including Government.  
More often than not, the Reserve Bank prefers to play a facilitating and supporting role while 
encouraging  other  stakeholders,  such  as  the  Banks,  to  come  to  the  party.  However  there 
have been times where a leadership role has been required, at least to start the ball rolling. 
Microfinance and greater financial inclusion  
1. 
More  recently  the  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  on  an  active  role  in  formulating  policies  and 
strategies aimed at increasing outreach of financial services to the unbanked or the under-
served  population.  A  new  department,  titled  the  Financial  System  Development  and 
Compliance (FSDC) Group, was set up in the Bank in April 2009 to drive these initiatives.  
I am pleased to announce that through this new Group, the Reserve Bank has been able to 
make good progress in areas of microfinance and financial inclusion.  
National microfinance workshop 
In  November  2009,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  collaboration  with  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme (PFIP), successfully organised a National Microfinance and Financial Inclusion 
workshop.  
Our  objective  was  to  harness  the  strengths  and  efforts  of  all  the  players  in  the  industry 
towards building a sustainable way forward for microfinance in general and financial inclusion 
in particular. 
The  workshop  provided  a  consultative  forum  for  stakeholders  to  review  and  develop  a 
medium term strategy on the way forward for greater financial inclusion in Fiji. At the end of 
the workshop, the strategic focus arrived at a common vision of “…reaching at least 150,000 
unbanked citizens through a coordinated national effort by the year 2014.”  
The Reserve Bank was assigned a lead driving role by all those present, which we readily 
agreed to take up. We did not want another workshop where lots of brilliant ideas are raised, 
but quickly fade once everyone went back to the comfort  of their respective offices, as so 
often happens in Fiji. In fact all the stakeholders were excited to move things forward. 
NFIT 
i. 
The  first  major  outcome  of  the  workshop  was  the  set  up  of  a  National  Financial  Inclusion 
Taskforce in February 2010 to drive and monitor microfinance and greater financial inclusion 
strategies  and  initiatives  first  developed  at  the  workshop.  The  RBF  Governor  is  the 
Chairperson. 
The NFIT, as it is known, has also appointed three Working Groups to support its mandate. 
These Working Groups are responsible for developing and implementing national strategies 
in each of the areas of Financial Literacy, Statistics and Microfinance. The Working Groups 
are  chaired  by  representatives  from  the  Taskforce,  with  the  membership  coming  from  the 
various  stakeholders,  including  the  public  and  private  sectors  and  donor  agencies.  They 
provide quarterly updates on their progress to the NFIT.  
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
A follow-up workshop is scheduled for November this year to take stock of progress made 
towards the targets set last year. 
Given that the RBF was passed the baton by the stakeholders during the first workshop to 
drive the new direction with respect to microfinance and financial inclusion, it is our intention 
to see that we achieve what we planned to do. A heavy reliance will, of course, be placed on 
getting the ongoing collaboration and support of the banks, NGOs, donors, private sector and 
government.  
Electronic money project  
ii. 
Ladies and gentlemen, an exciting means of extending financial and payments services in 
developing  countries  to  the  financially  excluded  is  the  use  of  innovative  communication 
technologies  and  instruments  such  as  mobile  phones.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
monitoring  such  developments  for  some  time  and  has  been  preparing  the  groundwork  in 
terms of the policies and laws to safeguard the users. In June this year, the RBF successfully 
launched  its  “e-Money  Fiji  project”  and  established  an  internal  committee  known  as  the  
“e-Money Taskforce” to oversee the development of electronic money initiatives in Fiji and 
related payment system developments.  
Mobile money 
iii. 
The e-Money Fiji Project initiative covers the introduction of mobile money transfer services 
in Fiji. There is no question that this new service has the capability of expanding the reach 
and  accessibility  of  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  and  rural  areas.  There  are  an 
estimated 750,000 mobile users in Fiji at this time covering 90 percent of the population.  
To  date,  the  RBF  has  provided  commercial  licenses  to  both  mobile  network  operators, 
Vodafone and Digicel, to launch their mobile money transfer services.  
Vodafone  took  the  lead  and  launched  its  M-PAiSA  brand  a  month  ago  and  had  50,000 
signed-up users as of last Thursday, the 15th July 2010.  
Digicel followed suit with its “Digicel Mobile Money” launch last Thursday and had 2000 users 
sign  up  after  just  two  days.  We  are  proud  to  learn  that  of  all  the  32  countries  that  Digicel 
serves, Fiji had been chosen as its flagship country where their first mobile money service 
product has been rolled out. 
Indeed we are at the forefront in the Pacific for mobile money transfers and hopefully we will 
prove to be successful “guinea pigs”. 
Both  Vodafone’s  M-PAiSA  and  the  Digicel  Mobile  Money  are  making  good  progress  in 
extending  financial  services  to  the  remote  and  under-served  communities.  The  RBF  has 
required that the two systems be inter-operable, meaning that a registered Digicel customer 
can send cash to a registered Vodaphone user, and vice versa. 
Whilst the Reserve Bank has taken a more flexible regulatory approach in support of these 
new  development  initiatives,  we  will  continue  to  compare  against  global  best  practices  by 
introducing  suitable  and  appropriate  policies  and  laws.  We  will  also  continue  to  share 
experiences  and  lessons  learned  with  our  regional  neighbors,  who  are  in  the  process  of 
assessing these new services.  
While the initial facilities offered are the basic transfer of cash, it is extremely exciting to know 
that future facilities will include bill payments and another feature which I am most excited 
about, the transfer of funds from one’s mobile wallet to a bank account. This latter use will 
enable the rural farmer, fisherman or craft creator to save in a safe place, the money he or 
she receives by mobile transfer in payment for his or her product. These producers will be 
able to do this without leaving their place of work, be it on the farm, on their boat or in their 
village. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 3
A  further  facility  of  extreme  interest,  and  which  we  are  also  working  on  with  the  mobile 
operators, is the extension of their services to international inward remittances. 
In addition to the initiatives of the two large mobile companies, one bank has also recently 
launched  its  own  version  of  mobile  money  transactions  with  the  implementation  of  SMS 
banking for its customers. This will definitely provide greater efficiency for rural customers of 
this bank. 
RBF microfinance policy  
iv. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  believes  that  the  commercial  banks  have  the 
potential to play a more active role in the development of the country in which they operate, 
through designing specific banking services and products to suit the needs of customers and 
the development goals of the country.  
With effect from 1 January 2010, the RBF introduced a Microfinance Policy that requested all 
commercial banks operating in Fiji to set up microfinance centers in each of their branches.  
We are delighted to note that all our commercial banks have moved to fulfill the requirement 
of  this  policy.  Some  banks  have  ventured  out  and  taken  banking  to  rural  communities  in 
various  parts  of  Fiji.  Another  bank  is  providing  microfinance  in  urban  centers  (a  great 
example has been the micro-loans to Suva’s wheel barrow boys, enabling them to make a 
start in business). 
In  addition,  banks  have  conducted  microfinance  expos  to  create  awareness  and  extend 
financial  inclusion.  We  greatly  welcome  these  efforts  by  banks  and  encourage  them  to 
maintain the momentum. 
The RBF has now been able to interface more closely with other development agencies and 
financial institutions in promoting microfinance schemes around the country. 
Last  month,  we  hosted  the  first  ever  RBF  Microfinance  Expo  in  Ba.  The  event  was  well 
received  by  the  community  and  we  were  fully  supported  by  all  the  banks,  NGOs,  mobile 
phone providers, non bank financial institutions, the National Centre for Small and Medium 
Enterprise  Development  and  other  stakeholders.  Of  course  the  micro  entrepreneurs  were 
also able to display and sell their wares.  
The  expo  provided  the  opportunity  for  the  financial  institutions  and  others  to  enlighten  the 
public about their financial and microfinance services. The RBF will continue to take a lead 
where necessary to encourage micro finance activities and take the providers to the people. 
We plan to host a similar Expo in Suva during the upcoming Hibiscus carnival in August and 
later on in the North. 
Local advisory boards 
v. 
To  help  drive  our  initiatives,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  recently  issued  a 
guideline to banks on the establishment of a Local Advisory Board within their Fiji operations. 
These  Boards  are  aimed  at  assisting  foreign-owned  banks  to  better  understand  and  align 
their  strategies,  not  only  to  Fiji’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment,  but  more 
importantly to the national development objectives, such as microfinance activities and the 
like. 
The  Local  Advisory  Boards  in  each  bank  will  comprise  local  individuals  who  would  bring 
unique  local  knowledge  and  skills  to  complement  that  of  the  expatriate  Senior  Executive 
Management, to enable them to gain a heightened awareness of our environment from a Fiji 
perspective.  
The Local Advisory Boards will play an advisory role to the main Board of each Bank and 
membership must be approved by the RBF. At this point in time the banks have made good 
progress in putting their respective Boards in place with members of 3 banks having already 
been assessed and approved.  
4 
 BIS Review 100/2010
We are looking forward to their contribution to their banks and to our country’s development 
strategies. 
Financial literacy and awareness  
Before I close ladies and gentlemen, I would just like to highlight the importance of financial 
awareness  and  literacy  in  our  efforts  towards  extending  financial  services  outreach.  The 
Financial Literacy Working group established through the NFIT is working with stakeholders 
in developing appropriate strategies in this regard. These include: 
a. 
Integrating financial education into the school curriculum from primary to secondary 
levels.  
Conducting  a  baseline  study  on  financial  competencies  of  households,  to  be 
undertaken in August this year. This will be used to assess and develop appropriate 
financial education programs for Fijian households.  
Promoting  Financial  Literacy  –  through  public  awareness  programs  and  a  Green 
Ribbon Campaign at the upcoming Hibiscus Festival. I have already mentioned the 
Reserve Bank is planning to host microfinance entrepreneurs and financial services 
providers utilizing a “Microfinance village” concept at the Hibiscus Festival.  
b. 
c. 
Conclusion  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  for  a  number  of  years  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  advocating  the 
development  of  Fiji’s  financial  services  sector  and  key  to  this  is  the  extension  of  financial 
services to the under-served or the unbanked.  
We  have  taken  on  the  challenge  of  promoting  financial  inclusion  in  Fiji  and  ensuring  a 
financial system geared towards supporting this critical area. Our intention is to see the poor, 
or those considered unbankable, being provided access to savings and credit facilities that 
will ultimately help in reducing poverty.  
The  key  areas  that  I  have  highlighted  may  have  only  provided  the  platform  for  financial 
inclusiveness  and  prosperity.  What  the  Reserve  Bank  would  like  to  see  is  the  on-going 
support of all key stakeholders towards these development initiatives.  
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  RBF  policies  and  strategies  alone  will  not  be  enough  –  the 
financial institutions, NGOs, donors, government and all other stakeholders need to play a 
part. The challenge for us here today is to open ourselves to change.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 5
