Zamani Abdul Ghani: Developments in electronic money management 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  and  Lafferty 
Group  –  World  Roundtable  on  Electronic  Money  Management  “From  Practice  to  Policy”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 15 May 2010. 
 On  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I  am  most  pleased  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  this 
gathering  on  “World  Roundtable  on  Electronic  Money  Management”  –  “From  Practice  to 
Policy”. This event is jointly organised by Bank Negara Malaysia, the OMFIF and the Lafferty 
Group. As you may be aware, Bank Negara will also be hosting the first ever Asia OMFIF 
Meeting, which will take place at Bank Negara’s Lanai Kijang over the next two days. This 
World  Roundtable  on  Electronic  Money  Management,  thus  precedes  the  Asia  OMFIF 
Meeting. It provides an excellent opportunity for the industry to have an interactive dialogue 
with regulators and practitioners from around the world to exchange ideas, experience and 
perspectives on developments in the area of electronic money and electronic payments.  
Economic efficiency and cost savings  
Rapid technological advancements and innovation in the last two decades had revolutionised 
the payment landscape. In the retail payments area, electronic money in the form of stored 
value cards and other access devices has grown rapidly. Businesses around the world are 
also intensifying their efforts to cut operating costs and increase efficiency to improve their 
long-term  competitiveness  and  sustainability.  These  developments,  among  others,  have 
intensified  the  demand  for  electronic  payment.  As  electronic  payment  facilitates  the 
automation  of  payables  and  receivables,  costs  associated  with  paper  and  labour  intensive 
processes, including potential errors in processing, would be sharply reduced or eliminated. 
Apart  from  lowering  costs,  electronic  payment  allows  for  better  resource  allocation,  thus 
raising  productivity  and  profitability  of  businesses.  Electronic  payment  also  improves  cash 
flow  forecasting,  thereby  resulting  in  more  efficient  liquidity  management.  Furthermore, 
customer  service  quality  would  also  be  enhanced  with  the  provision  of  faster  and  more 
convenient  means  of  payment.  Businesses  that  respond  to  these  opportunities  and  are 
effective  in  delivering  their  services  will  generate  greater  value  for  their  customers  and 
achieve competitiveness differentiation.  
The faster electronic payment displaces the use of cash, the less would be the need for the 
costly  printing  and  supply  of  currency  notes  and  coins.  The  same  is  also  true  for  physical 
cheques. The strategic management of currency is an increasingly challenging task faced by 
most central banks. Apart from ensuring cost effective and high quality currency notes and 
coins, it also requires accurate forecasts of the demand for currency notes and coins, which 
varies seasonally and with economic activity. The higher acceptance of electronic payment 
not  only  improves  the  economic  efficiency  of  a  country,  but  also  allows  substantial  cost 
savings to be gained. Studies have shown that widespread utilisation of electronic payment 
systems has the potential of contributing to at least 1% of a country’s GDP annually. Indeed, 
there  are  important  potential  benefits  and  scale  effects  that  can  be  reaped  from  the 
realisation of the electronic payment agenda for individuals and businesses, as well as for 
the  economy  as  a  whole.  Thus,  it  is  for  all  these  reasons that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has 
made the migration to electronic payments as one of its strategic results.  
While  the  acceptance  of  electronic  payment  is  on  the  rise  in  Malaysia,  with  electronic 
payment per capita doubling from 23 in 2005 to 41 in 2009, cash and cheques are still largely 
popular. Hence, resource intensive and time consuming processes continue to exist in the 
payment value chain. As electronic payments are more economical for the society and, as 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
part  of  the  broader  efforts  to  enhance  Malaysia’s  long  term  national  competitiveness,  it  is 
essential  that  costs  arising  from  these  inefficiencies  are  eliminated.  An  area  that  requires 
more  attention  moving  forward,  is  the  change  in  customers’  behaviour  and  mindset. 
Undoubtedly,  it  takes  time  and  energy  to  withdraw  cash,  deposit  cheques  and  reconcile 
cheque payments. However, there are segments of society who still prefer paper as they are 
so  accustomed  to  paper  and  have  always  trusted  paper  instruments.  Thus,  one  of  the 
greatest hurdles to accelerate the adoption of electronic payments is breaking longstanding 
habits and changing the behaviour of people.  
Another important aspect in promoting greater adoption of electronic payments is the need to 
strengthen  consumer  confidence  in  the  safety  and  security  of  the  payment  mechanism. 
Recognising the important role of payment cards in the Malaysian payment system and in 
the  electronic  payment  agenda,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  spearheaded  the  migration  from 
magnetic stripe to the chip-based card infrastructure on a national scale for both the ATM 
and  credit  cards.  This  migration  is  also  to  counter  fraud  due  to  cloning,  skimming  or 
counterfeiting. We began with the ATM card migration and by 2005, Malaysia became the 
first country to fully migrate to the EMV chip-based credit card infrastructure on a national 
scale.  
Financial inclusion  
Efforts  and  emphasis  on  accelerating  the  adoption  of  electronic  payments  would  also 
contribute towards Bank Negara Malaysia’s objective of building a progressive and inclusive 
financial system. Financial inclusion is a high priority in our national agenda and the Bank’s 
commitment in enhancing financial inclusion is explicitly mentioned in our new Central Bank 
of  Malaysia  Act  2009.  Malaysia  has  one  of  the  highest  penetration  of  deposit  and  loan 
accounts in the world. Based on the study conducted by the World Bank in 2008, more than 
80%  of  the  Malaysian  population  has  access  to  at  least  a  deposit  account.  In  2009,  the 
penetration of deposit accounts and loan accounts in Malaysia are 3,300 deposit accounts 
per  1,000  adults  and  1,100  loan  accounts  per  1,000  adults,  respectively.  The  World  Bank 
has also ranked Malaysia number one for three years (2008–2010) in terms of getting credit. 
Much of this success in achieving a high level of financial inclusion is due to the strategies 
and policy initiatives undertaken by the Bank over the years.  
Going forward, efforts would also be geared towards leveraging on the high penetration of 
mobile phones in Malaysia, even amongst the lower income groups. Thus, the convergence 
of electronic money and mobile phone hold immense potential to reach the unbanked and 
underserved  segments  of  the  population,  particularly  in  the  rural  or  non-urban  areas.  The 
mobile channel and electronic money instruments can, not only allow mobile payment and 
remittance services to be offered to these communities, but can also act as the gateway to 
extend further financial products and services including credit, savings and insurance. These 
would  bring  more  from  these  communities  into  the  formal  financial  system  and  economic 
mainstream  and  would  transform  the  livelihood  of  the  poorer  segments  of  society.  The 
development  of  a  more  inclusive  financial  system  is  one  of  the  focus  areas,  apart  from 
electronic payment in the new financial sector blueprint that Bank Negara is in the midst of 
formulating. 
Going green 
Electronic payment also enables businesses to move towards eco-friendly work environment 
and  practice  social  responsibility  through  “green”  initiatives.  Yes,  we  are  conscious  of  the 
“Equator  Principles”  in  finance  and  banking.  The  movement  away  from  paper  via  online 
banking and electronic payment and the elimination of the need to drive to and from bank 
branch offices allow customers to reduce their carbon footprints. Statistics have shown that if 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
20% of households in the world switch to online payment modes, an estimated 1.8 million 
trees equaling to 100 million pounds of paper would have been saved.  
Regulatory environment  
The  introduction  and  application  of  new  technologies  in  the  payments  area  have  led  to 
greater  innovation,  the  introduction  of  new  payment  channels  as  well  as  new  methods  of 
delivering payment services more efficiently at lower costs to a wider spectrum of society and 
consumers.  However,  these  have  also  brought  on  new  risks.  Regulators,  providers  and 
issuers have taken into consideration the risks that each of these various payment modes 
may have on the safety of the payment systems as a whole. Safeguards have to be put in 
place  to  instill  public  confidence  in  the  usage  of  these  innovative  payment  services  or 
channels.  In  this  regard,  it  is  vital  for  regulators  to  impose  prudential  requirements  on  the 
providers  and  issuers  of  the  electronic  payment  systems  and  instruments.  The  need  for 
sound  regulation  and  supervision  is  further  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  criminals  are 
constantly on the lookout to exploit the weakest link or point in the financial system.  
The risk of the new and increasingly popular payment mechanisms being used as conduits 
for money laundering and combatting the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) activities is also a 
growing  concern  for  central  banks  and  financial  intelligence  units  around  the  world.  The 
increasing  use  of  electronic  payment  systems,  particularly  electronic  money,  for  making 
cross-border  payments  makes  them  vulnerable  to  exploitation  for  criminal  purposes. 
Therefore, all parties involved in the payment value chain have to be vigilant to ensure that 
they are not exploited for such purposes. Adherence to international standards on AML/CFT, 
including  the  ability  to  trace  funds  back  to  the  source  and  to  positively  identify  the 
beneficiaries of the funds, are indeed vital.  
In  Malaysia,  electronic  money  is  prescribed  as  a  designated  payment  instrument  in  the 
Payment Systems Act 2003 (PSA) and the Act is under the purview of the Bank. As such, 
any  person  who  wishes  to  issue  electronic  money  would  be  required  to  obtain  the  prior 
approval of Bank Negara Malaysia and is subjected to the prudential requirements imposed 
by the Bank. In 2005, in line with the objective of reducing the use of cash in the domestic 
economy,  we  liberalised  our  policy  by  allowing  non-banking  institutions  to  issue  electronic 
money.  In  2008,  the  Bank  issued  the  Guidelines  on  Electronic  Money,  which  outlined  the 
broad principles and minimum standards to be observed by electronic money issuers. As at 
end-March 2010, 26 issuers have been approved to issue electronic money comprising both 
card-based  and  network-based  schemes.  During  the  past  five  years,  the  use  of  electronic 
money recorded encouraging average annual growth of 21.5% and 24.9% in terms of volume 
and value respectively. With regard to the oversight of electronic money issuers, in particular 
the non-banking institutions, our objective is to ensure the safety and reliability of the issuers’ 
systems and operations.  
We acknowledge, nevertheless, that in this rapidly changing commercial and technological 
environment,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  challenging  for  regulators  to  develop  policies  that 
are  effective  and  appropriate  to  address  the  regulatory  concerns  while  at  the  same  time, 
promote innovation. Digital convergence of telecommunications, computers, and the media is 
fast conjoining many new products and services to replace the old ones. For these reasons, 
inflexible  and  highly  prescriptive  regulations  and  rules  may  be  inhibitive  to  innovation.  In 
addition, with the entrance of more non-bank players in the payments industry, overseeing 
these players could be more challenging as a different regulatory approach may have to be 
adopted.  Regulators  would  need  to  be  conversant  with  the  business  dynamics  and 
operational arrangements of these new players while, at the same time, these players have 
to adapt quickly to the regulators’ supervisory approach and requirements.  
The regulators’ dilemma in achieving a proportionate regulatory framework, in particular to 
promote the growth of electronic money, remains a challenge. This give rise to the need to 
balance  trade-offs  between  impacting  public  confidence  and  promoting  innovation  and 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 3
competition.  Let’s  take  the  example  of  the  provision  of  a  more  lenient  regulatory  regime. 
While  this  would  promote  the  entry  of  new  players  in  the  market,  it  may  also  lead  to  the 
payment  systems  being  used  for  illicit  purposes.  Regulators  may  as  well  get  the  major 
stakeholders to understand this dilemma. By doing this, hopefully the regulators will be able 
to apply a more stringent regulatory regime to protect public interest, but at the same time do 
not unduly affect the viability and growth of electronic payments.  
Concluding remarks 
Regulators  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  effective  regulations  are  in  place  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  the  payment  system  as  well  as  to  promote  user  confidence, 
particularly for new payment services. At the same time, it is also recognised that migration 
to  electronic  payment  brings  immense  benefits  to  the  country.  Hence,  a  regulatory 
environment that would allow innovation to thrive has to be balanced against the objective of 
safeguarding public interest and confidence in the payments infrastructure. This balancing is 
required  to  ensure  continued  acceptance  and  usage  of  the  various  payment  systems  and 
instruments.  
The emergence of payments processors, such as Spare Change, Boku, Paymo, to facilitate 
payments  for  virtual  goods  and  services  over  online  social  networks,  such  as  Facebook, 
Bebo and MySpace, as well as person-to-person transfers among users, are developments 
which regulators are monitoring very closely. If their operations involve virtual currencies that 
enable payment for virtual goods and services, do they pose a risk to the safety and reliable 
functioning of the payment system? Should they be regulated? At what stage should they be 
regulated? Are regulatory concerns in these new payment innovations warranted if they exist 
only in the virtual space? How should they be regulated as they operate without geographical 
boundaries?  In  addition,  should  virtual  currencies  be  allowed  to  be  used  to  purchase  real 
good and services or be exchanged for real world currency? I or we do not have answers to 
these questions. But these are the issues that regulators and market players are grappling 
with. I will leave these to participants in this Roundtable to deliberate on.  
I believe that the common purpose of today’s Roundtable is to discuss on ways to speed up 
the migration to electronic payment with special focus on electronic money. This is indeed a 
good  platform  for  all  key  stakeholders  to  provide  their  thoughts  and  highlight  areas  that 
require further improvement. In conclusion, therefore, I would like to thank OMFIF and the 
Lafferty Group for their involvement in this Roundtable event. I wish you all success in your 
deliberations and look forward to your views and suggestions in achieving our common goal. 
Lastly, I on behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia also wish to register our appreciation to all of 
you for taking time from your busy schedule to attend this event. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2010
