Hidetoshi Kamezaki: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Hidetoshi Kamezaki, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of 
Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Sapporo, 28 July 2010. 
I. 
The economy and prices 
 The current economic situation 
A. 
Following the precipitous deterioration in the wake of the Lehman shock in the fall of 2008, 
Japan’s  economy,  since  bottoming  out  in  spring  2009,  has  been  showing  signs  of  a 
moderate  recovery.  The  main  driving  force  of  the  recovery  has  been  improvement  in 
overseas  economic  conditions,  as  a  result  of  which  Japan’s  exports  and  production  have 
been increasing, while business fixed investment is showing signs of picking up. Moreover, 
the government’s economic stimulus measures favoring environment-friendly products have 
contributed significantly to the pick-up in private consumption. 
Overseas economies have continued to recover moderately, underpinned by the effects of 
both  stimulus  measures  adopted  around  the  world  and  inventory  restocking.  Looking  at 
developments  by  region,  the  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  manifest  high  growth, 
supported  by  the  surge  in  fixed  asset  investment  spurred  by  a  large  stimulus  package  of 
4 trillion  renminbi,  although  recently  the  pace  of  growth  has  slowed  somewhat.  The  U.S. 
economy  has  been  recovering  at  a  moderate  pace,  supported  by  a  massive  stimulus 
package  of  780  billion  U.S.  dollars.  European  economies  overall  are  also  picking  up  
–  although  there  are  some  differences  across countries  – led  by  increases  in  exports  and 
production partly due to a decline in their currencies. Recovery in the euro area, however, 
has  been  weaker  than  in  other  regions  because  stimulus  measures  adopted  in  the  region 
were  relatively  small  in  scale,  economic  structures  lack  flexibility,  and  credit  uncertainty 
triggered by the fiscal problems in Greece remains. Against this background, Japan’s exports 
to all regions continued to increase. This has brought about production growth, led business 
fixed investment to pick up and caused household income to stop declining. 
The key elements of the government’s economic stimulus measures favoring energy-efficient 
products  are  the  eco-point  system  for  electrical  appliances,  as  well  as  tax  reductions  and 
subsidies  for  purchases  of  environment-friendly  cars.  These  measures,  together  with  the 
greatly improved cost performance of the products, the switchover from analogue to digital 
terrestrial  broadcasting,  and  the  extended  lifespan  of  automobiles,  have  tapped  potential 
replacement demand and had a significant positive effect on the sales of products covered 
by these measures. In addition, it seems that the measures have provided consumers with 
an  incentive  to  visit  retail  stores  and  encouraged  them  to  purchase  products  to  which  the 
stimulus measures do not apply, such as DVD recorders that are compatible with flat-panel 
TVs  and  the  latest  home  cleaning  robots.  This  increase  in  spending on  durable consumer 
goods has had a positive effect on the economy by increasing production. 
In sum, Japan’s economy has been supported by two major engines of growth, namely, the 
improvement  in  overseas  economic  conditions  and  the  government’s  economic  stimulus 
measures  favoring  environment-friendly  products.  However,  because  the  recovery  remains 
weak in areas that have not directly benefited from these developments, many people have 
yet  to  feel  that  the  economy  overall  is  recovering.  Moreover,  although  Japan’s  economy 
enjoyed  relatively  high  growth  of  around  5  percent  at  an  annualized  rate  from  the  end  of 
2009 through the beginning of 2010, the level of economic activity remains lower than before 
the  Lehman  shock.  It  is,  thus,  too  early  to  say  that  a  self-sustaining  upturn  in  domestic 
private demand is fuelling a robust recovery. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 1
The economic outlook 
B. 
Next, I will talk about the outlook for Japan’s economy. The effects of the two factors that 
have so far been the engines of economic growth are likely to weaken. Specifically, overseas 
economies, including those that currently are growing at a rapid pace, seem likely to slow to 
more  steady  and  sustainable  rates  of  growth  as  the  effects  of  inventory  restocking  and 
stimulus measures abate. The uptrend in Japan’s exports is expected to continue, but the 
pace of increase is likely to moderate gradually. Durable goods consumption is expected to 
fall  temporarily  in  reaction  to  the  termination  of  the  government’s  economic  stimulus 
measures favoring energy-efficient products: subsidies for purchases of environment-friendly 
cars  expire  at  the  end  of  September,  while  the  eco-point  system  for  electrical  appliances 
expires at the end of December. 
New  factors  should  be  taken  into  account,  however.  For  example,  the  government’s  child 
allowances,  which  started  in  June,  are  expected  to  help  support  private  consumption. 
Moreover, business fixed investment and household income are likely to pick up, reflecting 
an improvement in the capacity utilization rate and in corporate profits. Supported by these 
factors, Japan’s economy should assume a moderate recovery trend. 
The outlook I just presented, however, is subject to various upside and downside risks. 
One  upside  risk  is  that  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  might 
accelerate.  Recently,  a  growing  number  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies 
have  been  shifting  away  from  accommodative  monetary  policies,  while  in  China,  the 
government has implemented measures to curb the overheating of the real estate market. 
However, if capital from industrialized economies – which are persisting with accommodative 
monetary  policies  –  continues  to  flow  into  these  countries  and  thereby  exacerbates 
overheating in asset markets, it could boost growth. These developments could then pose an 
upside  risk  to  Japan’s  economy  by  means  of  an  increase  in  exports.  Such  developments 
would  not  be  wholly  desirable  since  overheating  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  would  inevitably  lead  to  a  tightening  of  policies,  which  might  then  pose  a 
downside risk to Japan’s economy. 
When considering downside risks, the growing instability in global financial markets warrants 
attention.  The  fiscal  problems  in  Greece  and  some  other  European  countries  will  not  only 
lead to a deterioration in domestic demand in these countries as a result of fiscal austerity 
measures,  but  also  exert  downward  pressure  on  European  economies  as  a  whole  in  a 
number  of  ways.  These  include  fiscal  consolidation  in  other  countries,  as  they  attempt  to 
avoid  a  similar  fate;  the  weakening  of  the  financial  intermediary  function  of  financial 
institutions that own sovereign debt issued by countries stricken by the crisis; and a decline 
in the propensity to consume, as a result of uncertainties surrounding overall markets. The 
direct impact on Japan’s economy is likely to be minimal, as its lending to countries in the 
region is inconsiderable, while exports to Europe account for only about 10 percent of the 
total. However, for China and the United States – the major destinations of Japanese exports 
– Europe accounts for about 20 percent of exports and Japan could, therefore, be indirectly 
affected.  Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  be  aware  of  downside  risks,  stemming  from  the 
effects of the yen’s appreciation against the euro, on Japan’s export competitiveness, as well 
as the impact of financial market instability on firms’ funds procurement. 
Price developments 
C. 
I  will  now  move  on  to  prices.  Commodity  prices,  which  have  a  major  impact  on  price 
developments  in  Japan,  have  been  on  a  rising  trend,  reflecting  high  growth  in  emerging 
economies.  As  a  result,  recent  import  prices  have  been  about  10  percent  above  year-ago 
levels, after having plunged more than 30 percent year on year in summer 2009. In addition, 
the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI), which measures fluctuations in prices of 
goods traded between firms in Japan, has risen somewhat above levels for the same period 
a year ago. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2010
The  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  excluding  fresh  food  (the  core  CPI),  which  measures  the 
price of goods and services purchased by households, has been declining on a year-on-year 
basis  since  March  2009,  indicating  deflation.  However,  following  the  largest  year-on-year 
decline of 2.4 percent in August 2009, the pace of decline has been moderating as a trend. 
Meanwhile, the pace of decline in the CPI excluding food and energy, or the core-core CPI, 
which is not usually susceptible to commodity price fluctuations, has also been moderating 
recently,  after  marking  the  largest  fall  of  1.2  percent  at  the  beginning  of  2010.  These 
developments,  apart  from  the  rise  in  commodity  prices,  probably  occurred  because  the 
Japanese economy bottomed out and started recovering around spring 2009, and the effects 
of the narrowing of the negative output gap began to be reflected in prices with a lag of about 
one year. 
The year-on-year rate of decline in the core CPI is likely to continue slowing, reflecting the 
rise  in  commodity  prices  and  the  narrowing  of  the  negative  output  gap,  and  the  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI  may  even  enter  positive  territory  in  fiscal  2011.  There  are,  needless  to 
say,  both  upside  and  downside  risks  associated  with  the  outlook  for  prices,  just  as  for 
economic  activity.  The  upside  risks  include  an  upswing  in  commodity  prices  caused  by 
stronger-than-expected  growth 
the  other  hand,  price 
developments  could  deviate  downward  from  the  outlook  if  pessimism  among  the  public 
spreads due to a slower-than-expected recovery of the economy. A decline in the medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations of various economic entities could trigger a fall in the actual 
inflation rate. Thus, risks associated with price developments require careful monitoring. 
in  emerging  economies.  On 
Measures taken by the Bank 
II. 
Next,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  Bank’s  policy  measures  since  the  start  of  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. 
Measures to address the rapid financial contraction 
A. 
In  order  to  address  the  rapid  financial  contraction  triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  the  Bank  successively  conducted  same-day  funds-supplying  operations  and 
introduced  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  as  emergency  measures  to  provide 
liquidity for financial markets. Furthermore, the Bank decided to introduce outright purchases 
of  CP  and  corporate  bonds,  based  on  the  recognition  that  a  significant  decline  in  the 
functioning of markets, such as the serious shortage of liquidity in the CP and corporate bond 
markets, was causing a tightening of overall corporate financing conditions. In addition, the 
Bank introduced a series of temporary emergency measures to facilitate corporate financing, 
including the easing of the rating requirement for corporate debt to be accepted as eligible 
collateral and the special funds-supplying operation to facilitate corporate financing, through 
which  the  Bank  provided  3-month  funds  for  an  unlimited  amount  against  the  value  of 
corporate debt pledged as collateral at a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent. 
Furthermore,  in  order  to  ensure  an  accommodative  financial  environment,  on  both 
October 31 and December 19, 2008, the Bank reduced the target level of the policy interest 
rate (the uncollateralized overnight call rate), bringing it down from 0.5 percent to the current 
0.1 percent. In order to provide ample liquidity through maintaining the policy interest rate at 
this low level, the Bank also introduced the complementary deposit facility, whereby interest 
is made payable on excess reserve balances held at the Bank by financial institutions. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  introduced  temporary  measures  to  secure  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, given that the strains in global financial markets and the subsequent fall in 
stock  prices  and  rise  in  credit  costs  had  greatly  affected  financial  institutions’  intermediary 
function  and  financial  soundness.  Such  measures  include  the  purchase  of  stocks  held  by 
financial institutions to help them reduce the market risk associated with stock holdings and 
the provision of subordinated loans to banks to help them maintain sufficient capital bases. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 3
Since then, the Bank has been gradually bringing to an end some of its temporary measures 
as financial markets have regained stability. In May 2010, however, in order to address the 
increased strains in global financial markets triggered by the fiscal problems in Greece and 
some  other  European  countries,  the  Bank  re-established  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying 
operations that had been wound up at the beginning of February 2010. 
Measures to address deflation 
B. 
Although  financial  markets  have  been  gradually  regaining  stability  and  the  economy  is 
showing signs of a moderate recovery, the Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy still faces 
the critical challenge of overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with 
price  stability.  For  this  reason,  the  Bank  reiterated  its  commitment  to  fight  deflation. 
Regarding the “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” (the level of inflation 
that  each  Policy  Board  member  understands,  when  conducting  monetary  policy,  as  being 
consistent with price stability over the medium to long term; hereinafter “understanding”), the 
Bank, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held in December 2009, made it clear that the Policy 
Board does not tolerate a year-on-year rate of change in the CPI equal to or below 0 percent, 
and that the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” are around 1 percent. 
On this basis, the Bank continues to maintain the policy rate at the extremely low level of 
0.1 percent. Moreover, in order to ease monetary conditions further by encouraging a decline 
in longer-term interest rates, the Bank in December 2009 introduced a new fixed-rate funds-
supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral  (hereinafter  fixed-rate  operation),  whereby 
funds  with  a  maturity  of  three  months  are  provided  at  an  extremely  low  interest  rate  of 
0.1 percent. The total amount of loans to be provided through the fixed-rate operation was 
first  set  at  approximately  10  trillion  yen  in  December  2009,  but  this  was  increased  to 
approximately 20 trillion yen in March 2010. 
C. 
Introduction of the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the 
foundations for economic growth 
Through the measures I have mentioned so far, the Bank has been providing ample funds to 
financial  markets  and  financial  institutions.  However,  the  funds  have  not  been  sufficient  to 
feed  into  the  economy  and  bring  about  strong  growth.  Therefore,  as  the  central  bank,  the 
Bank examined ways in which it could support financial institutions, in their efforts in terms of 
lending and investment, in a way that would help strengthen the foundations for economic 
growth. As a result of deliberations, the Bank on June 15, 2010, decided to introduce a new 
fund-provisioning measure to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
The  measure  provides  funds  for  financial  institutions,  reflecting  their  efforts  in  terms  of 
lending  and  investment  to  strengthen  economic  growth  at  a  loan  rate  equivalent  to  the 
Bank’s  policy  interest  rate,  which  currently  is  only  0.1  percent.  The  duration  of  each  loan 
provided by the Bank is one year in principle, and the maximum duration of the loans is four 
years, including rollovers. With this measure, the Bank hopes to offer the broadest support 
possible  for  the  various  efforts  that  financial  institutions  make  on  their  own  initiative.  The 
Bank  will  start  providing  funds  by  around  the  end  of  August  2010  and  new  loans  will  be 
disbursed  quarterly.  The  measure  is  temporary  and  the  Bank  set  March  31,  2012,  as  the 
deadline  for  new  loan  applications,  so  that  financial  institutions  would  accelerate  their 
implementation of lending and investment. 
The Bank has already started making necessary preparations to provide funds through this 
measure.  On  June  25,  the  Bank  announced  it  had  selected  66  counterparty  financial 
institutions for fund-provisioning through public application. Not only major banks, but also a 
wide  range  of  other  financial  institutions,  including  regional  banks,  became  counterparties. 
Each counterparty submitted its plan for strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
to the Bank, which is currently evaluating each counterparty’s eligibility based on the amount 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2010
of lending and investment carried out under the plan in the April-June quarter of 2010. Based 
on the evaluation, the Bank will determine how much it will lend in its first disbursement. 
Let me next explain the background to the Bank’s decision to introduce this fund-provisioning 
measure. 
III. 
Strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
Deflation 
A. 
As I mentioned earlier, Japan is experiencing deflation. Price instability, including deflation, 
has  various  negative  effects  on  the  economy  and  society.  For  instance,  it  reduces  the 
efficiency  of  resource  allocation,  restrains  economic  activity  by  making  economic  outlook 
uncertain,  and  distorts  income  distribution  by  changing  the  real  value  of  contracts,  assets 
and liabilities, which are typically in nominal terms. In addition, there are problems particular 
to  deflation.  For  example,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  debtors  with  a  high  propensity  to 
consume  tend  to  restrain  their  spending  when  the  real  value  of  their  debt  rises,  weighing 
down the economy. In addition, due to the zero bound on nominal interest rates, real interest 
rates do not fall to the level required by the level of economic activity. 
Declining  inflation  rates  are  a  trend  shared  by  all  major  economies  around  the  world.  It  is 
only in Japan, however, that prices in terms of the CPI excluding food and energy (the core-
core  CPI)  have  been  falling.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  the  large  output  gap,  which  has 
remained consistently negative since the second half of the 1990s. What is more, the gap 
has  been  much  larger  than  in  other  major  economies.  This  is  attributable  to  the  excess 
supply  capacity  that  has  not  been  adequately  adjusted  relative  to  the  level  of  domestic 
demand, which has stayed sluggish since the bursting of the economic bubble. 
Weakness in domestic demand was prolonged by the delay in balance-sheet adjustments by 
various economic entities and the lack of forward-looking expenditure since the bursting of 
the economic bubble. In particular, the delay in the disposal of impaired assets by financial 
institutions weakened their financial intermediary functions, impairing their ability to provide 
sufficient funds for new areas of growth. The pressure on various economic entities to adjust 
their balance sheets has more or less disappeared since the beginning of 2000. However, 
the prolonged period of weak domestic demand has been compounded by the recent onset 
of  population  decline,  pushing  down  economic  entities’  expectations  for  economic  growth 
and  forestalling  forward-looking  expenditure.  The  Lehman  shock  in  2008  dealt  another 
serious  blow  to  demand  and  its  impact  continues  to  this  day.  One  reason  that  supply 
capacity has not been sufficiently adjusted despite stagnant demand is that, as a result of 
various regulations and protection measures, factors of production have remained in areas 
from which demand has shifted away. 
There is a possibility that inflation expectations will lessen if expectations for future economic 
growth  continue  to  decline  and  the  output  gap  does  not  narrow  steadily.  In  this  case, 
consumers  of  goods  and  services  may  put  off  spending,  while  suppliers  may  cut  prices 
further  to  stimulate  demand.  Under  these  circumstances,  although  the output  gap remains 
unchanged, prices may fall further and deflation may become even more difficult to quell. At 
present,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  and  it  is  important  to 
make sure that they do not decrease. 
Overcoming deflation 
B. 
In order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation, it is necessary to narrow the negative 
output gap. To this end, demand has to be expanded. The task is not impossible and there 
are  various  areas  with  potential  demand  to  be  tapped,  such  as  sectors  related  to  the 
provision  of  healthy  and  safe  food,  the  environment,  and  population  aging.  An  example  of 
such latent demand is the recent government measures that sharply increased demand for 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 5
environment-friendly  durable  goods.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  also  important  to  follow 
developments  in  overseas  demand.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  economic  growth  in  emerging 
and  commodity-exporting  economies  has  been  astounding,  and  it  is  very  likely  that  their 
demand for Japanese goods and services still has much room for growth. 
The  issue  at  stake  is  how  to  tap  such  demand.  The  government’s  “New  Growth  Strategy” 
and  “Fiscal  Management  Strategy,”  both  announced  in  June,  may  provide  some  pointers. 
The “New Growth Strategy” aims to create a strong Japanese economy on the basis of the 
measures  for  demand  creation  that  I  just  mentioned,  together  with  steps  to  overcome 
constraints  on  the  supply  of  goods  and  the  circulation  of  funds  to  be  implemented  in 
accordance with a specific timetable. The “Fiscal Management Strategy,” meanwhile, aims to 
restore  a  sound  and  sustainable  fiscal  structure  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  the  “New 
Growth Strategy.” In any event, it is vital that these measures be implemented swiftly and on 
schedule. 
Moreover,  private  economic  entities,  in  addition  to  tapping  new  areas  of  demand,  need  to 
improve productivity through new manufacturing technology and by shifting capital and labor 
to  areas  with  higher  productivity.  The  “New  Growth  Strategy”  can  support  such  efforts.  It 
could  be  argued  that  higher  productivity  will  increase  supply,  which  would  cause  a  further 
widening of the output gap. However, it should be pointed out that higher productivity would 
raise the demand for products of highly productive firms and workers; that the anticipation of 
such an increase in future demand would raise current demand; and that, thus, the efficiency 
of resource allocation could be improved, which in turn would expand demand overall. 
The Industrial Revolution in Britain provides evidence of the pivotal role played by increased 
productivity  in  a  nation’s  growth.  During  the  Industrial  Revolution  in  the  early  nineteenth 
century, the Luddite movement emerged in which workers destroyed machines that deprived 
them  of  their  jobs.  Mechanization,  however,  increased  productivity  and  enhanced  Britain’s 
growth potential, paving the way for the subsequent ascendancy of the British Empire. There 
is  no  doubt  that  enhancing  productivity  is  indispensable  for  Japan  given  the  aging  and 
decline  of  the  population.  While  it  will  be  difficult  to  avoid  the  problems  arising  from  a 
declining population in the short term, increased productivity can help to avoid a decline in 
the potential growth rate and maintain the vitality of the Japanese economy. 
Measures taken by the Bank 
C. 
The  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth  introduced  by  the  Bank  on  June  15,  2010,  aims  to  support  private  financial 
institutions’ efforts of their own accord to provide funds required by private economic entities 
to find new demand and enhance productivity. It is hoped that the move will help to increase 
potential output growth, narrow the output gap, and eventually bring deflation to an end. In 
this sense, the measure is consistent with the principle stipulated in Article 2 of the Bank of 
Japan  Act  that  the  Bank  will  aim  at  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the 
sound development of the national economy.” Instead of merely expressing the objective in 
words, the Bank is taking action in the belief that this policy will work as a catalyst for private 
economic entities to join in to achieve a common goal. 
I  am  constantly  aware  that  the  Bank  always  must  be  ready  to  proactively  implement  the 
appropriate  policies.  Going  forward,  the  Bank  should  continue  to  be  proactive  and  do  its 
utmost to bring Japan’s economy back to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2010
