Deepak Mohanty: Perspectives on lending rates in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bankers’ Club, Kolkata, 11 June 2010. 
The  assistance  provided  by  Dr.Himanshu  Joshi,  Shri  S.  Gangadharan  and  Shri  Dhirendra  Gajbhiye   is 
acknowledged. 
 1. 
Shri  Dua,  Shri  Sen  and  friends.  I  thank  the  Bankers’  Club,  Kolkata  and  Shri  J.P. 
Dua,  Chairman,  Allahabad  Bank  for  providing  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  this 
evening. As you know, banks will be switching over to a “base rate” system of loan pricing 
from 1st July 2010. Besides the announcement of base rate, what is of greater significance is 
that it brings to fruition complete deregulation of rupee lending rates of banks, a process that 
began two decades ago. This is also a testimony to the maturity of the Indian banking system 
considering that earlier attempts at interest rate deregulation were not very successful. 
2. 
What I propose to do is to briefly trace the process of lending rate deregulation and 
address a few issues that have arisen in the context of the base rate system. I will conclude 
with some observation about the relationship between inflation-adjusted real lending rate and 
credit growth and its implication for overall economic growth. 
Deregulation of lending rates 
I. 
3.  With the objective of providing credit to the productive sectors of the economy, bank 
lending rates as well as the allocation of bank credit were closely regulated by the Reserve 
Bank till the late 1980s. Furthermore, there were a number of sector-specific, programme-
specific and purpose-specific credit stipulations. With the initiation of financial sector reforms 
in the early 1990s, various steps were taken to deregulate the lending rates of commercial 
banks.  First,  the  credit  limit  size  classes  of  scheduled  commercial  banks,  on  which 
administered rates were prescribed, were compressed into three slabs in April 1993. Second, 
a system of prime lending rate (PLR), the rate charged for the prime borrowers of the bank, 
was introduced in October 1994. The PLR system went through several modifications from a 
single PLR to multiple PLRs and then to a Benchmark PLR (BPLR) (Table 1). 
4. 
Another important development during this time was the introduction of a “loan system” 
of delivery of bank credit in April 1995. The objective was to bring about greater discipline in 
the utilisation of bank credit. Furthermore, the Reserve Bank relaxed the requirement of PLR 
being the floor rate for loans above Rs.2 lakh. Thus, in April 2001, commercial banks were 
allowed  to  lend  at  sub-PLR  rates  for  loans  above  Rs.2  lakh.  However,  the  divergence  in 
PLRs and the widening of spreads for borrowers continued to persist. The PLRs turned out 
to be rigid and inflexible in relation to the overall direction of interest rates in the economy. In 
order to address these issues, a BPLR system was introduced in April 2003. 
However,  the  BPLR  system  evolved  in  a  manner  that  did  not  meet  the  objectives. 
5. 
Competition  in  an  environment  of  excess  liquidity  had  forced  the  pricing  of  a  significant 
proportion of loans far out of alignment with BPLRs undermining its role as a reference rate. 
Furthermore, there was a growing public perception of under-pricing of credit for corporates 
and  over-pricing  of  credit  to  agriculture  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises.  Several 
requests were received by the Reserve Bank from banks suggesting a review of the BPLR 
system. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 25
 
6. 
The lack of transparency in the BPLR system also hindered transmission of monetary 
policy signals. In view of the concerns pertaining to the shortcomings in the BPLR system 
raised by the public and those recognised by the Reserve Bank, the Annual Policy Statement 
for 2009–10 announced the constitution of a Working Group on BPLR to review the BPLR 
system and suggest changes to make credit pricing more transparent. On the basis of the 
recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Deepak Mohanty) and after taking into 
account the views of various stakeholders and discussions with banks final guidelines on the 
base rate system were announced on April 9, 2010. 
The base rate system 
II. 
7. 
The  base  rate  system  will  replace  the  BPLR  system  with  effect  from  1st  July  2010. 
Base rate shall include all those elements of the lending rates that are common across all 
categories of borrowers. Banks may choose any benchmark to arrive at the base rate for a 
specific  tenor  that  may  be  disclosed  transparently.  Banks  are  free  to  use  any  other 
methodology, provided it is consistent, and is made available for supervisory review. Banks 
will  determine  their  actual  lending  rates  on  loans  with  reference  to  the  base  rate  and  by 
including such other customer specific charges as considered appropriate. 
8.  With the introduction of the base rate system, all categories of loans will be priced only 
with reference to the base rate with a few exceptions. The base rate can also serve as the 
reference  benchmark  rate  for  floating  rate  loan  products,  apart  from  other  external  market 
benchmark rates. The floating interest rate based on external benchmarks should, however, 
be equal to or above the base rate at the time of sanction or renewal. 
9. 
Since  the  base  rate  will  be  the  minimum  rate  for  all  loans,  the  current  stipulation  of 
BPLR as the ceiling rate for loans up to Rs.200,000 is withdrawn. It is expected that this will 
increase the credit flow to small borrowers at reasonable rates and direct bank finance will 
26 
 BIS Review 82/2010
provide  effective  competition  to  other  forms  of  high  cost  credit.  The  interest  rate  on  rupee 
export credit has also been deregulated. 
10.  Keeping in view the largely retail deposit-based banking in India, there is a need for a 
benchmark for transparent pricing of loans. Even in wholesale fund-based banking systems, 
the  London  Interbank  Offered  Rate  (LIBOR)  is  widely  used  as  a  benchmark  which  is 
essentially  an  interbank  deposit  rate.  Thus,  the  base  rate  fulfills  the  requirement  of  a 
benchmark  while  giving  full  flexibility  to  banks  with  regards  to  its  computation  and  overall 
loan pricing. 
III.  Lending rates in India  
11.  Let me now turn to an analysis of lending rates in India. The movements in nominal 
weighted average lending rate21 for the banking industry as a whole has shown a gradual 
decline. It has come down from a range of 16–17 per cent in most part of the 1990s to about 
11.5  per  cent  by  2008–09.  The  declining  trend  is  clearly  visible  in  the  2000s  (Chart  1). 
However,  wide  dispersion  persists  in  actual  lending  rates  owing  to  substantial  sub-BPLR 
lending. 
  
12.  How does one explain the trend in the lending rates? First, at a fundamental level the 
decline  in  the  inflation  rate  between  the  1990s  and  2000s  contributed  to  lower  nominal 
lending  rates22.  Second,  lower  inflation  volatility  in  the  2000s  reduced  the  inflation  risk 
premia.  Third,  significant  productivity  improvement  in  the  banking  system  lowered  the 
intermediation cost (Table 2). Fourth, the observed decline in weighted average lending rates 
in  the  banking  system  can  be  attributed  to  the  improvements  in  pricing  of  risk  due  to  the 
increased space provided by progressive deregulation of lending rates. 
                                                  
21   It has been worked out by using account level data for advances as at end-March each year as reported in 
Basic Statistical Returns (BSR) 1A. 
22   The  annual  average  WPI  inflation  declined  from  8.1  per  cent  in  the  1990s  to  5.3  per  cent  in  the  2000s. 
Similarly CPI inflation declined from 9.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 27
  
13.  While  the  lending  rates  of  various  categories  of  borrowers  depend  on  the  risk  and 
reward perceptions, the rates have declined for most categories of borrowers over time. At a 
disaggregated level, the weighted average lending rate for personal loans was higher while it 
was the lower for housing loans (Chart 2). 
 28 
 BIS Review 82/2010
 Real lending rates  
IV. 
14.  From  the  perspective  of  borrowers  as  also  from  the  point  of  view  of  sustainability  of 
debt,  what  matters  is  the  real  interest  rate.  The  Fisher  equation  gives  the  relationship 
between the real and nominal interest rates23. In the Fisher hypothesis time preferences of 
the public and technological constraints determining the return on real investment which is 
assumed to be constant24. So the nominal rate moves with inflation. The Fisher equation can 
be  used  in  either  ex  ante  (before)  or  ex  post  (after)  sense.  As  ex  ante  inflation  is  not 
observable,  one  could  compute  the  “expectations  augmented  Fisher  equation”  given  the 
desired real rate of return and an expected rate of inflation over the period of a loan. While 
there is no unique way to compute expected inflation, the real interest rate ex post can be 
computed as nominal interest rate minus realized inflation rate.  
15.  As  investment  decisions  are  made  over  a  medium-term  horizon,  it  is  important  to 
consider  real  lending  rates  in  a  medium-term  perspective.  Borrowers  tend  to  view  the 
nominal lending rate in terms of a desired real rate of return and expected inflation. Although 
several methods, including surveys, are employed to calculate expected inflation, it is difficult 
to  assign  expected  values  with  a  reasonable  degree  of  precision  given  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the future outcomes. This is more pertinent to developing economies like ours 
which are subject to structural economic factors and unanticipated supply shocks.  
16.  Another  useful  way  to  address  this  issue  is  to  derive  expectations  by  smoothing  the 
inflation series. This presupposes that expectations are adaptive25 which is often the case in 
economies  and  markets  with  asymmetric  information.  Furthermore,  given  monetary  policy 
credibility,  the  underlying  inflation  expectations  are  generally  stable  but  for  the  deviations 
caused by short term volatility due to transitory factors26. 
                                                 
23   i = r +; where “i” is nominal interest rate, “r” is real interest rate and “” is the inflation rate. 
24   Fisher, Irving (1930), The Theory of Interest, (New York: Macmillan). 
25   Backward looking. 
26   India is a moderate inflation country with the long-term average inflation of about 7.5 per cent which has come 
down to around 5 per cent in the recent years. Hence the long-term inflation expectations can be assumed to 
be stable. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 29
In our context, computation of real interest rate, even in an ex post sense, becomes 
17. 
challenging because of lack of a comprehensive measure of consumer price inflation. Hence, 
I  show  here  three  alternative  ex  post  measures  of  real  lending  rates  based  on:  (i)  the 
wholesale price index, which is our headline measure of inflation; (ii) the GDP deflator, the 
most  comprehensive  measure  of  inflation;  and  (iii)  the  consumer  price  index  for  industrial 
worker (CPIIW), which is the most representative of consumer price indices. It can be seen 
that the alternative measures of real interest rates have moved in tandem though there have 
been significant year to year variations (Chart 3). 
  18. 
If one assumes the inflation expectations to be adaptive then one could consider taking 
a larger time frame for economic agents’ memory than just pertaining to the immediate time 
interval. Here I have taken a two-year moving average series of inflation rate to represent 
adaptive inflation expectations and for estimating ex post real lending rates. The smoothed 
real lending rate series reinforces our earlier observation that lending rates rose in the 1990s 
and declined during the 2000s (Chart 4). 
 
30 
  BIS Review 82/2010
Credit growth and real lending rates 
V. 
19.  Now  I  turn  to  the  relationship  between  real  GDP  growth  and  real  lending  rates. 
Technically, the real GDP growth is a measure of average real rate of return in the economy. 
Ideally,  the  real  lending  rates  should  not  be  too  much  out  of  alignment  with  the  real  GDP 
growth rate. The data for the period 1990–91 to 2008–09 show that real lending rates were 
higher  than  real  GDP  growth  particularly  during  1997–98  to  2002–0327.  This  scenario  has 
clearly  changed  since  2003–04  concurrent  with  the  high  growth  phase  of  the  Indian 
economy. The weighted average real lending rate has since remained below the real GDP 
growth rate (Chart 5).  
 
  
20.  From  a  business  cycle  perspective,  one  could  examine  relationship  between  real 
interest  rate  and  credit  growth.  The  assessment  of  real  lending  rate  in  the  context  of 
underlying  credit  cycles  can  potentially  throw  light  on  aspects  of  cyclicality  in  economic 
activity  and  its  relationship  with  financial  sector  dynamics.  High  (low)  real  interest  rates 
coincide with low (high) credit growth (Chart 6). 
21. 
In terms of real sector activity, approximated by the index of industrial production (IIP), 
the industrial growth cycles are also inversely related to the real interest rate cycles (Chart 
7). 
                                                 
27   Analysing  the  data  for  1990–91  to  2001–02,  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan,  former  Deputy  Governor  had  observed, 
"effective real lending rate continues to remain high … which has adverse systemic implications". Valedictory 
address at the Bank Economists’ Conference 2002, at Bangalore, December 29, 2002. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 31
    
22.  The base rate will prompt banks to make a better assessment of risk in pricing of loans. 
It is expected to be more responsive to the stance of monetary policy which should facilitate 
movement in effective real lending rates consistent with the rates of return in the economy. 
32 
 BIS Review 82/2010
Conclusions 
23.  Let me conclude now. 
 
First, the introduction of the base rate system along side removal of interest rate ceiling 
on  small  loans  and  freeing  of  rupee  export  credit  interest  rate  brings  to  fruition  over  two 
decades of efforts to deregulate the lending rates of banks. This is expected to enhance the 
allocative efficiency of the financial intermediation process by banks. 
 
Second, deregulation of lending rates will promote financial inclusion with greater credit 
flow to agriculture and small business. This, together with other specific measures taken by 
the Reserve Bank for financial inclusion, will draw borrowers away from the informal financial 
sector to the formal financial sector and thus, facilitate credit penetration. 
Third, the base rate system that comes into effect from 1st July 2010 gives complete 
 
freedom  to  banks  in  their  loan  pricing  decisions  while  ensuring  transparency.  Banks  have 
unlimited  access  to  public  deposits  and  privileged  access  to  the  liquidity  facility  of  the 
Reserve  Bank.  Hence  there  is  a  greater  need  for  transparency  and  responsible  lending 
practices for public purposes. 
 
Fourth, the base rates of banks will mirror their relative efficiency and cost structure. 
While  lending  rates  tend  to  be  sticky,  it  is  expected  that  the  base  rate  system  will  show 
greater  flexibility  and  strengthen  both  the  interest  rate  and  credit  channels  of  monetary 
transmission. 
 
Fifth,  the  new  system  gives  the  freedom  to  banks  to  choose  other  market  related 
benchmarks besides their base rates for pricing floating rate products. This could promote 
development  of  market  benchmarks.  It  could  also  deepen  the  money  market  to  facilitate 
short-term liquidity management by banks. 
 
Sixth,  there  is some  apprehension that  the  base  rate  system  may  raise  the  effective 
cost of borrowings. This is unlikely because corporates have access to multiple sources of 
funds and hence the effective borrowing rates will be determined by market competition. 
 
Seventh,  the  nominal  effective  lending  rate  of  the  banking  system  which  remained 
higher in the 1990s have declined significantly in the 2000s. This can largely be attributed to 
moderation in overall inflation, reduction in inflation risk premia, interest rate deregulation and 
increasing efficiency of the banking system. 
 
lending  rate  becomes  challenging  without  a 
comprehensive  measure  of  consumer  price  inflation  and  difficulties  in  measuring  inflation 
expectations. Nevertheless, ex post measures of real lending rates over the last two decades 
show  a  clear  pattern.  The  real  lending  rates  rose  in  the  1990s  and  then  declined  in  the 
2000s. The real weighted average lending rate was higher than the real GDP growth rate, 
particularly  during  the  period  1997–98  to  2002–03.  Thereafter,  the  real  weighted  average 
lending rate has declined concurrent with the high growth phase of the Indian economy. 
 
Finally, credit and industrial output cycles show inverse relationship with real interest 
rate.  However,  there  is  a  need  for  further  research  to  better  understand  the  relationship 
between credit and interest rate cycles and its implications for sustainable growth. 
the  computation  of  real 
Eighth, 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 33
