Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The BSP @ 17 – moving the economy forward 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, on the 
occasion of the BSP’s 17th anniversary celebration, Manila, 7 May 2010. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat!  
Maganda ba ang umaga? Tama!  
Fellow central bankers, it is our 17th anniversary the dawn of a new chapter in our journey as 
the  country’s  central  monetary  authority.  BSPers,  batiin  po  natin  ng  happy  birthday  ang 
mahal nating Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! Happy birthday BSP! 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy that one of the milestones we are celebrating today 
is the realization of a dream to unite all BSPers through the magic of technology. Under the 
leadership of Deputy Governor Andy Suratos, our IT sub-sector team headed by Managing 
Director  Tess  Bulseco  has  enhanced  BSP’s  internal  connectivity  from  one-way  video 
streaming  to  a  two-way  communication  network.  In  other  words,  nag  level-up  na  tayo.  to 
interactive video connectivity on a national scale! Palakpakan po natin ang milestone na ito.  
Now, let use our new system, starting with our Assembly Hall. I request everyone here, when 
I say “now” please wave your hands and greet our fellow BSPers all over the country with 
“happy anniversary”. Sabay-sabay tayo NOW! Palakpakan po natin ang BSP head office! 
And since we are serving as anchor to this event, I ask everyone here at the assembly hall to 
respond to incoming greetings with a wave and a happy anniversary. 
This time, let us hear from BSPers in our Security Plant Complex in Quezon City! 
From Mindanao! From the Visayas!  
From North Luzon! From South Luzon!  
May  energy  pa  ba  tayo?  Meron  pa?  O  sige.  All  together,  across  the  Philippines  let  us 
celebrate  BSP’s  17th  anniversary  by  waving  and  saying  happy  anniversary.  What  is  my 
signal? Tama! Sabay-sabay tayo NOW! 
Fellow  central  bankers.  We  have  just  participated  in  a  major  event  in  Bangko  Sentral’s 
history: we have taken part in putting one of our core values in action – solidarity. 
But  beyond  connectivity  through  technology,  what  we  need  to  do  is  to  work  more  closely 
together.  We  need  to  ensure  that  within  our  offices  and  departments  PARTICULARLY 
ACROSS SECTORS we are all working in solidarity to serve our people and our country as 
central bankers. That after thorough and healthy discussions of a broad range of ideas, all 
possible  scenarios  and  options,  we  unite  behind  final  decisions  that  are  made,  whatever 
position we hold.  
We know that if we are divided and fragmented it will take more time to reach the goals we 
aspire for or worse, we may lose our way. Either way, we do a disservice to our country.  
This is not to say that we are not united. However, in this imperfect world, there is always 
room for improvement. In words and in deeds, let us be one.  
United, we are strong and can be the best we can be, at all times. Together, let us unleash 
the Power of One. Sa isip, sa salita, at sa gawa tayo ay HIGIT na magka-isa.  
Team  BSP.  Tatanungin  ko  kayo  ngayon.  Tayo  ba  ay  HIGIT  na  magkaka-isa?  Salamat 
naman! Ako at ang mga members ng Monetary Board natin ay a-asahan yan.  
BIS Review 93/2010 
 1
It  is  also  quite  timely  that  we  are  renewing  our  vow  of  solidarity  just  days  after  the 
assumption into office of President Benigno C. Aquino III who received his mandate from our 
people with a landslide win! 
As patriotic Filipinos, let us also unite behind President Aquino as he leads our people and 
our country to a better future.  
Fellow central bankers, let us celebrate our solidarity as BSPers and as Filipinos with a long 
round of applause!  
As we start a new chapter in the history of our country and the Bangko Sentral, it would be 
useful to assess where we are, where we are going, and how we plan to get there.  
For this, let us use our mission statement as our guide. First, we declared that “the BSP is 
committed to promote  and maintain price stability”. Do  you believe we have accomplished 
this? Yes, of course!  
Seventeen years ago, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas was established as an independent 
central monetary authority with the mandated primary duty under its charter to maintain price 
stability.  This  came  at  a  time  when  a  global  consensus  was  emerging  that  price  stability 
should indeed be the overriding goal of monetary policy. Since then, extensive studies have 
shown that the overall declines in the level and volatility of inflation can be associated with 
better  monetary  policy.  Price  stability  therefore  has  been  the  hallmark  of  modern  central 
banking. 
Today, we can say that appropriate and timely monetary policies have kept inflation and the 
Bangko Sentral’s policy rates at low single-digit levels. In fact, even through periods marked 
with  record  high  prices  of  basic  commodities  such  as  oil  and  rice,  we  protected  the 
purchasing  power  of  Filipinos  in  the  best  way  we  can  and  kept  the  cost  of  money  for 
business and consumers at relatively low levels. 
Our  mission  statement  also  declares  that  the  BSP  is  committed  to  “provide  proactive 
leadership  in  bringing  about  a  strong  financial  system  conducive  to  a  balanced  and 
sustainable  growth  of  the  economy”.  Do  you  believe  we  have  accomplished  this?  Yes,  of 
course!  
In  fact,  we  can  say  that  the  Philippine  banking  system  passed  the  ultimate  stress  test  by 
remaining  sound  and  stable,  even  when  major  international  institutions  buckled  under  the 
most debilitating global financial crisis in decades. I should also mention that while there was 
a global financial credit squeeze, Philippine banks kept credit flowing to our economy, on the 
back  of  ample  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  Confidence  in  our  banking  system  was 
manifested by a double-digit growth rate in aggregate bank deposits to nearly P4.7 trillion in 
2009. 
Indeed,  sustained  pursuit  of  critical  reforms  to  improve  governance,  strengthen  bank 
capitalization, clean up banks’ balance sheets, and enhance risk management helped create 
sound underpinnings for a healthier banking system.  
The last part of our mission statement further says “towards this end, it shall conduct sound 
monetary policy and effective supervision over financial institutions under its jurisdiction”. Did 
we accomplish these? Yes, of course!  
I believe that appropriate monetary and banking policies of the Bangko Sentral have been 
contributing  factors  to  sustaining  growth  in  our  country  and  in  particular  in  keeping  the 
Philippine economy resilient and on dry ground amidst the turbulence of the global financial 
and economic crises.  
Indeed,  we  can  take  quiet  pride  that  the  BSP  has  built  a  reputation  as  a  credible  inflation 
fighter.  I  can  say  that  our  transparency  and  accountability  practices  helped  anchor  the 
public’s  inflation  expectations  and  created  a  more  predictable  environment  for  business 
planning  and  consumer  decisions.  In  fact,  except  during  periods  of  significant  supply-side 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2010
shocks,  inflation  under  our  inflation  targeting  framework  has  been  generally  lower  than 
target.  
We also engaged other regulators within the financial sector to work more closely with the 
Bangko Sentral to harmonize standards and procedures, to align our policies with global best 
practices, and to have a coordinated program for a financial sector that is more responsive to 
the needs of our economy.  
Equally  important,  the  BSP’s  real-time  gross  settlement  system  or  PhilPaSS  continues  to 
inspire  confidence  and  development  in  the  financial  system.  Able  to  process  large  value 
payments  that  reached  P188  trillion  in  2009,  PhilPaSS  is  gearing  up  to  further  use  its 
capacity  to  benefit  overseas  workers  by  processing  remittance  flows  to  facilitate  service 
delivery and lower remittance fees.  
These are gains we have made insofar as the three pillars of central banking are concerned.  
In  addition,  we  also  have  a  healthy  external  liquidity  position  with  a  balance  of  payments 
(BOP)  surplus,  record  high  gross  international  reserves  and  remittances  from  overseas 
Filipinos, as well as a stable and competitive peso.  
All these will help provide our economy with appropriate cushions against possible external 
shocks, going forward. 
Our  Security  Plant  Complex,  on  the  other  hand,  continues  to  meet  most  of  our  currency 
requirements through banknote printing and coin minting. And through SPC, we helped the 
Department of Foreign Affairs produce machine-readable and electronic passports, thereby 
allowing  Filipinos  to  have  globally-compliant  travel  documents.  When  it  completes  the 
upgrading  and  expansion  of  its  facilities,  SPC  shall  be  able  to  meet  the  steady  rise  in 
demand  by  our  expanding  economy  and  growing  population;  it  shall  also  print  our  new 
generation banknote designs with upgraded security features. 
Let me also mention the advancement of key programs of the BSP during the past few years. 
In  support  of  the  global  fight  against  money  laundering,  we  continue  to  fine  tune  our 
regulations  and  expand  our  reach  which  now  include  our  supervision  of  foreign  exchange 
dealers and remittance agents.  
We are also proud of our accomplishments in microfinance across the Philippines which has 
liberated thousands of our entrepreneurial poor from poverty. This is based on hard data and 
the many inspiring success stories it has spawned. Our success in microfinance has been 
validated  by  a  global  survey  which  ranked  the  Philippines  as  number  one  in  terms  of 
providing a regulatory framework conducive to the development and growth of microfinance.  
Today,  more  than  200  banks  are  engaged  in  microfinance  with  aggregate  loans  of  about 
P12 billion granted to roughly 900,000 microentrepreneurs. And you will be happy to know 
that about 600,000 of them now have bank accounts and their total deposits have reached 
one billion pesos!  
In  addition,  our  inclusive  economic  and  financial  education  programs  that  target  Filipinos 
from different sectors across our country help empower millions of Filipinos: from students in 
the  elementary  and  college  levels,  to  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents,  to  salaried 
employees,  the  public  in  general,  as  well  as  exporters,  microentrepreneurs,  and  SME 
investors. In particular, we have enhanced access to bank credit in the countryside through 
the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) Program.  
We have also set up 22 economic and financial learning centers all over the country to make 
useful economic information accessible not only to students but also to professionals and the 
business sector.  
And beyond banking, the Philippine International Convention Center provide vital support to 
our country’s efforts to be competitive in the global conference and exhibition sector. By the 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 3
way, we have members of the PICC board and their top management with us this morning. 
Palakpakan po natin sila.  
We  also  constantly  worked  on  improving  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  capabilities  as  a  public 
institution  through  competitive  compensation  and  benefit  package  that  attracts  and  retains 
the  best  and  the  brightest.  Kayong  lahat  iyan.  At  the  same  time,  our  continuing  wholistic 
training  program  equips  our  employees  with  the  necessary  skills  and  expertise  to  perform 
their duties more effectively. We also continue to provide local and foreign scholarships to 
our deserving employees so that they can capably respond to the challenges ahead and one 
day assume leadership roles in our institution. And of course, we make sure we provide a 
healthy  and  safe  working  environment  conducive  for  a  more  productive  and  efficient 
workforce. 
Moving forward, we will need to draw strength from the core values  we have identified as 
imperatives  for  the  Bangko  Sentral  to  be  successful  in  pursuing  its  mandate.  We  have 
discussed Solidarity earlier. Let me guide you in identifying the other four values of the BSP. 
It starts with the letter P: you are correct, it is patriotism; 
It starts with E: you are correct, it is excellence; 
It starts with I: you are correct, it is integrity; and  
It starts with D: yes, it is dynamism.  
Finally,  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Bangko  Sentral.  On  behalf  of  the  members  of  the 
Monetary Board, I thank all of you for a job well done and for your continuing fidelity to our 
core values in the workplace.  
But  you  and  I  know,  there  is  still  a  lot  of  room  for  improvement.  We  will  work  on  these 
together,  starting  with  the  results  of  the  workshop  on  Organizational  Enhancements  which 
we completed last Friday. Briefly, this will cover continuing improvements in our processes, 
an  enterprise-wide  communication  policy  and  program,  the  continued  development  of  a 
values-driven  workforce,  and  reinforcing  the  ties  that  bind  us  through  our  heroes,  legends 
and symbols.  
Foremost of these symbols is our new logo that embodies BSP’s continuing transformations 
to  adapt  to  a  changing  environment  and  our  now  global  approach  to  the  three  pillars  of 
central  banking,  as  represented  by  three  gold  stars.  Our  principal  symbol  of  course  is  the 
Philippine  Eagle,  the  world’s  largest,  which  is  a  symbol  of  strength,  clear  vision,  and 
independence, the qualities we aspire for as a central bank.  
Ladies and gentlemen. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has a solid track record that makes 
me confident we have what it takes to reach our goals faster and in a more efficient manner. 
Together,  let  us  move  the  BSP  and  our  economy  forward  to  help  ensure  balanced  and 
sustained growth across our country. 
On a personal note, I want to say it is an honor and a privilege working with all of you at the 
Bangko Sentral. This year, I am commemorating my 36 years of service at the Bank. In the 
last  five  years,  I  have  served  as  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  Governor  of  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. Through all these years, you have supported me, in sickness 
and  in  health.  For  this,  my  family  and  I  thank  all  of  you.  This  includes  my  wife  Elma,  my 
daughters Eula and Mia as well as my son Patrick and his wife Miko, plus my granddaughter 
Zara.  
Wait!  I  am not  saying goodbye  yet.  I  still  have  one  year to  complete  my  term.  I  just  feel  I 
cannot thank all of you enough.  
I  also  extend  my  thanks  and  deep  appreciation  to  three  other  Members  of  the  Monetary 
Board  who  started  out  with  me  in  this  journey  five  years  ago:  Monetary  Board  Members 
Juanita  Amatong,  Nelly  Villafuerte,  and  Freddie  Antonio.  I  also  thank  past  and  present 
members of the Monetary Board in the last five years. It has been a pleasure and a privilege 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2010
working with them as well: Dr. Vicente Valdepenas, Atty. Raul Boncan, Atty. Ignacio Bunye, 
former NEDA head Augusto Santos and former DTI Secretary Peter Favila. Palakpakan po 
natin sila! 
Let us also thank all those who worked together in our anniversary committee headed by the 
energetic  and  inspiring  Director  of  the  SES  Gail  Fule!  Palakpakan  po  natin  sila.  They  will 
continue working in the next few weeks to make our 17th anniversary celebration memorable 
and successful.  
Fellow BSPers, as we celebrate our 17th anniversary as an independent central monetary 
authority, let us be grateful for the opportunity to serve our country and our people. And let us 
commit to work more closely together as we pursue our agenda to improve the quality of life 
of our people through responsive monetary and banking policies. 
Mabuhay tayong lahat! Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 5
