Duvvuri Subbarao: India and the global financial crisis transcending 
from recovery to growth 
Comments by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Peterson 
Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 26 April 2010. 
 1. 
India clocked average growth of 9 per cent per annum in the five years to 2007/08. 
That  growth  momentum  was  interrupted  by  the  financial  crisis  which  impacted  India  too, 
more than we had originally thought but less than it did most other countries. Despite falling 
below 6 per cent for one quarter, the growth for the full year 2008/09 was a resilient 6.7 per 
cent. Current estimates are that the economy had grown between 7.2 and 7.5 per cent for 
the just ended fiscal year 2009/10 and that growth for 2010/11 will be 8+ per cent. The quick 
turn in sentiment following the uncertainty and anxiety of the crisis period has seen the return 
of the FAQ: When will India get on to double digit growth? 
2. 
(i) 
For policy makers, the FAQ translates to three nuanced questions:  
In the short term, how do we restore the economy to its trend rate of growth while 
maintaining price stability? 
In  the  medium  term,  how  do  we  raise  the  trend  rate  of  growth  itself  without 
compromising financial stability? 
How do we ensure that growth is inclusive? 
(iii) 
3. 
India is such an over analyzed country that it is difficult to be original. The answers 
to all the three questions above are all out there in the open, and they involve moving on with 
a  host  of  structural  and  governance  reforms.  I  want  to  use  this  platform  provided  by  the 
Peterson Institute to comment on a few issues on the reform agenda that are relevant to the 
Reserve Bank of India. 
(ii) 
Capital flows 
4.  
Volatile capital flows have been a central issue during the crisis, and continue to be 
so now as the crisis is ebbing. Emerging market economies (EMEs) saw a sudden stop and 
reversal of capital flows during the crisis as a consequence of global deleveraging. Now the 
trend has reversed once again, and many EMEs are seeing net inflows – a consequence of a 
global  system  awash  with  liquidity,  the  assurance  of  low  interest  rates  in  advanced 
economies  over  “an  extended  period”  and  the  prospects  of  robust  growth  in  EMEs.  The 
familiar question of how EMEs can maximize the benefits and minimize the costs of volatile 
capital flows has returned to haunt the policy agenda. 
5.  
One  little  known  aspect  of  capital  flows,  what  could  perhaps  be  called  the  law  of 
capital flows, is that they never come in at the precise time or in the exact quantity you want 
them. Managing these flows, especially if they are volatile, is going to test the effectiveness 
of central bank policies of semi-open EMEs. If central banks do not intervene in the foreign 
exchange market, they incur the cost of currency appreciation unrelated to fundamentals. If 
they intervene in the forex market to prevent appreciation, they will have additional systemic 
liquidity  and  potential  inflationary  pressures  to  contend  with.  If  they  sterilize  the  resultant 
liquidity,  they  will  run  the  risk  of  pushing  up  interest  rates  which  will  hurt  the  growth 
prospects. Capital flows can also potentially impair financial stability. How EMEs manage the 
impossible trinity – the impossibility of having an open capital account, a fixed exchange rate 
and independent monetary policy – is going to have an impact on their prospects for growth, 
price stability and financial stability. 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 1
India has followed a consistent policy on capital account convertibility in general and 
6. 
on  capital  account  management  in  particular.  Our  position  is  that  capital  account 
convertibility  is  not  a  standalone  objective  but  a  means  for  higher  and  stable  growth.  We 
believe our economy should traverse towards capital convertibility along a gradual path – the 
path  itself  being  recalibrated  on  a  dynamic  basis  in  response  to  domestic  and  global 
developments. Post-crisis, that continues to be our policy. We will continue to move towards 
liberalizing our capital account, but we will revisit the road map to reflect the lessons of the 
crisis.  
7. 
India’s approach to managing capital flows too has been pragmatic, transparent and 
contestable. We prefer long term flows to short-term flows and non-debt flows to debt flows. 
The  logic  for  that  is  self-evident.  Our  policy  on  equity  flows  has  been  quite  liberal,  and  in 
sharp  contrast  to  other  EMEs  which  liberalized  and  then  reversed  the  liberalization  when 
flows  became  volatile,  our  policy  has  been  quite  stable.  Historically,  we  have  used  policy 
levers on the debt side of the flows to manage volatility. This has been our anchor when we 
had to deal with flows largely in excess of the economy’s absorption capacity in the years 
before the crisis. This has been our policy when we saw large outflows during the crisis. And 
I believe this will continue to be our policy on the way forward. 
8. 
The surge in capital flows into some EMEs even as the crisis is not yet fully behind 
us has seen the return of the familiar question – the advisability of imposing a Tobin type tax 
on  capital  flows.  Both  before  and  after  the  crisis,  there  are  examples  of  countries,  notably 
Chile,  Colombia,  Brazil  and  Malaysia,  which  have  experimented  with  a  Tobin  tax  or  its 
variant. Even as there are some lessons to be drawn from the country experience, on the 
aggregate,  it  does  not  constitute  a  sufficient  body  of  knowledge  for  drawing  definitive 
conclusions.  
9. 
Critics of Tobin tax contend that the tax is ineffective, is difficult to implement, easy 
to evade and that its costs far exceed the potential benefits, and all this because financial 
markets  always  outsmart  policy  makers.  Supporters  of  the  tax  argue  that  if  designed  and 
implemented well, the tax can be effective in smoothing flows and that evading controls is not 
such a straight forward option as efforts to evade require incurring additional costs to move 
funds in and out of a country which is precisely what the tax aims to achieve.  
10. 
In  India,  given  the  overall  thrust  of  policy,  we  are  quite  agnostic  on  the  choice  of 
different instruments. The stereotype view is that we have an express preference for quantity 
based controls over price based controls. A critical examination of our policy will show that 
this  view  is  mistaken.  For  example,  on  bonds  we  impose  both  a  limit  on  the  amount 
foreigners  can  invest  as  well  as  a  withholding  tax.  Similarly,  our  policy  on  external 
commercial  borrowing  employs  both  price  and  quantity  variables.  We  have  not  so  far 
imposed a Tobin type tax nor are we contemplating one. However, it needs reiterating that 
no policy instrument is clearly off the table and our choice of instruments will be determined 
by the context.  
11. 
The  recent  crisis  has  clearly  been  a  turning  point  in  the  world  view  on  capital 
controls. The Asian crisis of the mid-90s demonstrated the risk of instability inherent in a fully 
open capital account. Even so, the intellectual orthodoxy continued to denounce controls on 
capital  flows  as  being  inefficient  and  ineffective.  The  recent  crisis  saw,  across  emerging 
economies, a rough correlation between the extent of openness of the capital account and 
the extent of adverse impact of the crisis. Surely, this should not be read as a denouncement 
of open capital account, but a powerful demonstration of the tenet that premature opening 
hurts more than it helps. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2010
Notably,  the  IMF  published  a  policy  note  in  February  20101  that  reversed  its  long 
12. 
held orthodoxy. The note has referred to certain “circumstances in which capital controls can 
be a legitimate component of the policy response to surges in capital flows”. Now that there 
is agreement that controls can be “desirable and effective” in managing capital flows in select 
circumstances,  the  IMF  and  other  international  bodies  must  pursue  research  on  studying 
what  type  of  controls  are  appropriate  and  under  what  circumstances  so  that  emerging 
economies have useful guidelines to inform policy formulation.  
Exchange rate management 
13. 
Just as on capital flows, on exchange rate too, our policy has been consistent which 
is  that  we  do  not  target  a  specific  rate  or  level  for  the  exchange  rate.  The  Reserve  Bank 
intervenes in the market only to smooth volatility which is harmful to trade and investment. 
The  “volatility  centric  approach”  to  exchange  rate  also  stems  from  the  source  of  volatility 
which is capital flows. Despite not having a fully open capital account, we have experienced 
large volatility in capital flows as the following figures for the external sector for the four years 
to 2009-10 demonstrate. 
The above numbers show that capital flows were in excess of the current account 
14.  
deficit in the years before the crisis during India’s growth boom and that they had abruptly 
reversed in the crisis year 2008/09. The full balance of payments for the just completed fiscal 
year 2009/10 is not yet available but latest data show that the net accretion to reserves was 
modest.  
                                                  
1   Ostry,  Jonathan  D.  and  Others  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 3
The above numbers and trends are a demonstration of our policy stance. First, the 
15. 
two  way  movement  shows  that  we  have  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  and  also  evidences  the 
increasing flexibility of the rate over time in relation to the magnitude of flows.  
16. 
Second,  India  does  not  have  a  deliberate  strategy  of  building  up  reserves  for 
“self-insurance”.  The  variations  in  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  an  offshoot  of  our 
exchange  rate  policy  which  is  to  intervene  in  the  market  only  to  smooth  exchange  rate 
volatility and prevent disruptions to macroeconomic stability. Third, even as our reserves got 
built up over the years owing to capital flows, the same reserves have been used to contain 
volatility in the event of capital reversals. Importantly, given our persistent trade and current 
account  deficits,  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  comprise  borrowed  funds  which  are 
qualitatively  different  from  accumulation  of  reserves  through  trade  and  current  account 
surpluses.  Even  so,  it  is  clear  that  the  reserves  have  helped  us  better  cope  with  external 
sector vulnerabilities. 
17. 
Our  fairly  flexible  exchange  rate  policy  has  not  been  without  costs.  Importantly, 
because inflation in India has typically been higher than that in our trading partners in the 
recent period, the real  effective exchange rate has appreciated significantly more than the 
nominal rate. This has implications for our external competitiveness, that too at a time when 
the  world  trade  is  recovering  amid  concerns  relating  to  protectionism.  Also  if  we  have  a 
flexible exchange rate, and if other countries which are our trading partners or those which 
compete for the same export markets have a fixed exchange rate, we get disadvantaged.  
to 
Inflation targeting 
18. 
The Reserve Bank is not a pure inflation targeter. Some people have suggested that 
the economy will be better served if the Reserve Bank becomes a pure inflation targeter. The 
argument is that inflation hurts much more in a country like India with hundreds of millions of 
poor people and that the Reserve Bank will be more effective at combating inflation if it is not 
burdened with other objectives. This argument is contestable.  
19. 
Inflation  targeting,  characterized  by  a  single  target  (price  stability)  and  a  single 
instrument  (short  term  policy  interest  rate),  has  respectable  academic  credentials.  An 
exclusive  commitment 
inflation  enhances  operational  effectiveness  and  enforces 
accountability. The success of several developed economy central banks in maintaining price 
stability in the years before the crisis has also given it intellectual credibility. The unravelling 
of  the  “Great  Moderation”  during  the  crisis  has  however  diluted,  if  not  dissolved,  the 
consensus  around  the  minimalist  formula  of  inflation  targeting.  The  crisis  has  shown  that 
price stability does not necessarily ensure financial stability. Indeed there is an even stronger 
assertion – that there is a trade-off between price stability and financial stability, and that the 
more  successful  a  central  bank  is  with  price  stability,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  jeopardize 
financial stability.  
20. 
• 
Inflation targeting is neither desirable nor practical in India for a variety of reasons: 
First, it is inconceivable that in an emerging economy like India, the central bank can 
drive a single goal oblivious of the larger development context. The Reserve Bank 
must be guided simultaneously by the objectives of price stability, financial stability 
and growth.  
Second,  food  items  which  have  a  large  weight  (46–70  per  cent)  in  the  various 
consumer prices indices are subject to large supply shocks, especially because of 
the vagaries of the monsoon, and are therefore beyond the pale of monetary policy. 
An inflation targeting RBI cannot do much to tame a supply driven inflation except as 
a line of defence in an extreme situation.  
Third,  which  inflation  index  do  we  target?  In  India,  we  have  one  wholesale  price 
index and four consumer price indices. There are ongoing efforts at a technical level 
BIS Review 56/2010
  4 
   to reduce the number of consumer price indices, and I believe the technical issues 
are not insurmountable. But that still will not give us a single representative inflation 
rate for an emerging market economy with market imperfections, diverse geography 
and 1.2 billion people.  
Fourth,  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  in  India  is  impeded  because  of  a 
number  of  structural  factors.  Inflation  targeting  can  be  efficient  and  effective  only 
after monetary transmission becomes streamlined.  
Finally, we need to manage the monetary fall-out of volatile capital flows that queer 
the pitch for a single focus monetary policy. A boom-bust pattern of capital flows can 
lead  to  large  disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  rendering  both  inflation 
targeting and financial stability vulnerable. Like other emerging economies, India too 
will have to navigate the impossible trinity as best as it can.  
21. 
Post  crisis,  the  “new  environment  hypothesis”  which  says  that  flexible  inflation 
targeting, rather than pure inflation targeting, is more efficient is gaining ground. According to 
this hypothesis, if inflation is way off target, a central bank’s first call is to bring it within the 
acceptable  range,  and  if  inflation  is  within  the  range,  the  central  bank  can  focus  on  other 
objectives.  
22. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  “multiple  indicator  framework”  adopted  in  1998  and  refined 
since then, in fact, subsumes a flexible inflation objective framework over the medium-term. 
Under  this  framework,  while  we  strive  for  a  balance  among  multiple  objectives  with  the 
relative  weights  assigned 
the  prevailing 
macroeconomic context, we aim to achieve a medium-term inflation target. Our commitment 
in this regard is clearly defined in our own policy documents where we say our objective is to 
“contain perception of inflation in the range of 4.0 to 4.5 per cent in line with the medium-term 
objective of 3.0 per cent inflation consistent with India’s broader integration with the global 
economy”. Admittedly, our communication strategy is not yet best practice. We need to work, 
and indeed we are working, on improving dissemination, both at technical and non-technical 
levels. In the dissemination, we need to explain the inflation outlook, the priority assigned to 
different objectives, what impact our policy actions are intended to have and how they will 
take us towards the stated objectives.  
to  each  objective  varying  as  dictated  by 
Harmonizing monetary and fiscal policies 
One of the mega trends in macroeconomic management world over in the last few 
23. 
decades has been the gradual abatement of the fiscal dominance of monetary policy. This 
has been the trend in India too. The ebbing away of fiscal dominance has been a continuous 
process but two discrete events marked significant milestones. The first was the agreement 
between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  to  completely  phase  out  ad-hoc  treasury 
bills from April 1997, a move that saw the termination of the egregious practice of automatic 
monetization  by  the  central  bank  of  the  government’s  fiscal  deficit.  The  second  was  the 
enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act which, among 
other  things,  prohibited  the  Reserve  Bank  from  financing  government  debt  in  the  primary 
market with effect from April 2006. These trends got a further boost as a result of the fiscal 
consolidation during 2004-08 which yielded space for monetary policy. The healthy transition 
of monetary policy from fiscal dominance to functional autonomy was halted, if not reversed, 
by  the  response  to  the  crisis,  which  necessitated  fiscal  expansion  and  monetary 
accommodation of that higher fiscal deficit. 
24. 
In India, both the Government and the Reserve Bank have begun the process of exit 
from  the  expansionary  stances  of  the  crisis  period.  The  Government  has  programmed  a 
reduction in the gross fiscal deficit from 6.8 per cent of GDP in fiscal year 2009/10 to 5.5 per 
cent  of  GDP  in  2010/11.  The  Reserve  Bank  began  the  reversal  of  its  crisis  response 
accommodative stance by terminating sector-specific liquidity facilities, incrementally raising 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 5
the  cash  and  liquidity  reserve  ratios  and  the  policy  interest  rates.  Going  forward,  the 
challenge for India, as it indeed is for every country, is to unwind the expansionary policies 
harmoniously  since  inconsistencies  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  can  be  costly  in 
economic terms. 
25. 
As indicated earlier, the two crisis years – 2008/09 and 2009/10 – saw government 
borrowing rising sharply and abruptly. Even so, the Reserve Bank, as the Government’s debt 
manager, could manage the borrowing programme by maintaining easy liquidity conditions. 
Surely,  yields  on  government  securities  had  firmed  up,  but  only  modestly.  Even  as  fiscal 
deficit  this  year  (2010/11),  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  is  lower,  the  absolute  amount  of 
government borrowing in gross terms is roughly of the same order as in last year. Indeed, 
measured by the metric of fresh supply of government paper, the borrowing this year will be 
higher than in last year, and this perhaps will be a more influential determinant of the yield 
trajectory.  Meanwhile,  the  economic  conditions  have  changed  since  last  year  in  important 
ways. First, inflationary pressures are stronger, thereby restraining the flexibility for infusing 
liquidity  through  open  market  operations  (OMO).  Second,  last  year  banks  held  significant 
quantities  of  Market  Stabilization  Scheme  (MSS)  bonds  issued  earlier  for  sterilizing  the 
liquidity  arising  from  capital  flows.  The  Reserve  Bank  bought  back  those  bonds  to  infuse 
systemic  liquidity.  That  option  is  not  available  this  year  as  the  quantum  of  MSS  bonds 
remaining is very marginal. Finally and importantly, as recovery is taking hold, private credit 
demand  is  reviving.  But  the  upward  pressure  on  yields  on  government  securities  and  the 
consequent pressure on interest rates makes “crowding out” a potential possibility.  
26. 
Even  setting  aside  crisis  related  developments,  “fiscal  dominance”  of  monetary 
policy continues to be a concern. The long term interest rates are influenced significantly by 
the  yields  on  government  securities  and  hence  on  the  size  of  the  government  borrowing 
programme,  thereby  eroding  to  some  extent  the  efficacy  of  monetary  transmission.  The 
credibility of the Reserve Bank’s inflation management, therefore, is critically dependent on 
the credibility of Government’s fiscal consolidation.  
27. 
Fiscal consolidation is important for a number of other weighty reasons apart from 
the inflation dimension. The Government has initiated action on the recommendations of the 
Thirteenth  Finance  Commission  (TFC)  on  the  revised  road  map  for  fiscal  responsibility.  In 
drilling  down  the  road  map,  the  Government  should  also  keep  in  view  two  relevant 
objectives.  First,  fiscal  consolidation  should  shift  from  exclusive  reliance  on  increasing 
revenues  to  focus  on  restructuring  expenditures.  The  consolidation  effort  should  target 
slashing  recurring  expenditures  rather  than  one-off  items.  Second,  it  is  important,  even  as 
targeting quantitative indicators, to pay equal attention to the quality of fiscal adjustment. 
Improving monetary policy transmission 
28. 
The standard tool of central banks is the short term interest rate which they use to 
influence interest rates across financial markets, and thereby steer the financial conditions in 
the  economy.  During  the  crisis,  central  banks  around  the  world  reduced  policy  rates 
ferociously,  and  in  many  advanced  economies  the  rates  are  at  or  near  zero.  However, 
financial  markets  refused  to  respond  and  remained  in  seizure  reflecting  the  near  total 
collapse of monetary transmission.  
29. 
The effectiveness of monetary transmission, the process by which the central bank’s 
policy  signals  influence  the  financial  markets,  is  a  function  of  both  tangible  and  intangible 
factors. It depends on the depth and efficiency of the financial markets. It also depends on 
the  overall  confidence  and  sentiment 
financial  system.  Typically,  monetary 
transmission in emerging economies tends to be slower, reflecting shallow financial markets 
and inefficient information systems.  
30. 
The  monetary  transmission  mechanism  in  India  has  been  improving  but  is  yet  to 
fully mature. There are several factors inhibiting the transmission process. First, India has a 
the 
in 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2010
government  sponsored  small  savings  programme  characterized  by  administered  interest 
rates  and  tax  concessions.  Operating  through  a  huge  network  of  post  offices  and  field 
agents,  the  small  savings  scheme  has  an  enormous  and  impressive  reach  deep  into  the 
hinterland. Banks are typically circumspect about reducing deposit rates in response to the 
central bank’s policy rate signals for fear of losing their deposit base to small savings. The 
government too has not adjusted the rates on small savings on a regular basis to offset their 
competitive edge.  
31. 
Second, depositors enjoy an asymmetric contractual relationship with banks. When 
interest rates are rising, depositors have the option of withdrawing their deposits prematurely 
and  redepositing  at  the  going  higher  rate.  On  the  contrary,  when  deposit  rates  are  falling, 
banks  do  not  have  the  option  of  repricing  deposits  at  the  lower  rate  because  of  the 
asymmetry  of  the  contract.  This  structural  rigidity  clogs  monetary  transmission.  Banks  are 
typically unable to adjust their lending rates swiftly in response to policy signals until they are 
able  to  adjust  on  the  cost  side  by  repricing  the  deposits  in  the  next  cycle.  Third,  and 
importantly, monetary transmission is also impeded because of large government borrowings 
and illiquid bond markets.  
32. 
There is a stereotype view that monetary transmission broke down during the crisis 
in India too like in advanced economies. This is incorrect. Monetary policy signals transmitted 
to the money and bond markets reasonably efficiently. Monetary transmission in the credit 
market was admittedly slower but this had more to do with the structural rigidities explained 
above rather than any crisis related impediments in the financial markets.  
33. 
In evaluating monetary transmission during the crisis, it should be remembered that 
the  contagion  of  the  crisis  transmitted  to  India  though  largely  the  confidence  channel;  the 
financial  markets  were  affected  more  by  a  perception  of  scarcity  than  actual  scarcity.  As 
such,  market  conditions  improved  markedly  in  fairly  quick  order  since  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
assurance  that  it  will  maintain  “abundant”  liquidity  inspired  widespread  confidence  in  the 
markets. It is important to recognize that in India, the crisis transmitted from the real to the 
financial  sector  unlike  in  the  advanced  economies  where  the  transmission  was  from  the 
financial sector to the real sector. The implication of this is that the decline in credit flow, as 
banks have asserted, was due more to a decline in credit demand from the private sector 
rather than any increased risk aversion on the part of the banks.  
34. 
It should be recognised that the clogs in monetary transmission in India are possibly 
exaggerated because of the current system of loan pricing. Banks are required to declare a 
benchmark prime lending rate (BPLR) but they enjoy the freedom to lend at rates below their 
BPLR. Over time, sub-BPLR lending has become a rule rather than an exception. Currently 
about two thirds of bank lending takes place at rates below the BPLR. As many interest rates 
are indexed to the BPLR, banks have been reluctant to adjust their BPLRs in response to 
policy rate changes as changes erode their discretionary flexibility in pricing loans. The BPLR 
system has therefore become an inadequate tool to evaluate monetary transmission.  
35. 
Improving  monetary  transmission  is  important  if  the  Reserve  Bank’s  efforts  at 
promoting  growth  with  price  stability  are  to  be  effective.  The  problems  indicated  above 
suggest  obvious  solutions.  An  important  reform  initiative  post  crisis  has  been  the 
replacement of the BPLR system by a new base rate [BR] system which will come into effect 
on July 1, 2010. Each bank will determine its own BR reflecting all those cost elements which 
are common across borrowers. A bank will then charge its borrowers the base rate plus a 
premium on top of that reflecting customer specific risk. The BR will thereby set the floor for 
all lending rates. Concurrently, the ceiling interest rate on export credit and small loans up to 
Rs. 200,000 has been withdrawn making deregulation of lending rates complete. The new 
system  is  expected  to  be  transparent,  fair  and  contestable  and  will  help  in  improving 
monetary transmission to credit markets.  
BIS Review 56/2010 
 7
Conclusion 
In the course of my comments, I have spoken about five specific issues: 
36. 
Capital flows  
(i)  
Exchange rate management 
(ii) 
Inflation targeting 
(iii) 
Harmonizing monetary and fiscal policies 
(iv) 
Improving monetary policy transmission 
(v) 
37. 
My effort has been to indicate our priorities and clarify our policy stance on some 
issues thrown up by the crisis. This is by no means an exhaustive list of our challenges or 
tasks. That I am sure will be a much longer listing.  
38. 
The final thought that I want to leave with you as I finish is that the growth drivers 
that powered India’s high growth in the years before the crisis are all intact. The challenge for 
the Government and the Reserve Bank is to move on with reforms to steer the economy to a 
higher growth path that is sustainable and equitable. 
8 
 BIS Review 56/2010
