Jürgen Stark: Is the global economy headed for a lost decade? A 
European perspective 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics  (NABE)  Economic  Policy  Conference 
“The New Normal? Policy Choices after the Great Recession”, Arlington, 8 March 2010. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to participate in this year’s NABE Economic Policy Conference and an 
honour  to  be  invited  to  debate  the  policy  challenges  facing  the  global  economy  in  the 
aftermath of the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. Defining what “the 
new norm”  of the post-crisis economic environment should be is challenging; although the 
global economy has recently embarked upon a recovery path, substantial fragilities remain 
and the outlook is still fraught with significant risks. For policy-makers, our key challenge now 
is  to  internalise  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  and  to  address  its  causes  through  long  overdue 
reforms.  The  aim  should  be  to  prevent  similar  phenomena  re-emerging  and  to  create  the 
conditions for sustainable and balanced long-term economic growth. 
In my speech today, I will tackle three issues. I will start with an overview of the drivers and 
shortcomings of the pre-crisis global growth model. I will then move on to discuss what the 
obstacles to global growth might be in future and what features the “new norm” should have 
if  growth  is  to  be  sustainable.  Finally,  I  will  take  stock  of  the  reform  agenda  for  achieving 
strong, balanced growth and a resilient financial system. 
The pre-crisis global growth model: drivers and shortcomings 
It  is  undeniable  that  in  the  15  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  the  world  economy  achieved 
exceptionally high growth, combined with low levels of inflation and financial market volatility. 
Between  the  early  1990s  and  2007,  global  economic  growth  averaged  3.7%  per  annum, 
while the volume of world trade expanded at an average pace of 7.1%. Global growth prior to 
the crisis was driven by several factors. 
First, globalisation led to increased trade openness and a larger global labour supply. Key in 
this process was the integration of emerging Asia and the former COMECON countries into 
the  world  economy  during  the  1990s,  which  led  to  a  significant  expansion  in  the  global 
workforce.  The  larger  labour  supply  reduced  production  costs  at  the  aggregate  level  and 
increased the comparative advantage in particular of Asian economies. 
A number of countries benefited from this environment by pursuing export-led development 
strategies.  In  the  case  of  emerging  Asia,  these  strategies  were  supported  by  managed 
exchange rate policies that directly or indirectly targeted the US dollar. As a result, emerging 
Asian  economies  ran  persistent  current  account  surpluses  and  accumulated  vast  foreign 
exchange reserves. 
Another  feature  was  the  debt-fuelled  consumption  booms  experienced  in  a  number  of 
advanced economies. These booms were underpinned by positive wealth effects stemming 
from  the  appreciation  of  housing  and  financial  assets.  In  addition,  favourable  credit 
conditions  allowed  consumption  to  be  financed  through  a  substantial  rise  in  household 
indebtedness. The resulting shortfall in national savings meant that the large trade surpluses 
of emerging Asia were mirrored by deficits in the United States and certain other advanced 
economies. 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 1
Finally, growth was supported by a benign financial environment and a prolonged period of 
“easy  credit”.  This  phenomenon  was  related  to  a  general  process  of  deregulation  and 
inappropriate  regulation  of  the  financial  innovations  that  had  taken  place  since  the  early 
1980s. The securitisation of assets is one example of such innovations, which allowed the 
financial  sector  to  offer  credit  at  a  lower  cost  than  it  had  previously.  Favourable  financing 
conditions  were  further  amplified  by  accommodative  macroeconomic  policies,  abundant 
global liquidity and subdued financial market volatility. 
Nonetheless,  the  financial  crisis  has  forcefully  demonstrated  that  the  constellation  of  the 
recent past was fragile. With hindsight, it can now be seen that some of the factors driving 
growth in the past also sowed the seeds for the crisis. So why did the global growth model 
prove to be unsustainable? 
One  striking  feature  of  the  high  global  growth  rates  was  the  reliance  on  large  and 
unsustainable global imbalances. In principle, current account imbalances can be desirable, 
if they channel funds across the world to their most productive use. But in the years prior to 
the crisis imbalances were a symptom of economic distortions: in some countries asset price 
bubbles  developed  and  household  debt  levels  rose  beyond  sustainable  levels.  Eventually, 
the rise in the household debt burden resulted in an acceleration of defaults on mortgage and 
consumer loans, which undermined the stability of the financial system. 
In other countries – for example, in emerging Asia – which held the value of their currencies 
at  artificially  low  levels  to  support  their  export-oriented  growth  strategies,  the  vast 
accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  had  potentially  high  opportunity  costs.  These 
managed  exchange  rate  regimes  may  also  have  contributed  to  hampering  necessary 
domestic  adjustments  and  distorting  the  allocation  of  resources  towards  export-oriented 
industries. 
As  regards  the  financial  system,  there  was  a  general  under-pricing  of  risk,  reflecting  the 
apparently benign macroeconomic environment. This was exacerbated by the development 
of increasingly complex financial products, which made it difficult for investors to assess the 
quality  of  the  underlying  assets.  A  deterioration  of  credit  standards  –  due  to  ill-designed 
compensation schemes for loan managers – went hand in hand with growth in the leverage 
employed by financial institutions, which increasingly relied on short-term funding. 
Admittedly,  the  crisis  was  not  only  the  result  of  market  failures,  but  also  of  policy  and 
supervisory failures. The institutional framework failed to keep pace with financial innovation. 
At the same time, insufficient coordination at the global level allowed financial institutions to 
engage in regulatory arbitrage. 
The world economy after the crisis and the reform challenges 
These are the facts. The question to be addressed now relates to the features that are likely 
to characterise the world economy after the crisis. Are there any important risks or potential 
obstacles to growth going forward? 
For one thing, it is natural to assume that there will be a more permanent retrenchment by 
consumers in countries which experienced debt-fuelled consumption booms. Households in 
the United States, and also in a number of other countries, are unlikely to return to their past 
spending patterns. Massive losses in the value of financial and real estate assets mean that 
current debt levels are not sustainable and will require higher personal saving rates, which 
will  depress  consumption  in  the  years  to  come.  Retrenchment  by  consumers  has  already 
begun, but the wealth destroyed over the last few years may take a long time to rebuild. 
On the supply side, economic growth may be dampened in future as the financial crisis is 
likely  to  reduce  the  level  and  growth  rate  of  potential  output.  This  may  occur  through 
depressed capital accumulation, with investment held back by a higher cost of capital and 
credit  restrictions.  The  financial  crisis  may  also  adversely  impact  productivity  and  labour 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2010
to 
reconfirm  our  commitment 
markets. Differing growth patterns are likely to lead to structural shifts in the global economy, 
both from “West” to “East” and at the national level. A major risk is that structural frictions 
might impede the necessary adjustments and lead to higher unemployment in the longer run. 
The  dire  state  of  public  finances  represents  another  challenge,  as  many  countries  find 
themselves  with  unsustainable  fiscal  positions.  Fiscal  imbalances  tend  to  fuel  market 
concerns  over  a  country’s  ability  to  service  its  debt  and  to  meet  its  future  repayment 
obligations and risk imposing upward pressure on medium and long-term interest rates. This 
increases  the  cost  of  financing  for  everyone  and  poses  a  risk  for  future  economic  stability 
and growth. Internal studies at the ECB have found that in euro area countries an increase of 
100  basis  points  in  government  bond  spreads  (vis-à-vis  Germany)  is  associated  with  an 
average increase of 10 to 20 basis points in the cost of corporate bond financing. Moreover, 
high levels of public deficit and debt place an additional burden on the conduct of monetary 
policy. The substantial widening of long-term government bond spreads in many parts of the 
world  has  recently  demonstrated  that  financial  markets  are  keen  to  distinguish  between 
countries on the basis of their creditworthiness. This mechanism now appears to be a more 
forceful disciplinary device for fiscal authorities than before the crisis. A return to sound and 
sustainable fiscal positions is a key responsibility that has yet to be addressed. Otherwise 
there is a rising risk that the financial and economic crisis will be followed or exacerbated by 
a sovereign debt crisis. 
Having considered the obstacles likely to hamper global growth prospects, let me take the 
opportunity to share my views on what features the global growth model should have, if it is 
to be sustainable. 
to  medium-term,  stability-oriented 
First,  we  need 
macroeconomic policies. As before, these policies should be focused on maintaining fiscal 
sustainability,  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  which  should  help  limit  boom  and  bust 
cycles in the future. 
We need sound fiscal policies supported by credible fiscal rules. In Europe, the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  provides  a  rule-based  framework  based  on  reference  ratios  for  fiscal  deficits 
and public debt in terms of GDP. Looking ahead, the main priority will be to devise credible 
exit  strategies  to  correct  large  fiscal  imbalances  and  to  demonstrate  commitment  to  fiscal 
consolidation. 
As  regards  monetary  policy,  this  is  best  conducted  when  a  central  bank  has  a  clear  and 
unambiguous  mandate,  a  clear  objective  and  a  medium  term  orientation.  Central  banks’ 
independence is paramount for achieving their mandates and monetary policy should be kept 
immune from political interference. 
The role of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy deserves mention. A long series of 
booms  and  busts  over  the  last  four  decades  has  demonstrated  that  asset  price 
developments can pose serious threats to macroeconomic and price stability and therefore 
central  banks  cannot simply  ignore  them.  In this  respect,  it  appears  that  a  comprehensive 
monetary policy strategy, which also gives prominence to money and credit developments, 
might be better able to “lean against the wind” of financial exuberance. Central banks should 
be  equipped  with  a  broad-based  analytical  framework  in  which  such  developments  are 
monitored and analysed in detail. At the ECB, this framework is provided by the monetary 
analysis, the second pillar of our monetary policy strategy. 
Demand in the global economy also needs to be better balanced geographically. There is a 
broad consensus that national saving in the United States and other deficit countries needs 
to  increase.  This  can  be  achieved  through  a  strong  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation,  in 
conjunction with increased household saving. However, a rebalancing also requires stronger 
domestic demand elsewhere. This will require reforms in emerging Asian economies, most 
notably  in  China,  to  boost  domestic  demand,  by  developing  financial  systems,  and  by 
increasing  spending  on  social  safety  nets  to  reduce  households’  precautionary  saving. 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 3
Greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  some  countries  is  a  further  necessary  step  towards 
achieving more balanced global growth. 
Finally,  governments  need  to  intensify  structural  reforms  in  order  to  enhance  the  growth 
potential of their economies and their capacity to generate jobs. This is particularly relevant 
in the case of the euro area, given its relatively balanced current-account position and limited 
role in global imbalances. In the longer run, growth will depend, among other things, on the 
amount  of  innovation  and  the  degree  of  market  flexibility.  Key  challenges  for  Europe  are 
boosting  productivity  and  innovation  and  removing  existing  labour  and  product  market 
rigidities. These objectives have been at the core of the political agenda since the launch of 
the Lisbon Strategy in March 2000. 
The policy-makers’ task of addressing the reform challenges is not easy, yet a broad set of 
measures  is  already  taking  shape  at  the  global  level.  Following  the  crisis,  the  G20  has 
emerged  as  the  premier  forum  for  international  cooperation.  At  recent  G20  meetings,  a 
framework for sustainable and balanced growth has been agreed upon and preparations for 
its implementation are under way. Key features of this framework should be: 
 
 
 
 
A  sound  and  robust  financial  system  is  needed  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  global 
economy.  The  existing  institutional  framework  for  ensuring  financial  stability  needs  to  be 
improved and supervision and regulation enhanced. A number of reform initiatives have been 
undertaken in this respect, their key aspects being: 
 
 
 
 
Strengthening capital standards and mitigating pro-cyclicality;  
Reforming compensation practices to avoid incentives for excessive risk-taking;  
Addressing cross-border regulation of systemically important financial institutions;  
The need for a ‘‘holistic” approach to regulation, which should extend to the shadow 
banking system. 
A medium to long-term orientation;  
Refraining from calls for macroeconomic fine-tuning;  
Commitment to stability-oriented macroeconomic policies;  
Achieving a more balanced pattern of global growth. 
To this end, a timely finalisation of the Basel Committee’s proposals on capital and liquidity 
regulations is critical to strengthen the resilience of the banking sector. 
Initiatives  to  safeguard  financial  stability  are  being  coordinated  at  the  global  level  by  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB). At the European level, a new body, the European Systemic 
Risk  Board,  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the  global  effort  to  enhance  system-wide  risk 
assessment and develop a consistent macro-prudential framework. The establishment of the 
European Systemic Risk Board will give the ECB a more prominent role in macro-prudential 
supervision, quite separate from its monetary policy responsibilities. 
The initiatives undertaken at the global and European level should address the transparency 
and  risk-taking  behaviour  of  financial  institutions,  and  thus  be  consistent  with  general 
principles  such  as:  i)  correct  risk-taking  incentives  and  avoid  moral  hazard;  ii)  minimise 
distortion in the banking sector; iii) ensure a global level-playing field. We must ensure that 
governments  remain  vigilant  on  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  financial  market 
participants accountable for their decisions. In this context, I believe we should avoid creating 
new  incentives  for  moral  hazard  for  instance  by  creating  an  “emergency  fund”  for  banks 
financed or co-financed by taxpayers’ money. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2010
Is the global economy headed for a lost decade? 
Given the challenging reform agenda and the possible obstacles to global growth that I have 
outlined earlier, what are the chances of the global economy heading for a lost decade? 
I feel that there is a widely shared view today that global activity and trade are unlikely to 
exhibit the same strength in the years ahead as in the past decade. Indeed, returning to pre-
crisis economic activity levels is likely to take time. 
On the one hand, some emerging economies, notably in Asia, have not experienced declines 
in output, yet still remain dependent upon advanced economies for future growth. Evidence 
of decoupling is at best mixed and export oriented strategies in those countries still prevail. 
On  the  other  hand,  advanced  economies  may  be  faced  with  the  prospect  of  a  protracted 
period of sluggish growth, given that the financial crisis is likely to have adversely affected 
their growth potential. According to a recent OECD study, financial crises in OECD countries 
are estimated to lower potential output by 1.5 to 2.4 percent on average, while the magnitude 
of this effect might be significantly larger in the case of a severe crisis. If history is any guide, 
we  should  also  take  note  of  IMF  studies  which  have  found  that,  in  advanced  economies, 
recessions associated with financial crises tend to be unusually severe and long lasting, with 
output taking, on average, three years to recover to its pre-crisis peak. Studies by Reinhart 
and Rogoff have provided further evidence in this direction. Similarly, globally synchronised 
recessions are often long and deep and are generally followed by weak recoveries. 
In addition, the risk of global stagflation should not be underestimated. The emergence of a 
multi-speed  recovery,  with  developing  economies  leading  the  way,  might  put  upward 
pressure on commodity prices at a time when labour markets are weak and the recovery still 
fragile. 
Let me also provide some thoughts on a debate that was recently raised by the IMF as to 
whether central banks should err on the lax side and aim at higher inflation rates in order to 
minimise the likelihood of deflation. While I do see the temptation for governments to ask for 
higher inflation in order to monetise the dramatic build-up of public debt, let us not forget that 
it serves to expropriate the income and wealth of the general public to the benefit of those 
who  have  lived  beyond  their  means.  I  can  only  reject  the  idea  of  raising  inflation  rates 
permanently. I would not like to imagine the consequences if, on top of the current financial 
fragilities and in an environment of high public debt, the general public were to lose trust in 
the purchasing power of money. There is no evidence whatsoever to support that deviating 
from price stability and aiming at an inflation rate of 4% would enhance economic prosperity 
or growth. On the contrary, a considerable body of empirical research finds that the Phillips 
curve  has  a  negative  bent  in  the  long  run:  inflation  and  inflation  volatility  penalise  capital 
formation and thus detract from the economy’s growth potential. 
Finally, given the uncertainties enshrouding the post-crisis economic environment, it is worth 
recalling the lessons of Japan’s “lost decade”. One lesson is that the financial system needs 
to be repaired first, before a durable economic recovery can be initiated. Another lesson is 
that reforms should not be delayed. And finally, in the absence of these reforms, the recovery 
may  be  slow,  fragile  and  prone  to  reversals.  If  they  are  not  addressed,  then  problems 
stemming from structural deficiencies are bound to reappear. 
Concluding remarks 
In a nutshell, the past global growth model proved unsustainable. The lessons from this and 
previous  crises  suggest  that  failure  to  address  long  overdue  reform  challenges  promptly 
might result in a “lost decade” for the global economy. These reform challenges include: 
 
 
achieving a balanced global growth trajectory;  
implementing stability-oriented macroeconomic policies;  
BIS Review 26/2010 
 5
carrying out structural reforms;  
putting in place more flexible exchange rate arrangements;  
appropriate financial sector regulation and oversight. 
 
 
 
Only partial progress has been made so far, and the distortions that led to global imbalances 
are still present. If reform challenges are not met, there is a major risk that global economic 
activity will remain subdued, high public debt will become more persistent and unemployment 
will remain high. 
It is therefore crucial to make headway with our reform agenda, while taking care to ensure 
that  our  response  to the  crisis  does  not sow  the  seeds  for  renewed  economic  imbalances 
and financial excesses. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2010
