Andrew Sentance: Prospects for global economic recovery 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England, at the British Chambers of Commerce Annual Convention, London, 18 March 2010. 
 I would like to thank Michael Hume and Abi Hughes for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Over the three-and-a-half years I have spent so far on the Monetary Policy Committee, one 
of the things that has struck me most forcefully is the way in which the UK economy is so 
heavily  influenced  by  international  developments.  The  global  financial  crisis  and  the 
recession which resulted from it have highlighted that very clearly. But even before we felt 
the full force of the crisis in late 2008 and early 2009, UK inflation was pushed up to over 5% 
by a surge in global energy and commodity prices. And looking back over the whole history 
of the MPC since 1997, most of the shocks to UK growth and inflation that the Committee 
has had to worry about have had a significant international or global dimension.1 
These  global  influences  on  the  UK  economy  partly  reflect  our  economic  history.  Flows  of 
overseas  trade,  investment  and  finance  have  played  a  major  part  in  shaping  the 
development  of  the  British  economy,  creating  a  highly  international  business  and  financial 
environment here in the UK. But links to the global economy have also been strengthened by 
globalisation, which has reinforced international linkages across the world economy as the 
global economic system has become more integrated and interdependent.2 
                                                  
1   Key  global  economic  disturbances  over  this  period  include  the  Asian  crisis  (1997/8),  the  bursting  of  the 
“dotcom”  bubble  followed  by  the  impact  of  9/11  and  war  in  Afghanistan  and  Iraq  (2001–3),  and  oil  and 
commodity price volatility in the mid-2000s. 
I  have  discussed  the  impact  of  globalisation  in  more  detail  in  earlier  speeches.  See,  for  example,  
“Monetary  Policy  in  Turbulent  Times”  (21  April  2009)  and  “Energy  and  Environmental  Challenges  in  the  
New  Global  Economy”  (21  September  2009),  both  available  on 
the  Bank  of  England  website: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/speaker.htm#sentance. 
2  
BIS Review 33/2010 
 1
The performance of the global economy is therefore critical to the prospects for UK recovery. 
And  it  is  therefore  very  encouraging  that  the  global  economy  has  bounced  back  strongly 
following the sharp contraction in output and trade in late 2008 and early 2009. As Chart 1 
shows, the growth of world GDP in the second half of last year has returned to around its 
prerecession growth rate and world trade has also bounced back strongly. This recovery in 
the  world  economy  appears  to  have  continued  into  the  early  months  of  this  year.  For 
example,  the  volume  of  international  air  traffic,  which  is  highly  sensitive  to  world  growth 
trends, was 6.4% up on a year ago in January 2010.3 
Despite  the  gloomy  headlines  surrounding  the  release  of  the  latest  UK  trade  figures  last 
week, the UK economy is benefiting from this revival in world trade and activity. The latest 
trade data show that since the second quarter of last year, the volume of UK goods exports, 
excluding oil and erratics, have risen 8.5%.4 This is equivalent to an annual growth rate of 
15%  –  around  three  times  the  trend  rate  of  UK  export  growth  since  the  early  1990s.5  But 
imports have bounced back too, which is why the trade deficit is not shrinking at present. In 
the short-term that should not be a source of concern – rising imports at this stage of the 
cycle are usually a sign of a recovery in demand and a turnaround in the stock cycle. But 
over  time,  we  should  see  rising  exports  helping  to  close  the  UK’s  trade  deficit.  The  very 
positive  responses  on export  orders  and  confidence  shown  by  a  range  of  recent business 
surveys suggest that there is a significant further boost to our international trade performance 
on  the  way  –  supported  by  the  competitiveness  benefits  of  sterling’s  depreciation  since 
mid-2007. 
This  bounceback  in  the  world  economy  is  much  stronger  than  we  might  have  expected  a 
year ago.6 So what has been driving it? And how resilient might it prove to be? 
In my view, three main factors have been driving the recovery over the last year – a bounce 
back  in  business  and  consumer  confidence,  strong  growth  in  Asia  and  other  emerging 
markets, and the impact of policy stimulus. These three factors will also have a key bearing 
on future global economic prospects, and I will discuss them briefly in turn.  
Recovery in confidence 
A  key  factor  which  plunged  the  world  economy  into  recession  was  the  massive  shock  to 
business and consumer confidence across all the major economies of the world when the 
global financial system appeared to be rocking and reeling in late 2008 and early 2009. Since 
then,  confidence  has  gradually  recovered  as  the  financial  system  has  stabilised  and  the 
shock waves from the traumatic events of eighteen months ago have subsided. 
                                                 
3   See  http://www.iata.org/whatwedo/economics/  for  data  compiled  by  the  International  Air  Traffic  Association 
(IATA). 
4   The 8.5% increase relates to the seven-month period Q2 2009 to Nov–Jan 2010. 
5   UK exports of goods and services grew in volume terms by 5.4% per annum from 1992 to 2007; exports of 
goods excluding oil and erratics increased by 4.5% over the same period. 
6   This has been reflected in an upgrading of world growth forecasts for 2010. For example, the IMF forecast of 
GDP growth across the world economy this year has risen from 1.9% in April 2009 to 3.9% in its latest World 
Economic Outlook (January 2010). 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2010
 One indicator of this recovery in confidence is the performance of stock markets, reflecting 
an improving assessment of business prospects. As Chart 2 shows, equity markets in the UK 
and US have recovered by around 60% from their troughs about a year ago. 
Alongside this improvement in financial market confidence, business survey indicators have 
also  been  improving  across  the  global  economy.  Chart  3  shows  a  composite  measure  of 
surveys  of  purchasing  managers  from  the  major  world  economies.  The  very  negative 
readings of around a year ago have given way to responses which are consistent with rising 
activity and the expectation of future growth. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
  3
The  natural  momentum  of  a  recovery  is  that,  as  growth  continues  and  memories  of  the 
recession  fade,  both  consumer  and  business  confidence  will  continue  to  build.  Over  time, 
cutbacks in investment by firms and the deferral of major consumer purchases will begin to 
reverse. As a result, we should expect both consumer and investment demand to gradually 
strengthen as long as new shocks to confidence do not emerge. 
 Growth in Asia and emerging markets 
Alongside this general recovery in confidence, a key engine of the world recovery has been a 
strong  rebound  in  Asia  and  many  other  emerging  market  economies.  As  Chart  4  shows, 
forecasts for growth this year and next in the major Asian markets – and in developing and 
emerging market economies as a whole – are for a continuation of the healthy growth rates 
seen in these economies throughout the past decade. 
There  are  good  grounds  for  believing  that  this  strong  performance  in  Asia  and  other 
emerging markets will continue to be an engine of world economic growth as the recovery 
continues.  First,  there  are  healthy  supply-side  fundamentals  in  the  economies  of  Asia  –  a 
large  potential  labour  supply,  with  the  region  accounting  for  about  half  of  the  world’s 
population,  and  scope  for  continuing  productivity  catch-up  with  the  more  advanced 
economies.  Second,  governments  in  Asia  and  many  other  emerging  market  economies 
remain committed to market-oriented policies and continued integration into the world trading 
system, which has proved an important underpinning for rapid growth  and development in 
the  past.7  Third,  public  and  private  finances  are  generally  in  good  shape.  The  banks  and 
other  financial  institutions  in  the  major  Asian  economies  were  not  directly  affected  by  the 
crisis in the same way as the financial sector in the US and Europe. Government finances 
have also started from a stronger position, which means that fiscal policies can continue to 
support private sector demand and there is much less need for serious fiscal retrenchment 
as a result. 
                                                 
7   See, for example, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy, World Bank, 1993. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2010
These  strong  demand  and  supply-side  fundamentals  help  to  mitigate  concerns  that  the 
impetus from Asia and emerging markets will quickly fizzle out, or that it will be undermined 
by  the  re-emergence  of  global  imbalances.  And  the  increasing  importance  of  Asia  in  the 
world economy means it is now a material influence on the growth of the world economy. As 
Chart  5  shows,  the  seven  largest  economies  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  including  India, 
China, Japan and Australia, now account for close to a quarter of world GDP – not far short 
of the contribution to world GDP from the United States and the European Union. 
Indeed,  there  is  a  worry  that  growth  in  Asia  and  other  emerging  markets  may  prove  too 
strong, fuelling the growth of asset prices and putting upward pressure on global energy and 
commodity  prices.  As  Chart  6  shows  –  the  strong  growth  in  developing  economies  and 
emerging  markets  in  the  mid-2000s  was  associated  with  significant  upward  pressure  and 
volatility of oil, food and metal prices. 
 BIS Review 33/2010 
  5
Recent movements of the oil price have been very sensitive to news about the pace of global 
growth, and commodity prices have picked up more generally as growth has returned to the 
world economy. If the momentum of the global recovery is sustained, there is a risk of further 
upward price pressure from this direction, with a knock-on impact on broader measures of 
inflation around the world. 
The role of economic policy 
The  third  engine  of  growth  in  the  world  economy  at  present  is  the  stimulus  provided  by  a 
range of policy measures. Economic policies have played a role in stabilising world economic 
and financial conditions in three ways: first, by direct interventions to underpin the stability of 
banks  and  the  financial  system  more  generally  in  many  economies;  second,  through 
stimulatory fiscal policies; and third, through supportive monetary policies – very low interest 
rates and direct injections of money to support demand in a low interest rate climate, such as 
the MPC’s policy of “Quantitative Easing”. 
However, the current level of stimulus from monetary and fiscal policy was designed to turn 
around  economies  in  the  wake  of  the  traumas  we  experienced  12–18  months  ago.  As 
confidence  builds  and  private  spending  recovers,  it  is  likely  to  be  appropriate  to  gradually 
withdraw  at  least  some  of  this  policy  support  for  demand,  without  jeopardising  growth 
prospects. 
The need to re-adjust economic policy is most obvious on the fiscal side, where deficits are 
very  high  by  historical  standards,  particularly  in  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan  –  as  Chart  7 
shows.  These  large  deficits  reflect  the  important  role  that  public  spending  and  tax  policies 
have played worldwide in stabilising economic conditions during the recession. But to ensure 
sustainable public finances over the medium-term, these budget gaps will need to be closed 
over the recovery. 
In many countries, policy-makers are rightly concerned about the negative consequences for 
demand of tightening fiscal policy too quickly and abruptly while the recovery is still fragile. 
But a tightening of fiscal policy which is pursued as part of a longer-term, credible and well 
worked-out  plan  is  much  less  likely  to  have  such  negative  demand-side  effects,  and  may 
have offsetting benefits for the supply-side performance of the economy. 
 6 
 BIS Review 33/2010
Progress in putting public finances on a sounder footing can increase confidence and reduce 
uncertainty about future economic prospects, providing a much better climate for a recovery 
in private sector demand. It can also support the supply-side performance of the economy by 
helping  firms  and  individuals  plan  for  the  longer  term.  The  effects  of  deficit  reduction  on 
financial markets should also be positive for private sector demand. Long-term interest rates 
are likely to be lower in a world in which government deficits are being reined in, and the risk 
of destabilising financial market movements is also reduced. Again, this is likely to provide a 
much better climate for private sector investment and long-term spending and planning more 
generally. 
An  additional  mechanism  through  which  the  negative  demand-side  consequences  of  fiscal 
tightening can be offset is by maintaining a relatively loose or relaxed monetary policy. So 
the other arm of withdrawing policy stimulus – a tightening of monetary policy – needs to take 
into account the potential impact of deficit reductions on demand, activity and inflation. What 
this implies for the monetary stance and the level of interest rates will inevitably vary between 
countries and regions as different monetary authorities make their own judgements about the 
pace  and  extent  of  tightening  appropriate  to  their  own  circumstances.  Indeed,  some 
monetary  authorities  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  where  growth  has  been  stronger  and 
inflationary worries greater, have already begun to tighten policy. 
Elsewhere,  in  the  UK  and  many  other  major  economies,  the  current  settings  of  monetary 
policy still reflect the aggressive loosening of policy to counter the severe downside risks of 
the recession a year ago. As these downside risks recede and recovery becomes more firmly 
established, it will be important to reassess how much of that stimulus is still needed to keep 
the economy on a steady course consistent with low inflation. 
Conclusion 
The turnaround in the global economy over the last year has been quite impressive, given 
the  scale  of  the  shocks  from  the  financial  crisis.  That  should  give  us  grounds  for 
encouragement  that  continued  growth  in  the  global  economy  will  provide  a  supportive 
backdrop  for  recovery  in  the  UK  –  even  if  some  of  our  important  markets,  such  as  the 
economies of the euro area, may be turning around more slowly. Indeed, the IMF’s medium-
term forecasts for the world economy over the next five years point to stronger global growth 
than  we  experienced  in  previous  recoveries  from  the  major  recessions  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s, as Chart 8 shows. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
  7
But there are also many uncertainties affecting the current outlook for the global economy 
and  I  would  highlight  four  key  influences  which  will  shape  the  recovery  which  does  unfold 
over the next few years. 
First, I have argued that an improvement in business and consumer confidence has been a 
key ingredient in the economic turnaround so far. And in the absence of further shocks to the 
global  economic  system,  we  should  expect  confidence  among  firms  and  households  to 
continue  to  recover,  supporting  the  growth  of  private  sector  spending  and  helping  the 
recovery to build momentum. But given our experience in recent times, we cannot rule out 
new shocks which could set back recovery. 
Second, a major financial adjustment is taking place in the major economies of Europe and 
the United States as banks adjust their lending behaviour and seek to rebuild their balance 
sheets. This adjustment will continue to dampen the recovery in demand on both sides of the 
Atlantic too some degree, though its impact should lessen as the process of financial repair 
and rebuilding progresses. 
Third,  world  growth  in  the  recovery  so  far  has  been  particularly  strongly  driven  by  the 
performance of Asia and other emerging markets, and their dynamism has to a large extent 
offset  slower  growth  elsewhere.  In  my  view  this  is  not  a  flash  in  the  pan,  but  a  structural 
feature of the world economy that we are now living in, and we should expect a continuing 
impetus to global growth from this direction. However, as we saw in the mid-2000s, there is 
also  the  associated  risk  of  upward  pressure  on  inflation  from  global  energy  and  other 
commodity prices, if the momentum of world growth becomes too strong. 
Fourth,  the  high  degree  of  stimulus  provided  by  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  to  combat  the 
recession  will  need  to  be  withdrawn  over  a  period  of  time.  Returning  budget  deficits  to  a 
more sustainable level will require a prolonged tightening of fiscal policy in many countries, 
including the UK. Monetary policy can provide an offset by continuing to support the growth 
of  private  spending  –  though  the  appropriate  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  will  need  to  be 
continually reassessed in the light of the progress of the recovery at home and abroad and 
its impact on inflationary pressures. 
Given the turbulence we have seen in the major economies of the world over the last two 
years, it is very natural to worry about setbacks to the recovery, both in the UK and overseas. 
In the past, economic recoveries have not been smooth and linear. So we should expect to 
see some variability in growth rates, both at home and abroad, as this recovery develops. 
However, looking through this data volatility, there are also good grounds for expecting the 
growth of the world economy to continue to provide a healthy support to the UK’s economic 
recovery over the years ahead. And, over time, that is likely to bring a different set of policy 
challenges to the ones we have been facing over the course of the recession. 
8 
 BIS Review 33/2010
