Durmuş Yılmaz: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the press conference for the presentation of the Inflation Report, Ankara, 26 January 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press, 
Welcome to the press conference held to convey the main messages of the January 2010 
Inflation  Report,  one  of  the  most  important  communication  tools  of  the  inflation-targeting 
regime of the Central Bank. 
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  framework  addressed  in  monetary  policy 
decisions, elaborates global and domestic macroeconomic developments and presents the 
medium-term  inflation  forecasts,  which  have  been  revised  in  view  of  previous  quarter 
developments, along with the monetary policy stance. 
Before moving on to the Central Bank’s assessments on the inflation outlook and economic 
activity,  which  I  will  share  with  you  in  detail  shortly,  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  current 
global  conditions.  The  global  crisis,  which  erupted  in  developed  markets  and  then  spread 
across  the  world  during  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  has  continued  to  affect  the  economic 
outlook,  albeit  less  forcefully,  during  the  last  quarter  of  2009.  During  this  period,  data 
releases regarding the global financial system and economic activity displayed an ongoing 
recovery  (Figure  1).  However,  budget  deficits  –  especially  in  developed  economies  – 
continue  to  rise,  problems  across  credit  markets  linger,  and  employment  remains  in  a 
precarious  state,  all  suggesting  that  it  would  take  a  long  time  for  the  global  economy  to 
completely recover (Figure 2). Moreover, ongoing uncertainties regarding the exit strategies 
from unconventional fiscal and monetary stimulus continue to pose risks on the durability of 
the recovery process. 
 
BIS Review 31/2010 
  1
1. 
Inflation developments 
Distinguished Members of the Press,  
During  the  final  quarter  of  2009,  factors  affecting  inflation  evolved  in  line  with  the  outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report. Both domestic and external demand displayed a 
gradual  recovery,  yet  resource  utilization  remained  at  low  levels.  However,  an  unexpected 
surge in unprocessed food prices caused the inflation rate to realize one-percentage point 
higher than forecasted in the October Inflation Report. In other words, the deviation from the 
end-2009  inflation  forecast  presented  in  the  October  Inflation  Report  could  be  explained 
almost entirely by the increase in unprocessed food prices. Consequently, in the last quarter 
of  2009,  annual  inflation  climbed  to  6.53  percent,  remaining  within  the  uncertainty  band, 
albeit slightly below the target set (Figure 3). 
 
  
While  the  contribution  of  food  and  energy  items  to  annual  inflation  increased  in  the  last 
quarter  of  2009,  no  significant  change  was  observed  in  the  contribution  of  the  categories 
excluding food and energy (Figure 4). Meanwhile, rising oil and other commodity prices as 
well  as  the  withdrawal  of  tax  cuts  within  the  fiscal  stimulus  package  were  other  factors 
leading  to  an  increase  in  annual  headline  inflation  in  this  period.  Although  these 
developments caused the prices of core goods to increase more in the fourth quarter than in 
previous  years,  the  price  hikes  adjusted  for  tax  effects  remained  below  those  of  previous 
years (Figure 5). 
 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2010
 
Processed  food  prices  followed  a course  in  line  with  the  outlook  presented  in  the October 
Inflation  Report,  whereas  unprocessed  food  prices  surged  more  than  expected  (Figure  6). 
Thus,  food  prices,  which  increased  due  to  processed  food  prices  in  2008,  maintained  an 
upward  trend  in  2009  due  to  the  surge  in  unprocessed  food  prices.  As  I  have  already 
mentioned, these high-rated increases in unprocessed food prices explain substantially both 
the rise in inflation in the last quarter and the deviation from the end-2009 inflation forecast.  
 
  
In Turkey, annual inflation in unprocessed food prices displays remarkable fluctuations and 
this creates a significant forecast uncertainty. To illustrate this, following the lowest rate of 
third quarter change of the past five years in 2009, this group also displayed the highest rate 
of  increase  over  the  last  six  years  due  to  price  hikes  in  fruits-vegetables  and  meat  in  the 
fourth  quarter  of  2009  (Figure  7).  Here,  I  would  like  to  remind  that,  in  the  third  chapter  of 
Inflation  Report  that  will  be  posted on  our  website  shortly you  can  find  the  Central  Bank’s 
 BIS Review 31/2010 
 3
detailed assessments regarding volatility in unprocessed food inflation, including comparative 
analyses between Turkey and other countries.  
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
Let me underline that the rise in annual inflation observed in the last quarter of 2009 can be 
attributed to several temporary factors, rather than a deterioration in the general price setting 
behavior. In fact, core inflation indicators in the last quarter pointed to an underlying inflation 
trend of around 4 to 5 percent and remained consistent with medium-term targets. Although 
annual  inflation  in  core  measures  increased  modestly  with  the  expiry  of  tax  incentives  on 
durable goods, seasonally and tax adjusted data indicate that the underlying trend of inflation 
did not deteriorate (Figure 8). Furthermore, the inflation diffusion index, calculated by using 
the difference between the share of items with increasing prices and the share of items with 
falling  prices  in  the  CPI,  hovered  around  historically  low  levels  (Figure  9).  These 
observations indicate that the increase in inflation in the last quarter of 2009 is mainly due to 
temporary  developments,  and  to  factors  beyond  the  immediate  control  of  monetary  policy, 
rather than the main components of inflation.  
 
 
Parallel to these developments, inflation expectations for 12 months ahead that followed a 
downward course throughout the year increased slightly in the last quarter; whereas inflation 
expectations  for  24  months  ahead  remained  relatively  flat  (Figure  10).  While  expectations 
displayed a modest increase in January on the back of higher-than-expected inflation due to 
the surge in food prices in the last quarter of 2009 and on the back of tax adjustments that 
started to be implemented in early January, it is observed that the change in expectations 
remained more limited as maturities extended (Figure 11).  
 
 4 
 BIS Review 31/2010
 
In  the  last  quarter  of  2009,  inflation  displayed  an  upward  trend  on  a  global  basis  as  well. 
Inflation rates that had plummeted all over the world due to downward pressures arising from 
demand  and  cost  conditions  since  the  second  half  of  2008,  started  to  trend  up  in  August 
2009, particularly due to the low base of 2008 in commodity prices (Figure 12 and 13).  
 
 Monetary policy response 
2. 
After  commenting  briefly  on  inflation  developments,  I  would  now  like  to  cover  the  policies 
pursued by the Central Bank during the last quarter.  
 BIS Review 31/2010 
 5
Anticipating that inflation would decrease sharply as of the last quarter of 2008, the Central 
Bank  of  Turkey  (CBT)  focused  on  alleviating  the  potentially  harsh  impact  of  the  global 
financial crisis on the domestic economy. In this respect, the CBT has delivered sizeable cuts 
in  policy  rates,  while  providing  liquidity  support  to  facilitate  the  smooth  operation  of  credit 
markets.  The  cumulative  interest  rate  cuts  between  November  2008  and  November  2009 
reached 1,025 basis points, bringing Turkey’s policy rate closer to the average of emerging 
markets implementing inflation targeting regimes (Figure 14 and 15). 
 
  
Taking  into  account  the  favorable  developments  in  the  credit  markets  and  the  moderate 
recovery  in  economic  activity  in  the  last  quarter  of  2009,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC) slowed the pace of rate cuts, and finally decided to keep rates unchanged at the last 
two meetings. However, it was also noted that lingering problems across the global economy 
were  still  a  concern  and  that  uncertainties  regarding  the  strength  and  durability  of  the 
recovery remain. Considering these factors, the MPC reiterated that it would be necessary to 
keep policy rates at low levels for a long period of time.  
At  its  January  meeting,  the  MPC  indicated  that  tax  adjustments  and  base  effects  would 
cause  inflation  to  rise  significantly  in  the  first  two  months  of  2010  and  afterwards  remain 
above  the  target  for  some  time.  Noting  that  the  underlying  trend  implied  by  core  inflation 
indicators  would  remain  at  levels  consistent  with  medium-term  targets,  the  Committee 
emphasized  that,  given  the  levels  of  resource  utilization,  the  state  of  labor  markets,  and 
global economic conditions, general pricing behavior would not be affected adversely by the 
temporary rise in inflation, and therefore, inflation would display a declining trend once the 
transitory factors taper off. 
Market  yields  have  been  broadly  shaped  by  the  monetary  policy  stance  during  the  last 
quarter of 2009. This is particularly important as it demonstrates the increased effectiveness 
of monetary policy. Market interest rates slightly increased in October with rising perceptions 
that the policy rate cut cycle is coming to an end. However, continuing improvement in risk 
perceptions towards the end of the year recently paved the way for market interest rates to 
once again ease to historically low levels (Figure 16). 
 
6 
 BIS Review 31/2010
 
During the crisis, real market interest rates went down progressively on the back of rate cuts 
and  declined  to  all  time  lows.  Although  the  limited  increase  in  market  interest  rates 
reverberated on medium-term real interest rates in the last quarter of the year, real interest 
rates currently hover around historically low levels (Figure 17). Likewise, tightness in credit 
markets continues to ease on account of monetary policy practices and reduced credit risk 
perceptions (Figure 18). 
 
  BIS Review 31/2010 
  7
Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3.  
Distinguished Members of the Press, Distinguished Guests, 
After summarizing inflation and monetary policy developments in the final quarter of 2009, in 
this part of my speech, I would like to share with you the evaluation of the inflation outlook 
and  monetary  policy  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  in  the  upcoming  period.  Firstly,  I  will 
briefly describe the economic framework underlying these forecasts. Then, I will outline the 
Central Bank’s inflation forecasts presented in the Inflation Report that will be posted on our 
website shortly. 
In the last quarter of 2009, perceptions grew that the crisis was over and recovery started, 
which  helped  the  upward  tendency  in  global  risk  appetite  to  continue.  This  development, 
coupled with the ample and low-cost liquidity injected to the market in line with expansionary 
fiscal and monetary policies on a worldwide scale, underpinned optimism in global financial 
markets and led to continued demand for risky assets. Accordingly, risk premium indicators 
in most developing countries remained lower than pre-crisis levels (Figure 19).  
 
 
As you will recall, on several occasions we have mentioned that Turkey’s sovereign credit 
rating in the post-crisis period was not commensurate with the actual credit risk level in the 
market. Actually, in the last quarter of the year, consistent with our discourse and projections, 
the  medium  and  long-term  forecasts  for  Turkey  have  been  revised  to  positive;  several 
investment  institutions  have  increased  Turkey’s  share  in  their  portfolio,  and,  more 
importantly,  the  leading  credit  rating  agencies  have  upgraded  Turkey’s  sovereign  rating 
(Figure 20).  
 
 8 
 BIS Review 31/2010
 
The improvement in global risk perceptions in the last quarter led to the appreciation of local 
currencies of many developing countries. A similar trend was observed in Turkey too and the 
relatively stable course of the Turkish lira continued in the last quarter (Figure 21).  
 
   
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
The  third  quarter  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  release  was  in  line  with  the  outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report. While the impact of the fiscal stimulus package on 
domestic demand weakened, the gradual recovery in external demand continued. Within this 
framework, the GDP decreased by 3.3 percent in the third quarter of 2009 compared to the 
same quarter last year (Figure 22). In seasonally adjusted terms, the quarterly upward trend 
continued in the third quarter, albeit slower compared to the second quarter during which the 
impact of the fiscal stimulus package was substantial (Figure 23).  
 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 9
 
On  the  spending  side,  inventory  change  became  the  demand  component  that  made  the 
largest  contribution  to  quarterly  growth  (Figure  24).  Nevertheless,  private  consumption 
demand  slowed  down  slightly  after  the  tax  cuts  were  phased  out  (Figure  25).  Meanwhile, 
although private sector investments displayed a quarterly rise after a long time, investment 
expenditures are not expected to display a significant acceleration in the short term given the 
current uncertainty about demand and low capacity utilization rates, and it is obvious that it 
would take some time for investments to return to the pre-crisis level.  
 
  
Data pertaining to the last quarter of 2009 indicate that the moderate recovery in aggregate 
demand  continues  (Figure  26).  Although  inventory  de-stocking,  which  started  with  the 
sudden contraction in demand in the last quarter of 2008 and remained strong throughout the 
first  half  of  2009,  grew  significantly  weaker,  demand  for  consumer  goods  continued  to 
support disinflation (Figure 27).  
 
 10 
 BIS Review 31/2010
  
The significant decline in external demand has been one of the main factors driving the sharp 
contraction in economic activity during the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. 
As inventory de-stocking decelerated in the third quarter of 2009, the pick-up in aggregate 
demand led to acceleration in demand for imported goods and the contribution of net exports 
to quarterly growth became negative (Figure 24). External demand conditions will continue to 
play a critical role regarding the pace of the recovery in economic activity in the forthcoming 
period  as  well.  As  of  December,  no  significant  upward  revision  in  growth  forecasts  for 
developed countries – as compared to the forecasts in October Inflation Report – is deemed 
necessary.  Within  this  framework,  even  if  the  recently  issued  data  affirm  that  moderate 
recovery in exports continues, given the current level of exports and the expected pace of 
global economic recovery, external demand is not expected to reach its pre-crisis levels for a 
long period of time (Figure 28). 
 
 
The  weak  course  of  external  demand  would  restrain  economic  activity  and  employment 
growth  through  its  impact  on  industrial  production.  Indicators  such  as  capacity  utilization 
rates and per capita hours worked across industries suggest that resource utilization remains 
low throughout the economy. Nevertheless, indicators of the labor market started to recover 
in the third quarter of 2009. Although the upward trend in unemployment rates reversed in 
 BIS Review 31/2010 
 11
seasonally  adjusted  terms,  the  unemployment  rate  is  still  quite  high  compared  to  the  pre-
crisis  level  (Figure  29).  The  mentioned  recovery  in  unemployment  rates  as  of  the  third 
quarter  of  2009  was  mainly  driven  by  the  pick-up  in  non-farm  employment  (Figure  30). 
Assuming that the ample slack would continue to be a drag on investment and employment, 
recent  signs  of  improvement  in  employment  data  is  not  expected  to  turn  into  a  significant 
recovery, suggesting that the unemployment rate will likely remain elevated for an extended 
period.  Therefore,  unit  labor  costs  and  domestic  demand  would  continue  to  support 
disinflation. 
 
 Distinguished Guests, 
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier  in  my  speech,  the  tightness  in  credit  conditions  have  been 
moderating  since  the  publication  of  the  July  Inflation  Report,  owing  to  the  improvement  in 
global liquidity conditions and risk perceptions. Easing financial conditions and declining loan 
rates  have  been  strengthening  the  expansionary  impact  of  monetary  policy.  The  October 
Inflation Report had stated that the credit channel would begin to support domestic economic 
activity during the fourth quarter of the year. In fact, credit demand started to recover in this 
period, especially with commercial loans picking up significantly. However, the effectiveness 
of  the  credit  channel  in  supporting  economic  activity  is  still  partly  restrained  owing  to  the 
ongoing tightness in lending standards for small- and medium-sized enterprises.  
 
12 
  BIS Review 31/2010
It  is  expected  that  the  credit  channel  would  continue  to  support  domestic  activity,  and  the 
impact  of  cumulative  rate  cuts  would  become  more  prevalent  over  the  medium  term. 
However, the rising domestic borrowing requirement of the public sector, ongoing problems 
in the global economy, and elevated levels of unemployment would continue to restrain credit 
expansion.  
Overall,  recent  data  releases  have  shown  that  economic  activity  is  on  a  gradual  recovery 
path. Even if the gradual recovery in economic activity is expected to continue in the period 
ahead,  resource  utilization  is  anticipated  to  remain  below  the  long-term  average  for  some 
time. In this context, our medium-term forecasts suggest that the output gap – albeit closing 
faster than envisaged in the October Report – will remain disinflationary until the beginning of 
2012.  
Distinguished Members of the Press,  
Although the course of economic activity has been broadly in line with the outlook presented 
in  the  October  Inflation  Report,  there  have  been  some  developments  that  necessitated  an 
upward  revision  in  short-term  inflation  forecasts.  As  I  believe  that  interpreting  these 
developments  accurately  is  very  important,  I  would  like  to  further  elaborate  on  these 
developments. 
The  tax  measures  implemented  in  January  on  fuel,  alcohol,  and  tobacco  products,  to 
increase budget revenues, will add around 1.5 percentage points to 2010 consumer inflation. 
Forecasts presented in the October Inflation Report assumed that prices of these products 
would increase in line with target inflation in 2010, and thus the total contribution of these 
items  was  envisaged  to  be  0.5  percentage  points.  Accordingly,  tax  measures  in  January 
have shifted the inflation forecast path by around 1 percentage point through 2010. I would 
like  to  underline  that  this  impact  will  be  seen  immediately  in  January  2010  and  disappear 
following January 2011. 
The rise in oil prices was another factor that necessitated an upward revision in our short-
term  inflation  forecasts.  Commodity  prices  continued  along  a  rising  trend  during  the  last 
quarter  of  2009,  with  the  improving  perception  regarding  the  global  economic  recovery 
(Figure 32). Accordingly, oil prices hovered above our assumption of 70 USD per barrel for 
the fourth quarter (Figure 33). Therefore, oil price assumptions stated in the previous Report 
have been revised in line with futures prices registered during the first half of January. In this 
context, the previous assumption of oil prices have been revised up from 75 USD per barrel 
to 80 USD for 2010, and from 80 USD to 85 USD for 2011 and thereafter (Table 1). This 
revision has added around 0.2 percentage points to the 2010 inflation forecasts. Moreover, in 
line with oil prices, imported input prices are also assumed to increase gradually throughout 
the forecast horizon in response to the gradual recovery in the world economy. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 13
 
The October Inflation Report envisaged annual food inflation to be 5.8 percent for 2009 and 
6 percent  for  the  years  to  follow.  However,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier  in  my  speech, 
unprocessed food prices exceeded our forecasts. Therefore, we revised our assumptions for 
food inflation up from 6 percent to 7 percent for end-2010 (Table 1) and this added around 
0.3  percentage  points  to  the  2010  inflation  forecast.  Similarly,  assumptions  for  2011  food 
inflation have been raised to 6.5 percent from 6 percent. We maintain our 6 percent annual 
food inflation forecast for subsequent years.  
 
  
Finally,  regarding  fiscal  policy,  it  is  assumed  that  the  consistent  framework  outlined  in  the 
Medium Term Program (MTP) will be implemented and further enhanced by institutional and 
structural measures. In other words, it is assumed that no public price/tax adjustments would 
 14 
 BIS Review 31/2010
be made to lead to unpredictable volatilities in inflation and administered prices would be set 
in line with inflation targets over the next three years. Moreover, it is assumed that the fiscal 
stance  will  remain  expansionary  –  but  less  so  than  in  2009  –  throughout  2010,  and 
subsequently fiscal tightening would be gradually adopted starting from 2011. In this respect, 
it is envisaged that the rising debt-to-GDP ratios would reverse their course steadily starting 
from 2011, and hence the risk premium would not display any significant changes throughout 
the forecast horizon. 
Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press,  
Against this background, assuming policy rates are kept constant for a long period followed 
by limited rises thereafter, with policy rates staying at single digits throughout the three-year 
forecast  horizon,  the  medium-term  forecasts  suggest  that,  with  70  percent  probability, 
inflation will be between 5.5 and 8.3 percent with a mid-point of 6.9 percent at end-2010; and 
between  3.4  and  7.0  percent  with  a  mid-point  of  5.2  percent  by  the  end  of  2011. 
Furthermore, inflation is expected to decline to 4.9 percent by the end of 2012 (Figure 34). 
 
  
Overall, there has not been any major change in medium-term forecasts and the monetary 
policy stance, since economic activity has evolved in line with the outlook presented in the 
October  Inflation  Report.  However,  all  the  main  variables  affecting  the  short-term  forecast 
have  been  subject  to  an  upward  revision.  In  this  respect,  while  short-term  forecasts  were 
revised  upwards  significantly,  there  has  been  no  major  change  regarding  medium-term 
forecasts. 
The revised forecasts indicate that there will be no significant upside pressures on inflation, 
even if policy rates remain at low levels for a long period. However, as depicted in the slide, 
inflation is likely to display a significant increase over the next two months due to tax hikes 
and strong base effects (Figure 34). Moreover, the annual inflation rate may post a limited 
increase  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  due  to  the  low  base  effect  generated  by  the 
Consumer Price Index in the first half of 2009, when the downside effects of the global crisis 
on prices became more pronounced. Accordingly, even if inflation remains above the target 
for  some  time,  parallel  to  the  gradual  phasing  out  impact  of  the  tax  hikes,  inflation  is 
expected to trend downwards, stabilizing at around 5 percent over the medium term. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 15
As you may have noticed, I have frequently referred to the base effect today. The reason for 
this is that the base effect will influence the course of annual inflation throughout 2010 to a 
large extent. You will find our detailed explanatory evaluations regarding the base effect and 
its effects on 2010 inflation outlook in a box under the third chapter of the Inflation Report to 
be  posted  on  our  website  shortly.  I  strongly  recommend  that  you  read  these  evaluations 
carefully.  
The  fact  that  inflation  is  expected  to  stay  at  elevated  levels  for  some  time  due  to  tax 
adjustments and strong base effects highlights the importance of expectations management. 
In  this  respect,  with  the  awareness  of  these  temporary  factors,  it  is  critical  that  economic 
agents  focus  on  the  medium-term  inflation  trend,  and  therefore,  take  inflation  targets  as  a 
benchmark for their pricing plans and contracts. 
I would like to emphasize once more that any new data or information regarding the inflation 
outlook  may  lead  to  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Therefore,  assumptions 
regarding future policy rates underlying the inflation forecast should not be perceived as a 
commitment on behalf of the CBT. 
Risks 
4. 
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
In  the  last  part  of  my  presentation,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  risks  with  respect  to  the 
inflation  outlook  in  the  upcoming  period  and  provide  some  information  pertaining  to  the 
probable monetary policy strategy should these risks materialize. 
The  outlook  for  the  domestic  economy  and  the  risks  thereto  has  been  largely  shaped  by 
global developments in line with the intensification of the global crisis as of the last quarter of 
2008.  Given  the  important  role  of  trade  and  global  financial  channels  in  the  contraction  of 
domestic economic activity during 2009, we believe that global developments would continue 
to be the main determinant of the outlook for domestic activity and inflation in the forthcoming 
period. Accordingly, in this part of my speech, I will cover both the possible trends of global 
and  domestic  economic  activity,  as  well  as  their  impact  on  the  domestic  inflation  outlook 
jointly. 
Rising  budget  deficits  and  ongoing  problems  in  credit  and  real  estate  markets  continue  to 
pose  downside  risks  for  global  activity,  especially  for  developed  economies.  Although  the 
probability of another disruption in global economic activity has been decreasing, it is still an 
important source of downside risk on domestic economic activity and inflation. Should global 
conditions  deteriorate  again,  and  consequently  delay  domestic  recovery,  the  CBT  would 
consider further monetary easing. 
Despite the prevailing downside risks on global and domestic economic activity, upside risks 
have  also  been  emerging  since  the  second  half  of  2009.  The  extent  of  recovery  in  global 
economic  activity  in  the  second  half  of  2009  reminds  us  of  some  of  the  upside  risks  in 
economic activity as well. Moreover, it should be noted that the impact of the unprecedented 
expansionary  policy  measures  that  have  been  taken  since  the  last  quarter  of  2008  would 
become  visible  with  a  lag.  Similarly,  it  should  be  considered  that  the  1025  basis  points  of 
cumulative easing in CBT policy rates between November 2008 and November 2009 would 
also be fully conveyed with a lag. In this respect, should the recovery in domestic economic 
activity turn out to be faster than expected, the limited monetary policy tightening implied in 
the baseline scenario could be implemented earlier than envisaged. 
The fact that inflation will rise in the forthcoming period due to base effects and public price 
adjustments,  poses  an  important  risk  factor  through  its  potential  impact  on  inflation 
expectations. Several adverse factors such as food and oil price increases, base effects and 
administered  price  hikes  have  brought  about  upward  movements  in  inflation  since  the  last 
quarter  of  2009.  Although  these  factors  are  temporary,  they  are  likely  to  cause  headline 
16 
 BIS Review 31/2010
inflation  to  stay  at  elevated  levels  for  some  time.  It  is  crucial  that  economic  agents  fully 
understand  the  temporary  nature  of  these  developments  while  forming  their  medium-  and 
longer-term expectations. Under the assumption that resource utilization would remain low, 
labor  market  conditions  would  have  an  adverse  impact  on  consumption  expenditure,  and 
fiscal policy would generate a gradual depressing effect on the economy, these temporary 
factors  as  well  as  other  one-time  cost  push  pressures  would  not  lead  to  a  significant 
deterioration in general  pricing behavior. Currently, the annual rate of increase of services 
prices  and  core  inflation  are  consistent  with  medium-term  inflation  targets,  and  no  serious 
risk  of  pass-through  is  observed.  Therefore,  it  is  foreseen  that  policy  rates  would  be 
maintained at low levels for a long period. However, I would like to underline that should any 
unforeseen developments lead to a deterioration in general price setting behavior, the CBT 
will  not  hesitate  to  tighten  monetary  policy  sooner  than  envisioned  under  the  baseline 
scenario drawn up in this Report. 
Increasing  budget  deficits  on  a  worldwide  scale,  especially  in  developed  economies, 
continue  to  pose  upside  risks  on  inflation  expectations  and  thus  on  longer  term  global 
interest rates. Countries with relatively sounder banking systems and prudent fiscal policies 
would be more resilient against these risks. In this respect, the CBT will continue to monitor 
fiscal  policy  developments  closely  while  formulating  monetary  policy.  Should  the  goals  set 
out  in  the  Medium  Term  Program  be  implemented  through  institutional  and  structural 
measures, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy 
rates at single digits throughout the forecast horizon. 
The probable course of oil and other commodity prices still remains as another important risk 
factor. Short-term ample liquidity driven by countercyclical policies that are adopted by public 
authorities on a global scale can give way to speculative movements in commodity prices. 
Fast growth trends in countries like China and India, and the rising share of these economies 
in global commodity demand, exacerbate these speculative motives. Therefore, oil and other 
commodity  prices  may  continue  to  rise,  even  in  a  scenario  of  a  gradual  global  economic 
recovery. At this point, it is worth noting that weak domestic demand conditions would limit 
the pass-through stemming from upside cost-push shocks. Therefore, the CBT will not react 
to  the  first  round  effects  of  short-term  volatility  in  commodity  prices,  especially  when 
domestic  resource  utilization  remains  at  depressed  levels.  However,  if  an  uptrend  in 
commodity  prices  coincides  with  a  strong  and  durable  rebound  in  global  economic  activity 
that would in turn have adverse effects on inflation expectations, then the CBT will tighten 
monetary policy appropriately to keep inflation in line with medium-term inflation targets. 
Since  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  CBT,  without  endangering  its  main  objective  of  price 
stability,  has  focused  on  containing  the  adverse  effects  of  the  global  crisis  on  domestic 
economy, and this task has to a large extent been achieved. Monetary policy will continue to 
focus  on  permanent  price  stability  in  the  period  ahead.  Strengthening  the  commitment  to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda would support the relative improvement in 
Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In this respect, 
before  concluding  my  remarks, 
timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the  Medium Term Program  and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of the utmost importance. Thank you for 
your attention. 
to  underline  once  more 
I  would 
that 
like 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 17
