Budi Mulya: The need to strengthen Indonesian financial market  
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  Japan 
International  Cooperation  Agency’s  (JICA)  seminar  on  “The  Challenge  in  Developing 
Indonesia’s Financial Market”, Jakarta, 11 December 2009. 
 Distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is such a great pleasure to join in today’s seminar, which will address Indonesia’s financial 
market  and  its  further  development.  This  particular  topic,  I  believe,  become  more  relevant 
and  crucial  for  Indonesian  economy.  In  the  last  couple  of  decades,  we  all  have  been 
witnessing  on  the  role  of  the  financial  market  in  many  economies.  Yet,  within  the  last  two 
years, we also have observed on how financial market  malfunction has severely impacted 
the real economy, a very hard lesson to learn. Many aspects of this phenomenon have been 
written and discussed, both from policy makers’ perspective as well as analysts’. All of these 
analyses are intended to search for the most possible cause of the crisis, in order to prevent 
a repeating occurrence in the future. 
On that respect, I would like to highlight one important aspect from the most recent global 
financial turmoil, as background of my speech today and as one alternative reference of the 
approach in discussing the future development of Indonesia’s financial market, that most fit 
with Indonesian economic characteristic.  
In general, if we look back to the mid 2007, it can be reasonably seen that the crisis emerged 
in the debt market, particularly with regard to its derivative product, which reached its peak in 
September  2008  when  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed.  The  financial  market  transaction  and 
instrument development moved too far, beyond the need to serve the economic financing in 
a healthy way. The value of financial market instruments have been much higher, compared 
to their fundamentals value and their inherent risk. This is also closely related to the fact that 
the financial institution involved has also not been supported by adequate resource buffer to 
absorb potential capital loss. They tended to operate with very high leverage, depending their 
funding  from  money  market,  as  well  as  debt  market.  On  this  regard,  the  liquidity  of  those 
markets is a crucial key, since in high leverage circumstance, counterparty risk could easily 
jump.  As  a  consequence,  when  there  is  a  serious  disruption  in  money  market,  as  we 
observed  during  financial  crisis,  funding  becomes more  difficult  for  those  institutions.  They 
had to undertake force sale of their assets, experienced big losses, and some of them even 
collapsed or had to be bailed-out by the government. 
Some  argued  that  those  behaviors  were  closely  related,  or  as  consequences  of  the  low 
interest  rate  policy,  particularly  in  early  2000s,  as  well  as  the  relatively  loose  financial 
institution  regulation  and  supervision  by  authorities  in  major  countries.  Now,  we  are  also 
again witnessing low interest rate environment in major countries, as one of the main parts of 
the crisis policy respond. However, there is now an increasing discussion on how to enhance 
the effectiveness of the financial regulation and supervision, to prevent, that what happened 
in the past will not be repeated. In addition, there is also an increasing attention, put in the 
risk taking behaviors of financial market players, such as we find in the Leaders’ Statement 
of  the  G20  Summit  in  Pittsburgh  last  September.  This  risk  taking  behavior  is  believed, 
affecting monetary policy transmission through their significant distortion in financial stability. 
Hence,  in  turn  it  reduces  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  This  issue,  known  as  risk 
taking channel, is also relevant to today’s discussion, but I will not discuss further this aspect 
in my speech this morning. 
With the above background, I would like to emphasize my speech on the liquidity aspect of 
the banking and money market, as well as in the financial market. This liquidity aspect, along 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
with the availability of related “infrastructure” is a crucial foundation, to ensure the soundness 
of financial institutions and to develop healthy financial market. 
The Indonesian banking, money market and financial market 
In contrast to those observed in major financial market, the Indonesian financial market can 
be  considered  as  still  in  an  early  stage  of  its  development,  despite  significant  progresses 
achieved in the last couple of years. Also, from the type of transaction and instrument variety, 
as  well  as  from  their  funding  type  of  financial  institution,  the  Indonesian  financial  market 
could  be  viewed  as  too  traditional  or  too  conventional.  Yet,  these  facts  became  such  a 
“blessing  in  disguise”  and  help  sheltered  the  domestic  financial  market  and  the  economy 
from the adverse impact of the recent global crisis.  
Before I elaborate on the aspects that need to be improved in our domestic financial market, 
I would like to briefly discuss the characteristics of the Indonesian banking, money market 
and financial market as a background. 
Banking  
The Indonesia’s banking industry is actually operating in a new stage in post 1997/98 crisis 
and  1999  banks  recapitalization  era,  as  compared  to  the  previous  period.  There  are  two 
factors that characterized the current Indonesian banking sector in general.  
First, they are operating in structural excess liquidity in the inter-bank money market. In this 
regard, I refer the term liquidity as central bank’s reserve money. This is also reflected in the 
volume  of  Bank  Indonesia’s  open  market  operation  –  banks’  liquidity  that  Bank  Indonesia 
absorb, as part of Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy implementation to maintain short-term 
money market (overnight PUAB) stable around BI Rate. This is cash alike in banks’ assets. 
This is actually a rather common phenomenon in countries that experienced financial crisis 
and had to bail-out the financial industry. For example, in the US, the central bank balance 
sheet has ballooned from around USD 800 billion before crises into around USD 2.2 trillion 
recently. This data also reflected in the US commercial banks or other financial institutions’ 
placement – usually in overnight basis as excess reserve and now remunerated at 25 bps – 
in  the  Federal  Reserve.  Thus,  in  essence  similar  to  bank  placement  in  Bank  Indonesia’s 
OMO instrument (SBIs. FASBI, FTK). 
The  situation  I  just  described  was  needed  to  facilitate  the  domestic  banking  sector 
consolidation process in the post 1997/98 crisis. However, if this continue to exist too long, 
will lead to a mislead incentives. It will not encourage banks to have a more efficient asset 
and liabilities management. Also, banks will tend to be less aware to liquidity risk, as there 
will be a perception that there will always be a huge supply of liquidity in inter-bank money 
market. This can be seen during the peak of global financial turmoil at the end quarter of last 
year,  where  our  domestic  money  market  also  experienced  a  significant  “perception”  of 
tightening  liquidity,  despite  that  there  was  a  large  number  of  liquidity  stock  in  the  money 
market. There was more than Rp. 150 trillion of banks’ cash, placed into Bank Indonesia’s 
OMO  instruments.  Yet,  the  inter-bank  money  market  indicators  showed  that  the  flow  of 
liquidity in inter-bank money market has squeezed. The volume of inter-bank money market 
has declined from its normal level of around Rp. 10 trillion to below Rp. 5 trillion. The interest 
rate spread has also widened significantly. The JIBOR 1 month spread over BI Rate jumped 
from its normal level of around 50 bps to around 220 bps. Further, there was also indication 
of  unhealthy  competition  among  banks,  to  maintain  third  party’s  fund  by  offering  higher 
deposit rate. 
Second, there is large number of government bonds (SUN) in banks’ balance sheet, which 
mostly originated from banks’ recapitalization in 1999. Recently, banks hold around 50% of 
outstanding  SUN  of  Rp.  570  trillion.  This  type  of  asset  is  risk  free  hence  no  bad  debt 
provision  is  needed.  It  helps  banks  in  maintaining  a  strong  capital,  but  with  result  a  lower 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
yield compare to other earning assets. However, on the other side, this result in banks being 
more  expose  into  market  risk,  as  has  been  showed  when  the  SUN  prices  (IDMA  Index) 
dropped to their lowest level of 67.11 in 29 October 2008. Under excess liquidity condition, 
banks’  attention  on  the  liquidness  of  this  type  of  assets  is  relatively  low.  In  this  regards,  I 
refer liquidity as an easiness of SUN to be traded, or exchange into cash without significantly 
impact their price. Banks tend to practically borrow in unsecured money market, rather than 
undertake repo transaction to serve their short-term liquidity need. This could be seen, that 
despite  Bank  Indonesia  has  actually  facilitated  market  participants  to  establish  a  standard 
repo agreement (MRA) since June 2005 as one infrastructure to increase the liquidity of SUN 
market, but in reality their respond is quite marginal. 
Money market and financial market 
The  Indonesian  money  market  is  basically  inter-bank  money  market,  as  it  mostly  involves 
only  banking.  So  far,  the  transaction  in  the  inter-bank  money  market  is  dominated  by 
unsecured lending/borrowing (PUAB), and mostly in a very short term maturity. Around 60% 
of inter-bank transaction is overnight. There may be some short-term debt instrument in OTC 
(over  the  counter  market),  but  I  believe  in  a  very  small  numbers  and  not  actively  traded 
amongst bank. There is also perhaps, an interest rate swap (IRS) or overnight index swap 
(OIS)  in  OTC  market,  as  there  is  sometime  a  quotation  in  Bloomberg  or  Reuters.  But,  it 
seems not quite regular and the transaction is supposed to be in a very small number. Thus, 
in general, money market is not yet considered to better serve banks’ portfolio management. 
Meanwhile,  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  transaction  is  also  still  dominated  by  spot 
transaction. The daily volume of inter-bank spot transaction is about 1.5 – 2 billion US Dollar 
in the last two years. In addition, swap transaction is around 300 million US Dollar in 2009, a 
bit lower compare to around 500 million US Dollar last year. 
Further, the financial market is dominated by government debt instrument. The development 
of Indonesian financial market actually took place from the post 1997/98 period. The SUN 
market begun in 2002 when banks were started to be allowed to gradually trade their recap 
bond holding. The development in government bond market then triggered the development 
of  corporate  bonds  as  government  bond  serve  as  a  risk  free  benchmark  in  debt  market. 
However, the transaction in SUN  market is, so far, dominated by outright transaction. The 
repo market is not yet active, partly for the reasons as I have previously described, which 
lead to a perception of bank that undertake repo is in a desperate liquidity need situation, 
hence will be punished with higher interest rate.  
The relatively less liquid domestic financial market can be seen from the SUN turnover. 
Recently,  the  daily  outright  trading  volume  of  SUN  is  just  around  Rp  6.5  trillion  and 
300 transaction  within  the  last  two  years.  Thus,  just  around  1%  of  SUN  outstanding. 
While  the  repo  transaction  is  much  lower,  below  Rp.  1  trillion  daily,  but  not  always 
occurring every day. 
Why we need to further develop Indonesia’s financial market? 
From the above description, basically, I have just explained the main reasons, the need to 
further develop the Indonesian financial market. First, to increase the resiliency of domestic 
financial  market,  including  the  banking  sector,  from  possible  liquidity  shock.  Second,  to 
increase  the  efficiency  of  financial  portfolio  management  and  to  strengthen  liquidity  risk 
management, which in turn it will increase the effectiveness of monetary policy from Bank 
Indonesia’s perspective. And third, given the increasingly importance of financial market in 
the economy, it is crucial to have a strong, efficient and healthy financial market to avoid any 
possible  distortion,  including  from  inefficient  practice  that  will  add  more  cost  in  economic 
financing. However, the development should be undertaken in gradual manner, and again, 
should always be linked closely with the need of the real economy. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 3
I will now highlight some issues that I believe should be firstly considered as a starting point 
to develop our domestic financial market.  
The development of repo market can be considered as a starting point to increase financial 
market  liquidity.  This  will  increase  efficient  banking  liquidity  and  portfolio  management,  as 
well as government financing. In this regard, as financial transaction is mostly in essence a 
legal contract, thus having a commonly accepted standard repo agreement is a key. In this 
area, Bank Indonesia and the Government Debt Management Office, has again encouraged 
market  participants  to  establish  a  standardized  repo  agreement  that  complies  with 
international standard. In line with this, the progress of the commitment from major market 
players in debt market (HIMDASUN) signed in 20 August 2009 has to be monitored closely. 
On the other side, Bank Indonesia will also continue to promote the use of repo transaction 
by enhancing the strategy adopted in Bank Indonesia’s liquidity management operation. In 
addition,  the  need  to  have  a  commonly  accepted  standardized  transaction  among  market 
participants is also valid for transaction in foreign exchange market. 
It  is  also  important  to  encourage  the  establishment  of  broader  self  regulatory  organization 
(SRO)  in  domestic  financial  market  that  covers  all  segments  in  the  market,  to  provide 
convention for various market transactions, and to assist in monitoring OTC market, as well 
as a counterpart for the authorities and regulators. 
However, it is important to note that coordination among authorities, and the continued dialog 
with market participants, is a key element in developing financial market that most fit with the 
need of the economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  hope  today’s  seminar  produces  fruitful  discussion  for  all  of  us,  as  well  as  exchange 
perspectives  from  expertise  speakers  to  enrich  our  understanding  on  developing  the 
Indonesian financial market. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2010
