William C Dudley: Address to the New College Class of 2010 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  College  of  Florida  44th  Annual  Commencement, 
Sarasota, Florida, 21 May 2010. 
 Congratulations, graduates. And congratulations, even more so, parents and all of you who 
supported these graduates along the way! 
Thank you to the graduates and members of the faculty and administration for selecting me 
as  New  College  of  Florida’s  44th  commencement  speaker.  I  am  very  grateful  for  the 
opportunity to speak here today in such a beautiful setting. It’s nice to be back. 
Earlier  today,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  a  few  of  you  –  in  a  smaller  setting  –  to  hear 
about your plans for after graduation; or should I say, tomorrow. I am very impressed with the 
high caliber of graduates in your class. I also had a tour of the campus today, which I must 
say has changed a lot in the past 30 years. One thing that hasn’t changed, however, is the 
Palm Court – or as you all so affectionately call it, the “center of the universe.” 
I have very fond memories of my time at New College, aside from those great Palm Court 
parties. I received a terrific education and made some life-long friends. I hope the same has 
been true about your New College experience. 
I am especially grateful for the support from the faculty over the years – both while I was a 
student and afterwards. There are two people I would particularly like to highlight: 
Jan Van der Veen – Jan was the professor who really got me started in economics. 
Bob Bennedetti – Bob agreed to a contract in which I would get a semester of college credit 
mainly through working on the 1972 presidential campaign in the California primary election 
and  in  Ohio  for  the  general  election.  Probably  learned  more  from  that  experience  than 
anything  else  I  have  ever  done  in  higher  education.  I  would  encourage  all  of  you  – 
Republicans, Democrats and Independents – to get involved in public service at some point 
in your careers. 
I  have  many  memories  of  New  College  –  some  about  people  such  as  Jan  and  Bob,  and 
others  about  events  and  experiences.  For  example,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events  I 
have ever witnessed occurred here one night in December 1972 – the first Apollo spacecraft 
night launch. I remember staring out from the top of a dormitory roof not far from here across 
the horizon looking at the star specks – wondering, is that the rocket? When it actually came 
up  over  the  horizon  it  truly  was  amazing.  I  remember  it  as  no  bigger  than  a  half-inch  gap 
between your thumb and index finger at arm’s length. And as the liftoff proceeded and the 
vapor trail started to decline over the horizon following the curvature of the Earth – I really 
could see clearly that the world was truly round. Maybe that’s a good metaphor for my New 
College experience! 
My only truly unpleasant memory here was one literature course (student taught, I might add) 
in which I received an evaluation that essentially noted that I could not read, write or think. I 
like to think that was a bit harsh, but everyone is entitled to their own opinion! 
New  College  truly  is  a  special  place.  I  like  to  call  it  “graduate  school  for  undergraduates” 
because it really is a place that encourages students to intellectually engage, learn, think and 
communicate. 
The unstructured format of evaluations and contracts rather than grades is not for everyone  
– some folks need more structure. But I see that you have made it through and I congratulate 
you for that – it is an important milestone in your life. 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 1
Today, I want to talk about two issues: the economy you face as you graduate, and some 
advice – call it “lessons learned” – that might have some value to you as you contemplate 
what you are going to do with the rest of your life. 
The economy you face as new graduates 
The  U.S.  economy  is  recovering  and  we  are  now  seeing  the  first  signs  of  significant 
employment growth. Thus, this is a better year to graduate than last. However, finding a job 
will  not  be  easy  –  the  unemployment  rate  is  much  too  high  –  nearly  10  percent.  And  the 
recovery seems likely to be more sluggish than we would like. 
The economy is suffering from the hangover of the real estate and consumption boom that 
ended a few years ago. That boom collapsed beginning in mid-2007. The result was a very 
deep downturn from which we are now only emerging. 
Although the Federal Reserve has been aggressive about easing monetary policy to support 
economic  activity,  the  recovery  is  not  likely  to  be  as  robust  as  we  would  like  for  several 
reasons. 
First, households are still in the process of deleveraging. The housing boom created paper 
wealth  that  households  borrowed  against.  This  pushed  the  consumption  share  of  nominal 
gross domestic product to a record high of about 70 percent. When the boom turned into a 
bust, those paper gains evaporated. In fact, many households now find that the value of their 
homes is less than the amount of their mortgage debt. This has created a difficult time for 
many families and has caused the hangover to last longer. 
Second, the banking system is still under significant stress. This is particularly the case for 
small-  and  medium-sized  banks  that  have  significant  exposure  to  commercial  real  estate 
loans.  This  stress  means  that  banks  have  been  slow  to  ease  credit  standards  as  the 
economy has moved from recession to recovery. 
Third, some of the sources that have supported the nascent recovery are temporary. The big 
swing from inventory liquidation during the recession back to accumulation will soon end as 
inventory  levels  come  back  into  better  balance  with  sales.  And  fiscal  stimulus  from  the 
federal government is subsiding and will soon reverse. 
Coupled  with  the  benign  outlook  for  inflation,  these  headwinds  to  growth  and  employment 
explain why the Federal Reserve is keeping short-term interest rates unusually low. We want 
to do all we can to support more rapid economic and employment growth, subject to keeping 
inflation low and stable, and inflation expectations well anchored. The situation has improved 
and  total  employment  is  now  growing  –  for  example,  U.S.  payrolls  rose  by  290,000  last 
month. But we are still far from where we want to be. 
In this environment, finding a job will be tough, but when you hit the pavement remember that 
the  job  market  is  improving.  Don’t  get  discouraged.  Get  your  foot  in  the  door  by  doing 
something productive, even if it may not be exactly what you want to do for the rest of your 
life. Gaining knowledge and experience is what is important at this point. The first job out of 
college is a foot on the ladder – the job doesn’t have to be perfect to be valuable to you. 
A bit of advice 
In terms of your career, my first bit of advice is: don’t rush. There is plenty of time for your 
careers to unfold. It’s not a sprint, it’s a marathon. I didn’t really start my career until I went to 
work for the Federal Reserve Board at 28 after graduate school and didn’t begin working on 
macroeconomics until I joined Goldman Sachs when I was 33. 
When I entered the job market from New College in the fall of 1974 – the economy was in 
recession. I interviewed for many jobs, and I was told that I was overqualified for a few and 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2010
under qualified for many. I eventually got a job as a methods analyst, which is essentially an 
internal  efficiency  consultant.  It  wasn’t  much,  but  it  was  a  start  and  I  went  from  there.  My 
second bit of advice is to take the time to find out what really interests you. This means you 
may want to try a few different things before settling on a particular career path. When I left 
New College I certainly didn’t know where I was headed. I only made the decision to become 
a  professional  economist  two  years  later  when  I  was  deciding  between  law  school  and 
economics.  And  I  didn’t  decide  to  opt  for  more  policy-related  work  rather  than  become  an 
academic until I entered the job market from Berkeley five years later. 
The  important  point  is  that  if  you  like  what  you  are  doing,  you  almost  certainly  will  be 
successful at it. 
My third bit of advice is to be true to yourself. It is a lot easier to keep things straight and be 
happy if your public persona and private persona are not in conflict – you are one integrated 
person. 
Being true to yourself also means facing up to problems and mistakes early. Early on in my 
career as a professional economist, I got involved in writing a paper about tax reform with the 
head of the firm’s research department. The night the paper went to the printers, I woke up 
with complete clarity that there was a mistake in the paper. The mistake did not affect the 
conclusions of the paper. It just slightly changed all the numbers and was obscure enough 
that no one would probably catch it. 
What to do? I decided to take my medicine. I walked into the office of my co-author the next 
morning and said that we needed to throw out the 10,000 copies of the paper that had been 
printed.  The  head  of  research  –  Leon  Cooperman  –  was  known  for  his  –  let  me  say  this 
delicately – strong personality. But rather than blowing up at me, he said fine, let’s fix it. 
Facing up to the error must have actually worked in my favor since I won his respect. A few 
months later, he introduced me to Robert Rubin – who, as you know, went on to become the 
U.S. Secretary of Treasury. And through Robert Rubin I met all sorts of interesting people in 
the Clinton administration. 
My fourth bit of advice is to continue to build your human capital. That means seeking out 
jobs and opportunities that give you new experiences and skills. Keep up with your mentors 
and  continue  to  cultivate  relationships  and  build  your  network.  Education  isn’t  just  about 
college  course  work,  it  should  be  a  lifelong  experience.  If  your  employer  asks  you  do 
something  new  –  don’t  shy  away  from  it.  Instead,  think  of  it  as  a  wonderful  deal:  Your 
employer is going to pay you to deepen your skills and knowledge base. You will be paid to 
become more valuable. 
For me, the ability to build my human capital has happened – in spades – several times. The 
first  occurred  here  at  New  College  and  at  Berkeley  for  graduate  school.  Here  I  learned  to 
really  read  critically  and  how  to  write  –  the  one  literature  course  that  I  mentioned  earlier 
notwithstanding. 
The second was the opportunity early on in my career to become involved in macroeconomic 
forecasting and policy analysis. Up to that point, I had been a regulatory economist. I had 
only taken one course in macroeconomics in graduate school and it was the only course on 
which I received a “B” grade – I had not revealed any great affinity for that subject. At first, 
the  work  was  stressful.  When  people  asked  me  questions,  I  wasn’t  sure  whether  I  was 
supposed to know the answers or not. At first, I felt quite ignorant, but eventually that passed. 
The third was when I was asked to head the Markets Group at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York at the beginning of 2007. It was an unexpected opportunity for public service after 
spending the bulk of my career in the private sector. The Markets Group is the operational 
arm of the Federal Reserve System. It helps to have an economics background, but it was a 
very different task managing 300 people who worked in many complex businesses ranging 
from Treasury auctions to providing services to foreign central banks. And, when the financial 
crisis began in earnest in August 2007, the learning curve accelerated sharply. 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 3
And the fourth was when I had the opportunity to succeed Timothy Geithner as president of 
the Bank in January 2008. Now it is 3,000 people, not 300 to manage and a much wider set 
of responsibilities. 
Some of the most interesting parts of the job have been getting troubled financial institutions 
onto  a  stronger  footing so  that  these  firms  could  provide  greater  credit and  support  to  the 
U.S.  economy.  Obviously,  working  closely  with  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  and  my  Fed 
colleagues at the Board of Governors and around the other 11 Reserve Banks has also been 
particularly rewarding. 
Each  time,  the  opportunities  helped  me  broaden  my  knowledge  and  skills.  My  career 
benefited as a consequence. 
In  implementing  this  advice,  it  also  helps  to  have  lots  of  good  luck.  In  that  regard,  I  have 
been  blessed.  Think  of  the  chain  of  events  for  me  to  get  my  “dream  job”  –  head  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I had to decide to leave Goldman Sachs at the end of 
2005; be asked by Timothy Geithner to be head of the Markets Group in 2006 and be smart 
enough to take him up on his offer; Barack Obama had to win the presidential election; Tim 
had  to  be  selected  to  be  Treasury  Secretary;  and  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  in 
collaboration with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., had to agree on me as Tim’s 
successor. If you ever thought that train of events was even remotely likely, I think you would 
have been considered delusional! 
My final piece of advice is the most important one: Don’t forget all that they have taught you 
here about thinking critically and speaking up. 
So,  let  me  sum  up.  Go  into  the  job  market  with  enthusiasm  and  don’t  be  daunted  by  the 
inevitable rejections. That’s part of the process of getting started. Don’t feel in a rush to figure 
out all the details of your career. If you are true to yourself, continue to build your human 
capital and don’t forget everything that they have taught you here, I know that you will meet 
with every success. 
Thank you and, most importantly, good luck! 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2010
