Durmuş Yılmaz: Global crises and economic governance 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the  conference  on  “Global  crises  and  economic  governance”,  İnönü  University,  Malatya, 
15 April 2010. 
 Distinguished Rector, Distinguished Academicians and Esteemed Guests, 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  everyone  who  has  contributed  to  the  organization  of  this 
conference,  primarily  Prof.  Cemil  Çelik,  the  Rector  of  İnönü  University  and  distinguished 
faculty members of the university. I take great pleasure in participating in such an event with 
you. 
I would like to start my speech with a brief evaluation of the global financial crisis. Later on, I 
will share with you my observations related to developments in the global economy and the 
Turkish economy. After presenting a brief overview of the monetary policy implemented and 
the measures taken by the Central Bank during the crisis, I would like to close my speech 
with the monetary policy exit strategy, which we announced to the public yesterday. 
As  you  know,  problems  that  emerged  in  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market  in  the 
second  half  of  2007  spread  the  whole  world  to  reach  threatening  levels  for  both 
financial and economic stability.  
We  can  say  that  the  reaction  of  market  players  and  the  public  has  gone  through  four 
subsequent  stages  since  the  eruption  of  the  crisis.  These  stages  can  be  summarized  as 
those of Denial, Disappointment, Panic and Hope.  
In the first stage, the markets had difficulty perceiving the dimension of the damage caused 
by the crisis and considered that such an incident would be overcome shortly and/or would 
not reach significant levels. As a matter of fact, especially in the first half of 2008, one of the 
most  discussed  items  on  the  agenda  of  international  financial  circles  was  whether  there 
would  be  a  decoupling  of  economies  or  not.  In  that  period,  many  economists  and  market 
specialists  supported  the  idea  that  the  crisis  that  emerged  in  advanced  economies  would 
have  a  limited  impact  on  emerging  economies  and  that  emerging  economies  had  the 
capacity  of  compensating  the  global  demand  deficit,  which  was  to  be  observed.  In 
conclusion, they claimed that there would be a distinct decoupling in the growth dynamics of 
country groups.  
It has been fortunate that the expected decoupling has not been as intense as estimated. It is 
inevitable  for  both  developed  and  emerging  economies  to  be  affected  by  global  economic 
turbulence  in  a  period  characterized  by  the  progressively  rising  interdependent  nature  of 
global economies. However, the scale of the impact has differed from one country to another.  
When we look back, we see that the resilience of countries in the face of the crisis has been 
determined  mainly  by  four  structural  factors.  It  is  possible  to  examine  them  under  four 
headings  as  (1)  Floating  exchange  rate  regime  (2)  Resilience  of  the  banking  system 
(3) Countercyclical  monetary  policy  and  (4)  Room  for  maneuver  provided  by  the  fiscal 
discipline implemented in the pre-crisis period. 
Countries implementing a fixed exchange rate regime have been hit more severely by the 
crisis compared to those implementing a floating exchange rate regime. In countries with free 
capital flows, a floating exchange rate regime, – by enabling monetary authorities to adopt a 
flexible  approach  in  the  face  of  a  liquidity  crunch  in  markets  –  acts  as  a  safety  valve 
preventing over-contraction of the economy, under rapidly deteriorating international liquidity 
conditions. As a matter of fact, in countries implementing a floating exchange rate regime, 
economic  activity  exhibited  smaller  fluctuations  before  and  during  the  crisis.  Moreover, 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 1
countries under a floating exchange rate regime experience a stronger economic recovery 
compared to those under a fixed exchange rate regime. 
The second structural factor that determines the resilience of countries against the crisis is 
the  structure  of  the  banking  system.  In  this  period,  factors  such  as  asset  quality  of  the 
banking system, keeping leverage ratios at manageable levels, and proper implementation of 
regulatory and supervisory activities played an important role in containing the damage and 
credit crunch in financial markets. 
The last two factors that determine the level of impact of the crisis on countries are monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  practices  that  are  considered  as  cyclical  movements  in  the  economy.  In 
those  countries,  which  observed  fiscal  discipline,  implemented  countercyclical  monetary 
policies,  prevented  excessive  increases  in  private  sector’s  indebtedness  ratios  in  the  pre-
crisis  period,  central  banks  and  governments  had  the  room  for  maneuver  to  implement 
monetary and fiscal policies that could recoup demand shocks. 
Owing to the aforementioned reasons, many countries, including Turkey, has been able to be 
resilient  beyond  expectations,  in  the  face  of  the  crisis.  However,  it  was  undoubtedly 
impossible  to  fully  avoid  the  adverse  effects  of  the  crisis.  In  fact,  an  analysis  of  quarterly 
growth rates of world economies suggests that almost half of the economies contracted in 
the final quarter of 2008, and more than 90 percent in the first half of 2009. 
The first half of 2008 became a period where problems driven by the crisis were ignored by 
the  markets.  Nevertheless,  despite  certain  monetary  policy  measures  that  were  taken,  the 
global  crisis  entered  the  second  stage,  where  the  feeling  of  “denial  and  rejection”  was 
replaced  by  “disappointment”  and  “anger”  due  to  the  growing  frequency  of  problems 
emerging across financial markets. In this period, money markets were almost at a standstill 
due to the deterioration of risk perceptions, banks were faced with liquidity problems, asset 
prices experienced slumps, non-performing loans increased, balance sheets incurred losses 
that led to serious damage to the health of banking system, numerous banks and investment 
agencies  came  under  strain  and  even  went  bankrupt  –  all  of  which  describe  the  main 
characteristics of the second stage. 
Especially the rescue packages that were inevitably implemented by governments to prevent 
the collapse of the financial system in developed countries gave way to serious public anger 
directed  towards  banks  and  investment  agencies.  The  USD  700  billion  worth  of  stimulus 
package, which was prepared in September 2008 to enable the government to assume bad 
debts of US financial institutions and which was considered the biggest state intervention in 
recent years, was pending at the US House of Representatives for a long time due to the 
harsh  reaction  from  the  public.  In  the  meantime,  there  was  a  negative  reaction  from  the 
public towards the excessively high salaries of banking sector managers, who frequently was 
urged  a  readjustment  to  the  remunerations  of  managerial  staff.  Furthermore,  new 
arrangements  were  brought  onto  the  agenda  for  stricter  supervision  and  to  restrict  the 
activities of the financial sector. In addition to these developments, views related to inefficient 
functioning  of  public  institutions  in  charge  of  supervising  the  financial  sector,  primarily  the 
Federal Reserve, in the pre-crisis period, raised intense criticism on these institutions, too. 
Meanwhile,  under  the  name  of  financial  protectionism  there  have  been  advocates  of  the 
discourse that international banks should halt their functions abroad and instead lend to the 
corporate sector experiencing difficulty in finding funds at home. 
On the heels of “Denial” and “Anger”, the global crisis entered the third and most disturbing 
stage in the final quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. We can define the common 
public feeling that prevailed in the whole world in this period as “panic” and “fear of collapse”.  
In  early  2009,  the  effect  of  the  global  crisis  on  world  economies  deepened,  world  trade 
volume 
lows,  almost  all  countries  suffered  economic  contraction, 
unemployment  rates  soared;  in  brief,  the  world  had  faced  the  possibility  of  an  economic 
depression of such dimensions for the first time since 1929 – as a result of which the fears of 
a global and prolonged depression peaked. 
to  historic 
fell 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2010
In order to recoup the significant contraction in demand that emerged due to the decrease in 
the private sector’s total investment and consumption expenditures, governments and central 
banks  have  prepared  historically  extensive  and  comprehensive  stimulus  packages.  The 
scope of the crisis and the economic contraction became worldwide in a short while, which 
necessitated  the  timely  implementation  of  measures  in  coordination  with  other  countries. 
Public resources that were allocated to the financial sector and the stimulus packages that 
were  put  into  effect  during  the  crisis  have  brought  significant  burden  on  public  budgets. 
Research conducted by the International Monetary Fund indicates that the total amount of 
capital  transferred  to  the  financial  sector  was  USD  4  trillion;  state  purchases  to  prop  up 
securities markets amounted to USD 6 trillion; state guarantees to financial institutions and 
the corporate sector became USD 14 trillion; and fiscal measures such as tax rebates and 
new public spending reached USD 6 trillion. 
As  of  the  second  half  of  2009,  we  entered  the  fourth  and  last  stage  of  the  crisis.  We  can 
simply describe this stage as the period of “hope” emerging in the world public opinion with 
the support of the “green shoots” that appeared in economic activity. 
Data, which have been released since April 2009, have confirmed that the worst of the crisis 
has been left behind and has reinforced expectations that a recovery in the global economy 
has  started.  The  termination  of  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  programs  and  the  inventory 
de-stocking process – especially in developed countries – constitute the basis for recovery 
signals in the global economy. The improvement in the Global Purchasing Managers’ Index 
of both developed economies and emerging markets in the first quarter of 2010 indicate that 
the recovery in economic activity continues. An analysis of growth estimates of international 
institutions reveals that in 2010, the United States is expected to display a growth rate close 
to the long-term growth average and the recovery in Europe is expected to be slower than 
that in the United States. Taking into account the fact that the European Union is our leading 
export market, this constitutes an important risk factor for our economy.  
Now,  let  us  have  a  look  at  the  risks  with  respect  to  the  global  economy  in  the  upcoming 
period. The distressed assets problem in the banking sectors of developed countries is yet to 
be  solved  and  vulnerabilities  persist  and  they  constitute  the  primary  factors  impeding 
effective  functioning  of  the  credit  mechanism.  Meanwhile,  the  rapid  rise  or  high  levels  of 
unemployment  rates  in  many  countries  affect  the  total  demand  adversely  by  reducing 
household  expenditures.  The  persisting  uncertainties  about  exit  strategies  from  the 
extraordinary monetary and fiscal measures are another factor pose risk to the permanence 
of recovery. 
The ever-growing budget deficits and swelling public debt stocks driven by the expansionary 
fiscal policies adopted especially in developed countries became an important risk factor as 
they push long-term interest rates up and affect private demand adversely. Meanwhile, sharp 
rises are observed recently in the risk premia of Greece, Spain, Portugal and Italy with high 
debt stocks as concerns over the sustainability of their current budget deficit are elevated.  
After summarizing the stages that the crisis has gone through since mid-2007, I would like to 
talk about the reasons for the emergence of the crisis from the viewpoint of the main theme 
of this conference; i.e. “the issue of governance”. 
There  is  a  consensus  over  the  fact  that  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  markets  developed, 
deepened and grew more complex at an astounding pace but the institutions responsible for 
inspection and supervision failed to keep up with this change. Moreover, Basel II regulations 
made  credit  rating  institutions  a  part  of  the  regulation  process;  and  complex  derivative 
products and risk assessment methods spurred over-borrowing. In the pre-crisis period, the 
accommodating  monetary  policies  adopted  by  central  banks  of  developed  countries  in  the 
form of the low interest rate-high liquidity led to moral hazards in financial markets.  
Within this framework, assuming that financial markets always operate efficiently, we can list 
the  reasons  for  the  crisis  as  deregulation,  financial  innovations,  problematic  accounting 
standards and global instabilities. The liberty brought by deregulation led to shortsightedness 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 3
driven  by  over-confidence  and  short-term  profits  were  preferred  at  the  cost  of  risking  the 
financial  system  in  the  long  run.  Financial  innovations  generated  complex  derivative 
products,  where  who  owes  how  much  to  whom  is  not  clear  and,  which  actually  lead  to 
multiplying of risk instead of distribution of it. Meanwhile, the accounting standards based on 
“Fair Value” principle made cyclical effects and fuelled the destructive power of the crisis. 
Having mentioned the stages and reasons for the crisis, now I would like to share with you 
the  monetary  policy  implemented  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  during  the  crisis  and  my 
evaluations on the recent developments in the Turkish economy. 
Projecting  that  inflation  would  decrease  sharply  as  of  the last  quarter of  2008,  the  Central 
Bank of Turkey implemented a monetary policy focusing on restraining the potentially harsh 
impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  financial  activity  without  conflicting  with  the  primary 
objective of maintaining price stability. During this process, the CBT has delivered sizeable 
cuts in policy rates and a counter-cyclical monetary policy has been implemented with the 
aim  of  supporting  the  smooth  operation  of  credit  markets.  Between  November  2008  and 
November  2009,  the  CBT  cut  policy  rates  by  1.025  basis  points,  playing  a  pioneer  role 
among central banks of developing countries.  
As a result of the limited improvement in risk perceptions and the Central Bank’s projections 
supported by actual inflation data, market interest rates decreased significantly. In this period 
marked  by  the  crisis,  policy  rates  continued  to  be  one  of  the  factors  determining  market 
rates. In an era where ballooning government deficits are likely to put upward pressure on 
medium  to  long-term  interest  rates  across  the  globe  and  markets  are  still  sensitive  to  risk 
appetite, the fact that market rates continue to be primarily determined by the CBT’s policy 
rates is evidence of the increased effectiveness of monetary policy. 
The  course  of  real  rates  and  financial  tightening  measures  during  the  crisis  are  also 
indicators  of  the  improved  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  Turkey.  Real  market  rates 
declined continuously amid CBT’s policy rate cuts and reached historic lows. The tendency 
of real rates to fall is quite common in well-functioning economies during times of recession; 
yet, it is quite unprecedented for Turkey. In this regard, the current level of real rates is an 
indicator of the improved effectiveness of monetary policy.  
During the crisis, the monetary policy decisions of central banks in emerging economies had 
very limited short-term effect on their currencies. The values of these currencies were mainly 
determined by global risk perceptions. However, with the normalization in financial markets, 
we  foresee  that  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  countries  will  come  to  the  fore  in  the 
upcoming period and currencies of those countries with lower risk, stronger economic and 
financial  fundamentals  and  high  growth  potential  are  expected  to  perform  better.  In  this 
regard, it would not be surprising if Turkey’s credit rating is raised to reach the investment 
grade implied by the actual CDS spread.  
As  for  recent  developments  in  the  Turkish  economy,  the  moderate  recovery  in  economic 
activity continues. Quarterly growth in GDP continued in the last quarter of 2009. As tax cuts 
that were put into practice with the aim of spurring economic activity were phased out, private 
consumption  demand  displayed  a  more  moderate  rise  compared  to  the  first  half  and  the 
gradual  recovery  in  private  consumption  expenditures  continued  in  the  third  quarter. 
Meanwhile,  private  investment  expenditures  continued  to  pick  up  in  the  last  quarter  but 
remained  lower  compared  to  strong  growth  periods.  Taking  into  account  the  uncertainties 
pertaining  to  domestic  and  foreign  demand  and  the  low  capacity  utilization  rates,  it  is 
estimated that it would take an extended period of time for investment expenditures to reach 
their pre-crisis levels and no significant rise is expected in the short run. Recently, imports 
have  increased  faster  than  exports  and  this  indicates  that  the  recovery  in  the  economy  is 
mainly  driven  by  domestic  demand.  The  course  of  exports  in  the  upcoming  period  will  be 
determined by the pace of global recovery. As I have mentioned earlier while talking about 
global risks, forecasts for our largest trade partner, the European Union, suggest that it would 
take a long time for foreign demand to return to pre-crisis levels.  
4 
 BIS Review 79/2010
Industrial  production  has  been  increasing  moderately  since  March  2009.  According  to  the 
latest Business Tendency Survey conducted by the CBT, the moderate recovery in orders 
both  from  domestic  and  foreign  markets  continues.  On  the  expectations  side,  there  is 
improvement both in the real sector and consumer confidence indices. Nevertheless, the still-
weak foreign demand and the fact that Turkey’s exports predominantly rely on products that 
are  susceptible  to  cyclical  developments  are  retarding  a  rebound  in  industrial  production. 
Uncertainties  regarding  aggregate  demand  urge  firms  operating  in  the  manufacturing 
industry  to  take  a  cautious  stance  and  to  be  more  reluctant  about  inventory  building 
compared to the periods of strong growth.  
The  biggest  headache  for  Turkey,  unemployment,  assumed  a  slight  recovery  trend  in  the 
third quarter of 2009 as the economy started to generate employment opportunities again. 
Industrial  employment,  which  is  the  sector  that  is  most  severely  affected  by  the  crisis  and 
became  the  main  driver  of  contraction  in  non-farm  employment,  started  to  recover  at  a 
moderate  pace.  The  services  and  construction  sector  supported  non-farm  employment  as 
well. Despite the recent partial recovery, the unemployment rate is still quite high compared 
to the pre-crisis period. This high unemployment rate curbs the consumption demand as well. 
Putting the structural reforms that would remedy chronic problems in the labor market into 
practice  immediately  would  prevent  unemployment  rates,  which  climbed  during  the  crises, 
from becoming permanent and support potential economic growth. 
The  lending  appetite  of  banks  significantly  decreased  due  to  the  decline  in  risk  appetite 
accompanied  by  the  erosion  of  confidence  and  elevated  uncertainties  during  the  crisis. 
However,  we  can  assert  that  there  are  favorable  developments  thanks  to  policy  rate  cuts 
made since November 2008 and the improvement in global risk perceptions. Especially the 
most  recent  developments  suggest  that  there  is  an  apparent  improvement  in  Commercial 
Loans.  The  rise  in  loans  extended  to  SMEs,  which  have  an  important  share  in  the  labor 
market, indicates that there is moderate recovery in economic activity. The NPL ratios, which 
saw all time highs during the crisis, started to decrease, albeit slowly and gradually. To sum 
up, the upward trend in bank loans, which started in the second quarter of 2009, continues 
on a stable course.  
As you all know, the impact of the global economic crisis on financial markets was terribly 
severe  in  the  last  quarter  of  2008:  countries’  risk  premia  saw  record-high  levels  and 
excessive  volatilities  occurred  in  the  currencies  of  many  developing  countries.  Despite 
having  been  volatile  at  historically  high  levels  and  extremely  sensitive  to  the  global  risk 
appetite, the Turkish lira displayed a relatively stable course, which lasted through the first 
quarter of 2010 following the peak of the crisis. Meanwhile, the improvement in global risk 
perceptions in the fourth quarter led the currency of many developing countries to appreciate. 
In  terms  of  changes  in  currency  values,  the  Turkish  lira  did  not  significantly  differ  from 
currencies of other emerging markets in this period. 
Public debts and budget deficits have increased on a worldwide scale due to fiscal stimulus 
and decreasing tax incomes. In many countries, the ratio of public debt to national income 
went  beyond  the  sustainable  level  of  60  percent  (Maastricht  Criteria),  which  may  ease 
concerns about public finance and create upward pressures on market interest rates. I am of 
the opinion that, should market interest rates increase; the severity and duration of the global 
crisis will be adversely affected.  
The discipline established by Turkey in public finance in the past has significantly increased 
the  resilience  of  the  public  against  external  shocks  as  well  as  confidence  regarding  the 
sustainability  of  debts.  These  improvements  in  the  structure  of  public  finance  and  the 
sustainability  of  debts  allowed  the  implementation  of  expansionary  fiscal  measures,  albeit 
limited, in order to alleviate the impact of the global crisis. In this respect, SCT and VAT rates 
on  some  products  were  temporarily  reduced  to  allow  de-stocking  for  firms  and  a  new 
investment  incentive  system  was  established  to  improve  the  investment  atmosphere. 
Additionally,  tax  cuts  and  fiscal  incentives  were  introduced  to  increase  employment,  and 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 5
credit and guarantee supports were provided for SME’s and exporting firms. It is thanks to 
the fiscal discipline already established that countercyclical policy could be implemented in 
this period.  
Tax  arrangements  along  with  hikes  in  commodity  prices  that  were  put  into  effect  at  the 
beginning of the year played a significant role in the increase of inflation in the recent period. 
The  hike  in  annual  inflation  mainly  emanated  from  the  co-emergence  of  many  temporary 
factors  rather  than  general  pricing  behavior.  Meanwhile,  the  main  inflation  indicators 
remained  consistent  with  medium-term  targets.  Moreover,  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in 
services  prices  and  the  inflation  diffusion  index  saw  historically  low  levels.  These 
observations indicate that the increase in inflation in the last quarter of 2009 is mainly due to 
temporary  developments,  and  to  factors  beyond  the  immediate  control  of  monetary  policy, 
rather than the main components of inflation. 
We consider the possible effect of inflation hikes on expectations due to the base effect a 
significant risk factor in forthcoming months. However, under the assumption that resource 
utilization in the economy will remain at low levels for an extended period, employment and 
credit conditions will not allow a strong expansion in consumption demand and fiscal policy 
will gradually generate a contractionary effect, we believe that the effect of price increases 
emanating from one-time shocks on general pricing behavior will be limited. It is important 
that  economic  units  accurately  perceive  the  temporary  quality  of  the  said  factors  and  that 
medium  and  long  term  expectations  do  not  deteriorate.  The  CBT  are  vigilant  on  pricing 
behavior as inflation follows a high course, albeit temporary. The CBT foresees that inflation 
will follow a fluctuating course significantly above the target and then reassume a decreasing 
trend in the last quarter of the year once the temporary factors taper off and come back to 
levels consistent with targets in the first months of 2011. 
In  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  mention  about  the  general  framework  of  the 
monetary policy exit strategy that we shared with the public yesterday.  
As you all know, recently, one of the most discussed issues in monetary policies has been 
“exit strategies”, which include the withdrawing measures taken during the global crisis and 
normalization operations of monetary policies. We believe that the exit strategy of the CBT 
will  be  simpler  and  easier  as  no  need  for  radical  measures  arose  and  the  balance  sheet 
structure was not damaged during the crisis period. 
I would like to handle the exit strategy of the CBT in two groups as foreign exchange and 
Turkish lira. 
The basic principle of the CBT on foreign exchange liquidity is that the Central Bank, which is 
the  lender  of  last  resort  for  Turkish  lira  and  has  broad  flexibilities  related  to  Turkish  lira 
liquidity management, is not be considered as the lender of last resort for other currencies. 
For  this  reason,  the  banking  system  has  to  be  much  more  discreet  and  prudent  in  its 
management of foreign exchange liquidity. The facilities provided by the Central Bank during 
the  crisis  should  not  result  in  complacency  and  the  banking  system  should  carry  on  with 
effective  foreign  exchange  liquidity  management.  Therefore,  in  the  upcoming  period,  as 
normalization in the global markets becomes significant, it is planned that measures related 
to foreign exchange liquidity will gradually be taken to pre-crisis levels, in an orderly manner. 
Even  though  the  Central  Bank’s  exit  strategy  related  to  foreign  exchange  liquidity  may 
change as needs arise, it is foreseen to be as follows: 
1. 
2. 
The FX required reserves ratios may gradually be increased in a measured pace. 
Considering developments in global interest rates, foreign exchange deposit lending 
rates announced by the Central Bank may be increased. 
Lastly,  after  the  effects  of  developed  countries’  exit  strategies  are  monitored,  the 
intermediary function of the Central Bank in the foreign exchange deposit market will 
be abolished. However, banks will be able to borrow foreign exchange deposits from 
BIS Review 79/2010
3. 
6 
 the Central Bank within the predetermined borrowing limits. The maturity of foreign 
exchange  deposits  borrowed  within  the  predetermined  borrowing  limits  by  banks 
from the Central Bank will be decreased from 3 months to 1 week. 
Considering the allocation of liquidity within the system in order to prepare the banking sector 
for  technical  rate  adjustment,  to  reduce  possible  fluctuations  in  the  money  markets  and  to 
maintain  liquidity  management  flexibility  against  unforeseen  liquidity  developments,  the 
Central Bank decided to keep the integrity of both reducing overfunding in the context of the 
exit  strategy  and  technical  interest  rate  adjustment  operations  and  to  adopt  a  gradual 
strategy. 
In the first stage, the amount of liquidity that has been provided as a part of the overfunding 
policy will be reduced gradually. In this process, as currently is the case, due attention will be 
paid to keep overnight interest rates close to the announced borrowing rate. The overnight 
borrowing  rate  announced  by  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  be  the  reference  rate  of 
monetary policy. 
As  for  the  second  stage,  the  technical  interest  rate  adjustment  process  will  become 
operative. In this respect, in order to maintain the flexibility of liquidity management against 
unexpected liquidity developments and not to create volatility in money markets, it is planned 
to be carried out in two steps. 
In  the  first  step,  the  Central  Bank’s  borrowing  and  lending  interest  rates  for  overnight 
transactions  will  not  be  changed.  However,  the  one-week  repo  auction  procedure  will  be 
subject to change by implementing amount auction procedure via fixed interest rate instead 
of  the  traditional  auction  procedure.  In  this  step,  the  fixed  interest  rate  for  one-week  repo 
auctions will be determined by adding 50 basis  points to the declared overnight borrowing 
interest  rate  of  the  Central  Bank.  Therefore,  the  fixed  interest  rate  for  one-week  repo 
transactions will become the reference (policy) interest rate of monetary policy. 
In the second step, the difference between the one-week repo auction interest rate and the 
overnight  borrowing  interest  rate  may  be  increased.  The  CBT  may  aim  to  create  the 
secondary  market  average  overnight  interest  rate  around  the  one-week  repo  auction  rate. 
The difference between the one-week repo auction interest rate and the overnight borrowing 
interest rate may be increased either by raising the one-week repo auction interest rate if the 
Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) decides that monetary tightening is required, or by 
lowering the overnight borrowing and lending interest rates if the Committee decides not to 
make any change in the policy interest rate. In this period, the differences between the one-
week repo auction interest rate and the overnight borrowing and lending interest rates may 
not always be symmetrical and will be determined by the Committee as an element of the 
operational framework of monetary policy. 
As a result, some of the measures taken in the foreign exchange and Turkish lira markets 
during  the  crisis  are  planned  to  be  withdrawn  gradually.  In  this  context,  primarily  the 
measures taken in direct crisis management will be withdrawn, and, as is the case in the rest 
of the world, the exit strategy will be a cautious and gradual process that safeguards financial 
stability in our country as well. 
I would like to end my remarks by extending my regards to all the participating academicians 
and policy-makers for their contributions to the “Global Crises and Economic Governance” 
congress. Also, I would like to thank, once more, the staff of İnönü University and everybody 
for their contributions to the conference. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 7
