Njuguna Ndung’u: Costs of collateral in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Launch of 
the Study Report on “Costs of collateral in Kenya”, Nairobi, 24 March 2010. 
 Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance; 
Permanent Secretaries, here present; 
Mr. Martin Oduor Otieno, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. John Wanyela, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. David Ferrand, Director, Financial Sector Deepening Trust Kenya; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
 
It is with great pleasure that we congregate here this morning to chart the way forward on 
another avenue of enhancing efficiency in our banking system. This is through changes in 
the  collateral  technology  in  use.  But  before  I  make  my  remarks,  allow  me  to  thank  the 
Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance for agreeing to grace this occasion and 
deliver a keynote address. Also, allow me to thank KBA and FSD for their tireless effort to 
deepen the financial sector. 
Yesterday, we held our Monetary Policy Committee meeting in Mombasa CBK Branch. The 
first  review  was  a  survey  on  what  sustains  high  interest  rates  –  The  response  from  the 
market  showed  two  factors;  cost  of  credit  and  credit  risk  sustains  high  interest  rates.  But 
what is behind cost of credit and credit risk – perhaps the collateral technology in use. The 
cost of collateral is being addressed today by this study. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Kenyan  banks  have  persistently  cited  cost  of  collateral  as 
contributing  a  significant  portion  of  premium  factored  in  the  interest  rates  they  charge.  To 
demystify the assertion, CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA (CBK) and Kenya Bankers Association 
(KBA) in conjunction with Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSD) Kenya commissioned a 
study to review the Kenyan collateral process with a view to determining the costs associated 
with  each  step  in  the  process.  The consultants  were  also  required  to  put  forward  succinct 
recommendations based on their findings. Evidence seems to show that the three steps of 
collateral process in Kenya; that is: creation, perfection and enforcement, entail enormous 
costs and time.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  report  has  brought  forward  several  recommendations.  They 
will be implemented and will result in both cost and time reduction. The implementation of the 
recommendations touches on several Government agencies, most of which are represented 
here  today.  I  believe  your  presence  in  this  occasion  goes  a  long  way  in  showing  your 
readiness to play your part in addressing the constraints noted.  
The study has indicted the collateral process in Kenya; the collateral process is flawed and 
as  a  result  it  is  characterized  with  high  costs.  There  are  more  than  20  applicable  statutes 
relating  to  collateral  creation  and  perfection.  This  makes  the  process  cumbersome, 
expensive  and  complex.  It  is  high  time  the  statutes  are  looked  at  to  not  only  ensure 
uniformity but also simplify the process. Lenders have cited the slow and expensive judicial 
process as contributing to premiums they factor in their interest rates. A certain and reliable 
judicial  process  facilitates  quick  recovery  by  lenders  when  secured  facilities  are  defaulted. 
Good  borrowers  will  thus  not  be  penalized  for  a  mistake  that  is  not  of  their  making.  In 
addition, there are many manual and uncoordinated registries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: What are the other complementing initiatives to this study: Going 
forward  the  following  two  events  will  shape  the  outcome  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
report. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 1
  First,  the  licensing  of  credit  reference  bureaus  has  introduced  a  substitute  to 
physical  collateral,  which  is  information  capital  and  reputational  capital  as  well  as 
appropriate risk pricing. CRB Africa was launched early this month. It is expected 
that the credit information sharing mechanism will be fully operational by July this 
year and as a result we expect to subsequently see a reduction in costs of credit as 
banks  pass  the  resultant  benefits  to  their  customers.  Similarly,  it  is  high  time  that 
Kenyans henceforth adhere to their credit contract terms in order to build favourable 
credit track records for use as information collateral. 
Second,  the  CBK  and  KBA  have  formed  a  committee  to  drive  forward  the 
recommendations  of  the  study.  The  formation  of  the  committee  reflects  the 
importance attached to the study by both KBA and CBK. The implementation of the 
recommendations  will  not  only  be  beneficial  to  the  financial  sector  but  the  entire 
economy. This will happen at three levels: 
– 
– 
– 
First, through the supply of required credit in future.  
Second, through lengthening the maturity profile of term loans.  
Third, the appropriate definition of property rights and certainty in enforcement 
of contracts will be strong building blocks of a deepened financial sector. 
the  quick  execution  of 
It is therefore important and complementing to explore the widening of the membership of the 
committee  to  include  the  various  players  represented  here  today.  A  broad  based 
implementation  committee  will  support 
the  cross  cutting 
recommendations contained in the report.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I conclude let me take this opportunity to thank FSD Kenya, our 
development partner in several projects aimed at inclusive financial markets in Kenya; Kenya 
Bankers  Association  who  partnered  with  us  in  this  study;  ShoreBank  International  and 
Walker Kontos who authored the report being launched today; and all market players who 
took part in the study; but more importantly those who came here today to take part in the 
launch and I am sure they do believe we can achieve the prescribed results.  
Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me let me take this opportunity to invite our chief guest 
to address this gathering. 
Welcome Deputy Prime Minister, Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2010
