Durmuş Yılmaz: Overview of the Turkish economy in the light of new 
global realities 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the International Arab Banking Summit (IABS 2010), Istanbul, 18 June 2010. 
 Esteemed governors and distinguished guests, 
At the outset, I want to express my gratitude to the Union of Arab Banks along with Turkish 
Banking Association, Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency and the World Union of 
Arab Bankers for their efforts in organizing this summit. As the Central Bank of Turkey, we 
are honored to be a part of this prestigious event congregating such an esteemed group of 
participants. 
In this keynote speech, first I want to discuss the post-crisis episode in a global context. Then 
I  will  continue  with  the  extent  to  which  the  Turkish  economy  has  been  affected  by  the 
downturn in global economy. Finally, I will conclude with the opportunities and prospects in 
our region in the light of the new global realities. 
in 
the 
Dear participants, 
As we all observe from the latest data, signs of recovery have continued in the first half 
of 2010, albeit at variable speeds across countries and regions. Coordinated efforts of 
the global community have been so far successful in averting a downward spiral similar 
to the one experienced during the Great Depression. Although global economy is back 
on its feet, there are several risks involved in this recovery process and many challenges 
lie ahead.  
Many  countries,  especially  in  advanced  economies  have  spent  substantial  amount  of 
public funds to boost aggregate demand and to revitalize the financial system. Most of 
these countries have no fiscal resources left to put forward a similar stimulus package, if 
the world economy experiences another setback. Therefore it is of utmost importance to 
keep  the  recovery  intact,  which  is  already  too  fragile.  Debt  sustainability  and  fiscal 
imbalances  stand  out  as  the  main  challenges  for  many  years  to  come.  As  the  recent 
developments 
revealed,  deterioration  of  sovereign 
creditworthiness can hamper macroeconomic and financial stability. Therefore, ongoing 
problems  especially  in  some  advanced  economies,  particularly  in  Europe  should  be 
resolved in a quick, effective and credible manner.  
However,  we  should  also  keep  in  mind  that  supporting  global  demand  is  a  global 
responsibility. It is questionable whether emerging market economies would be able to 
fulfill the gap in global demand, while advanced countries stay on the sideline to clean up 
their  balance  sheets.  Neither  their  share  on  global  economy  nor  their  economic  and 
financial structure would be adequate to play that role. Especially emerging economies 
that are in deficit, still being in convergence stage, need to raise their production capacity 
to pay off their external debt accumulated during their catch-up.  
Therefore, I strongly believe that a holistic approach is a must. While developing any kind 
of policies, including fiscal tightening or restructuring, one should pay great attention to 
negative  externalities  these  policies  may  cause  on  other  economies.  In  particular,  we 
should  avoid  beggar-thy-neighbor  type  of  policies.  Unless  all  participants  provide 
appropriate contribution, the global economic recovery will not be safe and sustained. It 
is obvious that the emerging economies will be the major driving force behind the global 
financial  markets 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
growth  but  it  remains  crucial  that  each  country  with  its  capacity  should  make  its 
contribution to revive global demand.  
Currently, there are intense debates within the global community, particularly inside the 
G20  and  FSB,  to  restructure  the  financial  system  and  put  in  place  a  radical  and  quite 
ambitious  financial  sector  reform  agenda.  It  is  imperative  to  repair  and  rebuild  a  well 
functioning financial system that can support growth while maintaining financial stability. 
These  reforms  are  wide  ranging,  including  implementing  new  capital  and  liquidity 
standards,  promoting  principles  for  effective  supervision,  looking  at  ways  to  constrain 
moral  hazard,  developing  cross-border  resolution  mechanisms,  agreeing  to reforms on 
OTC  derivative  markets  to  reduce  systemic  risk  and  improve  market  efficiency  and 
integrity, and agreeing on a single set of high quality, global accounting standards.  
We very much welcome the work carried by the Basel Committee. Strengthening capital 
and  improving  liquidity  standards  should  be  seen  as  the  main  tools  to  reach  a  more 
resilient  banking  sector.  Turkey’s  experience  shows  that  a  sound  capital  base, 
appropriate  liquidity  and  well  supervised  leverage  are  the  key  elements  that  assure  a 
healthy  banking  system.  The  difficulties  faced  by  advanced  economies  today  may  be 
unprecedented  in  scale,  but  not  unique  in  nature.  Some  countries  experienced  similar 
difficulties  in  the  past  and  they  developed  comprehensive  schemes  to  satisfy  the 
principle of fair and substantial contribution of financial sector and taxpayer protection as 
well. For example in our case the amount of bailout we provided to the banking industry 
in  2001  was  as  high  as  almost  30%  of  the  GDP.  So  we  developed  a  regulatory 
framework to assure that such a disaster does not happen again, and if it happens how 
the resolution would be carried and how it would be financed.  
Before implementing comprehensive financial regulations on a global scale, all countries 
should  undertake  comprehensive  impact  studies  and  assess  possible  spillovers  to 
emerging  countries  before  putting  such  schemes  into  action.  All  necessary  measures 
should  be  taken  so  that  already  fragile  recovery  is  not  harmed  through  rising  cost  of 
capital in the global financial markets. We support developing a set of principles around 
which each country creates its own system based on local conditions. Banking levy or 
financial activity tax is only one of many options available to promote financial stability 
and to achieve equal burden sharing. Regulations on capital, leverage and liquidity and 
other macro prudential tools may also be used to achieve similar results.  
Dear participants,  
Let me give you some background information on the Turkish economy, before delving 
on the issue of closer cooperation within the region in the aftermath of global crisis.  
Like all other emerging market economies, the Turkish economy was tested by the global 
turmoil  and  has  proven  its  strength  and  resilience.  Average  annual  growth  of  almost 
7 percent between 2002 and 2007 faltered in 2008 and turned into a contraction in 2009 
as  the  exports  and  investment  flows  dried  up  considerably  due  to  the  global  crisis. 
However, all signs now indicate that the economy has rebounded quickly and is headed 
towards renewed growth and an improving fiscal balance in 2010. The resilience of the 
Turkish financial system, combined with our flexible and effective liquidity management 
framework shaped by the experiences of past crises, has turned out to be considerable 
assets  in  managing  the  recent  crisis.  As  a  result,  growth  forecasts  of  international 
institutions for the Turkish economy have been revised upwards repeatedly and reached 
as much as 7.2 percent, the highest among OECD countries.  
The  crisis  and  slowly  emerging  global  architecture  in  its  aftermath  present  major 
opportunities that have once again highlighted the importance of economic cooperation 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
and coordination among countries and economies. In the case of the Middle East this is 
perhaps  best  embodied  in  the  multiple  synergies  in  financial  integration  and  joint 
investment opportunities between Turkey and the Arab world.  
It is a great pleasure to see that the relations within our region have been strengthening 
on  a  solid  ground.  The  strong  historical,  cultural  and  social  ties  among  our  countries 
constitute  a  solid  basis  to  further  develop  multilateral  relations.  Commercial  relations 
between Turkey and the Middle East have been increasing quite rapidly in the last few 
years, as well as cooperation and exchange of information and dialogue between public 
authorities. Global crisis made clear that especially our region is one of the high growth 
bases  in  the  world,  which  in  turn,  constitutes  a  potential  to  grow  tight  commercial  and 
financial  relations.  Recently,  Turkey,  Jordan,  Lebanon  and  Syria  signed  a  joint 
declaration on Thursday to launch an initiative to form a free trade zone and a visa-free 
zone. These nations will also set up a joint cooperation council.  
Significant  steps  have  been  taken  towards  developing  our  commercial  relations  as 
witnessed  by  trade  volumes  between  countries.  On  the  heels  of  2001  crisis,  the  trade 
volume of Turkey with the Middle East Region was just about USD 6 billion. It reached 
USD 43 billion just before the financial crisis and stood at USD 29 billion as of 2009. In 
the  same  period,  the  share  of  Middle  East  in  Turkish  trade  volume  climbed  up  by 
5 percentage points to 12 percent, where as the share of European Union declined by 
10 percentage points to 43 percent.  
Let  me  give  you  several  country  specific  examples.  Syrian-Turkish  economic  relations 
have strengthened rapidly in the past few years, particularly following the implementation 
of  a  free  trade  agreement  between  the  two  countries  in  2007.  All  in  all,  trade  volume 
between Syria and Turkey has doubled since 2006 and reached to 1.75 billion USD in 
2009.  
Trade  volume  between  Turkey  and  Egypt  has  also  steadily 
from 
USD 500 million in 2003 to USD 3.2 billion in 2009. It is expected that these figures will 
reach up to USD 5 billion in the next three-years. One reason for this rapid increase is 
that both countries have completed the legal ground which secures free trade between 
countries. The Free Trade Agreement, which has recently been put into effect, does not 
only  provide  opportunities  for  higher  trade  volumes  but  also  functions  as  a  framework 
that brings together investors from both countries.  
Turkey has long provided a significant conduit for the flow of humanitarian and economic 
assistance to Iraq. Today, the volume of bilateral trade is also rapidly rising. The bilateral 
trade volume has been increased significantly since 2006 and reached to 6 billions USD 
in  2009.  The  high-level  official  visits  between  Turkey  and  Iraq  have  been  providing 
impetus to the diversification and advancement of our economic cooperation. Moreover, 
Turkish companies play a leading role in the reconstruction of Iraq.  
Our trade with Jordan and Lebanon exceeded USD 1 billion in 2009. With the conclusion 
of the ongoing negotiations on the Free Trade Agreement between Turkey, Lebanon and 
Jordan, trade relations among our countries are expected to gain volume.  
increased 
Dear guests,  
Increasing  commercial  relations  naturally  led  to  an  increase  in  international  banking 
services  among  our  economies.  Having  a  sound  financial  position,  Turkish  banks  can 
contribute  both  to  building  commercial  and  financial  links  within  the  region.  Today, 
several  Turkish  banks  are  interested  in  expanding  their  operations  to  the  Middle  East, 
considering  the  growth  potential  in  commercial  relations  and  considerable  amount  of 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
liquidity  in  the  region.  Besides,  the  Middle  East  is  one  of  the  world’s  fastest  growing 
markets in the banking and capital sector.  
Islamic finance is yet another venue through which financial links across the countries in 
the  region  may  be  strengthened.  The  global  crisis  has  given  an  opportunity  to  Islamic 
financial institutions to prove their potential. As their products limit the excessive leverage 
and the disruptive financial innovations, they have confirmed their products’ advantages 
to ensure macroeconomic stability. This may lead the way for Islamic financial institutions 
to  further  expand  and  improve.  Islamic  banks  support  GDP  growth  through  the  use  of 
funds they collect exclusively for the financing of real sector, rather than investing in non-
productive  financial  assets.  This  understanding  will  not  only  contribute  to  the  potential 
growth of the Islamic banks, but also help to maintain a sound structure of the financial 
system. I believe that such a forward-looking and constructive vision will contribute the 
financial stability to a great extent going forward.  
One crucial prerequisite for closer commercial links within the region is the existence of 
strong,  efficient  and  effective  payment  system.  In  the  last  twenty  years,  rapid 
technological  progress,  decrease  in  restrictions  and  globalization  of  financial  markets 
have led to a rise in financial activities and a rapid growth in the volume of domestic and 
cross-border  payments.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  played  a  leading  role  in  the 
modernization  of  payment  services  in  Turkey.  It  has  developed  secure,  reliable  and 
efficient inter bank payment and settlement systems. According to a recent IMF report, 
payment systems in Turkey have a sound legal basis and the country is “in observance 
of  the  great  majority  of  the  provisions  of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems and Core Principles for Systemically Important Payments Systems”. 
The Middle Eastern countries have made significant progress in this area. For example, 
Saudi Arabia is a member of the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems like 
Turkey and tries to improve its payment systems infrastructure by establishing new payment 
systems  with  respect  to  the  needs  of  its  financial  markets.  Egypt  has  a  project  of 
establishing a real-time gross settlement system. There are also some other low value – 
large value payment systems in other countries.  
As you already know the regulation on International Bank Account Number (IBAN) has 
been implementing in Turkey and the use of IBAN is effectively overseen by the CBRT 
since  2008.  The  use  of  IBAN  in  region  countries  like  Lebanon  and  Saudi  Arabia 
contributes  to  the  effective  and  safe  money  transfers  between  Turkey  and  these 
countries.  
A sceptic might say: “What counts is the profit one makes and the economic gains one 
gets. It does not matter whether we like each or not.” In our case this approach is wrong. 
We have shared common destiny for centuries and now we should be ready for dialogue, 
cooperation and coordination. Above all, when we want to push through common interest 
in the future, we should work together in order to get a joint view of the events past and 
present.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2010
