Usha Thorat: The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity 
Inaugural address by Mrs Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
“The  Economics  of  Ecosystems  and  Biodiversity  (TEEB)  D2  Workshop”,  Mumbai,  13 April 
2010. 
 Ladies and Gentleman, 
Herman Daly, a leading ecological economist, who received the 1996 Right Livelihood Award 
for “defining a path of ecological economics that integrates the key elements of ethics, quality 
of life, environment and community”, said: 
“There  is  something  fundamentally  wrong  with  treating  the  earth  as  if  it 
were a business in liquidation.” 
I  am  extremely  happy  to  inaugurate  this  workshop  on  The  Economics  of  Ecosystems  and 
Biodiversity  (TEEB)  organised  by  the  Indian  Institute  of  Technology  (IIT),  Mumbai,  the 
Conservation Action Trust (CAT), the Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) and the Green 
India  States  Trust  (GIST).  TEEB  is  a  major  international  initiative  to  draw  attention  to  the 
global economic benefits of biodiversity, to highlight the growing cost of biodiversity loss and 
ecosystem degradation, and to draw together expertise from the fields of science, economics 
and policy to enable practical actions moving forward. 
The  TEEB  study,  led  by  Pavan  Sukhdev,  was  launched  by  Germany  and  the  European 
Commission in response to a proposal by the G8+5 Environment Ministers (Potsdam 2007) 
to develop a global study on the economics of biodiversity loss. I understand that the Interim 
Report of TEEB, released in May 2008, provided strong evidence of significant global and 
local economic losses and human welfare impacts attributable to the ongoing degradation of 
ecosystems.  As  already  mentioned,  the  year  2010  has  been  declared  as  the  International 
Year of Biodiversity and will culminate in the 10th conference of the Parties to Convention on 
Biodiversity at Nagoya in October 2010, where phase 2 of the TEEB study will be presented. 
We are therefore indeed extremely fortunate that Pavan himself is leading today’s workshop. 
For  a  layperson,  such  as  me,  having  accepted  Pavan’s  invitation,  it  meant  starting  from 
scratch. I needed to understand the jargon. What do the terms biodiversity and ecosystem 
services mean? Why is it important for us to think and talk about these issues? What is the 
value  of  biodiversity  and  ecosystem  services?  Why  should  we  attribute  monetary  value  to 
biodiversity and ecosystem services? More importantly, how do we attribute monetary value 
to these services? Finally, how do we integrate the process of attributing monetary value to 
these concepts into decision-making on investment projects and use of natural resources – 
whether  in  the  public  or  private  sectors?  What  should  be  the  policy  framework,  and 
consequently the regulatory framework, to implement these policies? 
I find that the National Biodiversity Action Plan published by Government of India, Ministry of 
Environment  and  Forests  in  2008  highlights  as an  action  point  the  valuation  of  goods  and 
services  provided  by  biodiversity  and  use  of  economic  instruments  in  decision  making 
processes. More specifically, the Action Plan states 
 
To assign appropriate market value to the goods and services provided by various 
ecosystems and strive to incorporate these costs into decision making, management 
and sustainable utilization of biological diversity resources. 
To  factor-in  natural  resource  accounting  (NRA)  in  the  national  economic  planning 
processes and encourage financial institutions to adopt appropriate NRA appraisal 
practices  so  that  risks  to  biological  diversity  are  adequately  considered  in  the 
financing of projects. 
 BIS Review 50/2010 
 1
This  clearly  puts  in  perspective  the  significance  of  assigning  value  to  natural  resources, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services in economic policy. 
So,  what  are  biodiversity  and  ecosystem  services  and  why  and  how  do  we  measure  their 
value? Wikipedia defines biodiversity as the variation of life forms within a given ecosystem, 
biome  or  on  the  entire  Earth.  Biodiversity  is  often  used  as  a  measure  of  the  health  of 
biological systems. The biodiversity found on Earth today consists of many millions of distinct 
biological species. Many biologists now believe that ecosystems rich in diversity gain greater 
resilience and are, therefore, able to recover more readily from stresses such as drought or 
human-induced habitat degradation. Possibly, the greatest value of the variety of life may be 
the opportunities it gives us for adapting to change. The unknown potential of genes, species 
and  ecosystems  is  of  inestimable.  but  certainly of  high  value.  Genetic  diversity  will  enable 
breeders  to  tailor  crops  to  new  climatic  conditions.  The  Earth’s  biota  is  likely  to  hold  still 
undiscovered cures for known and emerging diseases. A multiplicity of genes, species, and 
ecosystems is a resource that can be tapped as human needs change. 
Almost all scientists acknowledge that the rate of species loss is greater now than at any time in 
human  history,  with  extinction  occurring  at  rates  hundreds  of  times  higher  than  background 
extinction  rates.  The  factors  that  threaten  biodiversity  have  been  variously  categorized.  Jared 
Diamond  describes  an  “Evil  Quartet”  of  habitat  destruction,  overkill,  introduced  species,  and 
secondary extensions. The IUCN has a detailed list of direct threats to biodiversity.  
Humankind benefits from a multitude of resources and processes that are supplied by natural 
ecosystems. Collectively, these benefits are known as ecosystem services. Some of these 
ecosystem services are air quality, climate (both global CO2 sequestration and local), water 
purification, pollination, and prevention of soil erosion. While scientists and environmentalists 
have discussed ecosystem services for decades, these services were popularized and their 
definitions formalized by the United Nations 2004 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA), 
a  four-year  study  involving  more  than  1,300  scientists  worldwide.  The  study  grouped 
ecosystem services into four broad categories: provisioning, such as the production of food 
and  water;  regulating,  such  as  the  control  of  climate  and  disease;  supporting,  such  as 
nutrient cycles and crop pollination; and cultural, such as spiritual and recreational benefits. 
If  the  world’s  economies  are  rationally  organized,  it  would  suggest  that  biodiversity  and 
ecosystem services must have less economic value than the economic activities giving rise 
to its loss. Many of the activities that threaten biodiversity have lower economic value, but the 
market does not recognize the economic value of biodiversity and eco system services and 
that  is  the  reason  for  loss  of  biological  diversity.  If  we  can  address  this  issue,  there  is  a 
chance of addressing biodiversity loss. The reason why market value fails to capture intrinsic 
economic value is because of the gap between what is good for the individual and what is 
good for society – the problem of externality. The other reason is the time horizon factor viz. 
the  initial  returns  and  long  term  sustainability  of  the  returns.  Again,  what  may  be  worth 
preserving  from  a  global  perspective  may  not  be  affordable  from  a  national  perspective. 
Hence if we have to make rational allocation of natural resources from a global societal and 
inter-generational perspective, one will need to attribute monetary values to biodiversity and 
the  costs  and  benefits  should  include  such  values  for  decision  making.  The  ongoing 
challenge of prescribing such value to nature is critical in how we recognize and manage the 
environment, social responsibility, business opportunities, and our future as a species. 
In a speech at the Financial Student Association, Amsterdam, on 28 April 2009, Andrew G 
Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, drew an interesting parallel 
between the recent global crisis and ecosystems. He cited the collapse of fisheries that came 
to a head during the 1970s. and 1980s, leading to the imposition of fishing quotas for various 
species.  In  setting  quotas,  no  account  was  taken  of  interaction  between  species  and  the 
surrounding  eco-system.  Relating  this  to  the  global  crisis,  he  observed  that  the  existing 
regulatory rules for financial institutions echoed the fisheries management of the 1970s. Risk 
quotas are calibrated and applied node by node, species by species approach, which takes 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2010
no  account  of  individual  nodes’  system-wide  importance  –  for  example,  arising  from  their 
connectivity  to  other  nodes  in  the  network  or  their  scale  of  operations.  Apart  from 
interconnectedness,  Mr  Haldane  also  uses  the  natural  relationship  between  diversity  and 
stability  to  show  how  lack  of  diversity  was  a  reason  for  collapse  of  the  financial  system. 
Studies  of  coastal  eco-systems,  he  said,  reveal  some  dramatic  patterns.  For  around  800 
years, between the years 1000–1800 AD, fish stocks and species numbers were seemingly 
stable and robust. Since then, almost 40% of fish species across the world’s major coastal 
eco-systems have “collapsed” – defined here as a fall in population of greater than 90%. That 
is systemic by any metric. There appear to be many environmental reasons for this collapse, 
some natural, others man-made. The financial system, Mr. Haldane observed, has mirrored 
the fortunes of the fisheries, for many of the same reasons. Since the start of crisis many 
banks  have  seen  their  market  capitalization  fall  by  a  significant  amount-  the  fisheries 
equivalent of collapse. But what took marine eco-systems two hundred years to achieve has 
been delivered by financial engineers in two!! In explaining the collapse in fish and finance, 
lack of diversity seems to be a common denominator. 
I  am  sure  that  during  the  workshop,  you  will  be  discussing  the  various  ways  in  which  the 
costs  and  benefits  of  projects  can  be  realistically  assessed  by  incorporating  the  monetary 
value of the risks or threats to biodiversity or ecosystem services. What is equally important 
is  for  the  workshop  to  discuss  issues  surrounding  how  to  ensure  that  these  costs  and 
benefits actually get incorporated in a project appraisal. Perhaps, the principles and rules for 
making  for  Environment  Impact  Assessments  (EIAs)  should  be  broadened  to  include  all 
aspects of environmental costs and benefits, such as impact on biodiversity and ecosystem 
services,  instead  of  merely  the  immediate  impact,  say,  on  pollution.  Gains  and  losses  to 
natural and human capital will thus need to factored-in as a mandatory requirement. Once 
the  assessment  is  done  in  this  manner  to  ensure  a  rational  allocation  of  resources,  it  is 
essential that goods and services are priced appropriately reckoning such costs and benefits 
as  are  not  reflected  in  market  valuations.  Where  such  costs  and  benefits  are  not  fully 
captured  in  the  pricing  there  would  be  an  issue  of  subsidies  and  taxation  to  ensure 
appropriate incentives. Protocols and best practices for such EIAs may have to be drawn up 
taking into account the work done in the area of ascribing monetary values to the costs of 
threats  to  ecosystem  and  biodiversity  and  the  benefits  from  such  ecosystem  services  and 
biodiversity. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  draw  attention  to  Hon’ble  Union  Finance  Minister’s 
Budget Speech for 2010–11, in which he announced a number of measures for addressing 
environment/climate change issues and preserving biodiversity. I am sure all concerned will 
take  advantage  of  these  announcements,  actively  support  and  involve  in  the  initiatives  for 
protecting ecosystems and preserving biodiversity.  
Finally, I would like to close with a quote from  the speech that Hon’ble Prime  Minister Dr. 
Manmohan  Singh  delivered  on  June  30,  2008  while  formally  launching  India’s  National 
Action Plan on Climate Change:  
“India has a civilizational legacy which treats Nature as a source of nurture 
and  not  as  a  dark  force  to  be  conquered  and  harnessed  to  human 
endeavour.  There  is  a  high  value  placed  in  our  culture  to  the  concept  of 
living in harmony with Nature, recognizing the delicate threads of common 
destiny that hold our universe together. The time has come for us to draw 
deep from this tradition and launch India and its billion people on a path of 
ecologically sustainable development”. 
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate this TEEB D2 Workshop and wish it all success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 3
