Subir Gokarn: Perspectives on financial sector strategy 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
High  Level  Panel  on  Opportunities  and  Challenges  for  Financial  Services  in  India  and 
Europe, New Delhi, 20 September 2010. 
 The  inputs  of  B.M.  Misra,  Pallavi  Chavan  and  Rakhe  P.B.  in  preparation  of  this  address  are  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
I  welcome  this  initiative  by  the  Asia-Europe  Business  Forum  to  organize  a  discussion  on 
opportunities  and  challenges  for  financial  services  in  our  respective  regions.  Virtually  all 
significant debate that is taking place today on financial sector regulation and development, 
whether in advanced or emerging economies, is placed in the context of the crisis and the 
role that the financial sector played in it. However, there is a significant asymmetry in that 
debate,  as  is  evidenced,  for  example,  in  the  discussions  on  post-crisis  financial  regulatory 
strategies in the G20 process. It is by now fairly clear that significant differences in regulatory 
frameworks across countries contributed to very different outcomes in terms of both the role 
of national financial sectors in the crisis and, in turn, the impact of the crisis on the financial 
sectors themselves. Within the G20 process, this has resulted in concerns about a “one-size-
fits-all” regulatory response to the crisis. However, on a more constructive note, it has also 
contributed to the emergence of a collective view on balancing the role of the financial sector 
in the development process with the need for global co-ordination on regulation in the face of 
increasing  global  integration  of  both  financial  systems  and  economies  as  a  whole.  This 
“emerging market perspective” was the subject of a seminar organized in Seoul as a prelude 
to the recent G20 Finance Deputies meeting in Gwangju, Korea, earlier this month. I believe 
that this perspective provides an important foundation for sustaining a meaningful dialogue 
between advanced and emerging economies, of which this forum is an example.  
In  this  brief  keynote  address,  I  would  like  to  put  forward  some  thoughts  on  the  broad 
principles that guide our thinking on financial sector development and which have shaped our 
contributions  to  the  “emerging  market  perspective”  that  I  referred  to  earlier.  On  previous 
occasions,  I  have  articulated  four  basic  principles:  efficiency,  stability,  transparency  and 
inclusion.  An  effective  strategy  would  need  to  balance  the  objectives  implicit  in  the  four 
principles by, first, exploiting the complementarities between them and second, recognizing 
the tradeoffs and, wherever they arise, prioritizing between objectives. Let me elaborate on 
the “opportunities” and “challenges” provided by each set of objectives.  
As  regards  efficiency,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  financial  system  needs  to  meet  the 
expanding and increasingly complex requirements of a rapidly growing economy; more so, it 
needs  to  meet  them  in  as  cost-effective  a  manner  as  possible.  Given  the  imperatives  of 
speed,  a  number  of  factors  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  this.  New  capacity  combined  with 
greater  competition  is  clearly  one  way  to  achieve  this  objective.  New  ways  of  addressing 
specific needs, for example, through the development of new markets and new products is 
another.  However,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system 
cannot be viewed in isolation. There must be a concrete link between the development of the 
economy and the capacity and the capability of the financial system.  
Clearly, as we think about rapid increases in both capacity and capability, the role of foreign 
institutions  needs  to  be  considered  with  reference  to  their  ability  to  bring  both  capital  and 
knowledge to the table. However, the benefits that greater foreign participation may generate 
have to be balanced against their potential to increase risks. This brings us directly to the 
second  principle,  stability.  Financial  stability,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  has  always  been  an 
objective of both governments and central banks and this was quite vividly demonstrated in 
the response to the crisis on 2008. Since then, what was perhaps more implicit than explicit 
is now sought to be formalized and institutionalized in many countries, including India. The 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 1
integrating 
is  a  critical  requirement  of  a  globally 
mechanisms needed to both pre-empt and deal with systemic risks and their materialization 
are  being  seriously  debated.  From  a  broad  emerging  market  perspective,  the  question  of 
how the significant presence of large foreign players contributes to systemic risk is a critical 
one as regulatory and prudential strategies are designed in the post-crisis environment. How 
do we exploit the benefits that they offer with respect to the broad developmental objectives 
without making our own systems vulnerable to shocks that emanate outside and over whose 
transmission  we  have  little  or  no  control?  A  balance  needs  to  be  maintained  between 
ownership,  governance  and  prudential  norms  that  satisfy  reasonable  systemic  safety 
requirements and commercial viability, which will make it worthwhile for these institutions to 
expand or set up business.  
I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  stability  principle  is  not  confined  exclusively  to  foreign 
presence.  Systemic  risks  can  originate  in  domestic  financial  players  as  well.  An  effective 
safeguard  mechanism  must  identify  all  possible  sources  of  such  risks  and  put  in  place 
appropriate measures.  
Transparency 
financial  system. 
Standardizing and harmonizing reporting norms will help to bring about global comparability, 
which,  in  turn,  will  help  national  regulators  identify  the  vulnerabilities  of  their  systems  and 
take  necessary  steps  to  prevent  the  precipitation  of  a  crisis.  However,  while  this  is  a 
desirable objective, the process of convergence is itself resource and knowledge intensive. 
Cross-border comparability will remain a problem as different countries converge gradually to 
the global standards. Even after it happens, mechanisms that ensure the full dissemination of 
information need to be instituted or strengthened to derive the full benefits of comparability.  
Finally,  on  the  issue  of  inclusion,  this  is  clearly  an  objective  at  the  core  of  the  larger 
development  agenda.  It  is  not  easy,  even  for  people  within  the  system,  to  appreciate  the 
sheer scale of the challenge. It is not just a question of numbers. The imperative is to provide 
financial access to several hundred million people in widely differing local environments in 
terms of levels of affluence, economic structures and means of livelihood, risks emanating 
from both natural and man-made sources and infrastructure conditions. This requires a deep 
understanding of the local terrain and the organizational ability to find cost-effective ways to 
cater to the requirements of financial services in each terrain.  
There are, of course, some universal or replicable components, which are either already in 
play or will become so shortly. Saturation coverage by the telecommunication network allows 
the  use  of  low-cost  wireless  handheld  devices  to  actually  play  the  role  of  a  bank  branch, 
significantly  reducing  the  cost  of  expansion.  The  impending  introduction  of  the  Unique 
Identification Number will significantly improve the efficiency of the KYC process as well as 
allowing full mobility across the networks of individual banks. But, given the overall scale of 
the  challenge,  as  well  as  its  regional  diversity,  properly  visualizing  the  role  of  different 
participants and coordinating their activities will be of critical importance. And all this will have 
to be done with full consideration of cost-effectiveness, commercial viability and, of course, 
the  implications  of  any  strategy  for  financial  stability.  In  short,  robust  development  of  our 
financial sector in a manner consistent with the larger goals of economic development needs 
to balance these four principles. It needs to exploit complementarities and manage tradeoffs. 
Let me list three current areas of activity, which reflect this overall approach.  
First,  the  process  of  issuing  new  banking  licenses  has  begun,  with  the  articulation  of  core 
issues and the pros and cons associated with ownership and capital criteria. A public debate 
and consultation process is now under way. Second, an effort to co-ordinate action on the 
remaining  barriers  to  the  development  of  the  bond  market  is  in  motion.  A  very  important 
motivation for this is the sharp rise in infrastructure spending and the need to ensure that this 
is not hindered by financial constraints. Third, a process of consultation with individual banks 
with the objective of developing realistic financial inclusion plans is going on.  
I  will  conclude  by  highlighting  three  balancing  acts  that  our  financial  sector  development 
strategy needs to perform:  
2 
 BIS Review 121/2010
1. 
Between  the  drivers  of  financial  sector  growth  and  the  requirements  of  the  larger 
growth and development agenda  
Between the benefits and risks of greater global integration  
Between the advantages of scale and the compulsions of diversity  
2. 
3. 
I trust that these thoughts will be a useful input into the discussions that follow and I thank 
the organizers of this Panel for the opportunity to share them with you. 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 3
