Mark Carney: Monetary policy report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 22 July 2010. 
 Good morning. It is my pleasure to introduce to you Tiff Macklem, who assumed the post of 
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada on Canada Day. We are pleased to be here 
with  you  today  to  discuss  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  the  Bank  published  this 
morning.  
 
The global economic recovery is proceeding but is not yet self-sustaining. A greater 
emphasis  on  balance  sheet  repair  by  households,  banks,  and  governments  in  a 
number  of  advanced  economies  is  expected  to  temper  the  pace  of  global  growth 
relative to the Bank’s outlook in April. 
The policy response to the European sovereign debt crisis has reduced the risk of 
an  adverse  outcome  and  increased  the  prospect  of  sustainable  long  term  growth. 
However, it is also expected to slow the global recovery over the projection horizon. 
Global  growth  is  now  projected  to  average  slightly  less  than  4  per  cent  through 
2012. 
The  U.S.  economy  continues  to  recover,  but  growth  is  projected  to  be  slightly 
weaker than anticipated in April. This is owing to the fallout from the sovereign debt 
crisis in Europe and a more protracted recovery in household demand.  
In  Canada,  the  economic  recovery  is  unfolding  largely  as  expected,  and  is 
supported  by  continued  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus,  higher  terms  of  trade, 
improved labour markets, and household confidence, as well as the global recovery. 
The level of real GDP is now close to its pre-recession peak.  
The Bank expects the pace of growth in Canada to moderate to a slightly greater 
degree than it had expected in April. GDP is now projected to grow 3.5 per cent in 
2010, 2.9 per cent in 2011, and 2.2 per cent in 2012.  
The Bank continues to expect consumer spending to slow to a pace more consistent 
with income growth.  
Business  fixed  investment  has  been  more  subdued  than  expected  and its  level  is 
still  depressed.  Going  forward,  we  expect  it  to  increase  to  levels  consistent  with 
previous  recoveries,  driven  by  the  need  to  expand  capacity  and  to  increase 
productivity in a more competitive international environment. 
Inflation in Canada has been broadly in line with the Bank’s April projection. Both 
total CPI and core inflation are expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the 
projection  period.  The  Bank  will  look  through  the  transitory  effects  on  inflation  of 
changes to provincial indirect taxes. 
The  risks  around  this  projection  remain  elevated  and  are  judged  to  be  roughly 
balanced  over  the  projection  horizon.  Globally,  on  the  upside,  the  boost  in 
confidence  as  advanced  countries  restore  fiscal  sustainability  could  generate 
greater-than-expected  offsets  to  the  fiscal  consolidation.  On  the  downside,  global 
private demand around the world, including in the United States, may be insufficient 
to sustain the recovery.  
In Canada, there are important two-sided risks to the outlook for private demand. On 
the upside, private demand might have greater momentum than expected, reflecting 
         BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
strong  confidence  and easy  credit conditions. On  the  downside,  it  is possible  that 
households reduce expenditures more than currently anticipated or that the recovery 
in business investment is further delayed. 
Since  April  2010,  with  improvements  in  the  economy,  the  Bank  has  ended  its 
extraordinary conduct of monetary policy. On 20 April 2010, the Bank removed its 
conditional commitment, which had provided considerable additional stimulus during 
a period of very weak economic conditions and major downside risks to the global 
and Canadian economies.  
On 1 June 2010, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of 
one percentage point to 1/2 per cent. As part of that interest rate decision, the Bank 
re-established  its  normal  operating  framework  for  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy.  
On  Tuesday,  20  July  2010,  the  Bank  raised  its  target  for  the  overnight  rate  by  a 
further one-quarter of one percentage point to 3/4 per cent.  
These  decisions  leave  considerable  monetary  stimulus  in  place,  consistent  with 
achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation target  in  light of  the  significant  excess  supply  in 
Canada, the strength of domestic spending, and the uneven global recovery.  
Given the considerable uncertainty surrounding the outlook, any further reduction of 
monetary stimulus would have to be weighed carefully against domestic and global 
economic developments. 
     With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
