Svein Gjedrem: History of economics in Norway 
Schweigaard  lecture  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway) at the University of Oslo, Oslo, 23 August 2010. 
 Dear students and other attendees 
Allow me to start by thanking you for the invitation to give the Schweigaard lecture for new 
students and others at the Department of Economics at the University of Oslo. Rather than 
reminisce about my days as a student, I will talk about the subject you will be studying and 
the economy which you will be using your knowledge to understand.  
The  world  has  just  witnessed  the  most  severe  economic  crisis  since  the  1930s.  Many 
countries that were affected by the crisis appear to be recovering. Continued turbulence in 
international  financial  markets  is  nevertheless  fuelling  uncertainty  about  developments 
ahead.  The  prospects  for  Europe  are  particularly  uncertain.  Many  countries  are  struggling 
with  high  public  debt  and  low  confidence.  A  number  of  countries  are  forced  to  make 
substantial cuts in welfare spending and raise taxes.  
The financial crisis started with problems in the US subprime mortgage market. There were 
few,  if  any,  observers  who  foresaw  that  problems  in  a  small  segment  of  the  US  housing 
market could result in such dramatic consequences for economic developments throughout 
the  world.  Economists, politicians  and  most  people  have  in  its  wake asked  how this  could 
happen.  
It may be that the desire to understand has led to a rising number of young people who want 
to study economics. That would be a positive effect of the crisis.  
Why  study  economics?  The  British  economist  Arthur  Cecil  Pigou  once  noted  what  he 
considered to be the true purpose of economics in society: 
“The complicated analyses which economists endeavour to carry through are not 
mere  gymnastics.  They  are  instruments  for  the  bettering  of  human  life.  The 
misery  and  squalor  that  surround  us,  the  injurious  luxury  of  some  wealthy 
families, the terrible uncertainty overshadowing many families of the poor – these 
are evils too plain to be ignored. By the knowledge that our science seeks it is 
possible that they may be restrained. Out of the darkness light! To search for it is 
the  task,  to  find  it  perhaps  the  prize,  which  the  “dismal  science  of  Political 
Economy” offers to those who face its discipline”.1  
Most of us may find these words rather grandiloquent. Economics is a subject that makes 
positivistic  attempts  to  explain  the  interaction  between  firms,  households  and  government. 
But  the  subject  can  also  in  more  normative  terms  be  used  to  indicate  how  society  and 
markets should be organised. 
It took many years for economics to gain its own department at the University of Oslo. In the 
1800s, political economy, as it was called at that time, was initially placed under the faculty of 
law.  It  was  not  until  1932  that  the  University  Institute  of  Economics  was  established  as  a 
department in its own right.  
Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  define  economics.  In  the  1930s,  the  British  economist 
Lionel Robbins stated that:  
                                                 
1 
In  Agnar  Sandmo  (2006):  “Samfunnsøkonomi  –  En  idéhistorie  (Economics  –  a  history  of  ideas)”, 
Universitetsforlaget, p. 224. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 1
“Economics  is  the  study  of  the  use  of  scarce  resources  that  have  alternative 
uses”.2 
This  definition  may  seem  rather  abstract  –  and  does  not  perhaps  capture  aspects  of  the 
subject that are important today. To illustrate the breadth and application of the subject, an 
alternative  may  be  to  list  some  of  the  questions  that  an  economist  can  contribute  to 
elucidating  or  provide  a  decision-making  basis  for.  The  issues  of  relevance  today  may  for 
example include the following:  
 
Is it economically profitable to build a power line through Hardanger? How should 
we weigh the value of untouched nature against the cost of using alternative power 
supply systems?  
How can CO2 emissions be reduced while minimising the impact on living standards 
and  employment?  While  engineers  have  valuable  knowledge  about 
the 
technological  aspects,  economists  can  analyse  how  pricing  and  taxation  can  be 
used to reduce emissions  
What are the consequences of increasing oil revenue spending in Norway? Over the 
past 10–20 years, a theme at the forefront of economic policy debate in Norway has 
been  how  fast  we  should  spend  petroleum  revenues.  Both  gas  and  oil  are  non-
renewable  resources  and  this  places  the  management  of  these  resources  in  a 
particular  position.  How  can  we  ensure  that  many  generations  benefit  from  this 
wealth? What structural changes will occur in the domestic economy if we increase 
petroleum revenue spending?  
What  were  the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis?  How  can  we  prevent  history  from 
repeating itself? 
How  can  the  authorities  promote  sound  and  stable  economic  growth  and  the 
efficient use of society’s resources?  
    The  last  question  has  been  the  subject  of  debate  for  centuries.  The  prevailing  view  has 
shifted  over  time.  Crises  and  recessions  have  often  spurred  new  recognitions  and  new 
thoughts. 
Anton Martin Schweigaard, the lawyer and economist who has given this lecture its name, 
has  been  referred  to  as  “the  champion  of  19th  century  economic  liberalism  in  Norway”.3 
Schweigaard taught statistics and economics at the University of Oslo from 1836 and was a 
staunch advocate of free trade.  
The  Scottish  moral  philosopher  Adam  Smith  laid  the  conceptual  foundation  for  economic 
liberalism in his book The Wealth of Nations. According to Adam Smith, economic decisions 
should  be  left  to  individuals.  Market  forces,  or  “the  invisible  hand”,  should  be  allowed  to 
function.  Economic  liberalism  was  a  reaction  to  the  prevailing  mercantilist  doctrine  of  the 
time, where state control by means of tariff protection, monopolies and other privileges was 
aimed  at  promoting  certain  industries.  Schweigaard  also  strongly  criticised  government 
control: 
                                                 
2 
In  Agnar  Sandmo  (2006):  “Samfunnsøkonomi  –  En  idéhistorie  (Economics  –  a  history  of  ideas)”, 
Universitetsforlaget, p. 13. 
3  Wilhelm  Keilhau  quoted  in  Halvor  Mehlum  (2008):  “Samfunnsøkonomen  Schweigaard  (The  economist 
Schweigaard), Memorandum No 20/2008”, Department of Economics, Oslo University, p. 5. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2010
“There  is  hardly  a  trace  of  the  multitude  of  unnatural  industrial  plants  that  it 
wanted to promote. That is how powerless we are when we seek to determine 
the law of nature rather than follow its prescriptions.”4 
The  ideals of  free  competition  and  a  passive state  predominated  up  to  World  War  I,  even 
though not everyone shared this view. The radical German economist and philosopher Karl 
Marx believed that competition and big industry led to falling profit rates and predicted that it 
would  lead  to  the  collapse  of  capitalism.5  In  pace  with  stock  market  crashes  and  deep 
depressions in the 1920s and 1930s, confidence in free market forces waned.  
The British economist John Maynard Keynes’ theories of economic management set a new 
standard  for  post-war  economic  thinking.  Keynes  argued  that  a  decentralised  market 
economy  alone  would  not  be  stable.  He  advocated  in  particular  that  government  should 
stimulate  the  economy  in  adverse  periods  by  increasing  government  spending.  Such  a 
countercyclical policy was necessary in order to ensure that the market economy could again 
function effectively. 
Keynes’ theories gave support to an era of more state planning and control. Some countries 
went farther than others. In Norway, the first Nobel laureate in economics Ragnar Frisch was 
an important agenda-setter. Frisch, who worked here in this department, wanted to make the 
subject more scientific by using mathematics and statistics. According to Frisch, economic 
theory  should  be  expressed  by  mathematical  models  and  supported  by  quantified 
relationships.  He  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  development  of  accounts  for  the 
nation as a whole – national accounts. When economists worldwide discuss concepts such 
as gross domestic product, private consumption and investment, this can to a large extent be 
attributed  to  Frisch.  Together  with  Trygve  Haavelmo,  also  a  Nobel  laureate  in  economics, 
Frisch contributed to giving the Department of Economics at the University of Oslo a proud 
past.  Frisch  was  sceptical  as  to  whether  market  forces  alone  would  ensure  an  efficient 
distribution of resources. Equipped with new tools, he saw the economist as a sort of social 
engineer  who,  with  the  help  of  mathematical  models,  detailed  accounts  and  proposals  for 
regulation, management and control, could assist government and parliament in improving 
living standards and welfare. 
Confidence in government planning and management marked Norwegian economic policy in 
the 1950s, 60s and 70s. Self-confidence among economists was considerable, as was their 
influence on economic policy. The work was led by former students of Frisch, such as Erik 
Brofoss  who  became  finance  minister  and  later  also  central  bank  governor.  The  following 
quote from his presentation of the central government budget in 1946 reflects his ambitions: 
“People have gradually managed to free themselves from the oppression of the 
forces of nature through scientific and technical progress. They have succeeded 
in breaking the chains of nature that have restrained humanity. It would be a step 
towards greater freedom if we could liberate ourselves from the blind submission 
to the randomness in economic life, which seems to the individual to be a force of 
nature. We must seek to master economic forces rather than being mastered by 
them.  To 
is 
necessary.”6 
this  end,  a  deliberate,  planned  and  coordinated  economy 
                                                 
4 
In  Tore  Jørgen  Hanisch,  Espen  Søilen  and  Gunhild  Ecklund  (1999):  “Norsk  økonomisk  politikk  i  det 
20. århundre.  Verdivalg 
the  20th  century)”, 
Høyskoleforlaget, p. 38. 
In  Agnar  Sandmo  (2006):  “Samfunnsøkonomi  –  En  idéhistorie  (Economics  –  a  history  of  ideas)”, 
Universitetsforlaget, p. 117. 
i  en  åpen  økonomi  (Economic  policy 
in  Norway 
in 
5 
6  Espen Søilen (2002): “Mot et samfunnsøkonomisk Optimum (Towards an economic optimum)”, in a series of 
reports by the Committee on Power and Democracy. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 3
Norway was among the countries that went particularly far in developing an economy with a 
high  degree  of  centralised  coordination  and  control.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  this  work 
culminated in the 1973 proposal to establish an incomes policy council. The social partners 
were  to  undertake  a  commitment  to  keep  negotiated  wage  increases  within  specific  limits. 
The proposal to establish an incomes policy council was logical. It was the last wall in the 
structure erected after the war. Other elements were: 
 
fiscal  policy  –  the  management  of  public  spending  and  revenues  –  was  oriented 
towards full employment 
credit regulation within limits specified in a separate credit budget  
channelling of loans through state banks 
regulation of cross-border capital movements 
low nominal interest rates stipulated by the government authorities 
a fixed, though adjustable, krone exchange rate 
use of price regulation 
an active business policy through state ownership and state grants and subsidies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The proposal to establish an incomes policy council did not receive support. There was just 
too  much  state  control  and  coordination.  Today,  40  years  later,  little  remains  of  the 
management system that was built after the war. The structure was not sufficiently robust.  
Detailed  management  and  regulation  of  the  economy  was  not  able  to  deliver  sustainable 
growth and welfare. On the contrary, the result was poor efficiency and wide fluctuations in 
the Norwegian economy in the 1970s and 1980s. The wide fluctuations culminated in a credit 
boom in the mid-1980s, which was followed by a banking crisis and a deep recession with 
high unemployment at the end of 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s.  
The way the economy is organised has changed considerably over the past 20–25 years. It 
would therefore be incorrect to say that one economic model has applied to Norway through 
the postwar period. Experience has shown that fiscal policy alone cannot ensure a high level 
of  employment.  The  structure  of  the  labour  market  and  of  wage  formation  is  probably  of 
greater  importance.  The  direct  regulation  of  credit,  interest  rates  and  capital  movements 
broke down and was phased out in the 1980s. The krone no longer has a fixed value relative 
to other currencies. Its value is determined from one minute to the next based on supply and 
demand.  We  say  that  the  krone  is  floating.  Price  regulation  no  longer  plays  a  role  as  a 
macroeconomic instrument. The scope of business policy has become more general. At the 
same time, the tax system has become more efficient. Tax rates are lower and the tax base 
broader.  State  ownership  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  remains  extensive,  but  the 
management of ownership has been completely changed. A number of markets in which the 
state used to be the sole owner have been opened up to the private sector. The competition 
in the power and telecom markets and in aviation and broadcasting that you would regard as 
a matter of course today did not emerge until the 1980s. State-owned companies were listed 
on  the  stock  exchange  and  unprofitable  enterprises  are  no  longer  kept  artificially  afloat. 
Norwegian  businesses  also  face  increasing  global  competition.  International  agreements, 
through our close collaboration with the EU and through the World Trade Organisation, have 
provided for freer flows of labour, goods, services and capital in and out of the country.  
Last but not least, rules and principles for economic policy were introduced in Norway, as in 
other countries, to prevent policy decisions based on shorter-term considerations and shifting 
preferences.  The  Norwegian  economist  Finn  Kydland,  who  is  from  my  home  district  of 
Rogaland,  received  the  Nobel  Prize  in  economics  for  his  study  showing  that  economic 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2010
the petroleum fund mechanism 
the fiscal rule 
a floating exchange rate  
inflation targeting  
performance can be improved if policymakers can commit to a pre-established set of credible 
policy rules.7 
Four pillars were established in the 1990s and in 2001 to stabilise economic developments:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
This system was introduced in response to the sharp upturns and downturns in the economy 
over the first twenty years of the Norwegian oil age. 
As  a  result  of  the  petroleum  fund  mechanism,  a  greater  share  of  government  petroleum 
revenues is invested abroad. This curbs the impact of oil price fluctuations on demand and 
output – as well as on inflation and the exchange rate. The rules for the investment of these 
oil  revenues  prevent  individuals  or  groups  from  gaining  strong  control  over  Norway’s  oil 
wealth. 
The  fiscal  rule  for  the  central  government  budget  states  that  petroleum  revenue  spending 
shall  be  limited  to  the  return  on  the  funds  invested  abroad.  This  provides  for  a  gradual 
phasing-in  of  oil  revenues  and  a  rate  of  spending  that  can  be  sustained  for  several 
generations.  The  fiscal  rule  is  a  binding  commitment  policymakers  have  imposed  on 
themselves and is intended to foster long-termism and predictability in fiscal policy.  
Norway’s floating currency, which normally appreciates in good times and depreciates in bad 
times,  also  has  a  stabilising  effect.  The  advantage  of  this  effect  is  most  evident  when 
economic  developments  are  weak.  For  example,  many  southern  European  countries  that 
have  adopted 
improve 
competitiveness, wages in these countries must fall or at least rise much more slowly than in 
other  European  countries.  This  only  occurs  when  unemployment  is  high.  With  a  flexible 
exchange rate, competitiveness can also improve when the domestic currency falls in value. 
A flexible exchange rate can thereby reduce fluctuations in employment and output. On the 
other hand, the foreign exchange market can be mistaken, driving the exchange rate away 
from the path indicated by fundamental conditions. Herd behaviour and market psychology 
can contribute to fluctuations and instability. 
In spring 2001, the Norwegian government and parliament defined a formal inflation target 
for monetary policy. The task of achieving the target was delegated to Norges Bank. Norges 
Bank sets the interest rate on banks’ deposits and loans from the central bank. This interest 
rate determines banks’ lending and deposit rates and the level of interest rates in general, as 
well as the price of the loans you take out as students. 
The interest rate is set with the objective of ensuring low and stable inflation. The operational 
target  of  monetary  policy  shall  be annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5 per  cent 
over time. Low and stable inflation is now the guiding principle behind interest rate setting in 
most western countries. New Zealand was the first country to introduce an inflation target at 
the  end  of  the  1980s.  Many  other  countries  have  since  followed  suit.  But  even  though 
inflation  targeting  is  a  relatively  new  phenomenon,  the  idea  is  not  new.  As  early  as  the 
beginning of the 1900s, the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell proposed that the interest rate 
should be used to keep the value of money – the price level – stable.8  
facing  considerable  challenges.  To 
the  euro  are  currently 
                                                 
7  Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott (1977): “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal 
Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, nr. 3, pp. 473–491. 
8  Knut Wicksell (1907): “The Influence of the Rate of Interest on Prices”, Economic Journal, XVII, pp. 213–220. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 5
The  shift  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  combined  with  a  generous  dose  of  good  luck,  has 
resulted in two “golden decades”. The major structural reforms have led to more efficient use 
of  labour  and  other  resources.  Developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  have  been  fairly 
stable.  Unemployment  has  been  low.  We  have  also  had  luck  on  our  side  over  the  past 
decade. Prices for Norwegian export goods, such as oil and gas, metals, minerals, fish and 
freight, rose sharply. At the same time, there has been a considerable decrease in prices for 
our  imports,  such  as  clothing,  footwear  and  electronic  equipment.  From  2003  to  2008,  
this  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  alone  boosted  national  income  by  more  than 
20 per cent, or a good 4 per cent per year. The picture of Norway’s favourable situation has 
been reinforced by the very severe impact of the financial crisis on other western economies, 
while Norway seems to have emerged with nothing more than a mild downturn.  
Nevertheless, there are many challenges ahead.  
Chart 1 
Relative labour costs 
Deviation from the average for the period 1970–2009 
Per cent, 1990–20101 
1  Figures  for  2010  are  an  average  for  the  period  1 January–19 August  2010.  A  rising  curve 
indicates weaker competitiveness. 
Sources:  Statistics  Norway,  Technical  Reporting  Committee  on  Income  Settlements  (TBU), 
OECD, Ministry of Finance and Norges Bank. 
 Norwegian labour has never been as costly as it is now. Norwegian businesses may lose out 
in  the  competition  for  contracts  given  the  current  high  level  of  spare  capacity  in  other 
countries.  There  are  frequent  reports  of  businesses  relocating  activities  to  neighbouring 
countries, such as Sweden. Labour in Sweden is perhaps as much as 30 per cent cheaper 
than  in  Norway  and  the  two  countries  are  closely  connected  in  terms  of  language  and 
culture.  
The management of  Norway’s oil  wealth poses another challenge. History has shown that 
countries  that  suddenly  gain  access  to  an  abundance  of  resources  have  a  tendency  to 
deplete the values rapidly and then fall into decline.9 Since the introduction of the fiscal rule 
in 2001, oil revenue spending in Norway has been increased by close to NOK 110 billion. Oil 
revenues  now  fund  about  1/6  of  government  expenditure.  Without  a  fiscal  rule,  spending 
                                                 
9  The Paradox of Plenty. Oil Booms and Petro-States by Terry Lynn Karl (1997) provides a good description of 
the problems facing oil-exporting countries. 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2010
would probably have been higher. In the 1950s, 60s and 70s, the tax burden was steadily 
increased to finance higher government expenditure. The return on our oil wealth has now 
taken over as the source of funding for increased public consumption.  
Chart 2 
Oil revenue spending1 
In billions of NOK, 2002–2010 
1 Structural non-oil deficit. 
Source: Ministry of Finance. 
 But  looking  ahead,  funding  Norway’s  welfare  system  will  be  demanding.  Increases  in  oil 
revenue  spending  cannot  be  sustained  for  much  longer.  Oil  production  will  decline.  At  the 
same time, we have been through a period in which the need for welfare services has been 
fairly stable. The age-dependency ratio has shown little change. The demographic landscape 
will not be as auspicious in the decades to come. Even though sound institutions have been 
built for the management of Norway’s oil wealth, it is too early to assess the effectiveness of 
our management. And even though the pressure to spend even more oil revenues has been 
considerable, it is likely that future generations will hold the view that we could have saved 
even more. 
Another important issue is what should be done to prevent further crises in financial markets. 
The global financial crisis has revealed weaknesses in the financial system. It has become 
clear that supervision must encompass the financial system as a whole, and not be limited to 
the  individual  financial  institution  or  financial  market.  The  term  used  to  refer  to  this 
supervision of the financial sector is macroprudential policy. The financial crisis is a topic that 
will probably hold the attention of economists for several decades to come.  
In  my  introduction,  I  commented  briefly  on  the  subject  economics.  Economics  is  a  wide-
ranging field and is clearly related to sciences such as mathematics and statistics, but also to 
other social sciences such as political science, sociology, philosophy, psychology and law. 
As  economists,  we  often  operate  in  the  borderland  between  economics  and  politics.  In  a 
speech to his students introducing a series of lectures on economic theory about 60 years 
ago,  Ragnar  Frisch  describes  the  economist  as  a  servant,  albeit  an  important  servant.  He 
says the following about the challenges we have to face: 
“In  this  confusion  of  fundamental  social  welfare  concerns,  conflicting  economic 
interests and complex causalities – big and small – the economist is supposed to 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 7
try and find a kind of path. He is supposed to explain both what is happening and 
what would happen if such and such an action were taken.”10 
However, as he also points out: 
“The purpose is not that he should reach a conclusion of the type: this is how you 
should act now! … Any economically important decision must also be based on a 
number of human, ultimately political, assessments that the expert, the economic 
scientist, is by no means more qualified to decide on than other good citizens.”10 
It can often be difficult to distinguish the object, ie exercise objectivity, from the perception of 
that object, ie subjectivity. Ragnar Frisch discusses this too. In an article written in 1936, he 
draws a line from the natural sciences through to the social sciences, where 
“… the difficulties of arriving at such unconditionally valid results become greater 
and  greater.  The  reason  for  this  is  first  and  foremost  that  the  whole  system  of 
ideas  on  which  the  natural  sciences  are  based  becomes  increasingly  more 
diffuse as one approaches the social sciences.”10 
When I was a student here at the University of Oslo at the beginning of the 1970s, there was 
a fairly broad consensus that the problem of unemployment had been solved once and for 
all. The belief was that the economy could be fine-tuned through government management, 
control and regulation.  
A similar optimism prevailed with respect to economics in the years prior to the financial crisis. 
In the preceding 15–20 years, the global economy was characterised by solid growth, greater 
economic stability than earlier and by low and stable inflation. The period is often referred to as 
“the great moderation”. A consensus was forming that wide fluctuations in the economy, as had 
been  the  norm,  were  a  thing  of  the  past.  The  US  economist  and  Nobel  Prize  winner  in 
economics Robert E. Lucas expressed a commonly held view in a speech he gave in 2003:  
“[...] macroeconomics in this original sense has succeeded: Its central problem of 
depression prevention has been solved, for all practical purposes, and has in fact 
been solved for many decades.”11  
Autumn 2008 was to become a reminder that we should be on our guard against established 
truths and consensus. If history has taught us anything, it is how little we actually know. So, if I 
were to offer some advice to those of you about to embark on your economics studies, I would 
first and foremost say this: be inquisitive and ask questions. Learn enough to be able to doubt.  
And  since  I  have  the  chance  for  a  word  with  you  “in  private”  I  would  like  to  seize  the 
opportunity  to  put  in  a  good  word  for  mathematics.  A  wealth  of  information  and  complex 
problems  often  make  it  difficult  to  see  the  essence  of  an  issue  and  to  distinguish  what  is 
important  from  what  is  not.  And  this  is  where  mathematics  can  be  helpful.  Mathematical 
models  and 
into  manageable  quantities.  A 
conversation  between  Odd  Aukrust  and  Trygve  Haavelmo,  two  giants  in  Norwegian 
economics research, shows that there is more than one way to use mathematics. They sat 
talking and began to discuss the subject of formulas and formulations. Aukrust said “my brain 
is so oriented towards the concrete that every time I see a formula, I turn it into a numerical 
example” Haavelmo answered: “that’s odd. Every time I see a numerical example, I have to 
turn it into a formula to be able to understand it.”12 
I wish you good luck with your studies. You have made a good choice. Thank you for your 
attention. 
formulas  simplify  complex  relationships 
                                                 
10  Ragnar Frisch (1995): “Troen på nøkken (A collection of essays, lectures and articles)”, Universitetsforlaget. 
11  Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (2003): “Macroeconomic Priorities”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 1, p. 1. 
12  Dagens Næringsliv (1989): “Sky Nobelpris-vinner (Shy Nobel Prize laureate)”, 12 October 1989. 
8 
 BIS Review 109/2010
