Njuguna Ndung’u: Consolidated Bank of Kenya’s new look 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the unveiling 
of the Consolidated Bank of Kenya’s new look, Nairobi, 4 June 2010. 
 Eunice Kagane, Chairlady, Consolidated Bank of Kenya Ltd; 
Mr. David Ndegwa Wachira, Chief Executive Officer, Consolidated Bank of Kenya Ltd; 
Board Members; 
Management and staff; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
I am delighted to have been invited to this auspicious occasion of unveiling the new 
look of Consolidated Bank of Kenya. Allow me at this early juncture to commend the 
board, management and staff of Consolidated Bank of Kenya for their contribution in 
the growth of the institution from the reigns of the failed institutions of the 1980’s to 
where  it  is currently.  It is  a stark  reminder  of  our  failures  in  the  past and  how  we 
have managed to turn it into an opportunity. The re-branding identity is a significant 
development aimed at achieving this goal. 
I  am  aware  that  Consolidated  Bank  of  Kenya  has  come  a  long  way  since  it  was 
incorporated in 1989 under the financial sector reform program established by the 
Government  with  the  objective  of  taking  over  and  re-structuring  various  troubled 
institutions. The process of rationalising, reorganising and re-structuring of the failed 
institutions  into  a  viable  professionally  managed  commercial  bank  was  initially 
expected to take about five years and thereafter its shares were to be sold to the 
public. However, the institution’s mandate was changed in 2001 to operate as a fully 
fledged commercial bank offering a full range of both retail and corporate banking 
services. 
The banking industry has become very competitive in the recent past and for you to 
compete effectively within your market niche you need to keep abreast of various 
innovative technological advancements that will support the service platform of your 
market niche. It is therefore important that this re-branding is seen not only in terms 
of  a  corporate  identity  but  should  also  reflect an  improved  service  delivery  by  the 
institution as well. 
The  Government  of  Kenya  unveiled  the  country’s  development  blueprint,  “Vision 
2030”  in  2008.  The  vision  for  the  financial  sector  is  to  “Create  a  vibrant  and 
globally  competitive  financial  sector,  driving  high  levels  of  savings  and 
financing  Kenya’s  investment  needs”  To  achieve  this,  the  Banking  Sector  is 
expected to increase efficiency and banking services reach especially to rural areas 
to help drive increased domestic savings. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  imperative  for  stakeholders  to  explore  mechanisms  to  deliver 
financial services and push forward the financial inclusion frontiers in tandem with 
Vision  2030.  As  a  first step  in  pushing  the  initiative  forward,  the  Banking  Act  was 
amended through the Finance Act 2009 permitting banks to use third parties (Agent 
Banking) to provide certain banking services on their behalf. I take this opportunity 
to urge banks to take advantage of the new provision. The agent banking model was 
designed to assist banks to lower their cost of offering banking services while at the 
same time improving their earnings as more Kenyans are offered an opportunity to 
access financial services. 
The  Kenyan  banking  Sector  continues  to  perform  well  despite  the  global  financial 
turbulences  and  challenges  on  the  domestic  front.  The  sector’s  total  assets 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 1
increased by 21% from Ksh.1.20 trillion in March 2009 to Ksh.1.45 trillion in March 
2010 whereas deposits increased by 23% to Ksh.1.14 trillion over the same period. 
Profit  before  tax  for  the  sector  increased  by  33%  from  Ksh.12.8  billion  in  the  first 
quarter of 2009 to Ksh.17.0 billion in the first quarter of 2010. This is remarkable, 
especially against the backdrop of domestic shocks and global financial crisis. 
Despite the impressive performance by banks, customers still have to contend with 
high borrowing costs. Although many banks have responded to Central Bank’s plea 
of  lowering  interest  rates,  it  is  our  expectation  that  all  the  banks  should  follow  to 
support the economic growth via the support of expanded private sector credit at an 
affordable  cost.  On  our  part,  we  should  now  ask  the  real  sector  to  access  and 
negotiate credit in line with their potential investment. 
Finally, let me reiterate that Central Bank and indeed the Government of Kenya will 
continue  to pursue  policies  that create  a  conducive  environment  for  growth  of  the 
financial sector and encourage the provision of banking services to majority of the 
un-banked Kenyan population at affordable cost. For us to be successful in this, we 
need to support strong institutional growth and remove underlying constraints that 
inhibit growth and financial reach. 
With these few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure to 
declare the new brand of Consolidated Bank of Kenya officially launched. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2010
