Duvvuri Subbarao: Improving financial literacy amongst school children 
and college students 
Address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the joint function 
of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Government of Karnataka on the Financial Literacy 
Project in Karnataka, Bangalore, 22 March 2010. 
English translation of the Governor’s address, which was delivered in Kannada. 
 Respected Chief Secretary, Government of Karnataka Shri S.V. Ranganath and friends, 
1. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  present  here  at  this  function  organized  jointly  by  the 
Government of Karnataka and the Reserve Bank of India. Over the last one year we have 
done a number of functions across the country as part of RBIs platinum jubilee celebrations. 
This function this afternoon here in Bangalore is easily one of the most exhilarating functions. 
It was particularly heart warming to listen to children speaking on financial issues. For the 
first  time,  I  get  a  feeling  we  are  making  a  solid  start  on  Financial  Literacy.  Our  Hon’ble 
Finance  Minister  Shri  Pranab  Mukherjee  and  the  Chief  Minister  of  Karnataka  Shri  B. 
Yeddyurappa had shown lot of interest to take part in this program. Due to some unforeseen 
urgent works, they were unable to attend this function. However, they have sent their good 
wishes for the program. 
2.  
When I came here for the Reserve Bank’s Central Board Meeting in May last year, 
I had an occasion to call on the Chief Minister, Shri Yeddyurappa and explained to him the 
role of responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. I also told him about the Reserve Bank’s efforts 
to further financial literacy and financial inclusion. The Chief Minister showed great interest 
and requested that we take Karnataka as a pilot state for launching our initiatives and offered 
the  full  cooperation  of  the  Government  of  Karnataka  for  this  purpose.  Over  the  last  eight 
months,  the  Reserve  Bank  worked  closely  with  the  Government  of  Karnataka  on  several 
initiatives. Today’s function is a culmination of these efforts. 
3.  
(i)  
There are three distinct events we are marking today. 
The first is the release of text books for Classes V, VII and IX containing lessons on 
finance. 
The  second  is  the  launch  of  the  Electronic  Benefit  and  Income  Transfer  (EBIT) 
Scheme. 
The third is distribution of prizes to state-wide winners of the RBI quiz competition 
conducted across schools and colleges of the State of Karnataka. 
Let me now say a few words about the significance of each of these events. 
4.  
5.  
The  Reserve  Bank  attaches  top  priority  to  deepening  financial  literacy.  This  means 
that school children and college students should acquire basic proficiency in financial concepts. 
Why is this important? This is important both for you as individuals and for the country as a 
whole. When children grow up and start earning, they should know their options – where to 
save, when to save, how and how much to save. Only when you are able to evaluate your 
options will you become responsible adults. This is important at the aggregate level too. When 
you  save,  your  money  becomes  available  to  the  government  and  to  other  private  sector  for 
investment.  And  that  investment  raises  our  growth  rate  and  creates  jobs.  I  want  all  of  your 
school children and college students to study well, in particular try and understand the world of 
finance. I also want to request the Education Department of Government of Karnataka to do an 
evaluation  of  the  introduction  of  the  finance  curriculum  after  one  year.  Based  on  your  feed 
back, we can improve the lessons and instruction material both here in Karnataka and all other 
states. 
(iii)  
(ii)  
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
Now let us know more about financial literacy. Banking facilities are still not available 
6.  
to many villages. Out of about 6 lakh villages in our country, 5.7 lakh villages still do not have 
any bank branch. At the earliest, banking facilities should be provided to these villages. For 
this purpose, technology should be used to open no frill accounts. The banking facilities can 
be made available the door step of the villages by appointing one of the villagers as banking 
correspondents.  Bio-metric  smart  cards  may  be  provided  to  the  no-frill  account  holders. 
Bio-metric smart cards should be imbedded with photograph and finger print of the account 
holder.  This  facilitates  acknowledgement  for  the  transactions  done  by  the  depositor.  Their 
day-to-day  transactions  may  be  uploaded  to  the  bank  branch  either  through  telephone  or 
internet. The benefit of government schemes may be directly and speedily credited to these 
no  frills  accounts.  This  is  being  implemented  in  six  districts  of  Karnataka  with  an  aim  to 
extend the same through out the country. 
7.  
We have organized various curricular and non-curricular programmes for improving 
financial  literacy  amongst  school  children.  The  Education  Department  of  Government  of 
Karnataka  have  revised  the  high  school  textbooks  for  the  year  2010–11  as  per  our 
suggestions.  As  part  of  non-curricular  activities  we  have  organized  State  Level  Quiz 
Competition. About 6100 schools and 3000 colleges took part in this competition. We got a 
splendid feedback for this from the school children. Children’s knowledge about banking and 
RBI has amazed us. I hope that our endeavour in this direction has laid a strong foundation 
for the future citizens of the country to become fully financially literate.  
8.  
Before I finish, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, I want to thank the Hon’ble finance 
Minister  Shri  Pranab  Mukherjee  for  his  very  strong  and  enthusiastic  support  for  financial 
literacy and financial inclusion, and the Chief Minister Shri Yeddyurappa for the co-operation 
extended by Government of Karnataka under his leadership. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2010
