Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial integration, development and stability – 
lessons from the crisis (introductory remarks) 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  “Financial  integration  and  stability:  the  legacy  of  the  crisis”,  sponsored  and 
organised by the European Central Bank and the European Commission, Frankfurt am Main, 
12 April 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference  on  financial  integration  and  stability,  jointly 
organised  by  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission.  I  would  like  to  thank  in  particular 
Commissioner  Barnier  for  participating  in  this  event,  and  his  services  for  the  smooth  co-
organisation of it.  
This joint conference is an illustration of the very good cooperation that exists since a long 
time  between  the  two  institutions.  The  European  Commission  is  in  the  driving  seat  on  all 
what concerns financial integration. The ECB also a strong interest in this topic, because of 
the implications for the single monetary policy, our primary mandate, and also on financial 
stability  and  the  operation  of  payment  systems,  areas  where  we  have  a  statutory 
responsibility. The very good cooperation between our institutions has intensified in the wake 
of the financial crisis. Let me just mention the recommendations and guidance we developed 
in the course of last year on support measures for banks in difficulties. This joint work limited 
the risk of unilateral and uncoordinated support measures by governments and was therefore 
crucial in maintaining a level playing field and in preserving the Single Market.  
It is a great pleasure for me to chair now the panel that will discuss some of key policy issues 
raised  in  the  two  reports  presented  to  you  earlier.  We  have  the  privilege  of  having  four 
outstanding  panellists  with  first  hand  experience  in  dealing  with  financial  integration  and 
stability at the highest level.  
Michel  Barnier  is  since  early  this  year  European  Commissioner  for  Internal  Market  and 
Services and before that he held various ministerial posts in French cabinets, including that 
of Minister of Foreign Affairs and of European Affairs.  
Jaime  Caruana  is  since  April  last  year  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements.  Previously,  he  was  counsellor  to  the  Managing  Director  and  Director  of  the 
Monetary and Capital Market Department of the IMF. Jaime was also Governor of the Bank 
of Spain, and in that capacity he served on the ECB’s Governing Council.  
Vikram Pandit is since end 2007 CEO of Citigroup, a truly global financial player which has a 
history of being present in more than 100 countries worldwide. He took the helm of Citi at a 
very  difficult  time,  and  since  then  has  initiated  a  turnaround  in  the  business  model  of  the 
bank.  Before  that,  Vikram  had  a  long  successful  career  in  other  financial  institutions, 
including Morgan Stanley and Citi itself.  
Alessandro  Profumo  has  been  CEO  of  Unicredit  Group  since  it  was  founded  in  1997. 
Unicredit  Group  can  probably  be  qualified  as  the  quintessential  European  cross-border 
banking  group,  with  operations  in  22  European  countries  and,  amongst  these  22,  in 
19 Central  and  Eastern  European  countries.  Alessandro  is  also  the  President  of  the 
European Banking Association.  
The last 2 to 3 years have been especially eventful for financial integration and stability, with 
once in a life-time developments. After Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy in September 2008, 
the  global  financial  system  experienced  unprecedented  stress  and  policy  makers  had  to 
tread unknown territory in dealing with it.  
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
The financial crisis has raised a host of policy issues that will provide food for reflection for 
generations  to  come.  I  will  mention  a  few  of  them  to  set  the  scene  and  to  kick-start  the 
discussion.  
The first set of issues relate to the developments in the late nineties and early 2000s. The 
combination  of  high  economic  growth,  ample  liquidity,  increasing  financial  integration  and 
development, and “light handed” regulation sewed the seeds of the crisis to come. I believe 
that  a  number  of  people  and  organisations,  including  mine,  identified  vulnerabilities  in  the 
financial system before the crisis erupted. Nevertheless, we did not anticipate the timing and 
the intensity. We should ask ourselves what we missed in the run-up to the crisis and what 
the lessons are for the future.  
Once the crisis erupted in full force, a first casualty were the money markets, which provide 
the oil to make the banking system run smoothly. Money markets came to an unprecedented 
stand-still. Because they are so closely linked to monetary policy, they had shown signs of 
almost full integration right after the introduction of the euro. But with the crisis, a degree of 
re-segmentation took place again along national borders; and the Eurosystem had to step in 
to take on the intermediation role that these markets play in normal times.  
Another set of issues relate to banking. Banks expanded both across borders and financial 
sectors, often combing commercial banking, investment banking and insurance business in 
one and the same group. The two groups whose CEOs are in the panel are clear examples 
of  this  evolution.  But  cross-border  integration  of  rules  and  prudentials,  including  the 
institutional  framework,  has  not  proceeded  with  the  same  speed  and  there  continue  to  be 
clear  differences  according  to  the  activity  type.  Banking  consolidation also  raises sensitive 
moral hazard and crisis management questions, as painfully illustrated by the crisis.  
The securities markets showed strong growth in the years before the crisis and clear signs of 
integration, though not to the same extent as observed in the euro money markets. With the 
crisis, bond price indictors showed signs of more dispersion across countries in Europe, but 
the  question  is  whether  this  points  to  more  segmented  markets  or  rather  increased  risk 
awareness on the part of investors. Very topical in this respect is also the CDS market and 
its  interaction  with  the  underlying  (sovereign)  bond  market.  Finally,  the  integration  of  a 
securities  market  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  integration  of  the  supporting  market 
infrastructure. This is an area where the Eurosystem and the European Commission have 
taken  significant  measures,  but  integration  continues  to  be  affected  by  legal,  fiscal  and 
technical issues.  
An  important  set  of  issues  on  which  the  panellist  may  want  to  comment  relate  to  the 
regulatory  reform  process,  where  the  G20  provides  the  strategic  impetus,  the  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) plays an important role in policy coordination, and the Committees and 
working  groups  (such  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  is  the 
emblematic  Global  Committee)  the  review  of  specific  international  standards.  Important 
regulatory reforms are underway in Europe, as well as in the United States, and I want to 
elaborate on them because they have important implications for the ECB.  
As you know, the proposed reform for the financial supervisory framework in the EU will be 
based  on  two  pillars.  The  micro-prudential  pillar,  the  European  System  of  Financial 
Supervisors  (ESFS),  will  be  composed  of  the  national  supervisors  and  three  European 
Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs).  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  will  form  the 
macro-prudential pillar.  
Under  the  proposals  of  the  European  Commission,  the  ESAs  will  carry  out  a  range  of 
activities, including the issuance of binding and non-binding rules which will provide the basis 
of a so-called “single EU rulebook”. The ESAs will further promote a consistent application of 
EU legislation and of a common supervisory culture, and provide for mediation in the case of 
disagreements  between  national  supervisors.  All  this  should  lead  to  a  more  harmonised 
regulation and supervision across countries, and as a result also foster financial integration.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
For central bankers, the part of the reform which directly concerns them is the establishment 
of the ESRB, a new independent body that will for the first time carry out a comprehensive 
macro-prudential oversight of the financial system of the EU. The ESRB will also issue risk 
warnings,  and,  where  appropriate,  recommendations,  and  follow  up  their  implementation. 
This  body  will  bring  together  the  central  bankers,  the  heads  of  the  three  supervisory 
authorities,  the  Commission  together  with  the  supervisors  of  the  27  EU  Member  States  to 
regularly discuss and assess the financial stability conditions in the EU. In that respect, the 
ESRB  shows  some  keen  similarities  with  the  Financial  Stability  Council  in  the  proposed 
financial reform in the United States.  
The  ESRB  is  expected  to  support  financial  integration  through  its  contribution  to  financial 
stability  in  the  EU.  Indeed,  if  market  participants  are  confident  that  the  authorities  take 
properly into account the interdependencies between countries and the various components 
of the financial system, they are likely to fully exploit the possibilities offered by cross-border 
activities in the EU.  
On  the  part  of  the  ECB,  I  can  assure  you  that  we  stand  ready  to  support  the  ESRB,  in 
particular taking into account the important presence of the members of the General Council 
of the ECB in the ESRB and the fact that the ECB will provide the secretariat and analytical, 
statistical, logistical and administrative support to the ESRB, as required under the legislative 
proposals. Preparatory work at the ECB has been organised through the setting up of an ad 
hoc  team  and  is  under  way  so  that  the  ESRB  can  take  up  its  work  after  its  formal 
establishment.  The  ECB  is  in  the  process  of  enhancing  its  capabilities  for  monitoring  and 
assessing financial stability risks. Only a number of weeks ago, we reformed our Directorate 
Financial  Stability  and  Supervision  into  a  Directorate  General  Financial  Stability  with  more 
resources. In all this, we also try to draw as much as possible on synergies with existing work 
and resources, both within the ECB and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), the 
constellation of the 27 national central banks of the European Union.  
I would now turn to the panel and ask our guests to share with us their observations. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 3
