Patrick Honohan: Two-way interdependence between the banking 
system and the State 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial  Services 
Authority of Ireland, to the Small Firms Association, Dublin, 11 May 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  of  this  occasion  to  speak  to  about  the  two-way 
interdependence between the banking system and the State, which has been illustrated in 
dramatic fashion in recent weeks.  
Understanding and managing the elements of this interdependence is key to improving the 
situation with regard to the cost and availability of credit, matters that are of central interest to 
my hosts tonight, the Small Firms Association. 
In brief, my message is twofold:  
– 
First,  continued  consolidation  of  the  public  finances  is  key  to  ensuring  a  flow  of 
reasonably-priced liquidity to the banks and their customers;  
Second, the recapitalization of the banks, which we announced at the end of March, 
is  key  to  dispelling  the  cloud  of  ill-defined  banking  losses  that  has  been  hanging 
over the public finances for many months.  
 The extraordinary events in European and international financial markets over the past few 
days show clearly how a better flow of credit does not simply depend on the motivation and 
skill of bank management. 
Improvements  in  the  flow  of  credit  can  only  go  hand-in-hand  with  the  creation  and 
maintenance of firm foundations in terms of the capital reserves of the banks, the national 
fiscal stance and national cost competitiveness. 
Credit and finance generally depend crucially on confidence. And in a country as open as 
Ireland – still a world champion in its degree of globalization – that confidence has to extend 
to  the  global  audience,  especially  those  who  have  invested  in  Ireland,  and  those  who  will 
continue to invest in Ireland. It also means confidence at home on the part of those – like my 
audience  today  –  whose  actions  can  help  restart  investment  and  boost  job  creation,  and 
those whose job it is to help finance that restart. 
This  week  and  last  the  media  focus  has  been  on  confidence  in  international  financial 
markets. Ireland has not been directly under the spotlight, but the fact that it has been just 
off-stage  is  illustrated  by  what  I  would  regard  as  wide  spreads  on  Irish  government  debt, 
which – albeit fluctuating – have been a feature for well over a year. 
We have been here before. Through the 1980s and into the 1990s Irish interest rates were 
kept far too high as a result of market pessimism. In effect, the Irish government was paying 
lenders  over  the  odds  to  compensate  them  for  currency  risks  on  a  scale  which  never 
materialized and which the government knew would not materialize. My estimate is that in 
those days we paid 2½ percentage points extra as a result of this unfounded pessimism over 
a decade. 
Over the past year and more it has been a similar story. Markets have been demanding a 
premium for risks which the government knows are unfounded. This morning the spread of 
Irish  government  10  year  bonds  above  the  German  benchmark  was  still  more  than 
1½ percentage  points,  despite  a  sharp  narrowing  following  the  measures  announced  over 
the weekend. 
One way or another, commercial bank lending rates also come to embody the risk premia 
being paid by the national government. This is something that cannot be avoided. And that  
BIS Review 66/2010 
 1
– in broad terms – is why bank lending rates have been creeping up again in Ireland. (I won’t 
speak  today  about  important  details  such  as  the  cross-subsidization  between  tracker 
mortgages and other lending.) 
Given how intimately dependent bank lending rates are on the rates at which the government 
can borrow, let me say a word about the government’s borrowing costs and how those have 
been affected by market sentiment in recent weeks.   
Right across Europe, for the past several weeks, the fiscal pressures in the Greek economy 
have  been  heightening  investor  concerns.  This  resulted  in  Greek  debt  being  traded  in 
secondary  markets  at  record  yields.  Despite  the  negotiation  of  a  large  financing  package 
sufficient  to  deal  with  the  Greek  government’s  borrowing  needs  for  three  years,  and 
assurances  that  Greek  government  debt  would  remain  eligible  to  back  commercial  bank 
access to liquidity at the ECB, market concerns remained high. Indeed, they tended to spill 
over  into  the  markets  for  the  debt  of  other  countries  with  high  borrowing  needs.  The 
functioning of interbank and other short-term markets was also hampered. Irish government 
debt did not escape this pressure, though it was not the most affected.  
The symptoms intensified during last week to the point where some financial markets seem 
to have become quite dysfunctional. It was clear that decisive action was needed.   
The action decided upon on Monday morning had three main goals: 
– 
First, the path of fiscal adjustment right across the European Union needed to be 
confirmed and for many countries reinforced. 
Second,  there  had  to  be  confirmation  that  sufficient  financial  resources  would  be 
available  to  enable  countries  taking  convincing  and  sufficient  fiscal  adjustment 
measures to accomplish this adjustment in a smooth manner. 
Third, to address the malfunctioning of securities markets and thereby to ensure the 
effective  conduct  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area,  wholesale  markets 
for debt and deposits which were beginning to freeze, had to be freed up.  
  Progressively these actions taken over the weekend are having their intended effect. But the 
lesson is not that we can all sit back and relax. The experience has shown how crucial it is to 
stay on a disciplined course to correction of the public finances right across the euro area. 
This is essential if the financial markets are to work more effectively and in particular resume 
their key function of helping to finance the recovery including through lending to small firms. 
Of  course  it  is  not  just  in  the  short-term  markets  that  the  banks  and  the  Irish  government 
have been closely intertwined in recent times, both in reality and, especially, in the minds of 
market participants. The banking losses, and recognition that the government would have to 
fill any eventual hole, started to weigh on markets from soon after the banking guarantee was 
put in place some 19 months ago. 
I won’t rake back in any detail today over the banking excesses that preceded the crisis of 
September 2008.  
The whole economy was boosted well beyond its sustainable path in the middle years of the 
past  decade.  Some  of  the  benefits  of  the  boom  were  spread  widely.  But  unfortunately  an 
even larger part of the boom was not only unsustainable but wholly illusory and resulted in 
wasted  resources  as  we  see  in  half-finished  and  half-empty  housing  estates  and  office 
blocks all over the country.  
It’s  much  tougher  to  adjust  expectations  down,  especially  when  one  has  taken  on 
commitments on the basis of an inflated wage, unsustainably low income taxes, or – relevant 
for small firms – a few years of inflated profits. Above all, many of those hit by unemployment 
resulting from the crash – which of course has been partly due to the global downturn, but 
was exacerbated by domestic events – are in a difficult and debilitating position. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2010
Money borrowed by the banks from abroad and ploughed into grandiose developments now 
has to be repaid by the banks.  
Uncertainty about the capacity of the banks to make these repayments, and hence about the 
scale  of  the  likely  call  on  the  State  to  step  in,  has  represented  a  cloud  over  the  public 
finances. 
This is the other main channel of interdependence between the banks and government.   
The prudential capital adequacy review whose results were announced on March 30 is going 
a long way towards removing this cloud. 
Over  the  previous  few  months,  we  at  the  Central  Bank  have  been  making  a  careful 
assessment of the likely bank loan-losses that are in prospect over the next few years. This 
is over and above the valuation work being carried out by NAMA, and which gives us a good 
fix on the likely recoverable value of the larger property loans. We have been working on the 
non-NAMA loans and figuring out their likely performance as they suffer from the impact of 
the overall economic downturn – part of it of course attributable to the global crisis, and not 
just  to  the  bursting  of  our  own  bubble.  This  exercise  involved  working  with  the  banks,  but 
challenging  their  estimates  of  loan-loss  based  on  our  own  more  realistic  –  some  may  say 
pessimistic – credit analysis. (I am over-simplifying the exercise, as it also looked at other 
elements  of  the  profit  and  loss  account  over  the  coming  years).  The  conclusions  of  this 
exercise are worth emphasizing.  
To my relief, and slight surprise, it turns out that most of the banks started the boom with 
such  a  comfortable  cushion  of  shareholders’  funds  that  they  would  be  able  to  repay  their 
debts on the basis of their own resources. This includes the two big banks. It is because of 
this fact – that their shareholders’ funds will remain positive through the cycle – that one of 
them,  Bank  of  Ireland,  has  already  been  able  to  tap  the  private  market  for  an  additional 
equity  injection.  Of  course  they  do  need  additional  capital  to  move  forward,  but,  as  has 
happened  in  the  US  and  elsewhere,  the  government’s  capital  injections  of  last  year  into 
these two institutions looks like being well-remunerated. 
This takes account of the low prices being paid – much lower than originally envisaged – for 
the  loans  being  transferred  to  NAMA.  The  NAMA  purchases  replace  risky  property-related 
loans  with  risk-free  NAMA  bonds  and  are  part  of  the  process  of  putting  them  on  a  solid 
foundation. By the way, knowledgeable experts on the property market assure me that, at the 
low prices they have paid, that organization now has a good chance of breaking even over 
the coming years, as indeed has been its stated intention all along.  
Having  calculated  their  likely  future  losses,  we  have  now  required  the  banks  to  rearrange 
their affairs to ensure that they have ample capital reserves to ride out this period of losses. 
They are responding with plans that raise additional capital reserves and reduce the scale of 
their less central activities.  
The recapitalization and restructuring of the banks will be accomplished by end year. They 
will be stable and secure, capable of resuming their role in providing financial services to the 
economy.  
Just two of the banks losses go so deep as to burn through not only the whole of their capital 
reserves but billions of the depositors and other lenders’ money. As you know, these two are 
Irish  Nationwide  Building  Society  (INBS)  and  Anglo  Irish  Bank.  There’s  no  point  in  my 
wasting purple prose in condemning the conduct and results of these banks. The taxpayer  
–  and  those  in  need  of  better  public  services  –  will  be  picking  up  the  sizable  tab  for  their 
deficiencies.  
What I do want to emphasize is that – huge though it is – the net deficiency of these two 
banks  does  not  impose  a  burden  on  the  government’s  budget  that  could  justify  recent 
interest rate yield spreads on Irish government bonds.  
BIS Review 66/2010 
 3
INBS accounts for about €2½ billion in net budgetary costs. With the NAMA purchases not 
yet completed, I can’t quite narrow the Anglo figure down precisely. However, rounding up 
recent estimates to be on the safe side, it would be a pessimist who would put the taxpayer’s 
net cost above €25 billion. That is a huge sum, and it’s unconscionable that it could have 
arisen. (I will have more to say about this in my report to the Minister for Finance at the end 
of the month). 
The main point today, then, is to stress that the cost is manageable. Shocking, if you want, 
but manageable. I make no excuse for using that word. It is important that everyone, at home 
and abroad, recognizes that this is a sum that is not a game-changer in terms of the public 
finances.  It  represents  about  one  year’s  borrowing  requirement  at  current  rates.  It  is  not 
destabilizing. 
The plan is that, when this has been accomplished later in the year, the markets will come 
more to realize that the banks’ losses no longer represent any threat to the public finances, 
and that this is no longer a factor that should cause them concerns about investing in Irish 
government paper. 
This  will  be  good  both  for  the  banks’  ability  to  mobilize  loanable  funds,  and  for  the 
government’s  ability 
though  steadily  contracting,  borrowing 
requirement.  
After  all,  it  is  the  underlying  gap  between  tax  revenue  and  government  spending  that 
represents the main pressure on the government’s finances and that has resulted in the bulk 
of  the  recent  heavy  borrowing.  Staying  on  course  to  reduce  this  underlying  deficit  is 
absolutely crucial to ensuring that confidence in the public finances can be maintained and 
strengthened. 
its  continuing, 
fund 
to 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2010
