Caleb M Fundanga: Measures to improve financial regulation and 
supervision of the financial system in Zambia 
Remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the United Nations 
Working group meeting on the world financial and economic crisis, New York, 3 May 2010. 
 The  Co-Chairpersons  of  the  Ad  hoc  Open  Ended  Working  Group  on  the  World 
Financial and Economic Crisis  
Distinguished Delegates  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It is a great honour for me to address this important meeting on the impact and ramifications 
of the global financial crisis on economies across the globe. I am particularly encouraged by 
the fact that the discussions pay particular focus on the issues of financial sector reform and 
how  we  can  best  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  plays  its  rightful  role  in  facilitating 
innovation, enterprise, growth and development.  
Chairperson, although the worst effects of the economic recession appear to be behind us, 
the  negative  effects  are  still  being  felt,  particularly  in  the  advanced  economies  where 
unemployment is likely to remain stubbornly high. According to the most recent forecasts by 
the  IMF,  the  global  economy  is  projected  to  record  positive  growth  of  3.9%  in  2010,  after 
contracting  by  0.8%  in  2009.  However,  these  growth  rates  mask  significant  differences  in 
economic  growth  across  the  world,  with  emerging  and  developing  countries  on  the  whole 
posting much stronger growth rates than the developed or advanced economies. It is obvious 
that there will be need to rebalance fiscal and monetary policies in these economies once 
growth  becomes  more  broad-based  and  entrenched  to  avoid  a  build  up  of  inflationary 
pressures.  As  the  crisis  was  mainly  a  result  of  weak  regulatory  framework  and  poor 
supervisory  oversight  in  advanced  economies,  there  is  also  need  to  continue  undertaking 
measures to reform the financial systems and enhance global standards for the supervision 
of the financial sector.  
Zambia weathered the crisis relatively well, with growth in 2009 actually increasing to 6.3% 
from  5.7%  in  2008.  This  growth  was  largely  driven  by  increased  output  in  the  mining  and 
quarrying,  construction,  agriculture,  and  energy  sectors.  Although  the  Zambia’s  financial 
sector was not directly exposed to toxic assets, the financial crisis and the global recession 
that  it  triggered  did  impact  Zambia’s  macroeconomic  environment.  The  Zambian  economy 
suffered reversal of short term capital flows and a slowing down of foreign direct investment, 
which  had  an  adverse  impact  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  the  major 
currencies. The collapse in commodity prices as global demand contracted also impacted on 
Zambia’s  mining  sector  and  its  related  support  industries,  leading  to  losses  in  output  and 
employment that fed back into the deterioration in the loan book of commercial banks. Non-
performing loans in the banking sector, for example, rose from around 6% in June 2008 to 
12.6% at the end of 2009. 
Distinguished delegates, part of the reason for the resilience of Zambia’s financial sector 
were the comprehensive financial sector reforms that have been systematically undertaken 
after  the  banking  sector  collapse  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  These  reforms  were 
promulgated under a Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) that was implemented to 
address  weaknesses  in  the  financial  sector,  identified  in  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme (FSAP) conducted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank 
in 2002.  
Zambia’s  reforms  included  the  following:  the  increase  in  capital  requirements  for  banks; 
consolidation of the supervision of bank and non-bank financial institutions under the Bank of 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
Zambia;  legislative  reform  that  gave  the  Bank  of  Zambia  powers  to  deal  with  failing 
institutions; and the promulgation of corporate governance guidelines including the conduct 
of outreach programmes on good corporate governance practices for the financial sector and 
the introduction of credit reference services. The Bank of Zambia is continuing with its work 
to  improve  the  financial  sector  and  enhance  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the 
development of the country through the implementation of the second phase of the Financial 
sector  Development  Plan,  FSDP  II.  The  FSDP  II  will  focus  more  narrowly  on  issues  of 
competition within the financial sector and extending financial inclusion. However, the fallout 
from the crisis has brought to the fore the need to further enhance the regulatory framework 
by  adopting  and  fortifying  supervisory  and  regulatory  practices  which  ensure  prompt  and 
effective policy responses to developments in the financial system.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  introduction  of  credit  reference  services  in  Zambia  was 
necessitated by the poor credit culture, which was identified as one of the weaknesses in the 
financial  sector,  under  the  FSDP.  Bank  of  Zambia  licensed  the  first  ever  credit  reference 
bureau,  in  2006,  following  the  introduction  of  the  Credit  Reference  Services  (Licensing) 
Guidelines  and  Credit  Data  (Privacy  Code)  2006.  The  substantive  operations  of  the  CRB 
commenced in the fourth quarter of 2008 after a Directive was issued by the Bank of Zambia 
on 10 December 2008 mandating all credit providers to use the services of a credit reference 
agency  before  issuing  any  loan  and  to  provide  credit  data  to  a  credit  reference  agency. 
However  in  spite  of  these  efforts,  the  credit  reference  system  still  faces  problems,  largely 
relating to the coverage of sectors, as the current legislation is limited to the financial sector. 
In view of this, the Bank of Zambia is currently developing a comprehensive credit reference 
law  that,  amongst  other  things,  will  have  jurisdiction  over  all  credit  providers  and  data 
sources and will provide for the treatment of credit data.  
Chairperson, allow me to share with you some of the key regulatory and supervisory issues 
that the Bank of Zambia is addressing with regards to the regulation of the financial system in 
Zambia  and  the  need  to  address  the  supervisory  challenges  posed  by  the  global  financial 
crisis. These issues include: the adoption of a risk based supervision (RBS), enhancing the 
legislative  framework,  the  determination  of  capital  adequacy,  the  introduction  of  a  deposit 
insurance  scheme,  the  enhancement  of  our  lender  of  last  resort  regime,  and  the 
enhancement  of  cross-border  cooperation  through  consolidated  supervision  of  financial 
institutions.  
Risk based supervision is a structured, forward-looking process designed to identify key risk 
factors to which individual banks are exposed. This approach entails closer interaction with 
banks and allows early identification of risks as well as close monitoring of the nature and 
direction of risks as they emerge. The banking industry has recorded notable rapid growth in 
the last ten years. This growth comes with heightened risk levels. The RBS provides robust 
mechanisms  to  ensure  that  banks  have  adequate  risk  management  systems  to  mitigate 
risks.  RBS  systematically  considers  all  key  functional  activities  (business  lines  and 
operational areas) and, within each key functional area, evaluates the level of risk, quality of 
risk  management,  and  direction  of  risk.  The  resulting  risk  profile  of  the  bank,  which  is 
dynamic,  will  therefore  change  during  the  supervisory  cycle.  This  paradigm  shift  in 
supervisory approaches requires a permissive legal and regulatory framework.  
In order to ensure timely and credible information for the effective supervision of banks and 
other financial institutions, the Bank of Zambia has been playing a key role in developing the 
Bank  Supervision  Application  System  (BSA),  which  is  a  Southern  African  Development 
Community (SADC) region initiative. The BSA is a standardized tool designed for capturing 
supervisory information, financial and risk analysis and provides a workflow mechanism for 
communicating the different aspects of the supervisory process.  
Distinguished delegates, the legal and regulatory framework governing the supervision of 
the financial sector must provide for a fast and flexible way of adapting the banking system to 
the constantly changing financial landscape. The legal and regulatory frameworks in Zambia 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2010
comprise of the Banking and Financial Services Act, Chapter 387 of the Laws of Zambia; the 
Bank of Zambia Act, Chapter 360 of the Laws of Zambia; the National Payment Systems Act; 
the  Prohibition  and  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Act;  the  Bank  of  Zambia  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Directives;  and  the  Bank  of  Zambia  Corporate  Governance  Guidelines.  The 
speed at which changes to these regulatory frameworks can be made is a crucial element of 
the  reform  process  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  arrangements  as  it  improves  policy 
responsiveness. A number of challenges exist in this area including the need to update some 
of the Statutory Instruments (SIs) in order to reflect the dynamics presently characterizing the 
financial markets. In some cases, new guidelines are altogether needed for regulating new 
products and innovations such as mobile banking, internet banking and Islamic banking. The 
need  for  quick  and  appropriate  responses  to  market  developments  and  innovations  while 
important also need to be balanced by a well designed regulatory framework that ensures 
the maintenance of a stable and sound financial system.  
Chairperson,  the  stability  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system  is  in  turn,  heavily 
dependent  on  the  adequacy  of  capital.  It  is  essential  for  the  right  balance  to  be  struck 
between  the  need  for  banks  to  hold  adequate  capital  to  absorb  losses  and  the  need  to 
ensure that capital requirements do not unduly constrain from lending to the real economy. It 
is  also  important  that  banks  are  not  so  highly  leveraged  relative  to  common  equity  as  to 
create  incentives  for  excessive  risk  taking.  The  required  capital  ratios  should  therefore  be 
viewed  in  the  context  of  the  high  quality  capital  –  Core  Tier  1  and  Tier  II  definitions  and 
should exclude subordinated debt as providing relevant support.  
Distinguished  delegates,  Basel  II  provides  a  pragmatic  approach  to  determining  overall 
capital levels. It introduced a new approach to the definition of relative capital requirements 
to  be  held  against  specific  asset  categories.  The  challenge  in  this  approach  is  in  deciding 
what an optimal level of capital is especially in light of massive scale of economic losses now 
being suffered as a result of the banking system collapse. However, any theory of optimal 
capital  level  will  have  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  increased  cost  of  financial 
intermediation  which  result  from  higher  capital  requirements  and  the  benefits  of  the 
decreased  probability  of  bank  failure  and  economic  harm  which  will  be  achieved.  Recent 
developments have established a prima facie case for higher minimum capital requirements. 
The challenge will be for supervisors to manage the transition to higher capital requirements 
in a phased approach and take into account the need to avoid procyclical pressure on bank 
capital adequacy under conditions of economic downturn. Zambia has adopted Basel II for 
implementation although work is still on-going in this area.  
The  enhanced  approaches  to  capital  that  I  have  just  described  have  the  potential  to 
significantly  minimize  the  probability  of  bank  failure.  They  may  also  assist  in  reducing  the 
extent  to  which  strains  on  bank  capital  and  liquidity  result  in  an  impaired  ability  to  extend 
credit to the real economy. But the probability of bank failure cannot be reduced to zero. The 
system of bank regulation and supervision therefore needs to be buttressed by arrangements 
for  deposit  insurance  (for  protecting  depositors  in  the  event  of  default)  and  for  bank 
resolution (to ensure orderly wind up and avoid knock-on effects to the rest of the banking 
system). In this regard, an effective deposit protection scheme becomes an important aspect 
of the financial safety net especially in crisis times. Although Zambia did not experience bank 
failures during the current global crisis, work on the establishment of the deposit protection 
scheme  is  currently  in  progress.  Quick  bank  resolution  is  also  an  essential  element  that 
inspires confidence in the financial system. In Zambia, for instance, work on liquidations has 
been  going  on  for  some  time  in  some  cases.  The  establishment  of  an  effective  depositor 
protection scheme should assist in early bank resolutions while providing protection to the 
most vulnerable depositors.  
Chairperson, although the Bank of Zambia has exercised the function of lender of last resort 
(LOLR) in the past during the banking crisis in the 1990s, there was no clear LOLR policy 
framework  in  place.  There  has  been  renewed  concern  that  the  economic  slowdown,  if 
prolonged,  could  create  liquidity  pressures  in  the  banking  system  in  Zambia.  Past 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 3
experiences and current global slowdown build a strong case for a clearly designed LOLR 
framework  in  which  the  central  bank  can  exercise  this  function.  The  challenge  in  the 
regulatory and supervisory arrangements is that of operationalising the lender of last resort. 
Lender of last resort should be seen in light of its role in promoting wider public good and 
systemic financial stability and ultimately, the wider economic stability. It plays an important 
role in the economy to avoid the social cost of a bank failure. Some bank failures may lead to 
contagion effect on other banks which has the potential to transmit to the entire economy. 
Lender of last resort should be an essential element of the wider institutional framework for 
governments  and  central  banks  for  dealing  with  banking  crises  in  addition  to  prompt 
corrective action, bank resolution and deposit insurance among others.  
Distinguished delegates, the speed with which the crisis spread across the globe highlights 
the global nature of financial markets and the importance of cross border supervision. The 
risk  posed  by  cross-border  operations  by  financial  institutions  is  clearly  significant  if  not 
properly supervised. Over the years, many financial organisations worldwide have adopted 
more  flexible  and  complex  structures  through  the  establishment  of  a  wide  range  of 
subsidiaries and affiliates that are engaged in business lines different from the core business 
of  the  parent  financial  institution.  The  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  has  seen 
banking activities, asset management or insurance activities that previously were conducted 
on  a  stand-alone  basis  now  being  provided  within  one  financial  group.  Some  of  these 
financial  groups  operate  businesses  across  borders.  The  main  economic  and  financial 
benefit  which  encourages  the  formation  of  such  groups  is  the  enhanced  ability  to  achieve 
economies of scale and capture synergies across complementary financial services business 
lines.  These  synergies  result  in  improved  operational  efficiency  and  effectiveness  due  to 
lower costs, reduced prices, and improved innovation in products and services. At the same 
time, the emergence of such groups has brought complex linkages and relationships among 
economic agents. Consequently, they have also necessitated a paradigm shift in supervisory 
approaches in order to identify, manage and monitor risks both within and across borders.  
Distinguished  delegates,  previously,  supervision  of  cross-border  banks  placed  significant 
reliance  on  the  ultimate  home  country  supervisor  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  the  overall 
institution.  This  implied  that  other  regulatory  authorities  could  only  provide  input  to  the 
supervisory  process  in  the  home  country.  Hence,  it  was  considered  appropriate  for  global 
firms to gain the benefits of global approaches to the management of their business and had 
significant flexibility in the use of legal entities to book transactions and to manage liquidity 
globally.  Therefore,  the  global  inter-connectedness  made  it  very  difficult  for  individual 
national entities to survive group failure even though they are subsidiaries, given the huge 
importance  of  confidence  factors  in  funding  markets.  The  challenge  is  how  to  develop 
regulatory  and  supervisory  approaches  which  will  minimize  the  likelihood  of  cross-border 
failures  and  to  reduce  the  severity  of  that  impact  in  the  event  of  a  failure  materializing.  It 
would appear that an appropriate response would have to combine both greater coordination 
among  supervisors  and  actions  aimed  at  specifically  addressing  national  concerns.  On  its 
part,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  currently  settling  Memoranda  of  Understanding  with  various 
central banks for effective supervision of entities with cross-border operations. This is also 
necessary for enhancing cooperation among the various regulatory authorities in the financial 
system  in  Zambia  such  as  the  Pensions  and  Insurance  Authority  and  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission.  
Chairperson,  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  there  has  been  renewed  interest  in 
macroprudential  supervision.  In  many  countries  or  economic  areas,  the  institutional 
framework for financial stability is being strengthened in the light of the lessons learnt from 
the  crisis,  and  incorporates  new  supervisory  tasks  and  bodies  responsible  for  the  macro-
prudential regulation of systemic risk and Zambia is no exception. Overall, the current crisis 
has revealed that microprudential supervision in many cases proved inadequate to identify, 
in  a  timely  manner,  the  nature  and  size  of  accumulating  risks  and  to  impose  appropriate 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2010
remedial action; and that there is therefore, a need to strengthen both the macroprudential 
and microprudential supervision of the financial system.  
The Bank of Zambia with the help of the World Bank is currently conducting pilot tests of the 
World  Bank  developed  Financial  Projection  Model  (FPM)  on  a  number  of  financial 
institutions. Among many other things, the FPM is a tool designed to simulate the effect of 
internal and external events upon financial institutions’ solvency and profitability to implement 
stress  scenarios  in  a  dynamic  fashion.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  also  developing  a  financial 
sector  contingency  plan  to  address  problems  of  a  systemic  nature  and  enhance  practical 
tools for effectively managing financial distress and potential systemic crisis.  
Chairperson,  let  me  conclude  by  stating  that  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis, 
Governments  around  the  world  and  the  international  community  acting  together,  have  an 
important  opportunity  to  address  some  of  the  structural  weaknesses  in  our  domestic 
economies and in the global financial system that were laid bare by the crisis. I have already 
outlined the broad changes that are being considered. It is, however, important to emphasize 
that for the emerging and developing economies, particularly those in SSA, these measures 
to  reform  the  international  financial  architecture  need  to  be  carefully  considered  to  ensure 
that they build on the strong foundation for economic growth that has been laid over the past 
decade.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 5
