Arnór Sighvatsson: Capital controls, fiscal policy and economic recovery 
Address  by  Mr  Arnór  Sighvatsson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a 
morning meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavík, 24 March 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
At  the  eleventh  hour,  just  prior  to  the  collapse  of  the  banking  system,  it  did  not  remotely 
occur to me that signing exemptions from rules significantly restricting the rights of residents 
to trade in foreign currency could become one of my responsibilities. Admittedly, it had been 
mentioned on several occasions, in meetings with foreign bankers and investors during the 
weeks  and  months  leading  up  to  the  collapse,  that  they  were  of  the  opinion  that  capital 
account restrictions were among the conceivable measures that Icelandic authorities could 
apply in the dire straits into which the Icelandic economy was clearly headed. When I was 
asked whether capital controls could be considered, in the difficult situation that had arisen, I 
naturally replied in the negative, with reference to the international agreements Iceland had 
signed – any other answer would have been risky. Even less did it occur to me that the IMF 
would endorse capital controls as a key factor in an economic strategy for the reconstruction 
of  Iceland’s  financial  system  and  economy,  as  the  Fund  has  often  been  criticised  for 
encouraging premature removal of capital controls in many countries around the world. The 
capital  controls  are  controversial.  Other  routes  were  considered  but  eventually  rejected  as 
too risky. The necessity of temporary controls now appears to be generally recognised, and 
support for them appears to have grown, so much so that this actually gives cause for some 
concern. There are likely two reasons for this. In the first place, many people appreciate the 
exchange rate stability they have brought – that is, after their tightening started to have some 
effect.  Second,  this  change  in  attitude  may  indicate  that  a  certain  group  has  benefited  to 
some  extent  from  the  controls,  which  prompts  me  to  conclude  that  it  is  desirable  to  begin 
lifting them as soon as is practicable, but without jeopardising stability. To find our way out of 
the capital controls, we must understand the reason they were imposed. To start with, we 
can recall a few basic facts. 
It is true of both banks and currencies that their stability is based on confidence. If confidence 
evaporates,  banks  fail  and  currencies  plunge,  often  far  below  the  levels  justified  by 
fundamentals.  Confidence  in  a  country’s  currency  and  confidence  its  main  financial 
institutions are  closely  connected, because  the  banking system  links domestic  and  foreign 
financial markets. It is the lifeline of any currency. If that lifeline is cut, the consequences are 
catastrophic.  In  simple  terms,  this  is  what  happened  when  the  Icelandic  banking  system 
collapsed. 
There was a real danger that a vicious circle, as capital fled ISK-denominated assets, could 
have amplified major difficulties faced by highly indebted households and businesses. When 
an entire country’s financial system collapses, as was the case here, it can take a long time 
to make it fully operational once more. As a result, it could take some time, given the global 
financial crisis, for foreign credit markets to re-open, as turned out to be the case. In view of 
the  fact  that  considerable  refinancing  of  Treasury  debt  was  scheduled for  2011  and  2012, 
there  was  clearly  limited  scope  to  use  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  reserves  to  mitigate 
exchange  rate  fluctuations  without  risking  the  Treasury’s  ability  to  refinance  or  pay  off  the 
loans maturing in these years. For whatever reason, when it came down to it, the IMF was 
not  prepared  to  extend  loans  to  facilitate  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  Icelandic  economy 
unless it could be guaranteed that funds provided would not be sucked down a whirlpool of 
capital  fleeing  the  country.  The  capital  controls  provided  the  authorities  with  leeway  to 
restructure the financial system, get a grip on Treasury finances, and deal with the problems 
of debt-ridden households and businesses. All of this is a prerequisite for regaining the trust 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 1
of international credit markets in the Icelandic economy and in the ability of the Treasury to 
meet its obligations. 
Since the controls were tightened, they have contributed to greater exchange rate stability 
than has been seen for a long time, albeit at a lower level than is desirable. This stability has 
facilitated implementing economic policy. It therefore comes as no surprise to hear the view 
expressed that the capital controls should be maintained on a more permanent basis. This is 
not as attractive an option as might appear at first glance, however. In the first place, liquid 
capital  cannot  be  kept  here  forcibly  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time.  The  controls  are  a 
violation of various international agreements signed by Iceland. They are tolerated as long as 
Iceland follows the economic Recovery programme supported by the IMF, and thus indirectly 
by the member states of the EEA, OECD, and the Fund itself. Soon after this programme 
concludes, the controls will likely have to disappear; i.e., if the Icelandic government does not 
wish to renege on international treaties it has ratified. Eventually, frozen capital will have to 
be allowed to go wherever it wishes. Second, long-term confidence cannot be established as 
long as uncertainty exists as to how much capital is tied up in ISK assets simply because of 
the capital controls. This uncertainty will not dissipate fully until they are removed. Until that 
time, there is a risk that it will restrain foreign investment, which is a premise for export-driven 
economic  recovery.  Third,  the  hefty  profits  that  can  accrue  to  parties  that  circumvent  the 
capital  controls  undermine  business  ethics  and  create  a  competitive  advantage  vis-à-vis 
those who abide by the law. The controls prompt individuals and firms to devote efforts to 
seeking  ways  to  circumvent  them,  resulting  in  waste  of  resources  and  excess  cost  in  the 
economy in the longer term. The negative impact of capital controls is likely to be greater the 
longer they last and the more lenient their enforcement is. The aim, therefore, is to remove 
the  controls  as  soon  as  it  is  safe,  while  enforcing  them  very  strictly,  not  least  during  the 
liberalisation phase.  
If it is unavoidable and desirable to lift the controls, how can this be accomplished without 
risking exchange rate instability? The strategy presented by the Central Bank last summer 
describes the principal aspects of the liberalisation process. While I do not intend to repeat 
what it says on this occasion, I would like to take the opportunity to point out that resolving 
the  problems  of  Treasury  financing  is  actually  a  precondition  for  renewed  progress  in 
economic recovery and for relaxing the capital controls without substantial risk. During the 
period of overheating leading up to the financial crisis, the non-tradable sector expanded far 
beyond what export sector growth could sustain for the long term. In many cases, production 
capacity in the non-tradable sector is excessive over the short to medium term. Hence the 
scope for economic recovery led by the non-tradable goods sector is scant; recovery must 
mainly commence in the tradable goods sector. Export growth will be weak, however, unless 
export companies have ready access to external financing. But their access to foreign capital 
markets will be difficult until the Treasury has blazed a trail, or as long as it faces terms that 
raise  doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  public  debt.  The  borrowing  terms  that  a  country’s 
Treasury enjoys from foreign creditors generally serve as a floor for the interest rate offered 
to the private sector. This makes it crucial to restore the Treasury’s good credit rating. Not 
only  will  this  pave  the  way  for  domestic  enterprises  to  external  financing,  it  will  also 
significantly reduce the likelihood of a fire sale of domestic assets once the capital controls 
are lifted. 
The principal task of the economic recovery programme drafted in co-operation with the IMF 
is to restore confidence in the Treasury’s ability to meet its foreign currency obligations. How 
can this be done? First, by practicing sufficient fiscal restraint to convince financial markets 
that,  despite  a  temporary  spike  in  indebtedness  in  the  wake  of  the  banks’  collapse,  the 
Treasury will be fully capable of meeting its international obligations; i.e., that its debt position 
is sustainable for the long term. Second, the Treasury has to demonstrate that it has access 
to sufficient foreign currency reserves to repay, if it comes to the crunch, loans maturing over 
the next two years. We still are just short of reaching this position, as efforts to achieve it 
have been delayed for reasons known to all of us. Here it is important to bear in mind the 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2010
common  saying  that  banks,  domestic  as  well  as  international,  are  ready  to  offer  you  an 
umbrella on a sunny day, only to demand it back promptly once the rain starts to fall. Anyone 
needing  an  umbrella  when  it’s  raining  has  to  show  that  he  can  get  alternative  one  on 
demand. Loans from the IMF and others are our umbrella. In the third place, co-operation 
with the IMF is important not only because of the access to credit contingent on the progress 
of the programme. The Fund serves as a sort of validation agency for the economic policies 
of  countries  that  find  themselves  in  economic  difficulties.  Its  stamp  of  approval  is  a  pre-
condition for obtaining credit not only from other countries, but also from foreign banks and 
investors. In many instances it is a premise for foreign investment in domestic industry. This 
view  has  been  clearly  expressed  in  interviews  with  numerous  foreign  bankers,  who  are 
prepared to take Iceland to the global credit market as soon as the uncertainty delaying the 
progress of the programme is eliminated. 
Many  find  the  medicine  prescribed  by  IMF  bitter,  and  have  requested  a  more  palatable 
economic strategy without the Fund’s involvement. Of course, it would be desirable to use 
automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  or  discretionary  fiscal  policy  to  mitigate  the  economic  cycle. 
Countercyclical  fiscal  policy,  however,  is  a  privilege  reserved  for  countries  whose  credit 
rating has not been tarnished. Iceland does not enjoy this privilege any more than Greece, 
Latvia, and various other states. To toss away the IMF’s umbrella and set off empty-handed 
to meet with foreign creditors in an attempt to refinance the loans maturing in the next two 
years  would  be  a  fatal  error.  In  fact,  the  loans  that  have  already  been  received  have 
guaranteed foreign exchange reserves sufficient to enable the Treasury to service its debt for 
the  next  two  years  without  major  foreign  currency  purchases.  However,  foreign  reserves 
would fall to a level that is not acceptable. The cost would be a lower exchange rate than 
otherwise, and it would be inadvisable to relax the capital controls at the same time. Fourth, it 
is important to take the first steps towards removing the capital controls as soon as possible 
after  the  objectives  described  above  have  been  achieved.  The  objective  is  to  make  the 
disappearance of the last vestige of controls an event that will hardly be noticed. We learned 
from the financial collapse that fair weather can turn foul at short notice. Once the storm has 
passed, however, the skies can also clear more quickly than most people expect. 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 3
