Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Advanced risk management and 
modeling for foreign exchange reserves 
Opening remarks by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, 
at the Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and Southern Africa 
(MEFMI) regional workshop, Kampala, 19–30 April 2010. 
 The Programme Officer, Financial Sector Management  
MEFMI  
Distinguished resource persons  
Workshop participants  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Good morning,  
On behalf of the Bank of Uganda, it is my pleasure to welcome you all to this workshop on 
Advanced Risk Management and Modeling for Foreign Exchange Reserves. I wish to extend 
an  especially  warm  welcome  to  all  of  the  participants  who  have  come  here  from  outside 
Uganda and to wish you a productive and enjoyable stay in our country.  
It is befitting at the start of this workshop to pay tribute to the outstanding work of MEFMI in 
building  capacity  for  macro-economic  and  financial  management  in  Eastern  and  Southern 
Africa. Many of my staff in the Bank of Uganda have benefitted from MEFMI’s programmes 
to  the  extent  that  the  Institute  has  made  a  major  contribution  to  the  building  of  technical 
capacities in the Bank. An especially valuable feature of MEFMI’s programmes is that they 
are  designed  through  close  collaboration  with  the  Institute’s  members  specifically  to  meet 
their  requirements  for  capacity  building.  Hence  MEFMI’s  capacity  building  is  genuinely 
demand driven; a feature which distinguishes it from the technical assistance programmes 
offered by many other agencies. MEFMI also provides an excellent example of the benefits 
to be gained from building up indigenous institutions at the regional level in Africa to serve 
the  needs  of  their  clients  and  members  for  technical  assistance,  instead  of  relying  on  the 
traditional donors.  
The  subject  of  this  workshop  is  risk  management  and  the  modeling  of  risk.  Risk  is  an 
inherent feature of human endeavours and has been since humans first walked on the earth. 
For  much  of  human  history,  risk  was  simply  accepted  as  fate:  something  arbitrary  and 
inevitable  in  the  face  of  which  human  society  was  helpless.  Arguably,  risk  management 
began in the second half of the 17th century, when London merchants meeting in a coffee 
house  made  small  contributions  to  a  pool  with  which  to  ensure  themselves  against  the 
possible  loss  of  their  vessels  on  the  high  seas,  thus  creating  an  embryonic  insurance 
industry.  Subsequent  efforts  to  understand  the  nature  of  risk,  to  quantify  it,  however 
imperfectly, and to manage it, using scientific theory and empirical observation, have been 
integral to the growth of modern economies. This is because managing risk is essential for a 
rational  allocation  of  capital  among  competing  investment  projects,  which  is  essential  for 
economic growth. Although the strategic objectives of management in the public sector are 
often different from those in the private sector, effective risk management is essential in both 
sectors.  
The timing of the workshop is especially opportune, coming in the wake of the most severe 
global financial crisis in more than 50 years. The global financial crisis has provided salutary 
lessons  for  risk  managers  in  financial  institutions  all  over  the  world.  Risk  managers  have 
begun  to  understand  that  financial  risk  is  a  much  more  complex  phenomenon  than  had 
hitherto  been  realized,  prior  to  the  crisis,  not  least  because  risk  can  be  generated 
endogenously  within  the  financial  system,  rather  than  being  simply  the  consequence  of 
exogenous shocks to the financial system. The global financial crisis has demonstrated that 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 1
even  those  assets  and  financial  institutions  regarded  as  relatively  risk  free  –  investment 
grade securities for example – can suffer substantial losses. We now know that tail risks, the 
low probability risk of very large losses – sometimes referred to as “Black Swans” – occur 
much  more  often  than  is  predicted  by  many  statistical  models.  Risk  managers  have  also 
learned that the liquidity of financial assets and institutions is much more fragile than they 
had previously thought, especially in transactions based financial systems, and that a drying 
up of liquidity can generate large losses in asset values.  
The value of rating agencies and the ratings that they provide have also become the subject 
of critical review as a result of their performance in the run up to the global financial crisis. 
Reputable  rating  agencies  issued  Panglossian  ratings  for  securities,  such  as  collaterised 
debt  obligations,  the  risks  of  which  they  did  not  properly  understand.  Investors  who 
purchased  these  securities  in  the  belief  that  they  carried  negligible  risk  suffered  serious 
losses.  
Looking ahead, it is difficult to be sanguine about the prospects for stability in global financial 
markets.  The  large  structural  imbalances  which  characterize  the  global  economy  will 
eventually  have  to  be  rectified;  a  process  which  could  generate  further  volatility  in  asset 
prices,  such  as  the  exchange  rates  of  the  major  international  currencies.  The  global 
economic  crisis  itself  has  severely  damaged  public  finances  in  many  of  the  industrialized 
economies and  this  is bound  to  have  consequences  for  the  price  of  government  debt  and 
possibly  also  exchange  rates  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  As  a  result,  the  type  of  assets 
which traditionally comprise the bulk of central bank foreign exchange reserves may become 
much more volatile in the future.  
In  such  circumstances  the  task  of  investment  managers  and  risk  managers  will  be  very 
challenging. They need to re-evaluate their strategies for risk management and strengthen 
their tools and capacities for modeling risk. This workshop has been designed to contribute 
to building capacity to meet these challenges. The workshop will also provide regional and 
international experts with an opportunity to exchange views, ideas and their own experiences 
of managing risk.  
A major focus of the workshop is the use of modeling techniques to guide risk management. 
Statistical  models  have  become  integral  to  risk  management  in  financial  institutions  and 
among financial investors. Such models have made a crucial contribution to the development 
of  risk  management;  providing  it  with  a  more  rigorous,  scientific  foundation.  But,  for  the 
reasons  that  I  have  already  mentioned,  some  of  these  models  are  now  attracting  critical 
scrutiny from policy makers, regulators, investment managers and academics.  
Notable  among  the  statistical  models  is  the  value-at-risk  model,  which  has  become  the 
principal  tool  for  the  management  of  market  risk,  and  to  some  extent,  the  management  of 
credit  risk  in  many  financial  institutions.  If  this  model  is  such  a  powerful  tool,  as  its 
proponents claim, why did financial institutions make losses which were many times greater 
than the amount which value at risk models estimated was possible? Risk models and risk 
management  in  general  are  based  on  the  assumption  of  normal  market  conditions,  where 
willing buyers and sellers exist, with adequate market liquidity to enable assets to be priced 
in the market. What happens when the market collapses? It is clear that risk management 
models perform poorly in such circumstances.  
Nevertheless, statistical models will continue to play an important role in risk management, 
despite their shortcomings, but practitioners must be wary of placing too much faith in the 
results  of  models  alone.  Sound  judgement,  based  on  a  comprehensive  knowledge  of 
markets  and  a  thorough  understanding  of  economic  and  financial  theory  is  an  essential 
complement to the use of statistical models.  
MEFMI has assembled an impressive line-up of international and regional resource persons 
to  conduct  this  workshop.  They  bring  a  huge  amount  of  experience  and  expertise  in  the 
various issues will be covered here in the next two weeks. I am confident that the workshop 
will help all of you who are participating to master the statistical modeling techniques which 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2010
are essential for risk management and to improve your understanding of the concepts and 
theories of risk management.  
With these few words, I declare the workshop open. I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 3
