Sada S Reddy: The future for Fiji’s economy 
Presentation by Mr Sada S Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the Fiji Institute 
of Accountants, Yanuca, Fiji, 11 June 2010. 
 The President of the Fiji Institute of Accountants, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies & Gentlemen 
Good Morning 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you on the Future for Fiji’s economy. 
It goes without saying, ladies and gentlemen, that this is a daunting task for the Governor of 
a  central  bank  to  speak  on  given  that  a  central  bank  has  a  much  narrower  role  in  the 
economy. The role of a central bank first and foremost is to maintain price stability. This in 
itself  is  a  very  challenging  role.  On  top  of  this,  in  Fiji’s  case,  we  also  have  an  equally 
important  task  of  ensuring  that  our  balance  of  payment  is  sustainable.  In  other  words,  we 
have to ensure that our foreign reserves are kept at adequate levels. I am sure most of you 
in  the  audience  have  been  closely  following  the  developments  in  this  regard  in  Fiji  over  a 
number of years but more importantly, over the last three years, with the onset of the global 
economic and financial crisis. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  herein  lies  the  reason  for  me  to  muster  the  courage  to  talk  to  you 
today about Fiji’s economy and how I see its future. In some respects, my speech will be a 
“HARDTALK ON FIJI’S ECONOMY”. 
To get a better idea of our future, it is important to look to the past, learn from the lessons 
and  chart  a  way  forward  for  our  country.  In  doing  this,  we  must  also  understand  how 
domestic and external factors impact our economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I will first look at the performance of the global economy, particularly 
at the performance of our trading partner countries.  
I  will  then  discuss  the  domestic  economy,  where  I  will  touch  on  Fiji’s  macroeconomic 
performance  and  challenges,  and  what  we  must  do  to  ensure  that  we  secure  a  better 
future for all. 
1.  Global Economic Conditions and Outlook 
Let me begin by summarizing the conditions in the global economy. 
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy is expected to grow 
by  4.2  percent  this  year,  following  a  contraction  of  0.6%  in  2009.  Further  growth  of 
4.3 percent is expected in 2011. The contraction of last year is regarded as the worst since 
the Great Depression of the 1930s. However, that is now well behind us. 
Ladies and gentlemen, except for Australia, all our trading partner economies contracted last 
year  as  a  result  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  significantly  affected  our  exports  and 
tourism last year. However, all of these countries are expected to post a modest growth this 
year and continue this into 2011. This is good news for Fiji, as demand for our exports and 
tourism should increase. In fact, we are already seeing the effects of these, especially in the 
tourism industry, where we see a strong recovery in visitor arrivals. 
Overall,  the  global  economy  has  performed  better  than  expected.  Among  advanced 
countries, the US economy is doing better than Europe and Japan, while for emerging and 
developing economies, Asia is driving the recovery. 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
China  and  India  recorded  high  growth  rates  in  2009  and  are  expected  to  record  similar 
growth  in  2010.  China’s  growth  quickened  to  around  12  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  this 
year, the fastest pace in almost three years, driven by stimulus spending and a credit boom. 
Having  said  that,  we  are  also  witnessing  some  countries,  especially  in  the  Euro  area, 
experiencing  great  economic  difficulties  due  to  debt  service  problems  arising  from  running 
several years of large fiscal deficits. And this was compounded by the global crisis. For this 
reason, growth in the Euro area will be very uncertain. And these uncertainties are causing 
significant  risks  to  the  international  capital  markets  as  well  as  prospects  for  growth 
worldwide.  Once  again  this  demonstrates  the  great  risks  out  there  for  a  sustained  global 
growth. 
2.  Macroeconomic Performance and Challenges 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now share with you my views on the Fiji economy. This is not 
going to be an easy task. Why? This is because the current state of our economy is a result 
not only of  recent global and domestic developments but  it is due to some very long-term 
fundamental  problems  in  the  economy,  going  back  ten,  twenty  years.  These  issues  have 
been compounded by various governance issues both at the national and at organizational 
and/or industry levels.  
For  now,  let  me  begin by  saying  that  Fiji has huge  potential.  I  do  not  think  anyone  in  this 
audience  will  disagree  with  me.  We  have  huge  potential  in  tourism,  agriculture,  forestry, 
fishing,  sports,  ITC  etc.  Fiji  is  endowed  with  rich  natural  resources  such  as  land,  a  huge 
marine  environment,  and  minerals  such  as  gold,  copper  and  other  minerals.  Fiji’s  tropical 
climate and pristine environment is a huge advantage which attracts thousands of tourists to 
our shores. Fiji’s relatively more developed status places it as the financial and trade hub of 
the South Pacific. Our people are well educated and are a great asset for the progress and 
development of this nation.  
However, despite its richness in resources and huge potential, Fiji’s economic situation over 
the past two decades has been characterised by low economic growth, low investments, and 
deteriorating balance of payments (BOP). 
Why has our growth been so low in the past? 
On  the  one  hand,  we  have  been  prone  to  factors  out  of  our  control  which  include  natural 
disasters, adverse global developments such as the recent financial crisis, and the erosion of 
preferential  market  access.  On  the  other  hand,  but  within  our  control,  our  sluggish  growth 
over the past years has been largely due to our slow progress on economic and structural 
reforms and declining terms of trade, which are essential to support a balanced economic 
growth path. As a result of this slow growth, unemployment levels have risen. 
Let me now talk about the performance and challenges in Fiji’s major sectors, beginning 
with the overall economy. 
Over  the  past  10  years  (2000–2009),  Fiji’s  economy  has  grown,  on  average,  by  just 
0.7 percent  per  year.  Looking  at  past  trends,  growth  rates  have  been  anything  but  stable 
during  the  last  decade.  Furthermore,  economic  growth  has  not  been  able  to  match  the 
population growth rate, which means that per capita income growth in Fiji has been slowing 
over the last two decades. 
Our economy has been contracting over the last 3 years. Last year our economy declined by 
2.2 percent. However, we expect to see a slight growth of 1.8 percent this year. We expect 
similar growth rates in 2011 and 2012 of around 1.5–2.0 percent. 
Ladies and gentlemen, a number of factors have contributed to this 3-year contraction in the 
economy.  Of  course,  you  know  the  significant  impact  the  global  crisis  has  had  on  our 
economy. In addition to that, we had several natural disasters that we had to contend with. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
to  show  positive  growth  except 
this  year,  we  are  expecting  all  sectors 
We also saw during this period, some of our large projects getting into financial difficulties not 
because of any domestic issues but because of the difficulties foreign developers had with 
their  financiers  offshore.  And  a  number  of  construction  projects  were  affected  in  this  way 
which had significant negative effects on the economy. 
For 
for 
agriculture & forestry  and  health  &  social  work  sectors,  which  have  projected  declines.  
The agriculture sector was badly hit by Cyclone Tomas, resulting in a downward revision of 
the overall growth rate for this year.  
Next year, growth is also expected to be broad-based, apart from an expected decline in the 
building and construction sector. The tourism industry is expected to lead the growth assisted 
by some growth in agriculture. 
Let me now move to the performance and challenges of major sectors. I begin with sugar. 
Sugar has traditionally been the backbone of Fiji’s economy. Apart from its direct benefits, 
the industry has also had significant benefits to the economy. However, the sugar industry 
has been plagued with on-going problems for a number of years which we were unable to 
solve decisively and now these problems are threatening the viability of the industry. 
The cane and sugar industry’s contribution to real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has fallen 
over  the  years.  This  industry  now  contributes  only  around  3.0  percent  to  real  GDP,  a 
significant  fall  in  contribution  when  compared  to  around  11–12  percent  contribution  
10–15 years ago. Following a peak of around 500,000 tonnes of sugar produced in 1994, 
production  has  steadily  declined.  Last  year,  sugarcane  output  was  the  lowest  since  1961. 
The total sugar output last season was 168,000 tonnes. The significant fall in sugar output 
last  year  was  due  largely  to  the  inefficiency  of  the  sugar  mills,  which  affected  sugar 
production. The sugar industry today faces major challenges. These challenges have to be 
addressed urgently. Areas of reforms needed in the sugar industry are: 
 
The FSC’s financial problems have to be quickly fixed. Its cashflow situation is dire 
to say the least. 
Factory problems must be fixed as soon as possible. The mill-upgrade programme 
under way for the last few years has not delivered to expectations and resulted in 
huge losses to the millers, farmers and the country as a whole. The FSC had to go 
into huge debt because of the mill upgrade programme. The substandard work done 
by  the  contractors  resulted  in  huge  losses  last  year.  It  was  a  disaster  to  say  the 
least. However, the Board and Management of the FSC are now confident that this 
year’s crushing season should go well;  
The industry needs to put in strategies to increase cane production to two or three 
times  the  current  production  in  the  next  24  months.  For  this  they  need  land  and 
financial support. They have to re-habilitate large number of cane farms which are 
producing  well  below  industry  norms  due  to  neglect  of  farms  and  long  ratooning 
rather  than  planting  new  cane  every  three  to  four  years.  Productivity  must  be 
improved through farm rationalization plus good farm husbandry practices; and 
Large scale commercial cane farming must be explored and developed. 
 
The garment industry is another sector where output has fallen over the years. The garment 
industry  in  Fiji  began  in  1988,  following  the  introduction  of  the  tax  free  schemes  in  1987. 
Over the past ten years, the garment industry contributed on average, 3.4 percent to Fiji’s 
real  GDP  with  garment  production  peaking  in  2001  with  production  valued  at  around 
$188 million. 
However, the expiry of trade agreements and strong competition from Asian economies has 
seen production dwindle. In 2004, the Government withdrew the tax free factory status given 
to exporters to comply with the WTO requirements (World Trade Organisation). In addition, 
  BIS Review 86/2010 
 3
since  2005,  the  industry  suffered  the  loss  of  a  quota  system  for  garment  exports  to  the 
United  States,  which  saw  the  closure  of  a  major  garment  manufacturer,  which  generated 
approximately  50%  of  total  garment  production.  Moreover,  the  implementation  of  the 
minimum  wage  regulation  effective  from  July  2009,  has  increased  the  cost  of  producing 
garments.  On  average,  the  industry  contracted  by  6.5  percent  from  2006  to  2009.  These 
developments have further weakened garment production. Strategies are needed to revive 
the  garment  industry  as  we  have  seen  that  Fiji’s  garment  industry  is  able  to  produce  high 
quality garments. 
What about the forestry sector? Over the last 15 years, timber production has fallen notably. 
In 1995, timber output reached a total of 600,000 cubic meters. To reach similar levels now, 
we would need to increase output by 150,000 cubic meters per year. 
Support for implementing the necessary infrastructure and value-adding must be considered. 
There is a need to explore and develop strategic partners and work to enhance the capacity 
of  resource  owners.  Improving  road  access  to  indigenous  timber  resources  is  also 
necessary. Certification of our timber is imperative for us to market Fiji timber for premium 
prices in the world market. In light of these changes, the recent move by the Government to 
restructure the mahogany industry is very encouraging. 
With the promulgation of the Mahogany Industry Development Decree 2010, in March this 
year,  we  are  hopeful  that  the  opening  of  access  to  mahogany  timber  will  generate  much 
needed  export  earnings  for  Fiji  in  time  to  come.  The  Decree  seeks  to  ensure  that  the 
mahogany industry is able to provide suitable and sustainable returns for the betterment of 
the economy and the people of Fiji and creating a distinct brand for Fijian Mahogany. It will 
facilitate  a  sustainable  harvesting  and  reforestation  program  with  the  view  to  create  a 
liberalised mahogany industry with maximum returns to Fiji. 
In  addition,  with  the  encouragement  from  the  Government,  the  Kadavu  Provincial  Council 
has  allowed  the  Fiji  Pine  Limited  (FPL)  to  harvest  pine  plantations  on  the  island  of 
Kadavu. Kadavu has close to 92,000 cubic metres of pine ready for harvest. The FPL has 
agreed  to  harvest,  weigh  and  pay  resource  owners  the  value  of  the  trees  straight  after 
harvest. The FPL mentioned that for every tree harvested, the Company would re-plant three 
more. This form of sustainable operations will not only boost foreign income in the short term 
but will provide a platform for long term gains. We need more of such initiatives in maritime 
areas which have the right soil and climate for pine and mahogany forests.  
Sandalwood  also,  I  believe,  has  great  potential.  There  should  be  special  efforts  made  to 
plant more of these forests. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  fishing  industry.  Fishing  industry  output  has  fallen  from  potential 
levels of around 30,000 tonnes reached in 2005 to around 13,000 tonnes in 2009. This can 
be done if all the stakeholders come together to develop a well articulated plan for the fishing 
industry to drive growth and increase value of our exports. 
How about the mining sector? The re-start of the Emperor Gold Mine is very encouraging 
and the mine is gradually increasing production. We need to raise gold production from the 
current levels of around 35,000 ounces to our potential of 150,000 ounces per annum. We 
had achieved these levels in the past. We must explore the possibility of new gold mines and 
other metals and minerals. Recent information on the Wainivesi gold project in Tailevu shows 
that mining commenced in quarter three of 2009, but has not progressed well due to power 
and milling problems. In addition, a bauxite mining project in Nawailevu, Bua is expected to 
start soon and may bring in much needed foreign exchange. Moreover, copper exploration in 
Namosi  and  gold  prospecting  in  Tuvatu  are  progressing  well.  The  ongoing  review  of  the 
mining legislation, expected to be completed by end of June this year, is encouraging.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  agriculture  holds  a  great  promise  for  this  country.  At  the  recent 
Agriculture  Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Government,  a  number  of  very  good  initiatives 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2010
were agreed to by the various stakeholders who attended the Symposium. We hope these 
initiatives will be taken on board and timely progress is made.  
We are very encouraged by the energy and vigour we have seen recently in the Ministry of 
Agriculture.  In  June  this  year,  the  first  batch  of  potato  seedlings  was  planted  at  Navai  in 
Nadarivatu.  We  have  been  told  that  the  Flour  Mills  of  Fiji  (FMF)  will  work  closely  with  the 
farmers  that  have  been  earmarked  for  potato  cultivation  this  year.  I  understand  the  FMF 
currently buys 400,000 kilograms of potatoes annually for producing potato chips and with 
this new venture, the FMF will be able to lessen the import bill for potatoes. We would like 
this type of activity for other agricultural and livestock products which we consume in large 
amounts, but are not self-sufficient in. These include rice, dairy, lamb and beef to name a 
few. 
Our  export  sector  has  performed  below  potential  over  the  years.  This  is  attributed  to  our 
narrow  export  base  and  other  structural  impediments  hindering  growth  of  key  potential 
sectors as I mentioned before. 
The average growth of exports over the last 15 years was 4 percent. In 2009, exports fell by 
around 16.4 percent driven by re-exports, sugar, mineral water, timber garments and coconut 
oil. However increases in earnings were noted for molasses, sweet biscuits, gold and fish. In 
2010 total exports are projected to grow by 9.5 percent. Further growth is envisaged for 2011 
and 2012. Some export commodities have shown a consistent growth trend, such as mineral 
water which has performed exceptionally well over the past decade. This trend needs to be 
maintained and improved. 
Ladies and gentlemen, for us to lift our GDP growth from the current low levels to around 
5 percent,  we  need  nearly  F$500  to  F$600m,  additional  foreign  exchange  receipts  every 
year. If not the bop constraint we are facing now will not be solved and our policies cannot be 
relaxed to allow for easier business conditions.  
Why is it that we have this bop constraint? This is because our exports are not keeping pace 
with our imports.  
Imports have continued to escalate. Fuel imports are around one third of our total import 
bill, which is very high for a country of our size. Total imports grew at an average rate of over 
6 percent over the past 15 years.  
In  the  next  3  years,  we  must  reduce  our  fuel  imports  by  $300  million  and  we  need  to  put 
strategies  in  place  for  that  to  happen  immediately.  Some  initiatives  in  place  include 
renewable  energy  projects  as  well  as  encouraging  energy  conservation  practices. 
Government is offering attractive incentives for renewable energy producers. These include 
tax-holidays,  tax  rebates,  and  lower  duties.  The  Fiji  Electricity  Authority  has  a  renewable 
energy development program which aims to provide 90 percent of energy through renewable 
sources  by  2011. Currently,  around  60  to  70  percent  of  FEA’s  annual  electricity  output  is 
generated  by  renewable  energy  sources. The  ongoing  Nadarivatu  hydro  project,  when 
completed,  should  add  41.7  mega  watts  of  power  to  the  national  power  grid  and  produce 
around 100 million units of electricity on a yearly basis.  
On its part, the RBF has recently introduced an Import Substitution Facility to try to assist 
large  scale  commercial  agricultural  businesses  to  obtain  credit  at  concessional  rates  of 
interest. The RBF has also offered a scholarship for Chef Training in Malaysia which should 
encourage the use of local foods in preparation of hotel menus. This is targeted at reducing 
our import bill and improving our balance of payments position, as well as encouraging local 
value adding. 
I wish to repeat my message once again to the hotel industry. Please do everything in your 
power to reduce your consumption of imports. This will go a long way in assisting our bop. I 
wish to congratulate those hotels which have taken the effort to start growing their own fruits 
and vegetables. This is very encouraging indeed. 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 5
As a result of the trend of declining exports and rising imports, the country has been faced 
with a deteriorating trade deficit and an associated current account deficit which reached a 
new high recently. The current account deficit is estimated at around 9 percent of GDP in 
2009.  A  9  percent  current  account  deficit  is  unsustainable.  Therefore,  we  have  to  do 
everything in our power to increase export earnings and reduce imports.  
Tourism  has  picked  up  well  following  the  global  downturn.  In  my  view,  under  the  current 
circumstances, tourism holds the greatest potential to lift Fiji’s growth rate. 
The Tourism Development Plan has set a target of 1 million visitors by 2016. We should aim 
to raise visitor arrivals threefold in the next three years. The industry and the Government 
should develop clear strategies to make this happen.  
It  is  very  encouraging  to  see  three  new  airlines  have  started  operations  to  Fiji  since 
December 2009, with our own Air Pacific adding Hong Kong to its list of destinations. This 
has linked Fiji to new markets and should boost future visitor arrivals.  
Let  me  now  touch  briefly  on  Government  finances.  Fiji  has  experienced  chronic  budget 
deficits  over  the  past  two  decades.  The  proportion  of  capital  expenditure  to  total 
Government  expenditure  has  been  low.  On  the  other  hand,  operating  expenditure  has 
continued to balloon over the years. In 2009, the proportion of operating expenditure to total 
Government  expenditure  was  80  percent.  The  major  driver  of  rising  operating  expenditure 
has been personnel costs. Personnel cost as a percent of operating expenditure had been 
quite  high  at  43.5  percent  in  the  1990–1999  period  before  rising  to  49.5  percent  in  
2000–2009  period.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  the  Government  is  taking  a  number  of 
initiatives  to  reduce  the  size  of  civil  service  and  thus  reduce  Government’s  operating 
expenditure. 
As  a  result  of  continuous  fiscal  deficits,  Government  debt  has  risen  over  the  last  two 
decades. Currently, it stands at around 52 percent of GDP. For Fiji it is estimated that a more 
sustainable level should be around 45 percent of GDP.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  fiscal  discipline  is  very  critical  for  sustainable  economic  growth.  If 
Government continues to run large deficits then not only the debt levels increase, it crowds 
out  the  private  sector  and  statutory  bodies  from  borrowing  in  the  domestic  market  thus 
putting pressure on interest rates. Chronic fiscal deficits also tend to seriously undermine the 
bop as has been the case in Fiji for last two decades or so. It is therefore very important that 
the Government budget deficit is kept in check and reigned in to well below 3 percent in the 
medium term. 
I  would  suggest  that  for  the  future  the  Government  should  consider  legislating  a  Fiscal 
Responsibility  Act  so  that  future  Governments  do  not  squander  Government  finances  and 
run irresponsible fiscal policies. 
We  are  pleased  to  see  that  despite  the  enormous  pressures  on  Government  revenue  in 
recent years, due to the contracting economy, the Government has kept a reasonably tight 
reign on Government expenditure. This discipline must continue and more should be done to 
reign in non-essential expenditures. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to highlight the importance of keeping the contingent liabilities 
of  the  Government  under  control.  The  Government’s  contingent  liabilities  have  grown 
substantially  over  the  past  several  years.  Total  contingent  liabilities  of  the  Government  in 
2009  were  around  $1.7  billion,  equivalent  to  about  26.5  percent  of  GDP.  This  level  of 
contingent liabilities is extremely high given the weak revenue base of the Government. 
This  trend  must  be  stopped  because  what  it  does  is  that  without  the  Government  really 
knowing what is really going on in the institutions whose debts Government has guaranteed, 
suddenly  Government 
the 
Government’s books and thus, seriously compromising Government’s finances. 
liabilities  coming  on 
those  contingent 
faced  with 
to 
is 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2010
There were a number of instances in the past where the Government had to step in to bail 
out because of the guarantees. One very well known case is the National Bank of Fiji (NBF). 
The collapse of NBF cost the taxpayers of this country around $372 million in total. In more 
recent  times,  Government  had  to  convert  nearly  $40  million  of  Housing  Authority  debt  to 
equity because Housing Authority was in no position to meet the debt commitments. There 
are signs that few other institutions whose debt Government has guaranteed may not be in a 
position to meet their obligations. This situation must not be allowed to continue.  
Government  must  carry  out  proper  due  diligence  on  statutory  corporations  which  seek 
Government  guarantees.  If  such  organisations  are  not  properly  managed  and  run, 
Government must put conditions to any guarantees it gives in future so that proper reforms 
are  done  to  make  these  institutions  financially  viable  so  that  they  borrow  on  their  own 
strength in the market. 
There is a huge moral hazard problem here. The Boards and Management of these statutory 
bodies  take  it  for  granted  that  the  Government  is  there  to  bail  them  out  if  they  get  into 
difficulties. So, they fail to take timely corrective actions to reform the institutions they are in 
charge of. 
Ladies and gentlemen, a number of people have commented on the US$150 million bond 
that  was  issued  by  the  Government  in  September  2006  due  for  repayment  in  September 
2011. Their concern, rightly so, is whether we have the capability to repay this loan. I would 
like to reassure you that the Government and the RBF are actively exploring all possibilities 
to meet this repayment and Fiji as usual will meet all its foreign obligations whatever it takes. 
Ladies and gentlemen, against the economic challenges we face, what can we do to raise 
growth? 
Basically, we need to raise investment and exports, improve business conditions, accelerate 
reforms, raise productivity and diversify the economy. 
We  need  to  raise  investment  in  Fiji  to  over  25  percent  of  GDP  from  its  current  level  of 
13 percent.  While  we  have  some  local  investment,  it  is  not  sufficient.  Hence  we  need  to 
attract  foreign  investment  to  our  shores  which  entails  improving  the  investor  environment. 
We  need  to  implement  policies  that  will  improve  the  state  of  our  infrastructure,  improve 
productivity levels and lower the cost of business in Fiji. 
Improving 
facilitate  economic  growth.  Fiji’s 
to 
infrastructure  has  suffered  from  neglect  and  investment  in  the  past.  Government  is  now 
taking steps to address infrastructure issues. 
Recently,  Government  successfully  secured  the  Exim  Bank  (Malaysia)  loan  of  over 
$40 million  for  its  road  upgrading  project.  In  addition,  Government  has  allocated  around 
$60 million for water and sewerage schemes in various districts of which the Suva/Nausori 
water and sewerage scheme is worth over $30 million alone. Another $9.5 million has been 
set  aside  for  maintenance  of  Government  properties/buildings,  including  hospitals,  police 
stations  and  Government  quarters.  Government  is  also  actively  working  with  the  Chinese 
Government  for  loans  for  improving  roads  and  other  infrastructure  projects.  The  loan  to 
Housing  Authority  by  the  Chinese Government  is  very  timely  to  provide  much  needed  low 
cost housing.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  reliance  on  preferential  access  is  now  a  thing  of  the  past,  and  we 
must stand on our own feet. We live in a world of competition where many countries have 
low cost structures and high productivity. Therefore, unless we raise our productivity and do 
business in a smarter way, we will not be able to compete successfully against the rest of the 
world. The main test for our industries will be to improve their productivity and compete on 
the global scene – there will be no easy way out for them.  
In  this  regard,  let  me  touch  on  important  reforms  that  are  critically  needed  to  unlock  the 
growth potential of Fiji. For one reason or the other, these much needed reforms have not 
is  extremely 
infrastructure 
important 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 7
been  successfully  implemented  in  the  past.  Government  has  recently  announced  a  major 
reform  agenda,  known  as  the  Economic  Reform  Programme  2010–2014.  These  reforms 
include: 
 
 
 
Good Governance (Constitutional, Parliamentary and Electoral Reforms)  
Civil Service 
Public Sector (FSC, FEA, FHCL, LTA, Govt Shipping, National Road Safety Council, 
etc.) 
Financial Sector (FNPF) 
Availability and Utilisation of Land 
Price Controls 
 
 
 
I am confident that a successful completion of these reforms will create efficiencies, improve 
productivity  and  competitiveness  and  improve  business  and  investor  confidence  in  Fiji. 
Hopefully  with  these  various  reforms,  the  cost  and  ease  of  doing  business  will  greatly 
improve. 
Also,  structural  reforms  are  critical  to  ensuring  fiscal  sustainability,  which  will  stimulate 
growth and help reduce poverty levels. Specifically, the Government’s plan for right-sizing as 
well  as  corporatizing,  privatizing  or  outsourcing  non-core  service  areas  is  vital  to  this  end. 
Price liberalization is also critical in ensuring right price signals are given, which will support 
the process of structural adjustment.  
Summary 
3. 
In  summary,  current  economic  conditions  show  a  recovering  global  economy,  although  at 
uneven rates amongst advanced economies. Strong growth of the Asian economies will drive 
the global growth. Against this background, the domestic economy is expected to pick up, 
albeit weakly.  
While foreign reserves are stable and inflation has peaked, concerns and risks remain. On 
the external front, high oil prices would place downside risks to the inflation outlook and the 
balance of payments. 
Ensuring  macroeconomic  stability  is  vital  for  achieving  a  sustainable  growth  target  of 
5 percent.  A  consistent  set  of  policies  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  stage  is  set  for  the 
economy  to  grow  sustainably  into  the  future.  Essentially,  we  need  supportive  fiscal  and 
monetary  policies  to  ensure  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  in  which  structural 
adjustment can be successful. 
As you are aware, the Reserve Bank continues to implement policy changes to ensure that 
there is sufficient liquidity in the banking system at all times, and that our foreign reserves 
and inflation targets are not threatened. This has entailed recent changes in interest rates 
and  the  implementation  of  a  new  monetary  policy  framework.  However,  considering  the 
limited  scope  that  monetary  policy  has,  it  is  extremely  critical  that  fiscal  policy  is  at  the 
forefront of meeting the challenges I have outlined.  
The  Government  has  shown  great  commitment  towards  fiscal  consolidation;  however,  it 
needs to speed up the progress on structural reforms, specifically on key sectors that drive 
economic growth. With these measures, ladies and gentlemen, I believe we will set in place 
a framework that would allow the economy to grow on a sustainable basis in the future.  
Thank you very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2010
