Caleb M Fundanga: Fostering entrepreneurship amongst young people 
in Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the VentureComp 
launch by Intermarket Banking Corporation, Lusaka, 12 January 2010. 
 The Managing Director Intermarket Banking Corporation, Mr Subhrendu Chatterji 
Mr  Joseph  Toubi,  Executive  Vice  President,  Business  Development  &  International 
Relationship, Afriland First Group 
Representatives from the Securities and Exchange Commission 
Representatives from the Pension and Insurance Authority 
Representatives from Lusaka Stock Exchange 
Representatives from Commercial Banks and other Financial Institutions 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I  am  honoured  for  the  invitation  to  officiate  at  this  important  launch  of  the  business  plan 
competition – VentureComp 2010. 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  commending  Intermarket  Banking  Corporation  for  its  commitment  to 
providing  innovative  products  and  services  on  the  market.  I  have  noted  that  the  bank  has 
brought an array of products and services that specifically target the small and medium scale 
enterprises  and  in  some  cases  business  start-ups.  This  is  commendable  and  should  be 
emulated by other banks. 
I am reliably informed that VentureComp 2010 is a business plan competition for students in 
all  Universities,  Colleges  and  other  Institutions  of  higher  learning.  The  spirit  of  the 
competition  is  to  foster  entrepreneurship  amongst  our  young  people  and  highlight  the 
numerous opportunities available in the area of business. 
It is also interesting to note that the best business plan will be rewarded with start-up capital 
for immediate realization of the idea behind it. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  contribution  of  financial  services  to  individual 
entrepreneurs as well as small and medium sized businesses cannot be over-emphasised. 
As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  following  the  liberalization  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  early 
1990’s, the financial sector in Zambia has evolved rapidly spurred by increasing competition. 
Similarly, policies and the legal and regulatory frameworks have been developed to take into 
account the fast changing liberalised environment. These developments have resulted in a 
considerable increase in the number of banks and other financial service providers. 
Therefore,  the  banking  sector  has  over  the  last  few  years,  witnessed  significant  growth  in 
consumer lending. As a matter of fact, on a sectoral basis the “personal loan” category has 
been  the  largest  recipient  of  total  credit  in  the  recent  years  and  accounted  for  22%  in 
November 2009. Small and Medium Enterprises have also significantly benefited from credit 
expansion.  The  resultant  credit  expansion  has  no  doubt  brought  significant  benefits  to  the 
economy as resources are increasingly channeled through to the lower end of the market. 
However, most of the credit extended by banks and microfinance institutions is targeted at 
individuals  in  formal  employment  or  already  established  enterprises.  Only  an  insignificant 
amount is extended to start-up initiatives or the informal sector. This has been exacerbated 
by  the  inability  of  entrepreneurs  to  articulate  and  sell  bankable  projects  through  robust 
business plans. 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 1
In addition, it is common knowledge that Zambians prefer to be in formal employment rather 
than engage in entrepreneurial activities on a full time basis. The small number of educated 
Zambians engaging in entrepreneurial activities limits the scale of indigenous businesses as 
evidenced by the non participation of Zambians in major sectors of the economy like mining 
or manufacturing. 
It is however, important to realise that individual entrepreneurs as well as small and medium 
sized enterprises form the engine of economic and social development as they generate the 
much needed employment for our people. Hence the need to encourage all efforts aimed at 
stimulating entrepreneurship. 
Distinguished Invited Guests, our institutions of higher learning play an important role by 
molding and developing innovative and creative mindsets amongst our young people. With 
this  belief  in  themselves,  young  people  can  be  productive,  take  responsibility  in  their 
respective  communities  and  ultimately  drive  our  economy  forward.  We  need  to  remind 
ourselves that Google was founded by students; Facebook was founded by a student; and 
even Microsoft was formed by Bill Gates as a student. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me assure you that the Bank of Zambia is committed to ensuring 
the  availability  of  finance  to  viable  entrepreneurs  including  small  and  medium  sized 
businesses. To this end, the Bank continues to spearhead the Financial Sector Development 
Plan, which is aimed at strengthening the Zambian financial sector as well as guiding efforts 
for  realising  the  vision  of  a  stable,  sound  and  market  based  financial  system  that  would 
support  the  efficient  mobilisation  and  allocation  of  resources  necessary  for  economic 
diversification and sustainable growth. 
In  concluding,  I  wish  all  entrants  to  this  competition,  the  best  of  luck.  I  further  with  to 
congratulate in advance the ultimate winners of this inaugural business plan competition – 
VentureComp 2010. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2010
