William C Dudley: The challenges ahead 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Center for the New Economy 2010 Economic Conference, 
San Juan, Puerto Rico, 19 February 2010. 
 Thank you very much and good morning. Although this is my first visit to Puerto Rico in my 
current role, I have been here a number of times, going way back to a childhood visit with my 
parents. It’s a beautiful and special place, but I must admit that coming in February has some 
special advantages.  
I welcome this opportunity to talk with business leaders, workers and educators. My goals 
are  to  hear  what  issues  are  on  the  minds  of  people  here  and  to  let  you  know  what  the 
Federal Reserve has been doing to help improve the economy. So I’m very grateful to the 
Center for the New Economy (CNE) for giving me the opportunity to speak to – and learn 
from – you. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
I  want  to  start  by  talking  about  the  implications  of  the  close  economic  ties  between  the 
mainland and Puerto Rico. Since the economies of the mainland and the Commonwealth are 
very  tightly  linked,  what  happens  on  the  mainland  has  important  consequences  for  Puerto 
Rico, as well. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, we anticipate that the mainland recovery 
will prove to be sustainable, and that this will ultimately benefit the economy here. But Puerto 
Rico faces some significant challenges beyond its ties to the weaknesses in the broader U.S. 
economy,  including  problems  in  its  own  financial  sector.  Dealing  with  these  problems 
forcefully  and  expeditiously  is  crucial  to  ensuring  that  Puerto  Rico  benefits  fully  from  the 
expected economic recovery over the next few years. The Fed is assisting in several ways: 
by  setting  the  stage  for  a  resumption  of  world  economic  growth,  by  helping  to  resolve 
problems in the U.S. mainland and Commonwealth financial sectors and by partnering with 
Puerto  Rican  groups  to  make  meaningful  contributions  toward  resolving  some  of  the 
Commonwealth’s other underlying issues. 
Puerto Rico’s special economic relationship with the mainland 
Puerto  Rico  has  what  economists  often  call  an  “open  economy.”  What  this  means  is  that 
Puerto Rico is especially dependent on external trade, so what happens to the Puerto Rican 
economy  is  greatly  affected  by  what  is  going  on  with  its  major  trading  partners.  When 
demand  from  Puerto  Rico’s  export  customers  is  weak,  then  sales  and  prices  for  the 
Commonwealth’s products fall, so jobs and incomes on the island suffer. 
In the recent recession – as in many financial crises – global trade declined even faster than 
output. As a result, the shock generated by the financial crisis spread quickly throughout the 
world.  Economies  and  regions  far  from  where  the  problems  began  suffered.  This  was 
especially true for economies dependent on trade, such as Puerto Rico’s. In fact, Puerto Rico 
suffered much more than most because the Puerto Rican economy was already in recession 
when the financial crisis struck. 
While Puerto Rico interacts with many other economies, one partner looms especially large 
for the Commonwealth. For generations, the mainland United States and Puerto Rico have 
had a special economic relationship in many dimensions. One of the most obvious of these 
ties is the free flow of people between the mainland and the island. Indeed, according to the 
U.S. Census, about one half of the people who identify their origin as Puerto Rican lived on 
the  mainland  in  2008.  The  active  migration,  return  migration  and  remittances  to  family 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 1
members  reflect  and  reinforce  the  close  personal  and  economic  ties  between  Puerto  Rico 
and the mainland. 
Another link is our common use of the dollar. This means that tourists from the mainland can 
visit without worrying about changing currencies. In addition, businesses can make long-term 
investments in Puerto Rico without worrying that currency fluctuations against the dollar will 
undermine  their  competitiveness.  It  also  means  that  when  the  U.S.  dollar  falls  in  value, 
Puerto Rico’s exports become more competitive around the world, although not, of course, in 
the United States. 
Somewhat  less  obvious  are  the  consequences  of  the  mainland’s  role  as  Puerto  Rico’s 
largest  trading  partner.  The  mainland  accounts  for  half  of  the  island’s  imports  and  three-
quarters  of  its  exports.  With  such  heavy  trade  flows,  when  the  mainland  economy  does 
poorly – as during the past year – Puerto Rico’s economy and job growth suffer. 
Financial  regulation  also  represents  an  important  linkage.  Of  course,  my  presence  here 
representing the New York Fed is one example of that particular connection – Puerto Rico is 
part of the Second District of the Federal Reserve System, along with New York, the U.S. 
Virgin Islands and parts of New Jersey and Connecticut. I’ll return to the theme of financial 
regulation shortly. For now, let me just say that we share, along with the rest of the world, a 
commitment to taking the necessary steps to prevent the type of financial crisis that we just 
experienced from recurring in the future. 
The Fed’s role in coping with the crisis and the outlook for the United States 
The close ties with the mainland means that the broader outlook for the United States is very 
important  for  Puerto  Rico.  The  U.S.  economy  has  been  through  a  terrible  period,  having 
suffered the worst financial crisis in 70 years. Extensive study of banking crises shows that 
they  tend  to  be  “protracted  affairs”  with  surprisingly  similar,  if  unpleasant,  contours. 
Downturns  average  four  years,  during  which  the  unemployment  rate  rises  an  average  of 
7 percentage points. The peak-to-trough decline in output averages 9 percent. 
Those statistics point out the risks that we faced. Well aware of the threat of a second Great 
Depression, U.S. policymakers took very aggressive actions to support economic growth in 
2008 and 2009. The Fed provided liquidity facilities and took many other actions to contain 
and reduce pressures in financial markets, while the U.S.  Treasury supported the banking 
system  and  provided  cash  and  incentives  to  households,  businesses,  and  state  and  local 
governments to support spending during 2009. 
The  Fed’s  “lender  of  last  resort”  interventions  –  including  facilities  such  as  the  Term 
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), as well as 
programs such as reciprocal currency agreements – are examples of the rapid application of 
central banking tenets to the unique challenges we faced as this crisis evolved. Indeed, in 
many  ways,  the  crisis  has  underscored  why  the  Federal  Reserve  was  created  almost  a 
century ago: to provide a backstop for a banking system prone to runs and financial panics. 
Where it proved necessary and feasible, the Fed also used its emergency lending authority 
to  forestall  the  disorderly  failure  of  systemically  important  institutions.  These  actions  truly 
were extraordinary – well outside the scope of our normal operations – but our judgment was 
that not taking those actions would have risked a broader collapse of the financial system 
and  a  significantly  deeper  and  more  protracted  recession.  Faced  with  the  choice  between 
these otherwise unpalatable actions and a broader systemic collapse, the Fed, with the full 
support of the Treasury, invoked its emergency lending authority and prevented the collapse 
of certain institutions previously considered to have been outside the safety net. 
Make no mistake: these necessary moves were unprecedented and controversial. The U.S. 
government’s  financing  of  Treasury’s  actions  required  federal  debt  to  rise  sharply,  and 
stabilizing the financial system temporarily boosted the size of the Fed’s balance sheet. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2010
The final numbers aren’t in yet, but it now appears that the downturn in real gross domestic 
product (GDP) in the United States lasted about a year and a half, much shorter than the 
typical banking crisis downturn. Peak to trough, output fell about 4 percent, less than half the 
typical decline seen in past financial crises. While there are still some significant downside 
risks  to  the  economy,  in  general,  the  outlook  is  improving.  Of  particular  note,  the  capital 
markets – except for certain securitization markets – are now generally open for business. In 
addition, the big banks in the United States have been able to raise a large amount of equity 
capital to put themselves in a stronger position. I believe that Federal Reserve actions over 
the last year and a half have contributed very substantially to this improvement.  
But there still is a lot of work to do. Smaller banks – especially those with large commercial 
real estate exposures – are under pressure, while households and smaller businesses find 
that their access to credit is still constrained. 
Moreover, regulatory reform is essential to prevent this type of financial crisis going forward. 
We  need  to  ensure  that  no  financial  institution  is  “too  big  to  fail.”  This  means  we  need 
Congress to enact a resolution mechanism that allows large, complex financial firms to be 
wound down smoothly, without the need for extraordinary interventions. In addition, we need 
to  take  steps  to  make  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  more  resilient  and  robust.  This 
requires many steps – some already in train – including higher capital requirements for large 
banks,  bigger  liquidity  buffers,  and  changes  to  ensure  that  compensation  practices  are 
consistent with safety and soundness and financial stability. It’s a long list – there is no single 
silver bullet – and it will take time, but the regulatory community and the political leadership 
will fail to meet our shared responsibility as stewards if we do not implement the necessary 
reforms in a timely and effective manner. 
Outlook for the recovery and risks from the financial sector 
The  U.S.  economy  has  begun  to  recover.  Growth  in  the  second  half  of  2009  was  a  bit 
stronger than expected and the pace of layoffs has diminished. We currently expect that the 
economy will keep expanding, but at a somewhat slower growth rate than during the second 
half  of  2009  as  the  temporary  boost  from  the  inventory  cycle  fades  and  the  effects  of  the 
stimulus  bill  gradually  weaken.  With  modest  growth,  we  expect  price  pressures  to  remain 
well contained. 
Nonetheless,  it’s  far  too  early  to  pop  the  champagne  corks.  While  the  U.S.  economy  is 
growing,  unemployment  remains  unacceptably  high  and  certain  impediments  could  restrict 
growth in the near term. One set of challenges are current conditions in the financial system. 
The  initial  stages  of  the  financial  crisis  have  been  widely  attributed  to  a  rapid  rise  in 
residential  mortgage  defaults.  Many  large  financial  institutions  turned  out  to  have  direct 
exposure – and often indirect exposure through complex linkages – to residential real estate, 
and  found  themselves  facing  severe  funding  problems  as  the  value  and  liquidity  of  their 
assets sharply diminished. 
As the real economy slipped into recession in 2008 and unemployment began to rise, other 
financial  instruments  came  under  stress,  including  commercial  real  estate  loans  and 
instruments based on these loans. Commercial real estate loans are frequently originated by 
medium-sized regional banks that have significant expertise in their local areas and are often 
held in the lending bank’s portfolio. 
In many parts of the United States, including Puerto Rico, these commercial real estate loans 
have  now  soured,  and  many  banks  are  seeing  the  value  of  their  assets  decline  and  their 
revenues  shrink.  In  extreme  cases,  some  banks  have  become  insolvent.  Finding  ways  to 
address problem assets and the health of the exposed banks is fundamental to restoring the 
banking industry to the firm footing that is needed to properly support economic growth. 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 3
To bring this point home, let me step back and offer some observations on the importance of 
a well-functioning financial system. A healthy banking sector is crucial for economic growth 
because banks and other parts of the financial system play a key role in determining how 
savings  are  allocated  among  competing  projects  and  users  of  credit.  If  households  and 
businesses cannot get credit on reasonable terms, then the economy sputters. To underline 
this  point,  the  Fed  and  Treasury  did  not  intervene  during  the  recent  crisis  to  save  the 
financial  system  (and  with  it,  some  big  financial  firms)  for  its  own  sake.  We  intervened 
because a collapse of the financial system would have done irreparable harm to Main Street. 
With the limited tools at hand, we made our choices (often between unattractive options) with 
the goal of supporting the economy, households and small businesses. 
A well-functioning financial system is also crucial in fostering economic development. History 
shows that substantial risks to the economy come from a persistently weak banking sector. 
Economists have debated whether healthy banks drive real economic growth, or vice-versa, 
but a wealth of recent evidence suggests that the causality runs at least partly from banks to 
growth, and not just the other way around. So, from my perspective, getting Puerto Rico’s 
banking system back onto solid footing is “job one” for supporting growth here. 
Preparing Puerto Rico to benefit from recovery in the world economy 
Of course, that isn’t the whole story. Growth may also be impeded by factors that are specific 
to particular regions or policies. 
I  work  in  New  York  and  live  in  New  Jersey,  where  we  know  a  thing  or  two  about  fiscal 
problems. Puerto Rico’s large public debt has the potential to reduce its growth prospects as 
the world economy recovers. Puerto Rico’s fiscal situation has deteriorated sharply over the 
last  five  years  as  the  Commonwealth’s  recession  has  deepened.  Throughout  this  period, 
public debt has risen quickly as revenues that are sensitive to economic activity – such as 
income taxes – have declined. 
But the fiscal problem in Puerto Rico pre-dates the current crisis. Even when the economy 
was  growing,  public  debt  was  growing  even  faster.  This  structural  imbalance  is  difficult  to 
sustain in the long run, and requires attention if Puerto Rico is to prosper. 
A  critical  factor  here  is  ensuring  that  the  Commonwealth’s  tax  system  is  designed  to 
generate the revenue required to sustain government operations. Furthermore, any good tax 
system should satisfy three important criteria: simplicity, fairness and neutrality. The current 
system suffers from some problems that make it difficult to meet these tests and generate 
adequate revenue. In particular, high rates are levied on a narrow tax base. 
One of the key public services funded by these taxes is education. Workers need skills to 
produce  the  complicated  technological  products  of  the  future.  There  is  clear  evidence  that 
workers with the sort of flexible thinking skills not easily duplicated by computers have seen 
their  productivity  and  earnings  rise,  a  trend  that  is  likely  to  persist  in  the  future.  Thus, 
technology and skills are essential for healthy economic growth and for the financial health of 
workers and their families. 
As  the  economy  and  financial  system  become  more  complex,  financial  literacy  is  also 
increasingly  central  to  family  financial  well-being.  Improved  understanding  of  budgeting, 
saving, financial products and planning for retirement is not only a high priority for people in 
their own lives, but also for the Fed with its responsibility for monetary policy. 
Education thus plays a key role in fostering upward mobility for future generations. All of this 
underscores the importance of achieving the best possible education for all of Puerto Rico’s 
young  people  and  making  lifelong  learning  and  skills  development  a  part  of  everyone’s 
future.  Yet,  about  half  of  Puerto  Rico’s  low-income  students  drop  out  of  high  school. 
Reducing  this  dropout  rate  will  not  be  easy,  but  should  also  be  a  priority  for  the 
Commonwealth. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2010
The  private  and  public  sectors  both  need  accurate,  timely  and  comprehensive  economic 
statistics to perform effectively. It is impossible to make good decisions without a solid factual 
basis for those decisions. For example, the government needs good economic information to 
develop effective fiscal, economic development and regulatory policy. Likewise, to make the 
best  production,  investment  and  pricing  decisions,  businesses  need  accurate  and  timely 
information on things such as wages, income and prices. Poor quality information increases 
uncertainty and this uncertainty inhibits well-considered risk-taking and investment decisions. 
Although Puerto Rico’s statistical system was once a model for other countries, now there 
are  major  opportunities  for  improvement  in  comparison  with  the  mainland  and  other 
countries. In recognition of this need, the government of Puerto Rico recently established the 
Institute for Statistics to work with its statistical agencies. 
One key example of these efforts concerns the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as a measure of 
inflation. A recent study by the Institute, aided by the Department of Labor, found that the 
island’s  official  inflation  rate  was  overestimated  by  more  than  double  between  2001  and 
2006.  Overestimating  inflation  can  have  tangible  consequences,  such  as  excessive  wage 
increases in certain sectors that can damage the island’s global competitiveness and cause 
unnecessary job loss. 
Also  thanks  to  the  Institute,  the  government  of  Puerto  Rico  now  has  a  release  schedule, 
called  the  “calendario”,  for  its  statistical  publications.  This  basic  tool  helps  people, 
businesses  and  investors  by  ensuring  that  they  use  the  latest  available  data  for  their 
decisions. It also boosts confidence in the data, which reduces economic uncertainty. 
How the Fed is helping 
There  are  many  challenges  ahead,  and  we  are  committed  to  being  an  active  partner  in 
confronting them. The Fed’s most important roles in helping Puerto Rico, of course, emanate 
directly from our responsibilities for economic growth, stable prices and a resilient financial 
system. We continue to take the actions required to promote maximum sustainable growth in 
the  U.S.  economy.  These  efforts  have  and  will  continue  to  benefit  the  mainland  and  the 
Commonwealth. 
In  addition,  we  are  working  very  closely  with  all  of  the  banking  supervisors  and  other  key 
parties to facilitate an effective resolution to the current problems facing the island’s banking 
sector. Some consolidation is likely needed to produce stronger, healthier institutions more 
able to make the sound lending decisions that support economic growth. 
Let me also tell you a bit about how we are contributing “on the ground” here in Puerto Rico.  
I  mentioned  financial  literacy  a  few  minutes  ago.  The  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the 
New York Fed have taken a great interest in economic education and financial literacy and 
will  continue  to  do  even  more  in  the  future.  I,  personally,  believe  that  financial  literacy  is 
essential  so  that  households  can  make  the  type  of  good  financial  decisions  that  help  to 
ensure better futures. 
The New York Fed, along with many financial institutions and foundations in Puerto Rico, has 
created and supported the Economic and Financial Education Alliance of Puerto Rico. Over 
the past ten years, the Alliance has trained more than 400 high school teachers in economics 
and financial literacy. I would like to personally thank all the institutions whose devotion to 
this Alliance has made these education efforts possible.  
These  teachers  take  what  they  learned  back  to  the  classroom  and  many  of  their  students 
enter the Federal Reserve Economics Competition. The students apply analytical skills to a 
local problem of their choosing and work as a team to create a presentation outlining their 
solution  and  responding  to  questions.  The  winning  team  develops  skills  –  in  analysis, 
presentations and teamwork – that will help them in their future studies and careers in the 
knowledge economy. 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 5
The New York Fed is also supporting the Office of the Commissioner of Financial Institutions 
in  its  two-week  expo,  where  last  year  20,000  people  saw  presentations  and  received 
financial counseling.  
We have also had a productive relationship with our good friends at the Puerto Rico Bankers 
Association. Each year during “Community Reinvestment Act Week,” our staff highlights new 
ideas and products especially suited to the Puerto Rican market. 
For  example,  this  November  we  held  a  forum  for  Puerto  Rican  and  U.S.  Virgin  Islands 
financial  institutions,  state  and  local  governments,  and  nonprofit  organizations  to  introduce 
“Bank  On,”  a  financial  product  proven  to  attract  under-banked  people  into  the  financial 
mainstream.  Since  then,  several  local  banks  have  formed  a  group  to  explore  how  to  best 
implement it here. 
Another  example  of  collaboration  is  our  work  with  the  Bankers  Association  and  local 
universities.  During  the  fall,  we  held  a  “Financial  Awareness  Video  Contest”  for  college 
students. This pilot project explores building peer-to-peer financial awareness among young 
adults by having contestants create a 90-second video. We look forward to hosting the first 
place winners during their trip to New York in the spring. 
To improve our understanding of the Puerto Rican economy, the New York Fed has joined a 
group  of  local  businesses  –  including  some  represented  here  –  to  sponsor  and  fund  a 
household  survey,  undertaken  by  the  Center  for  the  New  Economy,  our  hosts  today,  to 
benchmark Puerto Rican consumer finances. As of today, the data have been collected and 
Fed economists are collaborating with the CNE to provide technical assistance, to make the 
results of this study public and to make these data available for further research. 
To help businesses and government in Puerto Rico, we have also been providing technical 
assistance to Puerto Rico’s new Institute for Statistics. We recognize the importance of this 
work  and  applaud  its  efforts  to  improve  Puerto  Rico’s  inflation  measures,  national  income 
accounting and business activity measures, just to name a few. 
All of these activities, from monetary policy and financial regulation to fostering community 
development  and  economic  literacy  and  measurement,  complement  and  reinforce  each 
other. Our policy actions are most effective when people understand how financial markets 
work.  Our  decisions  are  always  better  when  we  are  well  informed  about  the  concerns  of 
families  and  businesses.  Thus,  outreach  to  the  region  and  communities  we  serve  is  an 
important part of my job. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few 
questions. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2010
