Masaaki Shirakawa: Uniqueness or similarity? Japan’s post-bubble 
experience in monetary policy studies  
Keynote address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Second 
International Journal of Central Banking (IJCB) Fall Conference, Tokyo, 16 September 2010. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I am very pleased to have a chance today to address the IJCB Conference. In particular, this 
conference  is  very  timely  and  appropriate  in  two  aspects.  First,  as  everybody  here  is  well 
aware, this conference focuses on a very important theme for central bank policymakers in 
the  current  situation,  “Monetary  Policy  Lessons  from  the  Global  Crisis.”  Second,  whether 
intentionally or not, this conference is held in Japan, the country often quoted as a precedent 
on  that  theme.1  In  fact,  we  hear  heated  discussions  in  the  United  State  as  to  whether  the 
United  States  will  fall  into  “deflation  in  the  Japanese  style”  or  the  “lost  decade  like  Japan” 
(Chart 1).2 
The  line  of  discussions  generally  has  something  in  common  in  interpreting  Japan’s 
experience.  That  is,  a  weak  economic  performance  is  attributed  mainly  to  the  failures  of 
Japan’s  policy  authorities  or  the  factors  peculiar  to  the  Japanese  economy  and  society.  I 
cannot completely deny Japan’s uniqueness, but I should also emphasize that we can find a 
lot  of  similarities  between  Japan’s  experience  and  our  experience  in  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. At various international conferences I attended in the early 2000s, I explained 
the  Japanese  situation  many  times,  but  never  imagined  that  zero  interest  rates  and 
quantitative easing would be adopted by other central banks in the advanced economies. I 
believe many of central bank officials thought the same way. 
In short, Japan’s experience provides too important and general food for thought to say that 
Japan is just unique. Nevertheless, I have the impression that Japan’s experience is often 
discussed, based on casual reading of related facts. Taking this opportunity, I will articulate 
my  thoughts  on  how  to  make  use  of  Japan’s  experience  since  the  burst  of  a  bubble  in 
making monetary policy studies.3 
Seven facts on Japan’s economy since the burst of a bubble 
II.  
The Japanese economy after the burst of a bubble is often referred to as the “lost decade.”4 
Real  GDP  growth  remained  just  1.5  percent  on  average  in  the  1990s,  which  declined 
significantly  from  4.6  percent  in  the  1970s  and  4.4  percent  in  the  1980s  (Chart  2).5  CPI 
inflation reached its peak of 3.3 percent in January 1991 soon after the burst of a bubble, 
started declining shortly thereafter, and turned negative in 1998 (Chart 1, shown earlier). 
Looking at policy responses, on the monetary policy front, the Bank of Japan’s (BOJ’s) first 
policy rate reduction after the burst of a bubble was carried out in July 1991, one year after 
                                                 
1   See, for example, Ahearne et al. (2002), Krugman (1998), and Posen (1998). 
2   See, for example, Bullard (2010) and Rogoff (2010). 
3  
In my speech today, I focus on Japan’s experience after the burst of a bubble. See also Okina, Shirakawa, 
and  Shiratsuka  (2001)  for  discussions  on  the  cause  of  the  bubble  since  the  late  1980s  and  its  lessons  for 
monetary policy. 
4   With regard to the appropriateness of the phrase, “lost decade,” see Shirakawa (2009). 
5  
In  the  2000s,  the  average  growth  rate  recovered  slightly,  and  stayed  at  1.7  percent  until  2007  before  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 1
the peak of land prices (Chart 3).6 Overnight interest rates came down to 0.5 percent and 
virtually reached zero interest rates in 1995, four years after the BOJ started the policy rate 
reductions.7  On  the  fiscal  policy  front,  aggressive  stimulus  measures  were  taken  in  two 
periods:  soon  after  the  burst  of  a  bubble  and  from  1998  to  1999  (Chart  4).  After  the 
introduction  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  the  contributions  of  fiscal  expenditure  to  real 
GDP growth remained negative. On the financial system policy front, capital injections into 
undercapitalized  financial  institutions  started  in  1998.  The  amount  of  injected  public  funds 
relative to nominal GDP finally reached 2.5 percent in Japan. Compared to the United States 
in the recent crisis, the amount of injected public funds was smaller in the United States, and 
remained 1.5 percent of nominal GDP, but the capital injections were carried out much faster 
in the United States. 
Those are the quick summary of macroeconomic conditions and policy responses after the 
burst  of  a  bubble  in  Japan.  When  making  use  of  Japan’s  experience  in  monetary  policy 
studies, I want to draw your attention to the following facts. 
First, Japan experienced business cycle expansions and contractions three times each since 
the low-growth 1990s (Chart 5).8 That seems contrary to the impression from the phrase of 
the “lost decade” that Japan has remained stagnant all the time since the 1990s. Whenever 
some signs of recovery were observed in Japan, expectations that the economy would finally 
escape  from  stagnant  conditions  and  enter  a  full-fledged  recovery  were  rising.  Based  on 
such Japan’s experience, I attempted to draw public attention to the risk of falling into false 
optimism  by  using  the  phrase  of  a  “false  dawn,”  when  we  saw  some  signs  of  economic 
recovery in advanced economies in the spring of 2009.9 
Second,  Japan  did  not  experience  a  sharp  and  drastic  economic  contraction  on  the  scale 
that we experienced after the failure of Lehman Brothers. Looking at Japan’s real GDP trend, 
the largest decline was recorded in the first quarter of 1998 by −1.9 percent. That decline, 
however,  was  smaller  than  those  in  many  countries,  including  Japan,  after  the  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers  in the  fall  of  2008  (Chart  6). Even  during  the  period from  1997  to  1998, 
when Japan’s financial crisis was severest, the level of real GDP remained higher than the 
average level of 1989, when Japan was at the peak of the bubble period. 
Third,  Japan  showed  economic  growth  on  a  per  worker  basis  comparable  to  the  United 
States in the 2000s, although significantly declined from the 1980s (Chart 7). At the same 
time, Japan delivered a weaker performance in real GDP growth. Obviously, the differences 
between  real  GDP  growth  and  real  GDP  growth  per  worker  reflect  the  declines  in  the 
workforce in Japan.10 In any event, in analyzing the Japanese economy after the burst of a 
bubble, it is essential to take account of changes in potential growth, which is determined by 
productivity growth and demographic changes. 
Fourth, Japan has experienced deflation, but its severity has been contained at a mild level. 
Consumer  price  inflation  turned  negative  in  1998,  and  from  1997  to  2010  it  declined  by 
−3.3 percent on a cumulative basis, and −0.3 percent on an annualized basis (Chart 8).11 In 
                                                 
6   The intervals between the peak of land/housing prices and the first policy rate reduction are almost the same 
in Japan and the United States. 
7   Okina and Shiratsuka (2002) make an assessment on the BOJ’s monetary policy actions before and after the 
burst of a bubble based on the Taylor rule. 
In  Japan,  the  President  of  the  Economic  and  Social  Research  Institute,  Cabinet  Office,  decides  on  the 
reference  dates  of  business  cycles,  based  on  the  discussions  in  the  Investigation  Committee  for  Business 
Cycle. 
8  
9   See Shirakawa (2009). 
10   That  tendency  becomes  more  evident,  by  comparing  real  GDP  growth  per  man-hour.  See  Hayashi  and 
Prescott (2002). 
11   The latest figure for the Japanese CPI is July 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2010
the meantime, long-term inflation expectations remained generally unchanged, and anchored 
around 1 percent (Chart 9). Japan’s deflation since the second half of the 1990s is a rare 
experience  in  the  post-war  advanced  economies,  but  the  scale  of  the  price  decline  is  far 
smaller, compared to the period of the Great Depression when the United States registered a 
CPI decline of 24 percent in the 1930s (Chart 10). 
Fifth, Japan has experienced deflation not only in goods prices but also in services prices. 
Compared  with  the  United  States,  the  difference  in  consumer  price  inflation  is  mainly 
attributed to services prices (Chart 11). That reflected flexible adjustments in nominal wages 
in Japan, since the service sector is basically labor-intensive. 
Sixth,  Japan  has  not  experienced  a  deflationary  spiral.  More  precisely,  Japan  has  not 
experienced the phenomenon after the burst of a bubble that a decline in prices induces a 
decline in economic activity, thereby leading to a further decline in prices.12 Instead, Japan 
has experienced the longest recovery, just in duration without considering its strength, from 
2002 under mild deflation (Chart 12). 
Seventh and finally, the BOJ introduced various innovative policy measures (Chart 13).13 The 
zero  interest  rate  policy  was  first  introduced  by  the  BOJ  in  1999.  The  “quantitative  easing 
policy,” which set a target for money market operations on the outstanding amount of current 
account balances at the central bank and expanded such balances far above the required 
reserve levels, was also first introduced by the BOJ in 2001. 
The BOJ expanded its balance sheet size considerably. From 1995 when overnight interest 
rates fell down to virtually zero, the ratio of the BOJ’s balance sheet size to nominal GDP 
increased  by  more  than  20  percentage  points  at  its  peak  (Chart  14).  That  increase  in  the 
ratio for the BOJ is twice as large as that in the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed), the European 
Central Bank (ECB), and the Bank of England (BOE) in the recent crisis. In addition, the level 
of the ratio for the BOJ is still higher than that for the Fed, the ECB, and the BOE. 
As the target level of the current account balances was raised, the maturities of short-term 
funds-supplying operations became lengthened. In the final stage of the quantitative easing 
policy,  the  average  maturities  exceeded  six  months,  and  the  longest  one  reached  eleven 
months. 
In addition, an experimental policy measure of commitment to the future course of monetary 
policy was first introduced by the BOJ. Under the quantitative easing policy, for example, the 
BOJ  made  a  commitment  to  continuing  with  the  quantitative  easing  policy  “until  core  CPI 
inflation becomes stably zero or above.” 
The  BOJ  also  adopted  “credit  easing”  in  the  current  terminology.  The  assets  purchased 
included  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  and  asset-backed  commercial  papers  (ABCPs). 
The BOJ purchased stocks held by financial institutions to reduce market risk associated with 
stockholdings,  which  was  one  of  the  biggest  risk  factors  in  potentially  destabilizing  the 
financial system. 
As I have reviewed so far, the BOJ introduced various unprecedented measures under the 
uncharted circumstances during the period from the late 1990s to the early 2000s. Innovative 
aspects  of  such  policy  measures  were  not  well  recognized  at  that  time,  but,  in  retrospect, 
such measures involved most of the elements in the unconventional policy measures taken 
in the recent global financial crisis. 
                                                 
12   For example, Posen (2010) noted that Japanese deflation remained stable over the course of the 1990s rather 
than accelerated. 
13   For  the  overview  of  empirical  studies  on  the  effects  of  the  BOJ’s  monetary  policy  measures  in  the  2000s, 
including the quantitative easing policy, see Ugai (2007). 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 3
III.  
Four similarities in economic conditions and policy responses after the burst 
of a bubble 
Based on the facts in Japan’s experience after the burst of a bubble, I will next point out four 
observations that are common to economic conditions and policy responses after the burst of 
a bubble in the two cases: one is the U.S. and European economies in the recent crisis and 
the other is the Japanese economy since the 1990s. I will also elaborate on their implications 
in analyzing economic conditions and monetary policy after the burst of a bubble. 
Sluggish economic recovery and balance-sheet adjustment 
The  first  similarity  concerns  the  fact  that  it  took  fairly  long  before  restoring  the  full-fledged 
recovery path after the burst of a bubble.14 In Japan, it was 2003 when the economy went 
back to the steady recovery path, and it thus took more than ten years since the burst of a 
bubble.  In  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  the  adjustment  is  still  continuing,  and  the 
duration of the adjustment period is yet to be confirmed. However, we can safely say that it 
will  take  some  time  before  restoring  the  full-fledged  recovery  path.  That  is  because  the 
balance-sheet  adjustment  produces  significant  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  in  the 
process of resolving various “excesses” accumulated during a bubble period.15 The forms of 
“excesses”  vary  from  country  to  country.  In  Japan,  they  were  “three  excesses”  in  the 
business  sector:  employment,  production  capacity,  and  debt  (Chart  15).16  It  is  essential  to 
explicitly incorporate an adjustment mechanism of “excesses” in analyzing the economy after 
the burst of a bubble. 
As a related issue, before the crisis it was frequently argued that a financial system with well-
developed  capital  markets,  in  addition  to  a  sturdy  banking  system,  was  more  robust  to  a 
shock  than  a  bank-centric  financial  system,  since  both  the  bank  channel  and  the  capital 
market channel worked in a complementary manner.17 It seems, however, such a view needs 
to be reconsidered. 
Effects of dysfunctional interbank money markets 
The second similarity lies in the fact that the sharp contraction of economic activity after the 
burst of a bubble occurred when interbank money markets became destabilized. In Japan, as 
I mentioned earlier, it was the period from 1997 to 1998 when real GDP declined the most, 
and it was the fall of 1997 when interbank money markets became destabilized (Chart 16).18 
In the recent global financial crisis, real GDP in advanced economies, including the United 
States  and  European  countries,  registered  the  largest  decline  during  the  period  from  the 
fourth quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2009. Such a massive decline was attributed to 
the  malfunction  of  interbank  money  markets,  triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers. 
The two cases have the common starting point of an interbank market participant default.19 
                                                 
14   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), and Reinhart and Reinhart (2010) for the detailed discussions on recovery 
patterns after crises. 
15   Nakakuki,  Otani,  and  Shiratsuka  (2004)  make  a  quantitative  assessment  on  the  effects  of  structural 
adjustments on economic growth in Japan. 
16   For the issues on the “three excesses,” see the 2003-05 issues of the BOJ’s Outlook for Economic Activity 
and Prices. 
17   See Greenspan (1999). 
18  The failure of medium-sized Sanyo Securities in 1997 led to the first default in interbank money markets in the 
postwar period in Japan. That triggered sudden liquidity contraction in interbank money markets, immediately 
spilling over to a wide-range of financial markets. 
19  See Nakaso (2001) for the details on Japan’s financial crisis and the BOJ’s role as the lender of last resort. 
When  Sanyo  Securities  failed,  the  default  of  one  billion  yen  in  the  interbank  money  markets  occurred. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2010
Given  the  serious  adverse  effects  of  the  failure  of  medium-sized  Sanyo  Securities  on 
interbank  money  markets,  at  the  time  of  the  subsequent  and  larger  failure  of  Yamaichi 
Securities, the BOJ committed to providing an unlimited amount of liquidity, thereby enabling 
its orderly resolution.20 Such policy responses staved off a global financial crisis starting in 
Japan.21 
A series of observations, just I mentioned, show that ensuring funding liquidity is one of the 
most  important  prerequisites  for  achieving  stable  economic  activity,  and,  to  that  end,  it  is 
crucial to stave off the malfunction of interbank money markets. In addition, I emphasize the 
importance of differentiating two things in analyzing the economy after the burst of a bubble: 
the phase of “acute pains” arising from the malfunctioning interbank money markets and the 
phase of “chronic illnesses” from balance-sheet adjustments. 
Weakened credit channel 
The third similarity can be found in the fact that the transmission channels of conventional 
monetary policy, explained in standard textbooks, did not seem to work well after the burst of 
a bubble. A typical example can be found in the credit channel. In Japan, the growth in bank 
lending decelerated rapidly after the burst of the bubble, and continued to remain stagnant 
for a long time (Chart 17). The growth in bank lending finally turned positive in 2005. Looking 
at the United States and European countries, the growth in bank lending is still continuing to 
decline, and the pace of the decline is much faster than that in Japan after the burst of the 
bubble.  In  addition,  the  expansions  in  the  monetary  base  did  not  induce  an  increase  in 
money supply nor bank lending (Chart 18). 
Before the outbreak of the recent global financial crisis, quantitative easing was frequently 
proposed  as  a  measure  against  deflation.  Nevertheless,  we  hardly  observe  the  fact  that 
massive  expansions  in  central  bank  balance  sheets  result  in  an  increase  in  inflation  in 
advanced  economies.22  Such  fact  suggests  that  conventional  monetary  policy  becomes 
substantially constrained under the economic circumstances with zero interest rates and on-
going balance-sheet adjustments. 
The effectiveness of unconventional policy measures under the dysfunctional 
financial system 
The  fourth  similarity  is  related  to  the  fact  that  various  unconventional  measures  taken  by 
central banks in a crisis produced significant effects on stabilizing the financial system, and 
thus contributed to minimizing the economic downturn.23 In particular, such unconventional 
measures  were  the  most  effective  in  the  situation  that  the  overall  function  of  the  financial 
                                                                                                                                                      
Although  the  defaulted  amount  was  relatively  small,  market  participants  became  suddenly  cautious  about 
counterparty risk. 
20   Due to such policy actions, the liabilities owned by Yamaichi Securities were replaced by those for the BOJ. Of 
course,  an  international  spillover  of  the  shock  could  have  occurred,  if  complex  securitization  schemes  had 
been extensively used at that time. 
21   Yamaichi Securities played an important role as one of the four big securities companies in Japan and actively 
conducted  overseas  businesses.  Due  to  massive  off-the-book  liabilities,  so-called  stock  shuffle  (loss 
compensation),  Yamaichi’s  funding  became  increasingly  tight  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Yamaichi  finally 
decided to go into the voluntary closure of its securities business in November 1997. When Yamaichi failed, 
the BOJ extended uncollateralized lending in order to support the orderly wind-down of its transactions, some 
of  which  turned  out  to  be  irrecoverable  at  the  conclusion  of  Yamaichi’s  bankruptcy  procedures  in  January 
2005. 
22   Posen  (2009),  using  the  inflation  data  in  the  G7  countries,  noted  that  the  only  periods  where  excessive 
monetary growth led to sustained rises in inflation were during the early and mid-1970s. 
23   Bernanke (2009) emphasizes that point. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 5
system,  including  credit  markets,  deteriorated  due  to  the  malfunction  of  interbank  money 
markets. The success of such measures is essentially due to central banks’ undertaking of 
counterparty  risk  and  credit  risk.  Such  central  banks’  risk-taking  is  certainly  crucial  in  the 
phase of “acute pains.” Thus, when examining the effectiveness of monetary policy, or more 
broadly central bank policy in general, it is crucial to make a clear distinction between the 
phase of “acute pains” and the phase of “chronic illnesses.” 
Things to remember in Interpreting Japan’s experience 
IV.  
So  far  I  have  discussed  the  common  factors  in  economic  conditions  after  the  burst  of  a 
bubble.  At  the  same  time,  there  exist  some  factors  peculiar  to  Japan’s  experience.  In 
monetary policy studies, we need to interpret Japan’s experience with consideration for some 
differences. 
Differences in the phase of adopting unconventional measures 
First,  we  need  to  take  account  of  the  differences  in  the  phase  of  adopting  unconventional 
measures.  In  the  malfunction  of  interbank  money  markets,  unconventional  measures  were 
proven effective by Japan’s experience as well as the global financial crisis this time.24 The 
real issue here is whether unconventional measures, especially quantitative easing or credit 
easing, are effective in the phase of “chronic illnesses” after such crisis subsides. 
Empirical studies on Japan mostly show that quantitative easing produced significant effects 
on stabilizing the financial system, while it had limited effects on stimulating economic activity 
and prices. Such empirical analyses on the United States and the United Kingdom seem yet 
to be available at this moment.25 But it seems very difficult to differentiate between the effects 
from the conventional interest rate channel and those from unconventional measures. That is 
because such unconventional measures were introduced in the phase of “acute pains” with 
considerably  higher  nominal  interest  rates  and  credit  spreads  than  those  in  Japan.  By 
contrast, Japan virtually faced the zero lower bound of nominal interest rates in the second 
half  of  1995,  and  thus  stimulative  effects  from  the  conventional  interest  rate  channel  were 
exhausted before the introduction of the zero interest rate policy in February 1999. 
The effects of demographic changes and productivity declines 
Second, we need to consider developments on the supply side and the potential growth rate. 
As  standard  macroeconomic  theory  emphasizes,  long-term  growth  is  determined  by  labor 
force growth and productivity growth. 
In  Japan,  labor  force  growth  peaked  in  the  mid-1970s,  decelerated  thereafter,  and  turned 
negative  in  the  mid-1990s  (Chart  19).  When  assessing  the  factors  behind  the  long-lasting 
economic stagnation over one or two decades, it is important to focus more on analysis of 
the real side of the economy.26 
                                                 
24   See Ugai (2007) for comprehensive survey on empirical studies on the effects of the quantitative easing policy 
in Japan. See  also, for example, Gagnon et al. (2010) and Joyce et al. (2010) for empirical studies on the 
recent experience in the United States and the United Kingdom, respectively. Bean et al. (2010) also provide a 
broader review of monetary policy responses in the recent global financial crisis. 
25   Ugai (2007) concludes that effect of expanding the monetary base and altering the composition of the BOJ’s 
balance sheet, if any, is generally smaller than that stemming from the policy commitment. 
26   Hayashi  and  Prescott  (2002)  argue  that  growth  theory,  treating  the  economic  productivity  as  exogenous, 
accounts  well  for  the  Japanese  lost  decade,  and  call  for  the  analysis  about  policy  change  that  allows 
productivity to grow rapidly. See also Rogoff (2010). 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2010
Such  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate,  and  associated  downward  revision  of  the  public 
expectations about the future growth rate, seem to produce downward pressure on prices.27 
In fact, there exists a significantly positive correlation between the potential growth rate and 
long-term  expectations  about  inflation  in  Japan,  in  contrast  to  other  advance  countries 
(Chart 20). Several interpretations are possible on that observation. For example, it can be 
considered  that  a  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate  induces  a  persistent  and  significant 
decline in the natural rate of interest, thus making it difficult for monetary policy to produce 
sufficient easing effects. Alternatively, economic growth expectations are revised downward, 
reflecting a decline in the potential growth rate, and a subsequent increase in the discounted 
present value of future net tax burden and debt-repayment burden to the private sector are 
likely to restrain private expenditure. 
Differences in labor practice 
Third,  we  also  need  to  pay  attention  to  the  differences  in  labor  practice.  Japan’s  labor 
practice  has  a  general  feature  that  the  dismissal  of  regular  workers  is  relatively  difficult, 
compared  to  the  U.S.  labor  practice.  As  a  result,  labor  costs  of  regular  workers  entail  the 
nature of quasi-fixed costs. Under such circumstances, firms have an incentive to cover the 
fixed  costs  by  lowering  sales  prices.  Price  declines  in  the  early  stage  of  the  post-bubble 
period are partly explained by such mechanism.28 
As  disinflation  progressed,  Japan  tended  to  set  wages  in  a  more  flexible  manner.  Such 
flexibility in wage setting was attained not only through a reduction in bonus payments and 
an increase in the number of non-regular workers, but also the downward revision of fixed 
compensation for regular workers (Chart 21). As mentioned earlier, compared to the United 
States,  price  declines  in  Japan  were  attributed  mostly  to  declines  in  services  prices.  That 
reflected flexible downward revisions of nominal wages. 
The  propensity  to  consume  in  Japan’s  household  sector  increased  even  under  deflation, 
partly  owing  to  the  fact  that  price  declines  were  driven  by  unstorable  services  prices 
(Chart 22).29  The  difference  in  labor  practice  is  one  factor  behind  the  observation  that 
deflation  was  the  severest  in  Japan  among  major  countries,  but  never  turned  into  a 
deflationary spiral. 
Although ultimately labor practice is determined endogenously, we need to incorporate the 
differences  in  labor  practice  in  analyzing  the  short-  to  medium-term  developments  in 
deflation. 
Developments in external demand 
Fourth,  we  need  to  take  account  of  an  increase  in  external  demand  as  one  of  the  driving 
forces behind Japan’s recovery (Chart 23). As I mentioned earlier, the Japanese economy 
needed  the  resolution  of  “three  excesses”  in  the  business  sector  before  restoring  the  full-
fledged  recovery  path.  In  addition,  such  recovery  in  the  Japanese  economy  was  also 
attributed  to  the  increase  in  external  demand  since  2003,  which  was  supported  by  high 
growth in the global economy under the global credit bubble as well as the depreciation of 
the  Japanese  yen.  Under  the  current  circumstances,  advanced  economies  need  to  gain 
momentum for recovery without relying on the “external” demand, since many economies are 
affected by the burst of a bubble. 
                                                 
27   See Kimura et al. (2010) and Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani (2008). 
28   See Kuroda and Yamamoto (2005). 
29   The increasing trend in the propensity to consume is also influenced by the aging population. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 7
In  that  sense,  we  need  further  analysis  with  considering  the  differences  in  the  recovery 
mechanism  after  the  burst  of  a  bubble,  depending  on  whether  one  country  experiences  a 
bubble or many countries in the world experience a bubble. 
Future research challenges 
V.  
To conclude my speech today, I will touch upon the challenges to monetary policy studies 
based  on  our  experience  of  the  financial  crisis.30  That  said,  we  are  fully  aware  that  many 
issues have been already raised on various occasions. I thus focus on some relevant, but 
often missing items in the research agenda related to both conventional and unconventional 
monetary policies. 
Speaking  of  conventional  monetary  policy,  I  stress  the  importance  of  deepening  our 
understanding about the effectiveness of aggressive policy rate reductions after the burst of 
a  bubble.  Before  the  burst  of  the  bubble  this  time,  the  majority  view  was  that  aggressive 
policy rate reductions enabled us to stave off a sharp and serious economic contraction.31 
Such optimistic view was challenged by a severe economic contraction in the recent global 
financial crisis. Such aggressive policy rate reductions are certainly needed to mitigate the 
economic downturn. Still, we need to recognize some facts in an extremely low interest rate 
environment. 
First, when short-term nominal interest rates come down to an extraordinarily low level, the 
smooth functioning of interbank money markets is undermined and the margin for financial 
institutions is also reduced. As a result, incentives to extend loans at financial institutions are 
weakened, resulting in the diminished monetary easing effects.32 
Second,  protracted  low  interest  rates  play  an  important  role  in  preventing  an  economic 
downturn,  but,  at  the  same  time,  they  tend  to  delay  adjustment  in  excesses  accumulated 
during the period of bubble expansion. In addition, they also tend to delay the rejuvenation of 
businesses.33 
Third, expectations about the continuation of low interest rates for a considerable period into 
future  are  a  necessary  condition  for  a  bubble.  A  bubble  does  not  emerge  just  from  easy 
monetary policy alone, and, at the same time, it does not emerge without expectations about 
the continuation of easy monetary policy. 
In any event, the productivity trend after the burst of a bubble is one of the key factors in 
defining  the  macroeconomic  performance.  If  a  shock  hitting  the  economy  is  huge,  but 
temporary, and the natural rate of interest does not decline so much, policy commitment to 
continuing 
intertemporal 
substitutions. But, otherwise, policy commitment cannot be effective enough. 
The  comments  just  I  made  do  not deny  the  necessity  of  aggressive  policy  rate  reductions 
after the burst of a bubble at all. My main point here is that we need to pay more attention to 
the effects of financial market dynamics caused by behavioral economics elements of market 
participants. 
Let  me  turn  to  another  line  of  research  I  think  important,  that  is,  unconventional  monetary 
policy.  As  I  discussed  earlier,  unconventional  monetary  policy  was  highly  effective  against 
the  “acute  pains”  in  the  recent  financial  crisis.  We  invented  various  unconventional  policy 
interest  rates  produce  certain  easing  effects 
through 
low 
                                                 
30   For the importance of revisiting the philosophy behind central bank policy and independence of a central bank 
in democratic society, not just for monetary policy making, see Shirakawa (2010a, b). 
31   See Greenspan (2002), and Mishkin (2007). 
32   See Bernanke (2010), and BOE (2009). 
33   BIS (2010) points out such possibility. See also Rajan (2010). 
8 
 BIS Review 118/2010
measures  out  of  necessity.  Nevertheless,  it  is  difficult  to  say  that  we  have  a  reliable 
theoretical  basis  for  such  policy.  We  had  no  choice  to  “think  while  running”  in  formulating 
such  unconventional  policy  measures.  In  that  sense,  I  have  the  impression  that  it  is  the 
translation  of  accumulated  “tacit  knowledge”  within  central  banks  into  practice.34  Central 
banks thus need to make efforts to transform their “tacit knowledge” into “explicit knowledge.” 
Through the experience of the recent crisis, I fully recognize that liquidity and counterparty 
risk are the two most important concepts in conducting a study on unconventional monetary 
policy. In the recent crisis, various unconventional measures, such as dollar funds-supplying 
operations  and  outright  purchase  of  CPs,  produced  substantial  effects.  That  suggests  the 
necessity  of  further  deepening  our  understanding  of  liquidity  and  counterparty  risks.  In 
particular, we need to explore the essential conditions for the smooth functioning of financial 
markets,  especially  short-term  money  markets  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  with 
consideration  of  the  behavioral  characteristics  of  market  participants  and  the  market 
microstructure.  We  thus  need  to  make  use  of  such  studies  in  various  activities  of  central 
banking,  ranging  from  daily  operations  to  system  designs  for  money  market  operations, 
payment and settlement systems, and financial regulation. 
In  closing,  I  am  sure  discussions  at  this  conference  will  be  constructive  and  meaningful. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
34   For  example,  Saito,  Suzuki,  and  Yamada  (2010)  show  that  markets  are  able  to  create  collateral  assets 
(relatively  safe  bonds)  in  a  crisis  endogenously  by  using  a  model  in  which  a  country-specific  catastrophic 
shock  was  shared  between  two  countries  in  the  presence  of  solvency  constraints.  They  then  discuss  a 
possibility that such endogenous creation of collateral assets in a crisis can be interpreted as a central bank 
intervention against a crisis. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 9
 10 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
   11
 12 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
   13
 14 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
   15
 16 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
   17
 18 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
   19
 20 
   BIS Review 118/2010
 BIS Review 118/2010 
  21
References 
Ahearne, Alan G., Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, Steven B. Kamin, Christopher Erceg, 
Jon  Faust,  Luca  Guerrieri,  Carter  Hemphill,  Linda  Kole,  Jennifer  Roush,  John  Rogers, 
Nathan  Sheets,  and  Jonathan  Wright,  “Preventing  Deflation:  Lessons  from  Japan’s 
Experience  in  the  1990s,”  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  2002-729,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2002. 
Bank for International Settlements, “80th Annual Report,” 2010. 
Bank of England, “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting March 4 and 5, 2009,” 
2009. 
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver, and Tim Taylor, “Monetary Policy after 
the Fall,” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Annual Economic 
Symposium, August 28, 2010. 
Bernanke, Ben S., “Reflections on a Year of Crisis,” Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City’s Annual Economic Symposium, August 21, 2009. 
________,  “The  Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Speech  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City’s Annual Economic Symposium, August 27, 2010. 
Bullard,  James,  “Seven  Faces  of  “The  Peril”,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review 
September-October Issue, 2010. 
Fujiwara,  Ippei,  Yasuo  Hirose,  and  Mototsugu  Shintani,  “Can  News  Be  a  Major  Source  of 
Aggregate Fluctuations? A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” IMES Discussion Paper Series E-16, 
Bank of Japan, 2008. 
Gagnon  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack,  “Large-Scale  Asset 
Purchases  by  the  Federal  Reserve:  Did  They  Work?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York 
Staff Report No. 441, 2010. 
Greenspan, Alan, “Do Efficient Financial Markets Mitigate Financial Crises?” Speech before 
the 1999 Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, October 19, 
1999. 
________,  “Opening  Remarks,”  Speech  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s 
Annual Economic Symposium, August 29, 2002. 
Hayashi, Fumio, and Edward C. Prescott, “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade,” Review of 
Economic Dynamics, 5, 2002, pp. 206–235. 
Joyce,  Michael,  Ana  Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens  and  Matthew  Tong,  “The  Financial  Market 
Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Bank of England Working Paper No. 393, 2010. 
Kimura,  Takeshi,  Takeshi  Shimatani,  Kenichi  Sakura,  and  Tomoaki  Nishida,  “The  Role  of 
Money and Growth Expectation in Price Determination Mechanism,” Bank of Japan Working 
Paper (forthcoming), 2010. 
Krugman,  Paul  R.,  “It’s  Baaack:  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1998, pp. 137–187. 
Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto, “Wage Fluctuations in Japan after the Burst of the 
Bubble: Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Payroll, and the Unemployment Rate,” Monetary 
and Economic Studies, 23 (2), 2005, pp.1–30. 
Mishkin, Frederic S., Monetary Policy Strategy, The MIT Press, 2007. 
Nakakuki,  Masayuki,  Akira  Otani,  and  Shigenori  Shiratsuka,  “Distortions  in  Factor  Markets 
and  Structural  Adjustments  in  the  Economy,”  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  22  (2), 
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2004, pp. 71–99. 
22 
 BIS Review 118/2010
Nakaso, Hiroshi, “The Financial Crisis in Japan during the 1990s: How the Bank of Japan 
Responded and the Lessons Learnt,” Bank for International Settlements Papers, 6, 2001. 
Okina, Kunio, Masaaki Shirakawa, and Shigenori Shiratsuka, “The Asset Price Bubble and 
Monetary  Policy:  Experience  of  Japan’s  Economy  in  the  Late  1980s  and  its  Lessons,” 
Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  19  (S-1),  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies, 
Bank of Japan, 2001, pp. 395–450. 
________,  and  Shigenori  Shiratsuka,  “Asset  Price  Bubbles,  Price  Stability,  and  Monetary 
Policy: Japan’s Experience,” Monetary and Economic Studies, 20 (3), Institute for Monetary 
and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2002, pp. 35–76. 
Posen, Adam S., Restoring Japan’s Economic Growth, Institute for International Economics, 
1998. 
________,  “Getting  Credit  Flowing:  A  Non-Monetarist  Approach  to  Quantitative  Easing,” 
Speech at CASS Business School, London, October 26, 2009. 
________,  “The  Realities  and  Relevance  of  Japan’s  Great  Recession:  Neither  Ran  nor 
Rashomon,”  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics  Working  Paper  Series  10–7, 
2010. 
Rajan, Raghuram G., Fault Lines, Princeton University Press, 2010. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Vincent R. Reinhart, “After the Fall,” Paper presented at Jackson 
Hall Conference, 2010. 
________,  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly, 
Princeton University Press, 2009. 
Rogoff, Kenneth, “Japan’s Slow-Motion Crisis,” Commentary at Project Syndicate, March 2, 
2010. 
Saito, Makoto, Shiba Suzuki, and Tomoaki Yamada, “Can Cross-Border Financial Markets 
Create  Endogenously  Good  Collateral  in  a  Crisis?,”  IMES  Discussion  Paper  Series, 
No. 2010–E–19, 2010. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Way  out  of  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  Lessons  and  Policy 
Actions,” Speech at Japan Society in New York, April 23, 2009 (available at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0904c.htm). 
________, “Revisiting the Philosophy behind Central Bank Policy,” Speech at the Economic 
Club of New York, April 22, 2010a (available at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1004e.htm). 
________,  “Future  of  Central  Banks  and  Central  Banking,”  Opening  Speech  at  2010 
International Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of 
Japan, May 26, 2010b (available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1005a.htm). 
Ugai,  Hiroshi,  “Effects  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Empirical  Analyses,” 
Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of 
Japan, 25(1), 2007, pp. 1–48. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 23
