Thomas Jordan: Bank regulation – what went wrong? What will improve? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the Forum für Universität und Gesellschaft, Berne, 24 March 2010. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  financial  crisis  has  caused  enormous  damage.  Massive  losses  were  recorded  in  the 
global  banking  system.  Many  countries  have  gone  through  the  worst  recession  since  the 
Second  World  War.  Government  rescue  measures  had  to  be  implemented  to  stabilise  the 
financial system. Existing bank regulations were not able to prevent the crisis, nor were they 
able  to  at  least  contain  the  damage  to  such  an  extent  that  government  rescue  packages 
would not have become necessary.  
While  before  the  financial  crisis,  there  was  considerable  uncertainty  about  possible 
shortcomings  in  bank  regulation,  these  have  now  become  apparent  and  will  have  to  be 
tackled. In addition, the provision of implicit state guarantees has made the need for action 
even more urgent. Big banks – believing that they will receive government assistance if they 
run  into  problems  –  have  even  stronger  incentives  now  to  take  on  excessive  risk.  This 
increases  the  risk  of  another  crisis  and  erodes  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  market 
economy – competition. Once again, in the future, banks will have to bear their own risks. 
The failure of a bank should no longer jeopardise the stability of our financial system. Only 
then, will our financial system become less prone to risk and will the extent of future crises 
clearly decrease. 
In order to achieve this goal, several measures have been decided on in Switzerland. First, 
new  capital  adequacy  requirements  were  enacted  in 2008.  Big  banks  will  have  to  double 
their  risk-weighted  capital.  In  addition,  they  will  have  to  hold  a  minimum  amount  of  equity 
capital,  irrespective  of  the  risk  models  they  use  internally.  This  is  because  the  crisis  has 
shown  that  internal  risk  models  massively  underestimated  the  risks  taken.  Second,  new 
liquidity  regulations  will  be  adopted.  In  the  future,  big  banks  will  have  to  hold  a  sufficient 
amount of high-quality liquid funds to be able to cover unexpected liquidity losses for a period 
of at least 30 days. The reason for this is that, in the financial crisis, even solvent banks had 
liquidity  problems.  Finally,  measures  to  solve  the  “too  big  to  fail”  issue  must  be  put  into 
practice. No bank should be so systemically important that governments feel forced to rescue 
it from impending failure, fearing the economic costs such a failure would cause. Possible 
solutions to the “too big to fail” issue are the creation of incentives to encourage banks to 
reduce their size or change their organisational structure. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 1
