Paul Tucker: Resolution of large and complex financial institutions – the 
big issues 
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the European Commission Conference “Building a Crisis Management Framework for the 
Internal Market”, Brussels, 19 March 2010. 
 Many thanks for input to Mark Adams, Andrew Bailey, Peter Brierley, Geoffrey Davies and Andrew Hewitt, and to 
Financial Stability Board colleagues for discussions on resolution issues. For background work to Michael Grady 
and for secretarial support to Sandra Bannister and Cheryl Feeney. 
I am delighted to be at today’s conference, the first major conference under Commissioner 
Barnier. 
As many colleagues here will know, I chair the Financial Stability Board’s Working Group on 
Cross-Border Crisis Management. But my remarks today are offered in a personal capacity, 
albeit drawing on the international dialogue. 
The conference is very well timed given the Commission’s work on a possible EU directive 
on resolution regimes. An increasing number of national authorities have already established 
or  are  prospectively  establishing  Special  Resolution  Regimes  for  the  resolution  of 
commercial banks, enabling the transfer of deposits and good assets to another bank, with 
bad  assets  and  other  creditor  claims  going  into  an  insolvency  process.  At  a  high  level  of 
generality,  a  distressed  bank  is  split  into  a  continuing  good  bank,  typically  acquired  by  a 
healthy  bank;  and  a  gone-concern  bad  bank,  which  goes  into  administration.  Insured 
deposits travel with the “good bank”. All other creditors typically travel with the “bad bank” 
and become claimants in the insolvency. 
We can be confident that this will help to buttress stability. Encouragement from the EU to all 
members states to establish such regimes would be really useful. 
But  we  also  know  that,  of  itself,  this  is  insufficient.  It  cannot  cope  with  distressed  LCFIs 
(“large and complex financial institutions”) without injections of public money. 
In the first place, every country having its own Special Resolution Regime does not solve the 
problem of resolving cross-border banking groups. 
Second, such regimes cannot cope with investment banking, whether national or global, if a 
buyer  cannot  be  found.  Even  for  a  (hypothetical)  LCFI  operating  entirely  within  a  single 
jurisdiction, with all of its counterparties, customers and contracts domiciled there, a standard 
resolution regime could not effect an orderly run down of, for example, a massive, complex 
derivatives portfolio. Putting over-the-counter derivatives though central counterparties would 
help. But it would not securely solve the problem. 
Today  I  want  to  surface  those  big  issues,  and  to  encourage  the  EU  and  the  international 
community more generally to explore possible solutions. In doing so, I take our objectives to 
be twofold: 
(i) 
First,  to  avoid  a  disorderly  disruption  to  the  provision  of  financial  services  to  the 
economy in the event of firm distress; 
And second, to put market discipline back into the system, by having losses fall to 
uninsured creditors as well as to equity holders, and without public sector solvency 
support. 
(ii) 
Bluntly,  the  challenge  is  how  to  sustain  the  provision  of  financial  services  during  a  crisis 
without the state bailing out uninsured creditors. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 1
Handling LCFI complex derivative/trading portfolios 
Some types of business activity, particularly complex trading, do not lend themselves at all 
well  to  the  standard  resolution  tools  I  summarised  just  now.  Not  least,  unwinding  a 
derivatives book is especially complicated; it typically requires dynamic hedging to preserve 
value, and that would be very hard indeed in a liquidation. Counterparties flee. Funding flees. 
The Lehman and AIG experiences demonstrate this. So, in a different context, does the time 
it  took  Berkshire  Hathaway  to  wind  down  the  complex  derivatives  portfolio  of  its  Gen  Re 
subsidiary; years, not months. 
What can be done? One route, suggested by those examples, would be for the authorities to 
finance the wind down of complex trading positions, in what would be in effect an analogue 
to US-style debtor-in-possession financing. The authorities would be preferred creditors. 
That  kind  of  approach  could  be  used  either  briefly,  in  order  to  bridge  to  an  insolvency 
procedure,  which  would  amount  to  putting  a  framework  around  the  kind  of  operation  the 
NYFed  mounted  for  a  week  or  so  to  contain  disruption  from  the  failure  of  Lehman’s  US 
broker-dealer.  Or,  alternatively,  it  could  in  principle  be  used  over  a  prolonged  period,  to 
finance the run off of a whole book. In either case, however, it would expose the authorities 
to risk of loss, and so would not always deliver the Objectives I think we share. It would not 
be assured to preserve orderly markets in all cases. And it would be insufficient if a firm was 
actually insolvent. 
A  quite  different,  and  rather  more  profound  approach  would  be  to  deploy  a  super  special 
resolution framework that permitted the authorities, on a rapid timetable, to haircut uninsured 
creditors in a going concern. 
By haircutting creditors in a going concern, there would be no need to close the business 
immediately  (or,  if  regulators  wished,  even  at  all).  That  is  a  very  high-level  description. 
Variants  obviously  exist.  Instead  of  haircuts,  uninsured  creditors  could  have  part  of  their 
claim  converted  into  equity.  And  it  would  need  to  be  clear  how  the  regime  applied  to  the 
normal  ranking  in  the  capital  structure,  with  common  equity  and  subordinated  debt  being 
wiped out before any senior unsecured debt was haircut (or converted) at all. 
Precisely because investment banking is highly levered, relatively small percentage haircuts 
(or  conversions  to  equity)  could  materially  recapitalise  a  distressed  firm.  Creditors  would 
recapitalise distressed LCFIs, not the state. In that, it shares some features of contingent-
capital bonds, but would be on a statutory basis and could apply to all unsecured creditors in 
the extreme circumstances of systemic distress. 
The  crucial  feature  is  that  haircuts/conversion  would  be  applied  up  front  to  creditors  of  a 
going concern. By contrast, under standard commercial-banking resolution regimes, the “bad 
bank” goes into an insolvency process as a gone concern, with de facto haircuts applied to 
its creditors ex post, after realisation of the assets by the liquidator – a process that almost 
always  destroys  value.  A  “going  concern”  approach  would  in  effect  combine  features  of 
standard  regimes  for  resolving  commercial  banks  (rapidity,  public  policy  objectives)  with 
some features of the US Chapter 11 for non-financial companies (haircuts for creditors in a 
continuing business). Of course, the kind of super-special resolution regime I am airing could 
not be an exact replica of Chapter 11 – if only because the capital structure of a distressed 
LCFI  would  have  to  be  restructured  very  quickly,  over  a  weekend  if  not  overnight,  and  so 
could not rely on a negotiated settlement with creditors. 
For  that  reason  alone,  in  common  with  the  existing  commercial-bank  resolution  regimes, 
there would plainly need to be safeguards.1 Perhaps the most important might be that such 
                                                 
1   For safeguards in the UK SRR, see the Banking Act 2009 (Restrictions of Partial Property Transfers) Order 
2009 (SI2009/322). 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2010
the 
In  some, 
the  scale  of 
financial  authorities  might  decide 
super special resolution powers could be applied only where the authorities made a formal 
determination that the firm’s distress would otherwise seriously threaten systemic stability. 
The  modalities  would,  I  suspect,  end  up  varying  according  to  countries’  particular 
circumstances. 
the 
haircuts/conversions;  perhaps  in  other  countries,  it  might  be  thought  that  a  senior  judge 
should decide on the basis of an application by the financial authorities. 
It  is  also  worth  saying  that  maintaining  an  LCFI  in  business  through  such  means  would 
neither preclude nor of itself require regulatory action against management or, once the crisis 
had passed, to wind-down parts or all of the business over time. 
Nor would a regime of the broad kind I have sketched exclude restructuring banking groups 
into  functional  subsidiaries,  with  different  resolution  tools  applied  to,  say,  deposit-
taking/payments;  custody  and  global  cash  management;  the  business  of  illiquid  lending  to 
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  and  households;  trading/derivatives  business  or 
wholesale banking more generally. That would not be inconsistent with reducing the number 
of  legal  entities  in  LCFI  groups,  perhaps  by  an  order  of  magnitude.  The  current  FSB-
sponsored  work  to  develop  “recovery  and  resolution  plans”  for  the  top  25  or  so  LCFIs  is 
designed  to  identify  where  those  kind  of  steps  are  warranted.  Resolution  could,  therefore, 
take  its  place  alongside  structure  and  regulation  as  one  of  the  key  elements  of  a  reform 
package to strengthen the global financial system. 
A super-special resolution regime along those lines would, on the face of it, go quite a long 
way towards reintroducing market discipline – by putting uninsured creditors at risk even in 
systemic  situations.  I  am  not  innocent  enough  in  the  ways  of  the  market  to  think  that  it 
wouldn’t  affect  behaviour.  Of  course,  it  would  lead  to  changes,  over  time,  in  the  capital 
structure of investment banking operations. Proper transitional periods would be needed. 
I suggest that it is worth debating. Maybe there is a fatal flaw. We should certainly search for 
the flaws. But if we do not find a way of resolving massive and complex trading books, the 
regulation of the business would probably have to be fiercer than otherwise in order to crush 
the probability of failure. Resolution is a way of coping with failure. Key voices are the non-
bank  financial  sector  and  the  corporate  treasurers  who  finance  the  banking  system.  What 
would they get out of it? They might benefit from avoiding the risk that the authorities choose 
to  liquidate  a  LCFI  they  had  thought  was  too  big  to  fail,  with  the  depletion  of  value  that 
entails;  think  of  Lehman.  They  would,  in  effect,  be  trading  off  losses  in  one  part  of  their 
portfolio against the prospect of protecting the rest of their investments from the fallout of a 
credit crunch that would follow the disorderly demise of a distressed LCFI. 
The cross-border dimension 
The other big issue is how to handle the resolution of internationally active banks. This is a 
challenge even for fairly vanilla commercial banking groups. 
There has been a Basel Concordat on how home and host authorities should co-operate in 
supervising international banks since 1975. It was updated in 1983 and 1992 to take account of 
group-level  consolidated  supervision  following  the  failures  of  Banco  Ambrosiano  and  then 
BCCI. But was the Concordat based on a false premiss: that the division of supervisory-labour 
during peacetime can carry smoothly over to the only period that really matters, distress? 
Because, as it happens, neither standard resolution regimes for commercial banks nor any 
super-SRR of the kind I have just outlined for going-concern restructurings could be applied 
easily  to  the  cross-border  activities  of  LCFIs.  SRR  tools  cannot  automatically  be  applied 
extraterritorially. 
It seems to me that policymakers need to face up to, and decide whether or not to fix, the 
really  big  issues  about  how  insolvency  and  resolution  laws  are  applied  to  internationally 
active financial companies. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 3
laws  apply  either 
territorial  principles 
international 
Broadly  speaking,  countries’ 
insolvencies,  consistent  with  separate  procedures  for  each  of  a  bank’s  entities  in  different 
jurisdictions (so-called “separate-entity resolution”); or universal principles, consistent with a 
single procedure applying to the resolution of an international bank and its branches abroad, 
wherever  they  are  located  (“single-entity  resolution”).  I  believe  that  top-level  policymakers 
have to choose what kind of regime they want. This issue needs to be elevated above the 
level  of  middle-ranking  technocrats  where,  through  no  great  fault  of  their  own,  it  has 
wallowed for too long. The issues were articulated as long as 20 years ago, following BCCI’s 
failure.2 Nothing much has been done globally. 
So in the second half of my remarks today, I just want to sketch why this problem arises. 
to 
Territoriality 
(i) 
Territorial approaches to resolution are adopted due to potential conflicts of interest between 
home and host-state authorities. These may reflect, for example, host countries not wanting 
to rely on home countries to act in the interests of financial stability in the host country; or 
different or conflicting triggers and objectives for Special Resolution Regime powers. 
There are a number of problems with territoriality. It undermines coordinated and cooperative 
resolutions, and creates uncertainty by encouraging a race for assets and collateral across 
jurisdictions. Related to that, it reduces the effectiveness of Special Resolution Regimes by 
allowing  host  authorities  to  ring-fence  local  assets  for  the benefit  of  local  creditors.  And,  it 
can  even  render  resolution  infeasible  if  the  legal  structure  of  an  LCFI  differs  substantially 
from its operational structure, with local legal entities dependent on other parts of the group 
for vital services. 
Greater harmonisation of SRRs across the major jurisdictions might help to reduce distrust in 
other  countries’  approaches.  But  harmonisation  does  not  remove  the  potential  conflict  of 
interests between home and host authorities. 
The  current  debate  around  subsidiarisation  of  global  commercial  banking  groups  stems  in 
large part from these problems. The thought is that if policymakers cannot solve the territorial 
problem, then they should embrace it – banking would go local, with a degree of ring fencing. 
That  course  may  conceivably  have  wider  advantages  –  for  example,  in  the  area  of 
macroprudential  regulation3  it  might  give  authorities  a  greater  degree  of  influence  over 
domestic credit conditions. But we do also need to consider whether there might be costs to 
such  an  approach.  For  those  policy  issues  to  reach  closure,  we  need  to  know  the  way 
forward on resolution. 
Pure universalism 
(ii) 
What of the other end of the spectrum? In principle, an alternative approach would be to shift 
to a more universal approach. A pure form of universalism would rule out separate resolution 
or insolvency proceedings, ring-fencing and, therefore, a race for assets. It might encourage 
                                                 
2   Basel committee on Banking Supervision (1992). “The insolvency liquidation of a multinational bank”, Bank for 
International Settlements. Its key conclusions were: (1) when closing a multinational bank, supervisors should 
pay attention to the nature and timing of communications among themselves and of their communications with 
creditors, shareholders and management; (2) the nature of liquidation rules may be relevant to the manner in 
which multinational banks are supervised; (3) differences in liquidation rules across jurisdictions in a winding-
up can affect returns to depositors and other creditors and the operations of deposit protection schemes; and 
(4) coordination and cooperation between liquidators can affect the returns to creditors in a liquidation and can 
be affected by the role of supervisors in a liquidation. 
3   See  the  Bank’s  recently  published  paper:  “The  role  of  macroprudential  policy:  A  discussion  paper”  and 
Tucker P  M  W  (2009e),  “The  debate  on  financial  system  resilience:  Macroprudential  instruments”  at  the 
Barclays Annual Lecture in London. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2010
a  more  cooperative  approach  to  cross-border  resolution.  There  would  be  one,  global 
resolution, led by the home authority. 
But pure universalism also faces major obstacles. First, it would imply a surrender of national 
sovereignty – replacing it with pre-defined and enforceable rules that determined the roles of 
different authorities in different jurisdictions. Second, unless steps were taken to rule out the 
need for sovereign Capital of Last Resort operations4, it might well need to be accompanied 
by  an  ex  ante  burden-sharing  mechanism,  to  facilitate  a  sharing  of  the  costs  of  resolution 
across the jurisdictions in which a bank had activities. 
In  theory,  that  could  be  addressed  by  the  main  home  and  host  authorities  of  each  LCFI 
agreeing  a  set  of  binding  principles  to  govern  the  distribution  of  the  costs  of  a  universal 
resolution across jurisdictions. An alternative would be to design a single resolution regime 
for all LCFIs, to be implemented along universal lines by a supranational resolution authority. 
But  would  countries  be  prepared  to  tolerate  the  loss  of  fiscal  independence  and  the 
overturning of national insolvency laws that this model would entail, especially if it required 
governments to commit to recompense the agency for unlimited amounts in the future? That 
is most definitely not a question for central bankers. 
Modified universalism 
(iii) 
Pure territoriality and pure universalism are corner solutions. We live in a world where some 
countries are closer to one corner, others closer to the other. 
Some  have  suggested  that  an  intermediate  solution  might  be  feasible.  This  would  involve 
“territorial”  countries  deciding  to  resolve  financial  institutions  headquartered  in  their  own 
jurisdictions on a universal basis. (A possible example of this approach in the recent crisis 
was  the  FDIC’s  resolution  of  United  Commercial  Bank,  which  involved  a  “purchase  and 
assumption”5 that extended to the Chinese subsidiary and the Hong Kong branch following 
coordination amongst the authorities in the US, China and Hong Kong.) 
A  “modified”  form  of  universalism  would  involve  host  authorities  choosing  to  defer  to  and 
cooperate  with  a  resolution  brought  by  the  home  country  authorities,  provided  that  certain 
conditions held. Separate insolvency proceedings might be employed by host countries, but 
allowing the proceeds to be remitted to the home country, “lead” resolution. Variations might 
be needed for subsidiaries and branches. Subsidiaries are distinct legal entities, but they too 
can  have  worldwide  creditors  and  claims.  So  it  would  all  need  to  be  within  some  kind  of 
joined-up whole. 
At a high level, the preconditions for something like this might include: 
(1) 
equitable  treatment  of  all  creditors  regardless  of  their  jurisdiction,  because  if 
creditors in host countries were likely to be penalised in a resolution brought by the 
home  country  authorities,  host  authorities  would  have  a  strong  incentive  to 
ring-fence; 
broad harmonisation of resolution regimes across the major jurisdictions. 
(2) 
Also, if governments do continue to contemplate the possibility of fiscal support in a crisis, 
then  there  might  need  to  be  some  kind  of  agreement  –  conceivably  case  by  case  –  on 
                                                 
4   For  a  discussion  of  capital  of  last  resort  see,  See  Tucker  P  M  W  (2009f)  “The  Crisis  Management  Menu”, 
SUERF, CEPS and Belgian Financial Forum Conference: Crisis Management at the Cross-Roads, pp. 13 and 
Tucker  P  M  W  (2009b),  “The  repertoire  of  official  sector  interventions  in  the  financial  system:  last  resort 
lending,  market-making,  and  capital”,  Bank  of  Japan’s  2009  International  Conference,  Tokyo,  May  2009, 
pp. 17. 
5   A “purchase and assumption” is the term used by FDIC to describe when a healthy institution purchases some 
or all of the assets of a failed deposit taker. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 5
principles governing the contributions imposed on each country to meeting the costs of the 
resolution. But the ideas I aired in the first part of the remarks were aimed at helping to take 
that off the table. 
A principle of equitable treatment of worldwide creditors and depositors would be consistent 
with  the  imposition  of  losses  on  unsecured  creditors  or  uninsured  depositors,  either  in  a 
going-concern restructuring of the kind I outlined earlier or through the application of more 
standard SRR tools to gone-concern bad banks. But it would require losses to be imposed 
on an equitable basis, respecting the existing priority ranking regardless of the jurisdictional-
location of creditors. That might require recognition across the main jurisdictions of certain 
safeguards.6 And, such an approach would require binding agreements amongst home and 
host resolution authorities. Vague assurances would not do the trick, as domestic authorities 
could  change  their  minds  when  it  really  mattered.  Host  and  home  authorities  would  need 
“skin in the game” to underpin co-operation. And co-operation in distressed circumstances 
could helpfully flow back to how supervisors work together in peacetime. 
An  obstacle  to  such  an  approach  might  be  that  in  some  countries,  legislation  mandates 
preferential treatment of creditors and depositors of local entities of cross-border banks. But 
that might be weighed by legislatures against the current reality that when the fiscal authority 
finds  itself  injecting  equity  to  save  a  bank  and  preserve  stability,  it  protects  worldwide 
creditors not just its home creditors. 
To be clear, I am not advocating any particular approach here. I just want the authorities to 
articulate  the  issues  clearly,  so  that  our  leaders  can  make  a  choice  and  think  through  the 
consequences of that choice. I’m not sure that it has really been put to them up to now. And, 
of  course,  whatever  is  done,  within  Europe  we  would  need  to  find  an  EU  version  that  sat 
between national and global regimes. 
Summary 
My  purpose  today  is  not  to  advocate  solutions.  It  is  to  identify  the  big  issues  and  to  float 
some possible avenues for discussion in the EU and internationally. 
The big question is clear enough. Can we resolve distressed LCFIs in an orderly way without 
injecting public money? 
One  possible  way  to  cut  through  Too-Big-To-Fail  is  to  adjust  our  sense  of  what  “Fail” 
involves. Perhaps it does not have to involve liquidation or administration. Perhaps it does 
not have to involve a binary shift from “going concern” to “gone concern”. But it does have to 
involve  loss  for  equity  holders  and  uninsured  creditors.  It  does  have  to  rekindle  market 
discipline.  It  does  have  to  preserve  the  flow  of  financial  services.  Those  are,  surely,  the 
essential components of the resolution leg of the regulation, structure, resolution triangle that 
make up the reform debate. 
Individual countries or economic areas such as the EU can get only so far on their own. To 
cope with distress in global banking, we need to decide whether or not we want international 
collaboration in the resolution of cross-border banking groups. That is a question which, one 
way or another, the highest reaches of the authorities should answer as part of the reform 
debate.  Once  that  is  clear,  some  of  the  questions  about  structure  and  regulation  might 
become clearer. 
A  lot  rests  on  whether  we  can  resolve  distressed  LCFIs.  We  need  to  answer  the  big 
questions.  
                                                
 
6   Examples  of  such  safeguards  include:  creditors  left  no  worse  of  than  in  liquidation;  netting  and  set-off 
agreements respected; secured creditor claims and collateral kept together; and capital market arrangements, 
such as covered bond programmes and securitisations, protected. 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2010
