William C Dudley: Asset bubbles and the implications for central bank policy 
Speech  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 7 April 2010. 
 Thank you for that kind introduction. Today I want to tackle a difficult subject: How should 
central  bankers  deal  with  potential  asset  price  bubbles.  As  always,  my  remarks  do  not 
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
As  I  see  it,  we  need  to  reexamine  how  central  banks  should  respond  to  potential  asset 
bubbles. After all, recent experience has underscored the fact that poorly regulated financial 
systems  are  prone  to  such  bubbles  and  that  the  costs  of  waiting  to  respond  to  an  asset 
bubble until after it has burst can be very high. 
Today, I will try to define some of the important characteristics of asset price bubbles. I will 
argue  that  bubbles  do  exist  and  that  bubbles  typically  occur  after  an  innovation  that  has 
created uncertainty about fundamental valuations. This has two important implications. First, 
a  bubble  is  difficult  to  discern  and,  second,  each  bubble  has  unique  characteristics.  This 
implies  that  a  rules-based  approach  to  bubbles  is  likely  to  be  ineffective  and  that  tackling 
bubbles to diminish their potential to destabilize the financial system requires judgment. 
Despite the fact that it is hard to discern bubbles, especially in their early stages, I conclude 
that uncertainty is not grounds for inaction. Instead, the decision whether to act depends on 
whether  appropriate  tools  can  be  deployed  to  limit  the  size  of  a  bubble  and  whether  the 
benefits of acting and deploying such tools are likely to exceed the costs. 
That cost-benefit calculus, in turn, depends crucially on the tools we can deploy to limit the 
growth of bubbles and the consequences when they burst. In this respect, I will argue that, in 
most cases, use of the bully pulpit and macroprudential tools, such as rules limiting loan-to-
value ratios or leverage, are likely to prove superior to monetary policy. 
Turning  to  the  first  issue  of  whether  there  are  asset  bubbles,  I  am  going  to  be  a  bit  of  a 
heretic and argue that there is little doubt that asset bubbles exist and that they occur fairly 
frequently. By an asset bubble, I mean price increases (or declines) that become unmoored 
from  fundamental  valuations.  I  want  to  be  clear  that  I  am  distinguishing  this  from  price 
movements that are tied to changes in fundamentals. I know this runs afoul of the efficient 
markets hypothesis – which in this context would argue that if a bubble were obvious, then 
people would take the other side and the bubble would not occur in the first place. 
There are several reasons why this argument does not hold in practice. First, it is not always 
easy  to  take  the  other  side.  There  may  be  constraints  on  the  ability  to  short  the  asset  in 
question. Such limits on the ability to short sell can arise for many reasons. For some assets, 
short  selling  in  size  might  simply  not  be  possible  because  the  markets  are  not  sufficiently 
developed. Also, even if there were instruments that can be used to go short, it may not be 
an easy trade to undertake. For example, if a bubble builds up over many years and market 
participants’ compensation is based on year-to-year performance, there may be disincentives 
to take the short side. Compensation schemes and other practices that skew incentives may 
create a bias to simply “trade with the market.” 
Second, bubbles may simply emerge from the way market participants process information 
and trade. Experimental work done by behavioral economists has shown that people often 
trade in ways that generate price bubbles. In many carefully controlled experiments in which 
the intrinsic value of the asset could be determined with certainty, participants still bid prices 
up far above fundamental valuations, with the bubbles being followed by sharp declines in 
prices. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 1
Let me give you an example of one of the seminal studies of this type. In this experiment, all 
investors start with an identical asset that pays the same dividend generated from a known 
probability  distribution  at  the  end  of  each  trading  period.1  This  means  that  all  participants 
know the expected value of the dividend stream with certainty. The participants are allowed 
to buy and sell these assets from one another. In this framework, if all participants were fully 
rational, then trading should occur only at intrinsic values based on the expected dividend 
stream. But this is not what happens in practice. In 14 of the 22 experimental runs, prices 
rose  significantly  above  fundamental  valuations  and  these  price  bubbles  were  followed  by 
crashes.  When  traders  in  these  experimental  runs  were  “experienced,”  meaning  that  they 
had participated in the experiment before, the probability of a bubble was reduced, but not 
eliminated. The authors conclude: “What we learn from the particular experiments … is that a 
common  dividend  and  common  knowledge  thereof  is  insufficient  to  induce  initial  common 
expectations. …” The lack of common initial expectations leads to a willingness to trade to try 
and earn capital gains above fundamental value.2 Relaxing the conditions in these types of 
behavioral  studies  to  admit  more  uncertainty  about  fundamental  asset  valuations  works  to 
enhance the propensity for bubbles by increasing the degree of divergence in participants’ 
initial expectations. 
Lastly, over the past few decades, there simply have been too many episodes in which asset 
prices have dramatically overshot on the upside and then violently corrected to suggest that 
the behavioral studies conducted in the laboratory do not also have real world counterparts. 
In the United States, these include the run-up in the value of the dollar in the mid-1980s, the 
stock market rise and crash in 1987; the compression of spreads due to convergence trades 
in the run-up to the Long-Term Capital Management debacle in 1998; the technology stock 
market boom of the late 1990s; and the credit and housing price bubble and crash of recent 
years. All these episodes were marked by spectacular price booms, followed by subsequent 
collapses. 
An  examination  of  some  of  these  recent  bubbles  suggests  that  while  asset  bubbles  are 
idiosyncratic in terms of their causes, institutional features, duration and severity, they often 
share  several  significant  features.  These  shared  features  are  important  in  assessing  how 
policy might be used to temper incipient bubbles in the future. 
In my view, asset bubbles often come about through a particular sequence of events. First, 
there is typically an innovation that changes the fundamental valuation in a meaningful, but 
uncertain way.3 Asset valuations associated with the innovation change (as they should), but 
there  is  significant  uncertainty  about  how  valuable  the  innovation  will  turn  out  to  be.  This 
leads  to  a  divergence  in  expectations  concerning  how  much  the  fair  value  of  the  assets 
should increase. I believe that this uncertainty about what constitutes fair value is important 
in fueling the bubble. 
                                                 
1   See  Vernon  L.  Smith,  Gerry  L.  Suchanek,  and  Arlington  W.  Williams.  1988.  “Bubbles,  Crashes,  and 
Endogeneous  Expectations  in  Experimental  Spot  Asset  Markets.”  Econometrica  56,  no.  5  (September):  
1119–51. 
In  a  more  restrictive  experiment  in  which  speculation  is  not  possible,  bubbles  and  crashes  still  occur.  See 
Vivian Lei, Charles N. Noussair, and Charles R. Plott. 2001. “Nonspeculative Bubbles in Experimental Asset 
Markets:  Lack  of  Common  Knowledge  of  Rationality  vs.  Actual  Irrationality.”  Econometrica  69,  no.  4  (July): 
831–59. 
2  
3   One might argue that an innovation is not a necessary condition for an asset bubble. For example, the run-up 
of the dollar in the mid-1980s was not associated with any particular innovation. Instead, a sharp shift in fiscal 
policy led to high real interest rates that stimulated a strong demand for the dollar, which caused the dollar to 
appreciate  sharply.  This  eventually  unwound  as  the  dollar’s  rise  undercut  U.S.  trade  competitiveness.  This 
caused the U.S. economy to slow, interest rates to decline and the dollar to fall. The lack of experience with a 
floating exchange rate regime undoubtedly played a role here. The world moved to a floating exchange rate 
system in the early 1970s. There was not much experience with how an expansive fiscal policy would affect 
exchange rates. This undoubtedly increased uncertainty about the sustainability of the dollar’s appreciation. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2010
For  example,  the  technology  stock  market  boom  in  the  late  1990s  coincided  with  the 
development of the Internet, which fostered the reorganization of many business processes 
and  generated  significant  productivity  improvements.  At  the  time,  it  was  unclear  just  how 
significant the innovation would be or how successful the companies would be that sought to 
take advantage of it. On the one hand, there were companies such as Cisco, which sold the 
“shovels” – the routers that enabled the Internet to work – that were very successful. On the 
other hand, there were companies such as Webvan, which sought to use the new technology 
to revolutionize the delivery of grocery supplies and services, and that failed miserably. 
Similarly,  the  recent  housing  boom  was  driven  by  two  innovations:  (1)  in  housing  finance, 
where subprime lending made mortgage credit available to households that were much less 
creditworthy, and (2) in structured finance instruments such as collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs).  The  first  innovation  significantly  broadened  the  availability  of  mortgage  credit  to 
households.  The  second  innovation  reduced  the  cost  of  this  credit.  Cash  flows  from  the 
underlying  mortgage  assets  were  apportioned  among  senior  and  junior  tranches.  These 
tranches, which had been rated by the rating agencies, were then distributed to a wide range 
of investors. This structured finance innovation, in turn, was supported by innovations in the 
shadow  banking  system.  Securities  lenders,  structured  investment  vehicles  and  conduits 
bought  the  highly  rated  tranches  of  the  structured  financed  products  and  financed  these 
assets in the wholesale short-term funding markets. 
The second element common to many asset bubbles is a surge in economic activity in the 
particular sector associated with the innovation. In the case of the technology stock market 
boom, there was a surge in business investment in technology goods and services. In the 
subprime/structured  finance  boom,  there  was  a  surge  in  demand  for  housing  as  credit 
availability  increased  sharply.  This  surge  in  activity  is  important  because  it  reinforces  the 
notion that the innovation is indeed significant and that “this time is different.” 
Third, there is often a positive feedback mechanism that tends to reinforce the belief system 
that underpins the extreme valuations associated with the boom. Without this, the boom isn’t 
likely to persist for long or push valuations far above what is justified by the fundamentals. As 
a  result,  the  asset  price  movements  are  unlikely  to  be  big  or  broad  enough  to  threaten 
financial and macroeconomic stability. 
During  the  technology  stock  boom  there  were  a  number  of  reinforcing  mechanisms.  One 
important reinforcing mechanism was the strong notion that those who got to the market with 
their new Internet innovations would achieve large first-mover advantages. This perception 
was  due  to  the  fact  that  successful  Internet-based  models  could  expect  to  achieve  strong 
network effects, which created significant barriers to entry and the prospect of extraordinary 
profits. Amazon might be a good example of a company that (eventually) succeeded at this. 
In this environment, many firms – both well-established companies and start-ups – invested 
heavily in the new technology. The ensuing sharp rise in investment in technology equipment 
and  software  led  in  turn  to  rapid  earnings  growth,  which  helped  (for  a  time)  to  sustain 
stratospheric valuations. 
In addition, the sharp rise in stock prices led to a re-assessment of the appropriate equity risk 
premium. The higher that stock prices rose, the more people thought that equities had little 
risk. Everyone could become a millionaire with little risk or effort.4 
Similarly,  in  the  subprime/structured  finance  boom,  there  were  several  important  positive 
feedback mechanisms. In particular, the surge in credit availability drove up the demand for 
housing  and  pushed  up  housing  prices.  This  increase  in  demand  caused  the  default 
                                                 
4  
In fact, one book, Dow 36,000, which was published in 1999 shortly before the stock market peaked, argued 
that “fair value” for the Dow Jones Industrial Average should be 36,000 because the appropriate risk premium 
for the equity market versus Treasury bonds should be zero. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 3
experience associated with such lending to be very low, reinforcing the notion that subprime 
lending was not very risky. It also reinforced the demand for the complex CDOs secured by 
such assets. During the boom, the structured finance models appeared to be sound because 
losses  on  the  underlying  subprime  mortgage  loans  were  low  and  because  the  correlation 
rates in performance across different assets in the pools were low, just as the models had 
assumed. 
Fourth, the proportion of market participants who believe that a particular episode of asset 
price increases are justified by the innovation tends to rise as the boom persists. Those that 
had  doubts  about  the  importance  of  the  innovation  or  the  persistence  of  the  gain  in  asset 
prices lose confidence in their opinions as they underperform and lose business and market 
share.  Those  who  believed  that  the  large  gains  in  asset  prices  were  justified  by  the 
innovation and who benefited from those beliefs become more dominant. Casual investors 
see the large rise in prices and jump in. This shift is important because, in markets, prices 
are driven by the marginal investor. As new and often less well-informed investors plunge in 
to  participate  in  the  boom,  they  can  overwhelm  the  so-called  “smart  money”  that  gets 
frustrated after having lost repeatedly trying to take the other side. 
In this respect, a bias toward optimism may also play an important role. Studies have found 
that  most  people  believe  that  they  are  above  average  in  terms  of  their  acumen,  be  it  as 
investors, car drivers or in other activities.5 This overconfidence may cause some people to 
keep investing in the asset, even when they are skeptical about its valuation because they 
are overly confident that they will anticipate the end of the bubble and be able to get out in 
time. 
Fifth, asset bubbles occur more easily when it is difficult to short the assets. For example, the 
technology stocks associated with initial public offerings were very difficult to short because 
the available supply or “float” was small – a high proportion of the shares in the companies 
were held by the original venture capital investors and subject to lock-up periods before the 
shares could be lent out to short sellers or sold. Similarly, housing is notoriously difficult to 
short. The option of selling one’s home in order to rent is expensive not only in terms of time 
and effort, but also in terms of transaction costs. And, shorting complex structured finance 
products was difficult because there were no standardized instruments; the securities rarely 
traded and were very difficult to value. It was not until the development of the ABX indexes – 
which allowed investors to buy and sell credit default swaps on pools of structured finance 
obligations  –  that  investors  had  a  vehicle  that  allowed  them  to  short  subprime  mortgage-
backed securities more easily.6 
Asset bubbles often come to an end when the basic belief system is contradicted by events. 
This  can  happen  very  naturally  as  a  matter  of  course  because  economic  fundamentals 
deteriorate,  or  because  there  is  a  change  in  rules  or  regulations  that  disrupts  the  balance 
between  supply  and  demand.  In  the  technology  boom,  this  might  occur  because  each 
company  cannot  get  to  the  market  first.  So  even  if  there  is  a  first-mover  advantage,  not 
everyone  will  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  it.  Over  time,  the  failure  to  achieve  first-mover 
                                                 
5   Overconfidence actually applies to a broad range of activities, not just investing. For a more general treatment 
of this issue of overconfidence and other ways in which economic agents depart from complete rationality, see 
Richard  Thaler.  “From  Homo  Economicus  to  Homo  Sapiens.”  2000.  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  14, 
no. 1 (Winter): 133–41. 
6   This is not to argue that short positions could not be established at all. Monoline guarantors, AIG Financial 
Products  and  some  securities  dealers  were  willing  to  sell  protection  in  the  form  of  credit  default  swaps  on 
some of these assets. Michael Lewis examines how some investors managed to take positions that benefitted 
from a collapse of the housing bubble in The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2010
status becomes evident and valuations adjust to reflect this, or lock-up provisions on Internet 
stocks expire, leading to a large increase in supply that leads to a sharp fall in prices.7 
In the housing boom, the end came about for several reasons. One limiting factor was that 
the  rise  in  home  prices  outstripped  income  growth.  Thus,  for  the  boom  to  persist, 
underwriting standards had to be continually relaxed; only in this way could a new cohort of 
first-time buyers qualify for big enough mortgages to be able to “afford” to buy their homes. 
The  difficulty  in  replenishing  the  pool  of  new  home  buyers  limited  how  fast  demand  could 
keep rising. In addition, the rise in home prices led to an explosion of supply especially in 
areas like Arizona, Florida, Nevada and inland California, where buildable land was plentiful. 
As  supply  caught  up  to  demand,  this  led  to  a  downturn  in  prices.  Once  this  occurred,  the 
poor underwriting standards associated with subprime mortgage lending became apparent. 
Subprime borrowers could no longer easily refinance or sell the house at a higher price and 
repay the original mortgage. As Warren Buffett reportedly once quipped: “Only when the tide 
goes out do you discover who has been swimming naked.” 
So what does this analysis imply for a central bank that might want to limit the development 
of such bubbles? The first conclusion is that assessing whether there is a bubble or not or 
the  size  of  the  prospective  bubble  is  going  to  be  very  challenging.  Because  there  is  an 
innovation, asset values should rise, but by how much? It is difficult to assess what is the 
new,  appropriate  valuation  after  an  important  innovation.  For  example,  consider  some 
questions that might have arisen relative to the technology bubble: What does the Internet 
mean for technology investment? How many of the new business startups will survive and 
prosper? Is an Amazon rare? How fast will the volume of Internet traffic grow and for how 
long? 
Similar questions arose with respect to the recent housing bubble: How much will subprime 
lending  increase  the  demand  for  housing?  How  will  this  increase  in  demand  translate  into 
prices? What will the default rate be once demand growth slows? What is the appropriate 
correlation  rate  in  terms  of  the  loss  experience  across  the  different  subprime  and  Alt-A 
mortgage pools that should be used in assessing the value of collateralized debt obligations? 
How are such correlations likely to differ in the boom versus in the bust? 
This  uncertainty  means  that  policymakers  can  never  be  sure  about  the  existence,  size  or 
persistence  of  an  incipient  asset  bubble.  As  a  result,  this  task  of  dealing  proactively  with 
bubbles will be very difficult! 
So what should the policymaker do? I think the first step is for the policymaker to work hard 
to investigate what is generating the sharp rise in prices for the asset in question. Sustained 
price increases are a symptom of changes in demand and supply. The policymaker needs to 
develop  a  perspective  about  whether  these  demand  and  supply  changes  are  realistically 
sustainable  to  the  extent  implied  by  market  prices.  In  particular,  carefully  analyzing  the 
assumptions that underpin sustained increases in asset prices – which might be symptoms 
of a bubble – and considering the risk that these assumptions might be wrong is important. 
Also, looking carefully at the dynamics of the system on which the beliefs are based may be 
useful.  In  particular,  are  the  dynamics  of  the  system  reinforcing  or  dampening?  If  the 
dynamics are reinforcing, then there is greater likelihood of an asset bubble. 
The  next  step  is  for  the  policymaker  to  evaluate  what  tools  might  be available  to  curb  the 
imbalances that have been identified. The idiosyncratic nature of the innovations and belief 
systems  associated  with  particular  bubbles  implies  that  the  tools  used  to  respond  to  each 
bubble will likely have to be different and tailored to the features of the particular bubble in 
question. 
                                                 
7   See  Eli  Ofek  and  Matthew  Richards.  2003.  “Dotcom  Mania:  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  Internet  Stock  Prices.” 
Journal of Finance LVIII, no. 3 (June): 1113–37. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 5
Finally,  the  policymaker  needs  to  conduct  a  careful  cost-benefit  analysis,  weighing  how 
successful  a  particular  policy  might  be  in  restraining  the  rise  in  asset  prices  versus  how 
costly  it  would  be  to  remain  passive,  letting  the  bubble  grow  and  then  potentially  burst 
disruptively. Many factors will affect the outcome of this analysis including the magnitude of 
the potential asset bubble and whether the potential asset bubble is occurring in the equity or 
debt markets. 
In this analysis, the policymaker is likely to find that compared with equity market bubbles, 
credit market bubbles are more prone to generate higher costs when they burst. Thus, the 
benefits of preventing credit bubbles from forming and collapsing are likely to be higher. 
Credit  bubbles  that  burst  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  much  more  directly 
than  equity  bubbles.8  That  is  because  much  of  the  debt  is  held  by  banks  and  securities 
dealers  that  are  highly  leveraged.  As  a  result,  when  the  bubble  deflates,  it  can  take  the 
financial system with it. In contrast, because most equities are held on an unleveraged basis 
by  investors,  such  as  pension  and  mutual  funds,  a  sharp  decline  in  equity  prices  will  not 
typically  threaten  the  entire  financial  system.  A  comparison  of  the  consequences  of  the 
technology stock market crash in equities versus the mortgage debt market crash strongly 
supports this thesis. Although the wealth loss was roughly comparable, the bursting of the 
housing  bubble  had  a  much  greater  negative  effect  on  the  financial  system  and  the 
macroeconomy. 
In this cost-benefit analysis, the central bank must understand that it will make mistakes. On 
one hand, it may fail to temper bubbles that turn out to be disruptive when they collapse. Or, 
on the other hand, it may try to temper price movement that it thinks are bubbles but are not 
bubbles  at  all.  The  costs  of  these  types  of  errors  much  be  weighed  against  the  potential 
benefits of tempering an asset bubble and limiting the damage from its subsequent collapse.9 
So what are the tools with which the policymaker should respond? As I see it, there are three 
broad sets of tools available: 1) The bully pulpit; 2) macroprudential tools; and 3) monetary 
policy. Let me now discuss each of these in turn. 
The first tool available is to simply lean against the wind of conventional wisdom by speaking 
out about the dangers associated with the incipient bubble. The policymaker could point out 
the assumptions embedded in the rapid rise in asset prices and question the accuracy of the 
assumptions. Obviously, the policymaker might be ridiculed by true believers about the lack 
of understanding about the important nature of the innovation. But I suspect that over time, a 
proactive  central  bank  that  laid  out  the  risks  clearly  would  gradually  gain  credibility  with 
market participants. Use of the bully pulpit would allow the central bank to signal its concern. 
This might shift the risk/reward trade-off by raising the risks that the talk might foreshadow 
more  forceful  action.  That,  by  itself,  could  temper  behavior.  Announcement  effects  can  be 
very powerful, especially when they can be followed by changes in policy. 
The  second  set  of  tools  includes  those  that  are  macroprudential  in  nature.  I  would  define 
macroprudential tools as regulatory and supervisory actions that are not applied on a firm-
specific  basis.  These  include  tools  designed  to  temper  demand  or  increase  supply  in  the 
asset subject to the bubble or to increase the ability of skeptics to take the other side of the 
market in which the bubble may be occurring. For example, to counteract a housing bubble, 
                                                 
8   This argument has been made by many others. See, for example, Frederic Mishkin. How Should We Respond 
to Asset Bubbles? May 15, 2008. 
9   An example of a sustained rise in asset prices that was not a bubble is the bull market in U.S. equities that began 
in  the  1950s.  At  the  start  of  the  sustained  rise  in  equity  prices,  stock  dividend  yields  exceeded  the  yields  on 
Treasury  bonds  and  this  was  perceived  as  normal,  partly  reflecting  the  searing  experience  of  the  Great 
Depression. Instead, corporate earnings rose relatively steadily, supporting dividend growth. This observation led 
investors to bid up stock prices and push down dividend yields and this proved – more or less – sustainable. 
Even today, the yield on the S&P 500 index is below the 10-year Treasury note yield. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2010
tools  available  might  include  limiting  loan-to-value  ratios,  limiting  debt  service-to-income 
ratios or increasing the taxes on housing transactions. Several Asian and some European 
countries have used such tools to limit speculative real estate activity, apparently with some 
success,  although  the  counterfactual  cannot  be  known  by  definition.10  To  limit  a  subprime 
lending  boom,  the  authorities  might  wish  to  enforce  strict  underwriting  practices,  including 
verifying  purchasers’  incomes  and  enforcing  rigorous  appraisal  valuations.  Increasing  the 
ability of investors to short the assets in question might also be helpful. 
In  terms  of  macroprudential  tools,  I’d  also  include  tools  that  influence  how  the  financial 
system  operates  and  functions.  Such  tools  might  include  supervisory  measures  that  set 
liquidity  and  capital  requirements  for  financial  institutions  and  other  intermediaries.  They 
might also include tools that try to limit the overall buildup of leverage in the financial system. 
For  the  equity  market,  macroprudential  tools  might  include  margin  rules  for  cash,  options, 
futures  and  equity  over-the-counter  derivatives.  For  the  fixed  income  market,  such  tools 
might  include  raising  the  haircuts  charged  to  securities  dealers  on  their  repo  financing; 
raising the haircuts that the securities dealers assess against the collateralized borrowings of 
their  customers  as  part  of  their  prime  brokerage  business,  or  raising  initial  margin 
requirements on OTC derivatives transactions. 
Macroprudential tools are undoubtedly difficult to use effectively in practice. For example, it is 
difficult to judge their impact. If, for example, loan-to-value ratios for single-family mortgages 
are lowered by 5 percentage points, how big an impact will this have on housing demand? 
There also is a risk that the rules or regulations will simply be circumvented. For example, 
investors might move to instruments or to off-shore regimes with less stringent margin and 
leverage  restrictions.  Thus,  it  is  important  that  the  authorities  have  the  ability  to  apply  the 
macroprudential tools broadly throughout the financial sector.11 
None of this is going to be easy. A lot more work will be required to develop a portfolio of 
tools  that  could  be  used,  that  would  be  effective  and  would  not  be  subject  to  significant 
evasion or unintended consequences. 
In terms of the use of macroprudential tools, let me briefly take note of another issue that 
requires significant consideration – the issue of governance. Who controls all these tools? 
Who decides when the tools will be deployed and how extensively or intensively? Having a 
sufficient toolkit seems like a good idea. But lodging all this authority within a single entity or 
institution might not be practical or desirable. 
The final tool available to the central bank is monetary policy. This tool is not likely to work as 
well  as  macroprudential  tools  because  it  is  too  broad.  Typically,  monetary  policy  will  not 
address specifically the sources of the changes in supply and demand that are driving the 
bubble and, obviously, monetary policy will have big effects elsewhere. 
Some argue that monetary policy should “lean against” incipient asset bubbles. The notion is 
that by pursuing a slightly tighter monetary policy, the central bank would take out insurance 
against  the  risk  that  the  rise  in  asset  prices  is  a  bubble  and  that  its  busting  would  be 
disruptive.  Although  this  sounds  attractive,  it  critically  depends  on  how  expensive  the 
insurance is relative to the losses that the insurance protects against. It is not clear to me 
that a modest tightening in monetary policy beyond that needed to achieve full employment 
and price stability in the absence of a bubble would represent a favorable cost-benefit trade-
off. The costs of the deviation from the optimal monetary policy in terms of lost output and 
                                                 
10   However, in the recent crisis, the different outcomes in the United States and Canada might be instructive. 
Canada had a tougher regime in terms of mortgage underwriting standards. Also, Canada had imposed an 
overall leverage limit on its banks, which helped to limit the amount of gearing in the financial system. Both of 
these  differences  may  help  to  explain  why  the  Canadian  financial  system  and  macroeconomy  were  less 
affected by the global financial crisis than the United States. 
11   Imposition of tighter rules and regulations may also be politically unpopular. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 7
employment might be high relative to the benefits of a somewhat smaller bubble. This seems 
likely to be the case in most instances. Historical experience does not suggest that bubbles 
are very sensitive to the level of short-term interest rates. 
That said, there is some evidence that a tighter monetary policy will reduce desired leverage 
in the financial system by flattening the yield curve and reducing the profitability of maturity 
transformation  activities.12  To  the  extent  this  is  true,  that  may  imply  a  somewhat  more 
favorable trade-off in “leaning against” a bubble. More research is needed on this subject. 
For now at least, monetary policy appears to be inferior to macroprudential tools that seek 
either to limit the size of prospective bubbles or to strengthen the financial system so that it is 
more resilient when asset prices fall sharply. 
In conclusion, let me underscore the challenge that central bankers face in combating asset 
price  bubbles.  Doing  so  effectively  requires  us  to  be  successful  in  both  identifying  the 
incipient bubble and in developing and implementing a response that will limit bubble growth 
and avert a destructive asset price crash. This is not easy because asset bubbles are hard to 
recognize in real time and each asset bubble is different. However, these challenges cannot 
be an excuse for inaction. Recent experience strongly suggests that asset bubbles exist and 
that their collapse can be very damaging to the financial system and the macroeconomy. 
In  my  view,  a  proactive  approach  is  appropriate  when  three  conditions  are  satisfied:  First, 
circumstances  should  suggest  that there  is  a  meaningful risk  of  a  future  asset  price  crash 
that  could  threaten  financial  stability.  Second,  we  have  identified  tools  that  might  have  a 
reasonable  chance  of  success  in  averting  such  an  outcome.  Third,  we  are  reasonably 
confident that the costs of using the tools are likely to be outweighed by the benefits from 
averting  the  prospective  crash.  When  these  three  conditions  are  satisfied,  we  should  be 
willing to act. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                 
12   Adrian,  Tobias,  Arturo  Estrella,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin.  2010.  Monetary  Cycles,  Financial  Cycles,  and  the 
Business Cycle. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 421. 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2010
