David Longworth: Bank of Canada liquidity facilities – past, present, and 
future 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the C D Howe 
Institute, Toronto, 17 February 2010. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me here today. It is a pleasure to be with you. This afternoon, I would 
like to talk about liquidity and the role of the Bank of Canada. As was unmistakably brought 
home by the global financial crisis, it is critically important that financial institutions recognize 
and manage liquidity risk and, at the end of the day, it is essential that central banks respond 
to systemic liquidity shortages. Central banks are in a unique position to do this. They can 
create liquidity at virtually no cost. When they undertake liquidity support and are careful to 
guard against credit risk – as the Bank of Canada is – they do not impose any cost on the 
taxpayer. Furthermore, liquidity support does not imply inflationary monetary policy. This is 
because central bank balance sheets can be adjusted in ways that can lead to policy interest 
rates  being  maintained  at  appropriate  levels  and  that  do  not  lead  to  other  sources  of 
inflationary pressure. 
In my remarks today, I will review how the Bank of Canada’s liquidity measures,1 including 
new  measures  introduced  during  the  crisis,  were  guided  by  principles.  I  will  discuss  how 
these principles will continue to help us as we wind down our extraordinary liquidity facilities. 
Elaborating  on  one  of  those  principles,  I  will  endeavour  to  address  how  the  provision  of 
liquidity by the central bank can be done to minimize moral hazard, that is, the potential that 
actions  of  policy-makers  provide  an  incentive  to  market  players  to  take  greater  risks  than 
they otherwise would. Finally, I will discuss what this may mean for the design and use of our 
facilities going forward. 
I am sure no one has forgotten that day in September 2008, when Lehman Brothers went 
bankrupt, nor the messy aftermath that ensued in the days following. What was striking was 
the  unprecedented  spike  in  the  cost  of  interbank  borrowing,  which  then  spread  to  other 
markets.  Financial  institutions  around  the  world  became  unwilling  to  lend  to  each  other, 
worsening  an  already  difficult  situation.  Key  intermediaries  began  to  hoard  liquid  assets; 
some went so far as to put a stop, temporarily, to their market-making activities. At several 
points, interbank lending and other short-term funding markets, including for banks, ceased 
to  exist  for  terms  greater  than  overnight,  thus  making  it  clear  that  this  was  a  shock  of 
systemic importance. 
In response, central banks and governments around the world took unprecedented action to 
stabilize the financial system and reduce the severity of the ensuing global recession. The 
Bank of Canada intervened repeatedly to provide liquidity to financial market participants to 
mitigate the risks of serious financial disturbances. 
                                                 
1  See Appendix 1: Bank of Canada Liquidity Facilities, p. 11. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 1
Going  into  the  crisis,  banks,  globally,  were  highly  leveraged2  and  had  overestimated  the 
ability  of  markets  to  provide  liquidity  in  times  of  stress.  They  relied  heavily  on  sources  of 
funding,  such  as  securitization,  that  disappeared  as  the  crisis  gained  momentum.  At  the 
same time, their funding requirements were growing, because they were forced to take more 
assets back onto their balance sheets and because they had to meet a surge in demand for 
credit  from  those  with  bank  credit  lines  who  had  previously  relied  on  market  sources  of 
funding. 
It is important to note that the decline in the liquidity of bank funding markets and the decline 
in  the liquidity  of  asset markets  in general  are  not  unrelated.  As  was vividly  demonstrated 
during  the  crisis,  liquidity  in  asset  markets  is  tightly  intertwined  with  the  ability  of  financial 
institutions  to  raise  funds  in  money  markets.  Impairment  in  one  market  increased  the 
likelihood of impairment in others. Indeed, market liquidity and funding liquidity of banks with 
trading operations are mutually reinforcing, creating the possibility of a “liquidity spiral” in a 
downward or upward direction.3  
Central bank liquidity measures: pre-crisis 
Prior to the crisis, the tools used by the Bank to provide liquidity to the financial system as a 
whole  were  measures  designed  primarily  to  reinforce  our  target  for  the  overnight  interest 
rate.4  These  tools  were  –  and  still  are  –  part  of  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  standard  operating 
framework  for  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  main  facility  we  use  is  the 
provision  of  settlement  balances  in  the  wholesale  payments  system  –  the  Large  Value 
Transfer System (LVTS) – which is supplemented, when required, by open market special 
purchase and resale agreements (SPRAs) and sale and repurchase agreements (SRAs).5 
There are two facilities that can provide liquidity to individual financial institutions.6 First – and 
also  intimately  linked  to  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  achievement  of  the 
overnight rate target, and the settlement of the payments system – is our Standing Liquidity 
Facility  at  the  Bank  Rate.  It  provides  liquidity,  as  required,  to  individual  LVTS  participants 
facing shortfalls in their end-of-day settlement balances.7 Second, our Emergency Lending 
Assistance,  which  has  rarely  been  put  to  use,  provides  extraordinary  liquidity  support  to 
solvent institutions that are facing serious and persistent liquidity problems.  
                                                 
2  The leverage of the Canadian banks was capped by the existence of the asset-to-capital multiple set by the 
Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions.  See  A.  Crawford,  C.  Graham,  and  É.  Bordeleau, 
“Regulatory Constraints on Leverage: The Canadian Experience,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review 
(June 2009): 45–50. 
3  See M. K. Brunnermeier and L. H. Pedersen, “Market  Liquidity  and Funding Liquidity,”  Review of Financial 
Studies, 22, No. 6 (June 2009): 2201–38; and Markus K. Brunnermeier, “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit 
Crunch 2007–2008,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, No. 1 (Winter 2009): 77–100. 
4  The overnight rate is the key means for achieving the Bank’s monetary policy objectives and the anchor of the 
yield curve. 
5  Often referred to as a “repo,” or repurchase agreement, a PRA is a transaction in which the Bank of Canada 
offers  to  purchase  Government  of  Canada  securities  from  designated  counterparties  with  an  agreement  to 
resell them at a predetermined price the next business day. Special PRAs (SPRAs) are transactions initiated 
by the Bank and are used to reinforce the target rate if overnight funds are generally trading above the target; 
these instruments add liquidity to the system. Alternatively, sale and repurchase agreements (SRAs) are used 
when overnight funds are generally trading below the target rate; these remove liquidity from the system. 
6  See  Bank  of  Canada,  2004,  “Bank  of  Canada  Lender-of-Last-Resort  Policies,”  Bank  of  Canada  Financial 
System  Review  (December):  49–55,  and  F.  Daniel,  W.  Engert,  and  D.  Maclean,  2004–2005,  “The  Bank  of 
Canada as Lender of Last Resort.” Bank of Canada Review (Winter): 3–16. 
7  When  LVTS  participants  are  in  deficit  at  the  end  of  the  day,  and  therefore  need  to  access  the  Standing 
Liquidity  Facility,  aggregate  participant  deposits  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  exceed  the  target  for  net 
settlement balances. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2010
This  simple  set  of  facilities  has  long  served  the  Bank  and  the  financial  system  well  and 
continues to do so.  
Liquidity and monetary policy 
In normal times, including just prior to the crisis, the focus of the Bank’s liquidity measures 
was on supporting our monetary policy stance. Liquidity actions were designed and intended 
to affect aggregate levels of liquidity (often just intraday) to achieve our overnight rate target, 
rather than the distribution of liquidity within the system. This is because a well-functioning 
financial system normally allocates liquidity efficiently, which is critical to a central bank since 
it supports the effective transmission of monetary policy. 
The  crisis  did  not  divert  the  Bank’s  focus  from  monetary  policy.  Just  as  before  the  crisis 
began, the Bank reinforced its target overnight rate during the crisis through the intraday use 
of  SPRAs  and  SRAs,  and,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  setting  of  the  target  for  next-day 
settlement balances. Early in the crisis,8 these policy tools were used aggressively. 
Five principles to guide extraordinary liquidity intervention 
As  global  financial  markets  became  more  turbulent  in  the  summer  of  2007,  central  banks 
around the world realized that unusual measures might be necessary to provide liquidity to 
support financial stability. The Bank of Canada developed and then published in the spring of 
2008 a set of five principles to guide its liquidity interventions. These principles were used to 
shape  the  design  and  application  of  our  extraordinary  liquidity  facilities.9  Allow  me  to 
elaborate on these five principles. 
i. 
First, intervention should be targeted, aimed at mitigating only those market failures 
of system-wide importance with macroeconomic consequence that can be rectified 
by a central bank providing liquidity. 
Second,  intervention  should  be  graduated,  or  commensurate  with  the  severity  of 
the problem. 
Third, intervention should be well designed, using the right tools for the job: market-
based transactions, provided through auction mechanisms, should be used to deal 
with market-wide liquidity problems, while loans should be used to address liquidity 
shortages affecting specific institutions. 
Fourth, intervention should be at market-determined prices to minimize distortions 
and under conditions aligned with those in the market, to limit the possibility that the 
central bank will crowd out the return of markets. 
Fifth, and finally, the Bank should mitigate the moral hazard of its intervention. 
Such  measures  include  limited,  selective  intervention;  the  promotion  of  the  sound 
supervision  of  liquidity-risk  management;  and  the  use  of  penalty  rates  as 
appropriate. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
                                                 
8  From 9 August 2007 to 30 April 2008. 
9  The  development  of  these  principles  was  influenced  by  work  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements’ 
Committee on the Global Financial System; this work was published as CGFS Paper No. 31, “Central bank 
operations in response to the financial turmoil,” in July 2008. For a more detailed discussion of the principles, 
see W. Engert, J. Selody, and C. Wilkins, “Financial Market Turmoil and Central Bank Intervention,” Bank of 
Canada Financial System Review (June 2008): 71–78. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 3
Liquidity measures to address the financial market turmoil 
Guided by these then newly developed principles, the Bank gradually expanded its liquidity 
framework  in  four  dimensions:  terms  to  maturity,  amounts,  counterparties,  and  eligible 
securities.10, 11 
The first trigger came in the latter part of 2007 when liquidity in credit markets shrank around 
the world, including in Canada, with credit spreads rising dramatically on a broad range of 
assets. As the normal generation of liquidity among system participants broke down, there 
were implications for the broader financial system. To address these heightened pressures, 
the Bank of Canada conducted term purchase and resale agreements (PRAs) in December 
2007  with  primary  dealers  against  an  expanded  set  of  eligible  securities,  with  maturities 
extending  past  the  end  of  the  year.  This  marked  the  first  time  that  liquidity  operations 
extending beyond one business day were offered in support of funding liquidity.12 Consistent 
with what would become our first principle, the Bank did not intervene until it became clear 
that liquidity distortions were taking on system-wide importance. With this measure, the Bank 
of Canada expanded its role to provide funding liquidity directly to major market participants 
to stabilize the financial system and to limit spillover effects to the broader economy. 
In  March  2008,  in  response  to  the  pressures  surrounding  Bear  Stearns,  term  PRAs  were 
reintroduced, this time on a biweekly basis. In addition, the Bank expanded the set of assets 
acceptable as collateral to secure intraday exposures in the LVTS and, correspondingly, for 
loans  provided  under  the  Standing  Liquidity  Facility.  We  allowed  certain  types  of  asset-
backed commercial paper (ABCP)13 to substitute for other, more-liquid collateral pledged in 
the LVTS, which, in turn, could be used more easily by financial institutions to obtain market-
based  funding.  Later,  in  June  of  that  year,  to  provide  flexibility,  we  also  allowed  U.S. 
Treasury securities. These steps illustrated the second and third principles – that intervention 
should  be  commensurate  with  the  severity  of  the  problem  and  that  it  should  use  the 
appropriate tools for the job. 
As  the  spring  progressed  in  2008,  funding  conditions  in  Canadian  money  markets  had 
improved  relative  to  those  in  other  countries.  So,  guided  by  the  principle  that  intervention 
should be commensurate with the problem, the Bank announced on July 10th that it would 
not renew maturing term PRAs. 
In the autumn of 2008, as you all know well, severe financial market pressures suddenly re-
emerged,  sparked  by  a  series  of  failures  and  near-failures  of  financial  institutions  in  the 
United States and Europe. Lehman Brothers was not the only one, although it was the most 
significant failure. As I described a moment ago, the ability of both financial and non-financial 
borrowers  to  obtain  market-based  financing  was  seriously  impaired.  The  deterioration  in 
Canadian  financial  markets  was  much  less  severe  than  elsewhere,  although  liquidity  was 
limited at all maturities, and trading volumes were thin. 
                                                 
10  For a more detailed discussion, see L. Zorn, C. Wilkins, and W. Engert, “Bank of Canada Liquidity Actions in 
Response to the Financial Market Turmoil,” Bank of Canada Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 2009). 
11  The complementary liquidity facilities provided by the Government of Canada, such as the Insured Mortgage 
Purchase Program, were also important in addressing the financial market turmoil in Canada. 
12  Prior to December 2007, term PRAs had been conducted only on an occasional basis to manage the Bank’s 
balance sheet  and address seasonal fluctuations in the  demand for  bank notes. In  addition, the  December 
1999 operations provided stable funding for the primary dealers over the “Y2K” period, given the uncertainty 
surrounding the ability of software to properly take into account the change to the year 2000. 
13  There are strict eligibility requirements for ABCP securities, such that only those securities with minimal credit 
and liquidity risk are accepted. See: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/notices_fmd/2009/securities_collateral060309.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2010
The  Bank’s  term  PRA  facilities  were  resumed,  under  the  existing  terms  and  conditions.14 
Within a few weeks, the Bank aggressively expanded its provision of liquidity, commensurate 
with  the  increasing  severity  of  the  crisis.  The  frequency  of  term  PRAs  was  increased  to 
weekly from biweekly; eligible counterparties were expanded to include LVTS participants in 
addition  to  primary  dealers;  and  a  3-month  term  PRA  maturity  was  added.  The  Bank  also 
temporarily  broadened  the  list  of  securities  eligible  as  assets  in  term  PRA  transactions  to 
include own-issued ABCP.  
As  the  crisis  deepened  through  the  rest  of  the  autumn  of  2008,  new  measures  were 
introduced.  In  October,  the  Bank  temporarily  broadened  the  list  of  assets  accepted  as 
collateral  to  include  the  Canadian-dollar  non-mortgage  loan  portfolios  of  LVTS  direct 
participants.15  These  assets  were  eligible  to  secure  intraday  exposures  in  the  LVTS  and, 
correspondingly,  to  secure  loans  under  the  Standing  Liquidity  Facility.  Also  in  October, 
because  the  traditional  liquidity  transmission  mechanism  was  not  operating,  and  thus  to 
address liquidity shortages beyond our traditional counterparties, we introduced a new term 
PRA  facility  aimed  directly  at  large  participants  in  the  money  markets.  In  designing  and 
implementing  these  tools,  the  Bank  was  guided  in  particular  by  the  third  principle,  which 
recommends using the right tool for the job. 
In November, we introduced a term loan facility at a penalty rate for direct participants in the 
LVTS, secured by their Canadian-dollar non-mortgage loan portfolios. Because this auction 
facility accepted these largely non-marketable, illiquid assets as collateral, participants in the 
LVTS  were  able  to  use  their  marketable,  liquid  collateral  elsewhere.  This  loan  facility  was 
used  to  make  liquidity  available  to  individual  financial  institutions  that  may  have  had 
difficulties managing their balance sheets but whose problems were not serious enough to 
warrant Emergency Lending Assistance. 
Later,  in  February  2009,  the  term  PRA  for  money  market  instruments  was  broadened  to 
provide  liquidity  to  participants  in  Canadian  private  sector  bond  markets  as  well. 
Correspondingly,  the  list  of  securities  accepted  as  collateral  was  broadened  to  include 
investment-grade corporate bonds. 
In designing the term loan facility and the term PRA for private sector instruments, the Bank 
was  guided  by  the  fourth  principle,  which  recommends  minimizing  market  distortions.  The 
facilities  use  an  auction  mechanism  to  allocate  liquidity  so  that  the  price  of  liquidity  is 
determined competitively by participants, rather than by the Bank. Both the term PRA facility 
for private sector instruments and the term loan facility were designed as backstop facilities 
with appropriate minimum bid rates, which provided the Bank with a natural means to exit 
from  them  when  market  sources  of  liquidity  became  a  more  cost-effective  alternative  for 
potential participants. In addition, the facilities were designed to preserve the existing market 
structures.  Finally,  intervention  was  aimed  at  mitigating  liquidity  risk  that,  in  the  Bank’s 
judgment, was not in line with fundamentals; it did not attempt to alter credit risk. 
The  fifth  principle,  that  we  mitigate  the  moral  hazard  of  our  interventions,  served  and 
continues to serve as a guide at all levels of our liquidity program. The Bank of Canada took 
several  precautions  to  mitigate  the  creation  of  perverse  incentives  that  could  adversely 
influence  market  behaviour.  As  I  noted  earlier,  the  Bank  intervened  only  in  response  to 
specific,  extraordinary  episodes  of  heightened  liquidity  pressures.  Moreover,  the  liquidity 
                                                 
14  The Bank also expanded its reciprocal currency swap arrangement with the U.S. Federal Reserve, in order to 
be able to provide up to $30 billion of U.S.-dollar funding to domestic financial institutions, if necessary. (Such 
a  need  never  arose  in  Canada,  nor  was  it  expected  to.)  The  swap  arrangement  was  part  of  coordinated 
central bank actions designed to address elevated pressures in U.S.-dollar short-term funding markets. Last 
month,  it  was  announced  that  the  swap  arrangement  has  expired  since  it  is  no  longer  needed,  given  the 
improvements  in  financial  market  functioning  in  the  past  year.  This  decision  respected  the  principle  that 
measures be commensurate with the severity – or decline in severity – of the problem. 
15  These were accepted at a collateral-to-portfolio value of 60 per cent. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 5
facilities  were  introduced  as  temporary  measures  in  order  to  reduce  the  incentives  for 
participants to change their behaviour. The Bank has been working closely with the federal 
Department of Finance, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), and 
other domestic bodies to monitor the liquidity conditions of markets and financial institutions, 
as well as the liquidity risk management of major financial institutions. In addition, the Bank 
monitors the results of each liquidity operation. Finally, where applicable, the pricing of new 
facilities was constructed to preserve incentives to transact in private sector markets. 
Liquidity facilities: the present 
By the spring of last year, as financial market conditions continued to improve, participation 
in our liquidity operations diminished, indicating that the need for the Bank’s support would 
likely  be  declining.  Indeed,  the  amount  of  liquidity  support  had  peaked  at  $41  billion  in 
December 2008. (It is currently some $23 billion.) 
It is important to note that at its April 2009 fixed announcement date, the Bank announced 
that  it  would  introduce  6-month  and  12-month  PRAs  with  a  minimum  bid  rate  of  25  basis 
points and a maximum bid rate of 50 basis points to reinforce its conditional commitment to 
maintain its target for the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the 
end of June 2010. This was a new use for its term PRA facility. 
At  the  end  of  June,  prospective  sunset  dates  for  all  of  the  Bank’s  extraordinary  liquidity 
operations  were  announced.  It  is  important  to  note  that  just  as  they  served  to  guide  the 
creation of our extraordinary liquidity facilities, the set of five principles was used to guide the 
winding  down  of  these  facilities,  particularly  principles  (ii)  and  (iii),  that  interventions  be 
commensurate with the severity of the problem and that the right tool be provided for the job. 
At  the  end  of  July,  the  Bank  lowered  its  pre-announced  minimum  amounts  for  the  regular 
term PRA auctions as well as for the term PRA for private sector instruments and the term 
loan facility. At the end of October, the term loan facility and the term PRA facility for private 
sector  instruments  were  terminated.  The  frequency  of  regular  term  PRA  auctions  was 
reduced  from  weekly  to  biweekly  and,  subsequently,  to  monthly.  At  the  beginning  of  this 
month, we began to reduce the eligibility of non-mortgage loans as collateral for the Standing 
Liquidity Facility from 100 per cent to 20 per cent.16 
The financial crisis has subsided, and financial conditions have improved significantly over 
the past ten months, both globally and in Canada. Through the crisis, the Bank’s regular term 
PRA facility was used heavily and appears to have contributed to reduced market stress and 
a return to well-functioning money markets. In contrast, there was relatively little demand or 
need  for  funding  from  the  term  PRA  facility  for  money  market  instruments,  the  term  PRA 
facility for private sector instruments, and the term loan facility, which were all designed as 
backstops. That said, the presence of these facilities – including the latter two until the end of 
October  2009  –  helped  to  mitigate  uncertainty  among  market  participants  about  the 
availability of liquidity. 
Future: dealing with moral hazard and the provision of liquidity 
I would now like to return to the issue of moral hazard. Recall that our fifth principle is the 
mitigation  of  the  moral  hazard  associated  with  our  interventions.  Having  gone  through  a 
financial  crisis,  we  can  be  even  more  clear  on  how  to  do  this.  How  can  we  minimize  the 
potential that our actions provide incentives to market players to take increased risks? 
                                                 
16  This process will be complete by 1 April 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2010
There are three basic things a central bank can do to mitigate the moral hazard associated 
with  its  crisis  interventions:  (i)  limit crisis  intervention  to  significant  systemic  events,  as  we 
have  done;  (ii)  encourage  infrastructure  development  and  regulatory  reform  that  make  the 
financial  system  more  resilient  to  systemic  shocks,  thereby  reducing  the  frequency  and 
repetition  of  patterns  leading  to  systemic  events;  and  (iii)  maintain  a  flexible  intervention 
strategy that can deal with specific types of systemic problems as they evolve. This flexibility, 
which  acknowledges  the  inherent  uncertainty  surrounding  the  timing  and  magnitude  of 
systemic crises, means that individual system participants will not know in advance how to 
transfer risk to the central bank at artificially low prices.17 The use of auctions to price and 
distribute liquidity can be helpful in this regard. 
I’d  like  to  expand  on  the  second  element,  making  the  financial  system  more  resilient  to 
shocks.  To  reduce  the  probability  of  a  crisis,  there  are  actions  that  can  be  taken  by  the 
central  bank  and  by  the  prudential  supervisor.  The  actions  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  has 
taken or is taking include: 
 
implementation  of 
Encouraging  and  overseeing 
liquidity-generating 
infrastructure,  such  as  a  central  counterparty  for  repo  trades,  that  help  market 
participants self-insure against idiosyncratic shocks;18. 
Maintaining  standing  facilities  –  our  Standing  Liquidity  Facility  and  Emergency 
Lending  Assistance  –  with  either  penalty  rates  or  with  stigma  even  in  non-crisis 
times, which allow key institutions to determine when to approach the Bank as the 
lender  of  last  resort  for  funds.19  This  could  stop  large  idiosyncratic  shocks  from 
cascading into systemic events;20, 21, and, 
Monitoring financial institution liquidity against tighter criteria (together with OSFI). 
 
On the part of prudential supervisors, the following are actions that are under way or have 
been  proposed  and  that  can  also  help  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient  and  thus 
mitigate moral hazard: 
 
Establishing  standards  that  encourage  financial  institutions  to  maintain  sufficient 
liquidity to deal with the idiosyncratic or small systemic shocks they can expect to 
face and to have policies for sound liquidity management practices in place;22  
the 
                                                  
17  This  is  consistent  with  the  advice  developed  in  2008,  except  for  the  element  of  co-insurance,  which  was 
considered  to  be  a  possible  measure  in  the  first  iteration  of  the  principles  guiding  the  Bank’s  extraordinary 
liquidity interventions. The concept of co-insurance has  been replaced by the idea that  financial  institutions 
self-insure against idiosyncratic shocks and that the central bank provides insurance only for systemic liquidity 
shocks. This change should be more effective in limiting moral hazard because it focuses more on containing 
the cause of moral hazard. 
18  Other examples include standardized transparent securitization and through-the-cycle margining. 
19  The Standing  Liquidity Facility has a penalty rate (Bank Rate) and the Emergency  Lending Assistance has 
stigma. 
20  Allowing  key  institutions  to  determine  when  to  borrow  from  the  central  bank  would  reduce  information 
collection and monitoring costs for the central bank, while the penalty rate and stigma would control the moral 
hazard associated with inappropriate use of the facility. 
21  The terms and conditions of the Bank’s collateral policy, including the size of haircuts, can also help to contain 
moral hazard. 
22  The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s press release of 17 December 2009 entitled, “Consultative 
proposals to strengthen the resilience of the banking sector announced by the Basel Committee” covers the 
introduction of “a global minimum liquidity standard for internationally active banks.” See also C. A. Northcott 
and M. Zelmer, “Liquidity Standards in a Macroprudential Context,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review 
(December  2009):  35–40;  and  “International  framework  for  liquidity  risk  measurement,  standards  and 
monitoring,” a consultative document issued by the Bank for International Settlements, December 2009. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 7
   that 
Strengthening  capital  regulations  to  ensure  that  risk  is  appropriately  mitigated 
without imposing an excess regulatory burden on financial institutions or generating 
additional moral hazard from “not allowed to fail” policies;23  
Ensuring 
institution 
there  are  meaningful  consequences 
stakeholders  who  have  responsibility  for  mitigating  risk  when  mitigation  strategies 
fail  by,  among  other  things,  having  a  clear  and  transparent  resolution  mechanism 
and “living wills,” which can allow institutions to fail or to be quickly restructured;24, 25 
and,  
Requiring the use of contingent capital or convertible capital instruments, perhaps in 
the form of a specific type of subordinated debt, to help ensure loss absorbency and 
thus reduce the likelihood of failure of a systemically important institution.26  
financial 
to 
These are also the building blocks that can be used to reduce the probability of a crisis. The 
goal  is  to  reach  a  destination  where  financial  institutions,  markets,  and  infrastructure  play 
critical – and complementary – roles to support long-term economic prosperity. 
As we move forward, it is important that financial system participants do not believe that our 
intervention  in  times  of  crisis  implies  a  willingness  to  intervene  in  normal  times.  It  is  also 
important that we retain considerable flexibility about when and how to intervene in the next 
crisis to fulfill our mandate to be liquidity lender of last resort to the financial system in the 
event of a systemic shock. 
For the Bank, the primary facilities used during the crisis, the term PRA and the term loan 
facility,  should  continue  to  be  a  part  of  the  Bank’s  toolkit,  as  is  our  Emergency  Lending 
Assistance.  In  a  crisis  with  a  shortage  of  good  quality  collateral,  the  Bank  would  also 
consider  a  term  securities  lending  facility  to  exchange  good  collateral  for  lower  quality 
collateral  –  at  the  appropriate  price  –  in  order  to  support  the  functioning  of  core  funding 
markets. Given potential changes to core market infrastructure (the implementation of central 
counterparties, for example), further study will also be important to determine the appropriate 
tools to address future liquidity issues. 
                                                 
23  The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision press release of 17 December 2009 covers “raising the quality, 
consistency  and  transparency  of  the  capital  base”  and  “strengthening  the  risk  coverage  of  the  capital 
framework.” 
24  The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  working  on  “a  package  of  measures  to  address  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
problems associated with systemically important financial institutions,” which includes "improving the capacity 
to undertake  an orderly  resolution of  a failing firm,"  including one that  operates cross-border. See the FSB 
press release of 9 January 2010 entitled, “Financial Stability Board meets on the financial reform agenda.” 
25  Canada  has  clear  and  transparent  resolution  mechanisms  for  federally  regulated,  deposit-taking  financial 
institutions,  which  are  periodically  reviewed  and  enhanced  as  needed.  For  example,  the  Canada  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  (CDIC)  has  long  had  powers  to  restructure  and  resolve  troubled  deposit-taking 
institutions, and in 1996 federal legislation was amended to give the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
the authority to temporarily take control of an institution, and if necessary, request a winding-up order, subject 
to certain prescribed conditions and approval of the Minister of Finance. More recently, CDIC was granted the 
authority in 2008 to establish bridge banks to facilitate the restructuring of federally-regulated deposit-taking 
institutions. 
26  The  BCBS  press  release  of  11  January  2010  entitled,  “Group  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of 
Supervision reinforces Basel Committee reform package,” announces that the “Basel Committee is reviewing 
the  role  that  contingent  capital  and  convertible  capital  instruments  could  play  in  the  regulatory  capital 
framework.”  See  also  “Considerations  along  the  Path  to  Financial  Regulatory  Reform,”  remarks  by 
Superintendent Julie Dickson, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, 28 October 2009. 
8 
 BIS Review 17/2010
Conclusion 
To conclude, the principles developed as the crisis began have served the Bank and, more 
importantly, the financial system well. Throughout the crisis, the Bank has been innovative 
and  nimble.27  In  this  period  of  winding  down  our  temporary  facilities,  we  are  acting 
deliberately and thoughtfully, for example, by providing advance notice and by only gradually 
reducing both the amounts and frequencies of the auctions. We will continue to act in this 
manner as  we move to reinforce the stability and resilience of the financial system – and, 
both in the near and longer term, we will continue to employ these principles to guide our 
actions. 
                                                 
27  An example is allowing LVTS participants to assign their non-mortgage loan portfolios as eligible collateral for 
LVTS and SLF purposes, a practice that we have indicated will be partially kept in place going forward. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 9
