Duvvuri Subbarao: Looking back and looking ahead  
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Grand Finale of the Platinum Jubilee Celebrations of the RBI, held at the National Centre for 
Performing Arts, Mumbai, 1 April 2010. 
 We are gathered here to mark the Grand Finale of the Platinum Jubilee celebrations 
1. 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
It is my pleasure and privilege to welcome: 
Hon’ble Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh  
 
Hon’ble Finance Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee  
 
His Excellency, Governor of Maharashtra, Shri K. Sankaranarayanan; and  
 
Hon’ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Shri Ashok Chavan  
 
2. 
I  also  want  to  acknowledge  the  presence  here  on  this  happy  occasion  of 
Smt. Gursharan  Kaur,  who  has  accompanied  the  Prime  Minister,  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
former Governors and Deputy Governors and their graceful spouses. 
3.  
And of course, a big and hearty welcome to all our guests – our colleagues in the 
financial sector, our friends and well wishers, and our former and current staff, all gathered 
here today to celebrate with us.  
Reserve Bank @ 75 
4.  
As an institution, central banks go back several centuries. The first central bank, the 
Riksbank in Sweden, was established in 1668, nearly 350 years ago, at a time when much of 
India  was  still  under  the  Great  Mughals.  The  Bank  of  England  came  shortly  thereafter  in 
1694. By the turn of the century in 1900, there were only 18 central banks. Today, there are 
around 180 central banks, a tenfold increase in the last one hundred years.  
5.  
The intellectual justification for a central bank in India was proposed by big weights 
such  as  James  Wilson,  the  first  editor  of  the  Economist,  in  1860,  and  by  John  Maynard 
Keynes  in  1913.  However,  the  idea  did  not  turn  into  reality  until  many  years  later.  The 
Reserve Bank was born as a private shareholders bank in 1935 in the city of joy, what was 
then Calcutta, it moved in 1937 to Bombay, the erstwhile name for this great city of Mumbai, 
and was nationalized in 1949. The journey over the last seventy-five years has been eventful 
for  the  Reserve  Bank,  shaping  not  only  its  intellectual  evolution,  but  also  securing  its 
preeminent position in the economic policy space of the country.  
6.  
The  Reserve  Bank’s  75  year  journey  has  been  marked  by  a  host  of  historic 
developments  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Internationally,  there  were  the  aftermath  of  the 
Great  Depression  of the  1930s;  the  Second World  War and  the  consequent  challenges  of 
war financing; the establishment of the Bretton Woods system in 1944; the unraveling of the 
gold standard and the oil price shocks of the 1970s; the Third World debt crisis of the 1980s; 
the Asian crisis of the mid-1990s; and most recently the global financial turmoil. 
7.  
There  were  historic  developments  on  the  home  front  too,  and  they  were  varied  – 
starting with the launching of the five-year plans and the challenges emanating from one of 
history’s most ambitious and gigantic experiments in economic development; the after-effects 
of the two wars in the 1960s; the devaluation of the rupee in 1966; bank nationalization in 
1969;  the  balance  of  payments  crisis  of  the  early  1990s  and  the  follow  on  path-breaking 
economic reforms that moved India into a new economic era. The Reserve Bank is proud of 
BIS Review 42/2010 
 1
the role it has played in shaping these developments, or responding to them as the case may 
be, but always with sensitivity and integrity. 
Leadership of RBI 
8.  
The  high  esteem  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  is  held  today  owes  a  lot  to  the 
competence  and  professionalism  of  its  staff,  its  institutional  values  and  culture,  and 
importantly, the outstanding leadership of former Governors – twenty-one to date.  
9.  
When  applauded  for  the  law  of  gravity,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  not  one  to  make  easy 
concessions to humility, famously said in a letter to his friend and rival Robert Hooke, that if 
he had seen a little further, it was because he was standing on the shoulders of giants. I can 
quite relate to that statement. As the Governor of the Reserve Bank in these exciting times, 
I am  deeply  humbled  by  the  intellectual  reputation  of  the  lineage  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
Governors. It is my privilege to pay a tribute to all twenty-one of them on the occasion of this 
Platinum Jubilee. Four of our former Governors – Dr. Manmohan Singh, Dr. (or I should more 
appropriately  say  Prof.)  C.  Rangarajan,  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan  and  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  –  are  happily 
with us today. Shri M. Narasimham and Shri S. Venkitaramanan have been unable to travel 
to Mumbai but send their best wishes for the function.  
Platinum Jubilee celebrations 
10.  
As  you  have  just  seen  in  the  film  clip,  over  the  past  one  year,  we  celebrated  the 
Platinum Jubilee in diverse ways. The flagship of our celebrations, one which will possibly 
have the most enduring value, has been the outreach programme. The outreach programme 
was  focussed  on  taking  forward  the  twin  pillars  of  financial  inclusion and  financial  literacy. 
The motivation behind this venture was for the RBI, as an institution, to connect with ordinary 
people of the country. The odyssey took all of us, our Deputy Governors, Executive Directors 
and myself, to villages across the country, typically off-main road, away from urban influence, 
unbanked  villages,  to  see  and  understand  how  grassroots  institutions  –  self-help  women’s 
groups,  micro-finance  institutions,  non-government  organizations,  rural  cooperatives,  rural 
branches of regional and mainstream commercial banks – operate, and to listen first-hand to 
the hopes and aspirations of village India. In return, we also got an opportunity to explain to 
people what the Reserve Bank does, and how what we do touches their everyday life.  
11.  
I can claim, indeed I do so with pride, that we visited at least one village in every 
state of the country and most union territories. Given that India has over 600,000 habitations, 
our  coverage  was  admittedly  miniscule.  Even  so,  it  has  been  a  wonderful  experience  – 
intellectually rewarding, emotionally fulfilling and professionally mind-expanding.  
12.  
During my own outreach visits to villages in several states, I was impressed by the 
self-confidence  of  self-help  group  women,  the  enthusiasm  of  rural  girls  for  education  and 
their growing aspirations for a better quality of life. In many ways, the outreach programme 
has been a reality check on the design and implementation of the Reserve Bank’s policies, 
and  it  has  reinforced  our  institutional  commitment  to  addressing  the  challenge  and 
opportunity of financial inclusion. 
13.  
As part of the outreach programme, we also conducted quiz contests and debating 
competitions in schools and colleges in various parts of the country to spread the message of 
financial literacy and to explain the role and responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. In addition, 
the top management of the Reserve Bank participated in a couple of town hall events that 
were aired on television, fielding questions from ordinary people. The idea once again was to 
understand the concerns of India’s growing middle class, and in turn demystify the Reserve 
Bank to them. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2010
shows 
Experience 
that  external  developments 
Challenges on the way forward 
14.  
A Platinum Jubilee is a chronological milestone, an occasion for celebration; but it is 
also an occasion for introspection. People often ask me about the challenges for the Reserve 
Bank – where I would like to see it going in the next few years. I am deeply conscious that 
this is not a seminar; so, I will highlight just four areas that the Reserve Bank must address 
going forward. 
15.  
The  first  challenge,  I  believe,  is  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to  learn  to  manage  both 
economic  and  regulatory  policies  in  a  globalizing  environment.  The  recent  global  financial 
crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  uncertainties  and  dilemmas  of  macroeconomic 
management  in  a  globalizing  world.  Even  as  governments  and  central  banks  acted  with 
unusual  show  of  policy  force,  they  found  that  they  were  unable  to  get  the  situation  under 
control  because  of  the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  system  and  the  cross-border 
externalities  to  domestic  policy  actions.  Most  importantly,  sentiment  and  confidence  were 
remarkably correlated across countries around the world.  
16.  
interact  with  domestic 
macroeconomic  factors  in  complex,  uncertain  and  even  capricious  ways.  As  India 
increasingly integrates with the rest of the world, the results of our policies will be influenced 
by  what  happens  beyond  our  borders.  It  is,  therefore,  important  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
acquire expertise in policy formulation in a globalizing environment. Of course, globalization 
is  not  a  one  way  street.  What  happens  here  in  India  is  beginning  to  affect  the  rest  of  the 
world.  I  recall  a  Bloomberg  headline  the  other  day  which  said,  “US  stocks  drop  as  India 
raises rates for the first time since 2008”.  
17.  
Second in my list of challenges – or rather goals – for RBI is that it must reposition 
itself  as  a  knowledge  institution.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  forcefully  revealed  the 
enormous  size  and  forbidding  complexity  of  the  financial  sector.  Some  people  have 
described  the  financial  sector  before  the  crisis  as  anti-Schumpeterian  –  a  “destructive 
creation”. Now, as the crisis recedes, there is a deep, intellectual churning, and we are on to, 
as most people hope and believe, Schumpeterian “creative destruction”. 
18.  
Even at the risk of being clichéd, let me say that at the Reserve Bank, we need to 
“think  global  and  act  local”.  The  idea  is  not  to  fight  globalization  but  to  manage  it  to  the 
country’s best advantage. Mahatma Gandhi said [and I quote], “I do not want my house to be 
walled in on all sides, and my windows to be stuffed. I want the cultures of all the lands to be 
blown about my house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any”. 
[unquote] The Mahatma’s exhortation is even more true today than when he said it. 
19.  
We need to learn from the best in the world, but adapt our learning to the demands 
and  culture  of  a  maturing  and  emerging  economy.  We  need  to  be  constantly  pushing  the 
envelope,  be  at  the  frontiers  of  domain  knowledge,  oftentimes  reinvent  it,  but  all  the  time 
remain  sensitive  to  the  core  concerns  of  an  emerging  market  economy,  one  which  is  still 
home to hundreds of millions of poor people. 
20.  
That  takes  me  to  the  third  big  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank  –  to  widen  and 
deepen financial inclusion. We all know from personal experience that economic opportunity 
is strongly inter-twined with financial access. Such access is especially powerful for the poor 
as it provides them opportunities to build savings, make investments, avail credit, and above 
all,  insure  themselves  against  income  shocks.  At  the  aggregate  level,  financial  inclusion 
provides  an  avenue  for  bringing  the  huge  savings  of  the  poor  into  the  formal  financial 
intermediation system, and for channelling them into much needed investment. One of the 
big take-aways from our outreach programme is that financial inclusion is not just a public 
good;  it  is  also  a  merit  good.  It  empowers  poor  people  in  diverse  ways.  If  there  is  to  be 
“inclusive  growth”,  financial  inclusion  is  the  next  big  idea,  as  it  will  at  once  promote  both 
growth and equity.  
BIS Review 42/2010 
 3
The  final  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  become  a  more  transparent  and 
21.  
sensitive  institution.  We  are  a  public  institution,  and  have  an  obligation  to  deliver  quality 
service at the cutting edge level. We need to listen to people, be sensitive to their concerns, 
and  redress  their  grievances.  We  also  need  to  communicate  effectively,  and  credibly  and 
explain  the  logic  of  our  decisions  and  actions  at  both  technical  and  non-technical  levels. 
Being  able  to  communicate  clearly  is  non-trivial  in  many  ways.  “Centralbankspeak”,  the 
language that central bankers speak, can get counterproductive, if not used wisely. We all 
know of Alan Greenspan, the iconic chairman of the Fed. He had to propose to his future 
wife seven times before she finally understood that he was actually proposing to her! 
The idea of India 
22.  
A final thought before I close. A powerful lesson from the financial crisis has been 
that financial sector development is not, and cannot be, an end in itself. The growth of the 
financial sector is important only to the extent it improves the growth of the real sector. For all 
of us in the Reserve Bank – indeed even for those outside it – engaged in financial sector 
issues, it is important to remember that what we do in the financial sector adds value if, and 
only if, it makes a difference to the lives of ordinary people. This is the lasting message that 
the Reserve Bank will carry forward beyond the Platinum Jubilee celebrations.  
Prime Minister Sir, as Finance Minister, in your budget speech of 1994–95, you had 
23.  
famously invoked Victor Hugo to say that: “No power on earth can stop an idea whose time 
has  come.”  If  our  first  Prime  Minister,  Pandit  Nehru,  gave  us  “the  idea  of  India”,  you  had 
reinvented the idea to unleash India’s “animal spirits”, Keynes’ memorable phrase for “get up 
and go” entrepreneurism. As a nation, it is our collective dream, hope and joy to take forward 
that  idea  of  India.  On  the  occasion  of  its  Platinum  Jubilee,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
rededicates itself to the continuing task of turning that idea into reality.  
4 
 BIS Review 42/2010
