Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Expresso 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Expresso, 
Portugal, conducted by Mr João Silvestre, 24 April 2010.  
 Are we really leaving the crisis behind or are there still some risks ahead? Is there a 
risk of a double dip? 
As regards the conjuncture in the real economy, what it is clear is that on the global level we 
are  in  a  recovery  mode.  That  is  particularly  visible  in  the  emerging  countries,  in  emerging 
Asia especially but and also in Brazil and in Latin America. The emerging world is picking up 
now very clearly and that is excellent for global growth. As regards the financial sector and 
financial  aspects  of  the  global  economy,  I  would  say  that  there  is  still  of  course very  hard 
work for drawing all the lessons from the crisis. We have to be sure that we have a global 
financial system which would be much more resilient than it was before the crisis. It is work in 
progress. It is the work we have started in the auspices of the G20, the work that we are 
doing  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  with  the  Basel  Committee,  with  all  the  workshops 
that have been established at a global level. For the banks, we will have decisions by the end 
of the year on the capital requirements, new rules and regulations at a global level. We are 
bound  to  learn  the  appropriate  lessons  and  to  pave  the  way  for  a  global  financial  system 
which should be much more solid. We cannot afford to have twice the same acute degree of 
instability. For several reasons, I think people would not tolerate that. Our democracies have 
accepted a level of taxpayer risk that has been extremely elevated to avoid the collapse of 
financial sector. I do not think they will accept that twice. 
What are the main risks in your opinion? Still the financial system?  
We always have risks in a market economy. There was no risk in the Soviet economy, but 
this absence of risk led the economy to a total collapse. In a market economy, you have to 
permanently identify and analyse risks, you must have the best risk management possible to 
be sure that you prevent the materialization of risks both at the level of individual institutions 
and at the systemic level itself. 
In the present moment, we still have all the risks associated with the fact that we have not yet 
achieved the work that we started at the end of 2008 and have not yet drawn all the lessons 
from the crisis. We still have to make very significant progress to improve transparency and 
to combat short-termism. We have to counter pro-cyclicality, which is one of the features of 
global finance today, amplifying the booms and the busts of global economy. Promoting and 
improving transparency, countering short-termism and eliminating as much as possible pro-
cyclicality are three of the most important avenues we have to take. 
One  of  the  problems  of  pro-cyclicality  is  that  banks,  despite  the  huge  amount  of 
liquidity, are not conceding enough credit do the economy. 
I confirm that, of course. We did by means of so called “non-conventional measures” all what 
we could to permit the commercial banks to continue to finance the real economy as well as 
possible despite the crisis. We did that in a manner which has been prompt and decisive in 
terms  of  quantity  and  quality  of  the  measures  taken.  Now  we  are  progressively  unwinding 
these  measures.  This  unwinding  is  fully  in  line  with  the  fact  that  the  markets  are 
progressively  functioning  better.  As  regards  the  banks  our  message  is:  do  not  forget  that 
what we are doing ourselves is to permit you to finance the real economy and do your job. 
Are they frightened about this financial crisis or still have lots of toxic assets on their 
balance sheets?  
After  every 
recession  –  we  avoided  a  depression  but  we  had  a  sharp  
recession  –  we  observe  that  there  was  a  period  of  decreasing  outstanding  credit  to  the 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 1
private sector. As a rule, recovery of credit has always been more rapid for the households 
than for the corporate business. 
Do  you  expect  new  problems  in  the  future  in  some  of  the  euro  area  banks?  I  am 
thinking,  for  instance,  in  Irish  banks  where  the  government  created  recently  a  bad 
bank.  
I would call all responsible authorities, private or public, to be very alert. The cleaning up of 
bank balance sheets is in line with what we recommend. We have a very simple message for 
all  banks  in  euro  area:  to  do  their  job  financing  the  real  economy;  to  do  all  they  can  to 
restructure  their  balance  sheets  to  be  able  to  finance  the  economy  including  taking 
advantage of the market possibilities to issue new capital, utilizing their retained earnings to 
reinforce their own funds and have moderate remuneration. In a small number of cases we 
are also telling them to utilize the options offered by governments to restructure their balance 
sheets. 
What is, in your opinion, the appropriate capital requirement for a bank?  
We  will  see.  We  have  opened  up  the  discussion  with  the  private  sector.  The  Basel 
Committee is gathering all the responses from the industry that were due by the end of April. 
We  will  work  intensively,  at  the  level  of  the  international  community,  on  the  appropriate 
calibration of the new Basel rules. 
You think that the exit strategies of the fiscal policy, namely in some countries higher 
deficits  like  Ireland,  Portugal  or  Greece,  are  in  themselves  threats  to  the  economic 
recovery?  
We in the ECB Governing Council have always defended fiercely the Stability and Growth 
Pact (SGP). We have always drawn the attention of the governments to the fact that the SGP 
was essential and crucial for the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). For all governments, 
the sound management of fiscal policies is essential, not only because they are part of the 
EMU, not only because it is both moral and common sense behaviour to protect the children 
and the grandchildren and not to impose on them an abnormal burden, but also because it is 
a  crucial  element  in  of  the  confidence  of  the  households,  entrepreneurs  and  market 
participants. That is the reason why we see no contradiction between the objective to permit 
the economic recovery to expand and be active as possible, and the sound management of 
fiscal policies. 
But governments should be careful on the pace of fiscal tightening to avoid risks?  
Governments  should  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  if  they  do  not  do  what  is  necessary  to  be 
credible  in  having  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  in  the  medium  term,  they  will  not  create 
confidence. If they do not create confidence in their capacity to run sustainable fiscal policies 
they will not help the recovery today. Because the recovery today depends crucially on the 
confidence of households, of fellow citizens and of enterprises. 
Do you think Portugal could experience in the future a situation similar to Greece if the 
government fails to accomplish Stability and Growth Program and bring the deficit to 
a level below 3% of GDP?  
The countries are all in very different situations. That being said all governments of the euro 
area,  without  exception,  have  the  task  to  be  credible  in  the  sustainability  of  their  fiscal 
policies. It is our permanent message. 
You know for some time our finance minister, Teixeira dos Santos. He was able to cut 
fiscal deficit between 2005 and 2008. Is he the right person to do it again right now?  
It is not the responsibility of the ECB to give good marks and bad marks to finance ministers! 
All  what  goes  resolutely  and  courageously  in  the  direction  of  sound  fiscal  policies  and 
improvements  in  the  cost  competitiveness  of  the  economy  has  to  be  accelerated.  It  is 
essential. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2010
Is it fair that some countries like Portugal or Ireland, with their own fiscal problems, 
could be called to participate in the solution for Greece financing its debt?  
All the countries, without any exception, have to behave properly to have good management 
of  their  fiscal  policy,  good  monitoring  of  their  relative  competitiveness,  of  their  unit  labour 
costs,  of  their  structural  reforms  and  overall  competitive  indicators.  They  all  have  to 
collectively  exercise  strong  surveillance  on  the  individual  governments  of  the  euro  area, 
impose  strong  conditionality  where  needed  and  fully  recognize  that  they  are  sharing  a 
destiny in common. 
Should  the  euro  area  and  European  Union  create  an  institutional  framework,  like  a 
European Monetary Fund, to solve this kind of problem?  
Firstly, the SGP is there precisely to organize peer surveillance of the sixteen members. The 
close monitoring of the policies pursued by each of the sixteen and the good functioning of 
this  peer  surveillance  is  absolutely  essential.  If  we  have  a  reinforced  surveillance  on  the 
members of the euro area themselves, we will not have problems in the future. Secondly, I 
think the task force presided over by Mr Van Rompuy, according to a decision taken by the 
heads of state and government, will concentrate on how we could improve surveillance and  
– when necessary – the conditionality that the euro area will impose on each of its members, 
in line with the Treaty. 
You think that this solution to Greece is enough to calm down the financial markets?  
I already said what I have to say on that. 
Was this financial crisis your most difficult task in the ECB?  
We have no “most difficult task”. We have to be permanently alert. As you know, the ECB 
has  been  very  alert.  Before  the  crisis,  we  warned  against  the  possibility  of  a  market 
correction of great magnitude. We said that, I said that myself, in 2006 and at the beginning 
of 2007. We were the first central bank in the world, in August 2007, to assess that a period 
of financial turbulences was starting and to take appropriate decisions. That was, of course, 
a very difficult decision to take based upon this new turbulent market environment we had to 
cope with at that time. We had a lot of difficult decisions to take, like all other major central 
banks  of  the  world,  after  the  intensification  of  the  crisis,  which  took  place  mid-September 
2008, when we decided to embark on a series of non-conventional measures. We have to be 
alert,  all  of  us,  permanently,  to  stand  ready  to  respond  to  events  that  are  very  difficult  to 
predict and in their nature are unique. 
Was the financial sector, and banks in particular, too optimistic about the possibility 
of this kind of crisis?  
It is unfortunately clear that the financial sector had very mediocre risk-management in the 
years  preceding  this  crisis.  There  was  a  sentiment  that  risks  could  be  taken  and  the 
eventuality of their materialization was not perceived by market participants and institutions. 
Furthermore, a number of financial instruments emerging were abnormally complex, and did 
not allow the final investor to be transparently informed. We were in an environment which 
proved to be simultaneously intransparent, complex and extremely risky. We have to be sure 
we are correcting all that and improving every part and parcel of global finance in the future. 
Are  bankers  already  prepared  to  be  careful  in  the  future  or  should  the  regulators 
impose on them that kind of behaviour?  
We need both. We need, of the course, the private sector to be fully aware of the risks that 
might emerge. It is clear that, for the private sector as a whole the crisis was a tough lesson, 
so they have all changed their behaviour. They have all spontaneously, under the pressure 
of this intense crisis, improved their risk management. They learnt their lesson the hard way. 
The regulators themselves have to push them in the right direction and to impose on them 
what they do not do spontaneously. It is in a way a dramatic change of culture that we have 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 3
to process with the efforts of the authorities and public sector, as well as the private sector, in 
global finance and, therefore, the global economy. 
Was there a threat of a new Great Depression?  
What we had in 2008 and 2009 was a crisis which was graver than the worst crisis since 
World War II. If we had not been prompt and bold in the constituency of central banks and 
executive branches we would probably have had to cope with the worst crisis since World 
War  I.  We  would  probably  have  a  depression,  a  very  profound  depression  at  global  level. 
The threat was grave and immediate. That is one of the reasons why we have to be sure that 
we have much more solid and resilient global finance and global economy. 
Is the euro area economy in worst shape than the US economy? Is the US recovering 
faster? 
Each economy has its own features, its own characteristics, its own structures. When you 
compare figures you have also to take into consideration a significant difference which is due 
to  difference  in  demographics  that  are  much  more  dynamic  in  the  US.  You  have  also  to 
consider that we have, in Europe, a connection to the rest of the global economy which is not 
the  same  in  the  US.  All  that  being  said,  I  think  Europe  has  a  lot  to  do  to  improve  macro-
policies, in particular fiscal policy, but also to be very active in the field of structural reforms. It 
is extremely important that the new 2020 project, which succeeded the Lisbon Agenda, will 
be  done  at  utmost  level  of  responsibility  and  determination.  Because  the  big  difference 
between Europe and the US is the flexibility of the economy. As a consolidated economic 
entity, whether at the level of the euro area or of the European Union as a whole, we are 
macroeconomically close to balance with no significant current account imbalances. We are 
financing our own investment with our own savings. Which is not necessarily the case in the 
US. But on the other hand, we have an economy that is not sufficiently flexible. We have to 
embark on bold, structural reforms and be very much active on that if we want again growth 
and prosperity. 
In terms of structural reforms, is this an urgent need for Portugal?  
I  think  that  it  is  very  urgent  and  very  important  for  all  European  countries,  and  of  course, 
amongst them, for Portugal. 
Next June you will have a new vice-president, Vítor Constâncio. Was he a good choice 
for the job?  
Vítor Constâncio has been a very active member of the team of the Eurosystem for a long 
period of time, a very active participant of the Governing Council and General Council of the 
ECB. The Governing Council was requested to give its own opinion which was positive. I am 
very happy to continue working with Vítor as of 1 June much more intensively. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2010
