Axel A Weber: Lessons for monetary policy from the financial crisis 
Keynote speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
XII Annual  Inflation  Targeting  seminar  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brasil,  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
14 May 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Due to the worldwide financial crisis a number of conceptual issues have been raised. This 
also applies to the conduct of monetary policy. I would like to focus on three key aspects of 
the ongoing debate on what lessons are to be learned from the crisis. The first question is 
whether central banks should raise their inflation target in order to gain more leeway in times 
of financial and economic distress. The second question is whether moving to a price-level 
target would facilitate the conduct of monetary  policy. And the third question concerns the 
role of asset prices and the importance of financial stability for monetary policy in general. 
In  discussing  these  issues,  however,  it  is  important  not  to  underestimate  the  dangers  to 
financial  stability  that  still  exist.  Although  it  is  now  in  its  third  year,  the  financial  crisis 
continues to present us with new challenges, as the focus of markets has shifted in recent 
months  towards  concerns  about  the  situation  of  public  finances  in  a  number  of  countries 
across the globe.  
Public  debt  has  risen  sharply  not  just  in  Europe  but  worldwide.  In  almost  all  industrialised 
countries this has been a consequence of the support measures needed to stabilise not only 
the  financial  sector  but  also  the  economy  as  a  whole  against  the  backdrop  of  the  sharp 
economic downturn. Today, there is no alternative to the rapid and credible consolidation of 
public  finances.  A  lack  of  confidence  would  undermine  current  fiscal  stimulation,  and 
correspondingly  higher  financing  costs  would  make  consolidation  even  more  difficult. 
Furthermore, confidence in the soundness of public finances is a major prerequisite for both 
the stability of financial markets and the anchoring of moderate inflation expectations. Fiscal 
policy  has  to  deliver  sustainable  public  debt  levels  as  a  key  policy  priority  at  the  current 
juncture.  Reducing  deficits  is  vital  in  this  context,  and  a  frontloaded  credible  consolidation 
strategy is thus of key importance. Given the danger of contagion, safeguarding the stability 
of the monetary and financial system should be seen as the rationale behind some of the 
recent liquidity support measures adopted by the Eurosystem. Any such measures have to 
be implemented in a way that respects the appropriate division of responsibilities between 
fiscal and monetary policy in the euro area: Providing liquidity and supporting malfunctioning 
markets  essential  to  ensure  a  proper  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  the  central  bank’s 
contribution  to  achieving  stability.  Ensuring  sustainable  public  finances  is  a  fiscal  policy 
issue.  For  the  remainder  of  my  speech,  however,  I  shall  be  discussing  the  three  issues  I 
have already mentioned concerning the optimal strategy for monetary policy. 
Lessons for monetary policy? 
Increasing the inflation target? 
2. 
2.1 
Starting with the first question: Should we add a safety margin to the inflation target or the 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  –  as  we  call  it  in  the  Eurosystem?  Some  prominent 
economists argue in favour of a somewhat higher figure. For advanced economies with an 
inflation  target  of  around  2%,  the  proponents  of  a  higher  figure  suggest  an  increase  of 
another 2 percentage points to 4%. The idea behind this is quite straightforward: Increasing 
the distance from the zero interest rate bound by means of a higher average inflation rate 
might supposedly create more room for an expansionary monetary policy.  
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
However, enthusiasm for this proposal seems to be fading. One explanation for this might be 
that recent developments have provided reassurance that the zero interest bound does not 
constitute  a  restriction on  monetary  policy.  In our  case,  the  flexibility of  monetary  policy  in 
Economic and Monetary Union has not been limited during the crisis despite very low interest 
rates.  The  success  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  has  shown  that  central 
banks have more instruments at their disposal than just the short-term interest rate. In the 
Eurosystem,  unconventional  measures  have  allowed  us  to  provide  liquidity  to  market 
participants and thereby deter deflationary expectations. 
Moreover, the costs of higher inflation should in no way be underestimated. Apart from menu 
costs,  these  include  –  as  you  are  all  well  aware  –  redistribution  effects  between,  say, 
borrowers and creditors, as well as the loss of allocative efficiency once the transparency of 
relative prices has been hampered by the resulting higher volatility of inflation. In addition, 
most tax systems are far from neutral with respect to the level of inflation. 
The most relevant argument against higher inflation targets is the implicit downside of higher 
inflation  expectations.  Such  expectations  might  become  instable  since  the  public  might 
expect further increases in the future. In light of the existing concerns that governments will 
try to inflate away the huge increase in public debt caused by the crisis, the timing of this 
proposal was particularly unfortunate. Actually, a recent study by Bundesbank staff analyses 
the incentives that a government has to reduce its real debt burden by increasing inflation 
temporarily.  On  the  one  hand,  within  their  monetary  DSGE  model,  the  success  of  such  a 
policy  depends  crucially  on  the  maturity  structure  of  public  debt.  On  the  other  hand,  what 
turns out to be essential is the extent to which monetary policy can use the credibility of its 
inflation target to exploit expectations of low inflation1. Without allowing an un-anchoring of 
inflation expectations, it is scarcely possible to let actual inflation rise sufficiently.  
In this context, we should remind ourselves what efforts it took us to break persistent inflation 
trends and to anchor long-term inflation expectations at low levels during the past decades. 
In  fact,  we  do  not  have  to  go  back  as  far  as  the  1970s,  the  time  known  as  the  “Great 
Inflation”, to find inflation rates considerably higher than those today. In the late 1990s, some 
Latin  American  countries,  among  them  Brazil,  introduced  inflation  targeting  as  a  monetary 
strategy  and  thereby  succeeded  in  driving  down  inflation  rates.  Somewhat  earlier,  EU 
member  states  started  preparing  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –  a  project  that  was 
crowned by the introduction of the euro as a common currency. In Brazil, as well as in some 
of  the  euro  area  member  states,  the  efforts  involved  in  bringing  down  inflation  are  well 
remembered.  In  this  sense,  our  two  continents  share  the  experience  of  building  up  a 
successful disinflation record. We should not risk this success for the perceived benefits of 
more flexibility in our monetary policy frameworks. 
Price-level targeting 
2.2 
In my view, allowing inflation expectations to rise permanently is not an option. Against this 
background,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  question:  Should  central  banks  switch  to  a 
strategy in  which inflation expectations  are only temporarily raised when needed? In other 
words,  should  central  banks  follow  the  advice  given  in  the  academic  literature  and  think 
seriously  about  defining  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  terms  of  a  target  path  for  the 
aggregate price level rather than a target for the rate of inflation?  
In  technical  terms,  the  main  difference  between  the  two  regimes  is  that  under  price-level 
targeting, the central bank commits itself to correcting deviations of the price level from the 
target  path  (over  a  given  horizon),  whereas  under  inflation  targeting,  the  central  bank 
commits to correcting deviations of inflation from target (over a given horizon), but does not 
                                                 
1   Krause, M U and S Moyen (2010), Public Debt and Inflation Incentives, Deutsche Bundesbank, mimeo. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2010
respond to one-off shifts in the price level. As a consequence, under inflation targeting, there 
will  be  price-level  drift  –  the  price  level  will  be  non-stationary  –  whereas  under  price-level 
targeting, the rate of inflation will be stationary, and the price level will be trend stationary. 
Hence, price-level targeting would limit uncertainty regarding the future price level and thus 
facilitate the forecasting of the real value of future payment flows which are fixed in nominal 
terms (as is the case in the majority of financial contracts). This would be beneficial because 
it would tend to reduce the risk premiums demanded by risk-averse creditors and thus lower 
the cost of capital. However, according to conventional wisdom, the potential benefits of the 
reduction in uncertainty regarding the future price level must be weighed against the potential 
cost  of  correcting  shock-induced  price-level  shifts.  Bringing  the  price  level  back  onto  the 
target path may induce additional fluctuations in the inflation rate and real economic activity 
compared with targeting the inflation rate. 
Whereas this reasoning may persuade us to be sceptical, the recent academic literature has 
stressed the potential benefits of price-level targeting which arise from the stabilising effect of 
the  price-level  target  on  inflation  expectations.  In  this  respect,  price-level  targeting  has 
gained  particular  importance  in  the  current  period  of  extremely  low  policy  rates  since  the 
stabilising effects of the price-level target on inflation expectations have the added advantage 
of reducing the probability of hitting the zero interest rate bound. 
This  argument  is  based  on  the  following  reasoning:  A  negative  aggregate  demand  shock 
leads to a drop in the price level to below the target path. If the central bank’s commitment to 
the price-level target is credible, the private sector anticipates that the price level will return to 
its  target.  Hence,  a  drop  in  the  price  level  will  lead  to  an  automatic  rise  in  inflation 
expectations.  This  movement  of  inflation  expectations  mitigates  the  effect  of  the  original 
shock on the inflation rate. Consequently, for a given nominal interest rate, the real interest 
rate decreases. This stimulates aggregate demand and, in turn, keeps the required nominal 
interest  reduction  to  a  minimum.  Hence,  a  credible  price-level  targeting  regime  lowers  the 
risk of hitting the zero bound and falling into a deflationary trap following a negative goods 
demand shock. 
Given these stabilising attributes of price-level targeting, it is hardly surprising that price-level 
targeting  regularly  performs  well  in  simulation  studies  which  compare  price-level  targeting 
and inflation targeting under the assumption that the central bank is constrained to act under 
discretion. It may be argued, however, that when considering a fundamental change in the 
monetary policy regime, the relevant question is not whether the new strategy does better 
than discretionary inflation targeting, but rather how the proposed strategy compares to the 
optimal commitment solution which monetary policymakers strive to attain.  
A recent study by the Federal Reserve Board has shown that if explicit account is taken of 
the  zero  interest  rate  bound,  optimal  monetary  policy  under  commitment  may  involve 
considerable  price-level  drift  following  a  more  substantial  contractionary  demand  shock. 
Consequently,  returning  the  price  level  to  its  target  path,  as  required  under  price-level 
targeting, is associated with welfare losses. Based on an extension of the New Keynesian 
model that allows for sector-specific shocks, a recent study by Bundesbank staff confirms the 
welfare costs of eliminating an optimal price-level drift2. 
It is not clear at present whether the costs associated with returning the price level onto the 
target  path  would  be  outweighed  by  the  benefits  which  accrue  from  the  reduction  in  long-
term  price-level  uncertainty.  Against  this  background,  price-level  targeting  cannot  be 
regarded as a viable monetary policy strategy until we know much more about its potential 
                                                 
2   Gerberding, C, R Gerke and F Hammermann (2010), On the Welfare Costs of Price-level Targeting, Deutsche 
Bundesbank, mimeo. 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
benefits  and  costs  than  we  do  at  present.  But  it  is  definitely  worth  pursuing  this  line  of 
research further in the future. 
Asset prices, financial stability and monetary policy 
2.3 
Another  question  that  has  been  raised  once  again  by  the  financial  crisis  concerns  asset 
prices and their relevance to monetary policy. First of all, the well known arguments against a 
“leaning against the wind” strategy are still valid: Financial bubbles are difficult to identify and 
difficult to moderate using monetary policy instruments. 
Nevertheless, there is empirical evidence on the link between money and credit growth and 
asset  price booms.  This  suggests that  monetary  policymakers  should  take  due  account  of 
developments  in  the  financial  markets  and  in  asset  prices  –  as  part  of  their  price  stability 
mandate.  One  of  the  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis  may  be  that  the  time  horizon  relevant  to 
monetary policy decisions should not be too short. 
Looking  beyond  credit  and  monetary  developments,  there  are  more  interdependencies 
between  monetary  policy  and  the  financial  cycle.  Therefore,  we  must  improve  our 
understanding of the impact of monetary policy on banks’ behaviour and vice versa. On the 
one  hand,  recent  experience  has  clearly  shown  that  financial  imbalances  can  trigger  an 
economic downturn and thereby endanger price stability as a result of deflationary risk. On 
the other hand, the financial cycle is not exogenous to the strategic orientation of monetary 
policy.  Monetary  policy  has  the  potential  to  influence  risk-taking  behaviour,  for  example. 
Thus, monetary policymakers taking these factors into account should respond symmetrically 
to  financial  cycles.  This  will  not  prevent  boom-bust  cycles  in  asset  prices,  but  might 
contribute to somewhat less volatile financial cycles. 
Does this imply that monetary policymakers should take responsibility for financial stability? 
In my view, ensuring price stability over the medium term remains the appropriate objective 
of monetary policy. In order to fulfil this task, monetary policy has basically one instrument at 
its disposal, the short-term interest rate. Given that short-term interest rates are too blunt a 
tool  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  financial  stability  should  not  become  an  additional 
independent objective of monetary policy. 
Instead,  financial  stability  is  best  ensured  by  macro-prudential  policy  with  its  own  set  of 
instruments.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  macro-prudential  policies  cannot  or  should 
not be carried out by central banks. On the contrary: The expertise already present in central 
banks  as  well  as  the  interactions  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  I 
mentioned earlier are arguments that call for central banks to play a prominent role.  
Central banks possess comparative advantages of information and action as they combine 
complementary  elements  such  as  oversight  of  payment  systems,  their  own  refinancing 
operations,  their  activities  in  the  financial  markets  and  their  presence  in  international 
committees. In addition, only central banks can perform the vital function of the lender of last 
resort for the banking sector during financial crises. This, in turn, requires that central banks 
constantly keep abreast of financial institutions’ solvency situations and of liquidity conditions 
in  the  money  market.  They  are  therefore  able  to  assess  possible  domino  effects.  Central 
banks’  market  proximity  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  process  clearly  enhances  their 
ability to identify disequilibria and proactively counter potential pockets of instability.  
What is needed, however, is a clear distinction between central banks’ responsibilities with 
respect to monetary policy and their financial stability tasks. For example, at the level of the 
EU, a separate European Systemic Risk Board will deal with macroprudential issues, but it 
will be situated at the ECB, allowing it to draw on the central bank’s resources and analytical 
capacities.  In  a  similar  vein,  the  Bundesbank  has  created  a  new  “Financial  Stability” 
department. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2010
Conclusion 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  financial  crisis  has  stimulated  a  number  of  discussions  about  the  optimal  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  I  have  touched  on  only  some  of  them,  highlighting  the  key  points.  This 
seminar has provided us with the opportunity to elaborate on the lessons to be learned by 
monetary policy. And I have learned a lot in yesterday’s and today’s sessions! 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 5
