Patrick Honohan: Recent economic developments in Ireland and the 
outlook for the economy 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial 
Services  Authority  of  Ireland,  at  the  presentation  of  the  Annual  Report  2009,  Dublin, 
16 July 2010. 
 stabilisation and normalisation of the banking sector; 
consolidation of the public finances; and 
restoration of the economy’s competitiveness position. 
We  are  today  publishing  the  Central  Bank’s  2009  Annual  Report.  The  new  Central  Bank 
Reform Bill will formally create a new single unitary organisation. To reflect the reality of our 
new  structures,  this  is  the  first  such  report  to  incorporate  the  annual  reports  of  both  the 
Central Bank and Financial Regulator in one publication. We are today also publishing our 
Strategic Plan, which I expect will also form the basis for our operations going forward under 
the new legislation, subject to the views of the new Commission. 
I am joined by Jim Farrell, Chairman of the Financial Regulator Authority; and Mary Sheehy, 
Assistant  Director  General  and  Secretary  of  the  Bank.  We  will  be  happy  to  take  your 
questions after our brief opening words. 
As we state in the annual report, the failures of the banking system here have rocked the 
economy and the public finances, with severe impacts on all members of society. To address 
this, the country is faced with three key policy issues: 
 
 
 
For our part in the Central Bank, the focus remains on restoring the health of the banking 
system.  
We have already taken action, in March of this year, to review and set new, higher capital 
requirements  for  our  main  banks.  These  new  levels  are  based  not  just  on  expected  loan 
losses but on potential losses in a stressed situation. We expect that the banks will meet the 
capital requirements set out by us, which we believe are sufficient to withstand future stress 
scenarios. A combination of capital raising and asset disposals, underpinned by government 
support,  should  ensure  they  meet  those  targets  by  December.  We  are  also  carrying  out 
additional stress tests on AIB and Bank of Ireland, as part of the European wide methodology 
set  out  by  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS).  Of  course,  we  have 
already stress tested these banks in the earlier exercise I referred to. Indeed, the severity of 
the tests we conducted earlier on loan losses exceeds that of the CEBS version, although 
CEBS  has  extended  the  test  to  reflect  events  in  the  sovereign  debt  markets.  We  will  be 
providing details of this latest exercise on this day week. 
The  new  requirements  we  are  imposing,  along  with  some  other  measures,  including  the 
recent extension of the guarantee on banks’ liabilities, place our banks in a stronger position 
to start lending again and to support economic recovery.  
As  for  the  public  finances,  it  remains  critical  that  the  government  sticks  firmly  to  the  fiscal 
adjustment programme that it has embarked on. This path, difficult as it may be, is the surest 
route  to  supporting  the recovery  in  confidence in  the  Irish economy  both  domestically  and 
internationally. The budgetary arithmetic is so far broadly on track and in this context I’d like 
to  emphasise  how  important  it  is  to  interpret  correctly  the  overall  government  borrowing 
figures as they are published. In addition to the normal government borrowing requirement, 
these figures now include the additional net costs of financial restructuring of the banks. The 
€4 billion injected in 2009 into Anglo Irish Bank already lifted the general government deficit 
from  11.7%  to  14.3%  of  GDP.  This  year  again,  the  remaining  sizeable  net  injections  into 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
Anglo  and  Irish  Nationwide  Building  Society  add  an  even  larger  sum.  So  looking  at  the 
general government deficit net of bank restructuring costs gives a clearer picture of whether 
the underlying trend in the public finances is still on track, as it is so far.  
The  focus  internationally  on  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  has  been  at  the  centre  of 
renewed  pressures  in  financial  markets  generally  in  Europe.  Here  too,  it  is  important  to 
interpret  data  correctly.  What  might  broadly  be  described  as  IFSC  institutions  represent  a 
large and growing part of the borrowing by Irish resident banks from the Eurosystem. For this 
reason we are enhancing our statistical presentations to include a new table covering retail 
banking  institutions  in  Ireland  and  that  table,  to  be  published  in  our  monthly  statistics,  will 
give the best indication of Irish bank liquidity conditions. 
The other key element is competitiveness. Again, this is improving but we need to maintain 
the momentum in order to maximise the economy’s growth prospects over the medium term. 
We  will  be  publishing  our  next  economic  commentary  and  forecasts  in  a  couple  of  weeks 
when we will address these issues in some more detail. 
Today we also publish our Strategic Plan for the period 2010–2012. It sets out our medium 
term objectives and the actions we will take to achieve them. This again reflects the reforms 
we  have  already  implemented  in  our  own  organisation.  We  have  made  a  number  of  new 
senior appointments and have reformed our internal structures to fully merge the functions of 
the Central Bank and Financial Regulator. In doing so we have taken account of the lessons 
that we have learnt to date about the financial crisis, including those I set out in my recent 
report to the Minister for Finance.  
The Strategy covers all our main functions, including our requirement to contribute to price 
stability, to fulfil our responsibilities generally as a member of the Eurosystem, to ensure the 
financial  services  infrastructure  delivers  the  necessary  efficiencies  to  the  economy,  to 
provide  authoritative  economic  advice  and  to  help  consumers  through  our  consumer 
protection mandate. 
The major new measures and initiatives featured in the Plan include: 
 
A  refocused  approach  to  strengthening  the  financial  system  including  a  new 
approach to financial stability assessment; 
The development of a new regulatory model with an enhanced supervisory capacity 
for  the  detection  and  correction  of  problems  with  an  active  and  challenging 
approach; 
Interacting with new EU supervisory bodies, such as the European Systemic Risk 
Board and the European System of Financial Supervisors; 
Building  on  consumer  protection  including  a  review  of  the  Consumer  Protection 
Code; 
Greater attention in our economic research on the functioning of the financial system 
and fuller collaboration with the universities, ESRI and the wider public service; 
Moving towards a 100% charge back arrangement on the costs to industry to reduce 
the cost to the taxpayer. 
     We  are  also  today  publishing  a  Payments  Oversight  Report  which  explains  how  we 
discharge our various responsibilities in this area in order to ensure that the economy has 
reliable and effective payments systems to allow for the smooth functioning and delivery of 
everyday financial transactions. 
Finally,  the  annual  report  details  the  Central  Bank’s  accounts.  The  Bank’s  profits  for  2009 
amounted to €933.8 million. After transfers to reserves, surplus income of €745.5 million will 
be paid to the Exchequer. The Bank’s balance sheet assets at the end of 2009 amounted to 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
just under €125 billion reflecting the continuing high levels of liquidity support by the Bank 
through the Eurosystem to banks located in Ireland. 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 3
