Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Partnering with the media for effective 
communication and quality reporting  
Speech by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 1st 
Bank of Uganda/Media Top executives’ dialogue, Kampala, 6 November 2009.  
 The Chief Executive Officers, Editors-in-Chief and Senior Management of the Media Houses 
represented here today  
Colleagues from Bank of Uganda  
Distinguished Participants  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me take this opportunity to welcome you all to this, first ever, dialogue between Bank of 
Uganda  and  top  executives  of  various  media  houses.  The  theme  for  today’s  discourse  is 
“Partnering with the media for effective communication and quality reporting”.  
We have organised this dialogue because we believe that there will be mutual benefits for 
the Bank and the media if we can build and sustain a relationship which is based on a shared 
understanding of each others’ goals and mutual trust.  
Like any central bank, the Bank of Uganda depends for the success of its policies on being 
able to communicate effectively with the general public. This is because public perceptions 
and  expectations  affect  their  economic  decisions.  Those  perceptions and  expectations  are 
clearly influenced by the actions of the central bank. Hence it is imperative that the public 
fully understands what the central bank is trying to do and what the implications of its actions 
for the future course of the economy are.  
Let  me  give  you  an  example.  The  rate  of  inflation  is  a  key  variable  in  the  economy.  The 
public’s expectations of future inflation affect their economic decisions made today, in terms 
of businesses setting the prices of their products, workers’ wage demands and the rate of 
interest required by investors. If expectations of future inflation are misconceived, decisions 
made today could have harmful consequences; businesses which set their prices too high 
might find themselves priced out of markets, for example. Hence one of the most important 
tasks of the central bank is to ensure that the private sector can make informed economic 
decisions based on accurate data and a proper understanding of economic policy, including 
the goals of policy and the measures which are being taken to achieve those goals.  
The Constitution grants to the Bank of Uganda operational independence to implement its 
policies.  The  Bank  shares  this  operational  independence  with  many  other  central  banks 
around the world and this is now well understood to be essential for effective macroeconomic 
management. But independence requires accountability if it is to be politically sustainable in 
a  democracy  and  accountability,  in  turn,  requires  transparency.  We  are  under  no  illusions 
that unless we can convince the public that we are competent to carry out our mandate of 
maintaining  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  public  and  political  support  for  central 
bank  independence  will  be  undermined.  Only  by  being  open  and  transparent  about  our 
policies and operations will we be able to maintain public support.  
It is sometimes claimed that public agencies like the Bank of Uganda present a Panglossian 
picture  of  the  economy,  emphasizing  the  good  news  and  ignoring  the  bad.  That  is  not  a 
strategy we aim to follow in the Bank of Uganda, for one simple reason. Our credibility with 
the  public  is  crucial  to  our  ability  to  achieve  our  economic  goals.  If  we  were  to  present  a 
distorted picture of the economy, or make overly optimistic claims about the future course of 
the economy, our credibility would be eroded, because the reality would eventually become 
known.  Good  macroeconomic  management  has  nothing  to  gain,  in  the  long  term,  from 
inaccurate public information or the hiding of “bad news”.  
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
the 
regulating 
the  macroeconomy  and 
Hence our communications strategy at the Bank of Uganda focuses on providing accurate 
data  on  the  economy,  drawn  from  reliable  data  sources,  such  as  the  Uganda  Bureau  of 
Statistics, and communicating our policy actions and goals through our regular publications 
and  press  briefings.  The  Bank  has  over  the  years,  reduced  the  bureaucracy  of  accessing 
information in many ways. First, through improving the media’s access to the senior officials 
of  the  Bank  for  explanations  and  discussions  of  topical  issues;  second,  by  revamping  our 
website  and  the  establishment  of  an  online  statistical  database;  third,  through  the 
dissemination  of  numerous  survey  results  like  the  Business  Confidence  Index  and  bank 
lending  surveys  that  seek  the  views  of  the  private  sector  on  financial  sector  and  overall 
economic  performance.  Fourthly,  the  publication  of  key  information  through  the  various 
reports, media briefs and releases has been stepped up.  
As I have already noted, effective communication with the public is essential to our work in 
managing 
financial  system.  But  effective 
communication requires a partnership with the media. I think it goes without saying that, in 
the long run, a more open relationship between the Bank and the media, involving regular 
press briefings, interviews, press conferences, etc, will be more conducive to the Bank being 
able to communicate effectively with the public.  
Working effectively with the media certainly does not mean that we believe that the media 
should  simply  be  the  mouthpiece  of  the  central  bank,  reporting  uncritically  on  how  we 
manage  the  economy.  That  would  clearly  be  counterproductive,  because  the  public  would 
lose faith in the media as a source of objective and independent information and analysis. An 
objective and professional media which has credibility with the public is of much more value 
to the central bank than an uncritical media which no one takes very seriously.  
The interests of the media and those of the Bank of Uganda are not identical but that does 
not mean that we cannot work together in a harmonious manner. To do this we must create a 
relationship which is based on openness and trust. Trust is critical and it works both ways. 
From the media’s standpoint, reporters and editors must be confident that they are not being 
deliberately misled with false information that they receive from the bank. From the Bank’s 
standpoint, we must be confident that the media will not deliberately distort or misrepresent 
information given to them by ourselves.  
We should also strive to improve professionalism in economic and financial journalism. The 
information that the media makes available to the public matters for the financial markets and 
influences the decisions made in these markets. Accuracy is, therefore, essential. To help 
strengthen  standards  of  reporting,  the  Bank  has  provided  training  to  local  journalists  on 
financial and economic issues at seminars over the past four years, and we intend to provide 
more of these training sessions in the future.  
I  want  to  finish  with  quote  from  Mr.  Larry  Summers,  currently  Chairman  of  the  Presidents 
Economic Council of Advisors in the United States;  
”In  this  age  of  electronic  money,  investors  are  no  longer  seduced  by  a 
„financial dance of a thousand veils.‟  Only hard and accurate information 
on  reserves,  current  accounts,  monetary  and  fiscal  conditions  will  keep 
capital from fleeing precipitously at the first sign of trouble.”  
Memo from CEO to Manager:  
Today at 11 o'clock, there will be a total eclipse of the sun. This is when the sun disappears 
behind the moon for two minutes. As this is something that cannot be seen every day, time 
will be allowed for employees to view the eclipse in the parking lot. Staff should meet in the 
lot  at  ten  to  eleven,  when  I  will  deliver  a  short  speech  introducing  the  eclipse,  and  giving 
some background information. Safety goggles will be made available at a small cost. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
Memo from Manager to Department Head:  
Today at ten to eleven, all staff should meet in the car park. This will be followed by a total 
eclipse of the sun, which will appear for two minutes. For a moderate cost, this will be made 
safe  with  goggles.  The  CEO  will  deliver  a  short  speech  beforehand  to  give  us  all  some 
information. This is not something that can be seen every day.  
Memo from Department Head to Floor Manager:  
The CEO will today deliver a short speech to make the sun disappear for two minutes in the 
form of an eclipse. This is something that cannot be seen every day, so staff will meet in the 
car park at ten or eleven. This will be safe, if you pay a moderate cost.  
Memo From Floor Manager to Supervisor:  
Ten  or  eleven  staff  are  to  go  to  the  car  park,  where  the  CEO  will  eclipse  the  sun  for  two 
minutes. This doesn't happen every day. It will be safe, and as usual it will cost you. 
Memo from Supervisor to staff:  
Some staff will go to the car park today to see the CEO disappear. It is a pity this doesn't 
happen everyday. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 3
